source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj217/2025oncj217.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. chen, 2025 oncj 217
date: 
2025 04 16
court
file no.: central east - newmarket 4911-998-20-07014-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
jian chen
before
justice paul m. cooper
heard
on march 11, 12, 13, 2024, april 9, 2024, may 2, 2024,
june
17 and 25, 2024, october 10, 2024 and december 20, 2024
oral
reasons for judgment given on june 25, 2024 and december 20, 2024
written
reasons for judgment released on april 16, 2025
a. ghosh............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
c. szpulak.................................................................... counsel
for the accused jian chen
cooper j.:

jian chen (“jian”) was charged on an information
alleging that he trafficked one (1) kilogram of ketamine, contrary to s. 5(1)
of the
controlled drugs and substances act.

in june of 2020, the york regional police opened
an investigation of a suspected ketamine trafficker. the defendant was not the
target of the investigation. in fact, he was not known to the police nor was
he on any police intelligence radar.

by happenstance on june 26, 2020, through an
evolving series of multiple but separate events, jian chen quickly became
discovered. he was observed driving a black audi suv in the parking lot of the
pacific mall in markham, ontario. police surveillance outlined the defendant’s
vehicle came to a stop while driving in a row perpendicular to the parked
vehicle of the initial target of the police investigation. the police observed
their target approach the passenger window of the defendant’s audi, reach in
and retrieve a noticeable item that is then taken directly back to the target’s
own vehicle. both the target and jian chen were quickly stopped, detained, and
arrested. this noticeable and identifiable item contained one kilogram of
ketamine.

jian chen entered a plea of not guilty. he
challenges the admissibility of the evidence and asserts that the evidence
should be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter
as a result of
breaches of his 10(a) and 10(b) rights.

the blended
voir dire
/trial began on
march 11, 2024. evidence on the application was heard together with
submissions on the alleged breach and s. 24(2) relief within the three days
scheduled for the matter. counsel for jian chen informed the court no evidence
would be called on the
voir dire. additionally, counsel advised that
the defendant would not call any evidence on the trial.

after adjourning the matter for my ruling, i
decided during deliberation that it would be important to hear thorough
submissions on the applicability of s. 24(1) of the
charter
from the
parties as the defendant had requested “such further and other relief” that the
court may “deem just and appropriate”. i heard those submissions on may 2
nd,
2024.

on june 25, 2024, i informed the parties of my
decision. i indicated to the crown and defence that i had found a breach of both
s. 10(a) and s. 10(b) but determined that i would not exclude the evidence
under s. 24(2) of the
charter. further, i indicated that as a potential
remedy under 24(1) of the
charter
specifically, should the defendant be
found guilty, consideration would be given on sentencing. the remedy was
appropriate given the minor breach of s. 10(a) and the more troublesome breach
of s. 10(b). a stay of proceedings or exclusion of evidence under 24(1) of the
charter
was not warranted.

i further went on to provide brief reasons on
the trial proper. i determined that on the record before me on the trial
proper that the crown had discharged its burden of proof beyond a reasonable
doubt and found jian chen guilty of trafficking in ketamine. mr. jian chen was
sentenced on december 20
th, 2024. as indicated on the record, the
brief oral submissions were provided with reasons to follow. these are the
reasons.
facts

the york regional police guns, gangs and drug
enforcement unit had concern regarding the influx of ketamine being available
in the region. from information obtained they suspected that yang chen (the
“target”) [no evidence of any relation to the defendant] was trafficking in
ketamine. the unit in their daily briefing decided to conduct surveillance on
the target’s residence. as part of the investigation, an undercover police
officer (“u/c”) would attempt to engage the target to provide or sell a sample
of ketamine to the u/c.

what unfolded next came as an unexpected
surprise. after commencing surveillance just after 6:00 p.m. on june 26, 2020,
the police witnessed consecutive but separate acts of trafficking. the
surveillance team had limited members. once the first observation of
trafficking was observed a takedown was called. some of the observation team
followed a female involved and arrested her. she was found in possession of a
large quantity of marijuana and $100,000 in cash. the female apprehended only
spoke mandarin.

the second unexpected crime observed in short
order involved a pickup truck and the loading of garbage bags. believing
another incident of trafficking occurred, the team decided to call for a second
takedown. as the full team had not returned back to the target’s residence,
one officer, p.c. colson, followed the pickup which pulled into a neighbourhood
plaza a short distance away. p.c. colson witnessed another person now in
attendance and, being alone, the officer was faced with the possibility of the
impossible task of now following two separate suspects. he determined that
notwithstanding he was alone he would have to act quickly. he called for
backup and proceeded on his own to approach both suspects, grabbed their keys
to their vehicles and placed them under arrest. both of these suspects also only
spoke mandarin.

concurrent with the surveillance team having the
target’s residence under surveillance, the undercover police officer had been
communicating with the target in an attempt to obtain the ketamine sample from
him. the target provided an opportunity well beyond the undercover’s objective
and offered to transact a full kilogram of ketamine. that deal was set up
quickly. the transaction was to occur around 8:30 p.m. that evening, near a
bank located in the parking lot area of the pacific mall.

the target left his home around 7:15 p.m. and
was followed. the police had not made provisions for this large purchase. it
became important to follow the target, who only had a small black pouch with
him that he had retrieved from a white vehicle at his residence, prior to
driving off to the pacific mall in a black bmw.

while the team had the target under
surveillance, the undercover was informed by the target he needed five further
minutes before he could meet for the agreed transaction at 8:30 p.m.

it is during these five minutes that jian is
observed driving his black audi suv up to where the target had parked in the
mall parking lot. the officers watched as the target went up to the front
passenger window of the defendant’s vehicle, reached in the opened window and
retrieved what looked like a bag the size of a shoebox, and immediately returned
to his own vehicle as the black audi suv drove off.

the surveillance team split and a takedown was
called. the target had the item described as a bag the size of a shoebox in
his vehicle. the police found one kilogram of ketamine secreted in the
package. the target spoke mandarin. there were no other items, let alone any
type of similar items, in the target’s vehicle.

jian was stopped a short distance away on
kennedy road, north of denison drive, by detective constables simard-caron and
hamburg at 8:37 p.m. constable hamburg went to the driver’s side of the
vehicle and advised the accused that he was under arrest for trafficking. he
asked the defendant, who had a cell phone in hand, to get out of the car and he
complied and moved off the roadway to the sidewalk area. d.c. simard-caron
handcuffed jian chen. the officers performed a cursory search incident to
arrest and requested a transport vehicle. d.c. hamburg read rights to counsel
but recognized a language issue as the defendant responded, “no english; no
english.” the officers requested an officer who could speak cantonese or
assist with language interpretation to attend as the prisoner transport
officer. they believed this officer would be able to attend in minutes.

d.c. hamburg was shocked when police constable
adams attended. constable adams was to transport jian chen to five district,
minutes away, as the requested officer who could assist with language
interpretation was helping the booking sergeant with the earlier arrests.

p.c. adams, unfortunately, did not bring police
property bags with her to the scene, so the desired transport to have the
defendant obtain and understand rights to counsel now encountered a second
delay in time.

a third delay in delivering rights to counsel
occurred after transport at the station while p.c. adams and the defendant
waited outside the sally port at five district. she was advised to wait with
jian as three other individuals arrested by the guns, gangs and drug unit
earlier that evening all needed interpretation to complete their booking
process prior to the defendant being assisted.

by 9:46 p.m. jian chen had been brought into the
police station at five district for processing. p.c. tong assisted the booking
sergeant. p.c. tong, who is fluent in mandarin, informed the defendant of the
reason for his arrest and cautioned him. he further read him his rights to
counsel and provided a secondary caution. p.c. tong was told by the defendant
that he had an immigration lawyer. p.c. tong told jian chen that he needed a
criminal lawyer, not an immigration lawyer. as p.c. tong relayed some of the
information to the staff sergeant, the staff sergeant instructed p.c. tong that
the defendant will be “going with” duty counsel. duty counsel service was
contacted at 10:07 p.m. at 10:20 p.m., duty counsel called back and were able
to assist and provide advice accommodating the language barrier. jian spoke to
duty counsel in private at 10:22 p.m.
position of the parties –
charter
application
i.
the defence
a.
section 10(a) and section 10(b) of the
charter

mr. chen was detained at 8:37 p.m. on june 26,
2020 and waited at least one hour and nine minutes before being provided his
rights to counsel. the guns, gangs and drug enforcement unit were aware the
target of their investigation spoke mandarin and was communicating in mandarin
with the undercover officer. they must have realized that at some point if an
arrest was to happen they would need the assistance of officer tong to provide
rights to counsel in mandarin. further, as their objective was not just the
target but discovering the ‘back-end’ source or the ‘bigger fish’, it was
reasonable for the police to make provisions for rights in mandarin for any
other arrestee found during their investigation.

the police failed to make reasonable provisions
or be aware of alternatives to ensure rights to counsel were provided
immediately upon arrest. additionally, when rights to counsel were provided,
the defendant had the right to speak to counsel of choice and not to be steered
to duty counsel by a booking sergeant, who knew better.
b.
section 24(2) remedy

the defendant requests that all evidence seized
from and through the course of his arrest be excluded. first, the seriousness
of the
charter
-infringing conduct must not be understated. the police
were on an active investigation involving surveillance of a target and the
assistance of an undercover officer in contemporaneous communication with the
target. from experience the team must have known there was a possibility of
arrest, and the need for resources to assist with the likely need to interpret
rights to counsel, in order to ensure no delay in satisfying immediacy
requirements. the police casual approach was exacerbated by the booking
sergeant’s perfunctory steering of the defendant to duty counsel.

the breaches were very serious and the police
action displays a reckless disregard for the
charter. the defence
suggests this case illustrates what is seemingly a systemic problem with the york
region police.

secondly, the impact on the
charter
-protected
interest of mr. jian chen is not technical or minor. the detention without
rights provided, for an hour and nine minutes, is significant. an arrestee is
vulnerable and requires counsel not just for liberty but as a lifeline to the
outside world.

thirdly, the public would be outraged to learn
that the police have a non-compliant approach. the negative impact would
effect the public’s confidence in the administration of justice and the rule of
law.
c.
section 24(1) remedy

the court should consider a stay of proceedings
or in the alternative the exclusion of evidence against the defendant. the
integrity of the justice system, access to justice and trial fairness would be
negatively affected if the court fails to impose a stay of proceedings. canada
prides itself on being a diverse and multicultural nation and the breaches of jian’s
rights are troubling. he or others who do not speak english should not be
afforded a lesser protection under the
charter. should the court not
view this as the clearest of cases, s. 24(1) provides jurisdiction that is
flexible and responsive for the court to exclude evidence.
ii.
the crown
a.
section 10(a) and section 10(b) of the
charter

there were no breaches of mr. jian chen’s
rights. upon his arrest, an officer immediately read the defendant his rights
to counsel. the officer quickly recognized that there was a language barrier. 
the officer requested a cantonese-speaking officer attend. there was a delay
in the delivery of the rights to counsel as a result of multiple arrests each
requiring the assistance of p.c. tong, a cantonese/mandarin speaking officer on
duty. this was an unforeseen and dynamic situation justifiable in the
circumstances as rights to counsel were indeed provided in the defendant’s
chosen language as soon as it was feasible to do so. additionally, mr. jian
chen was not steered toward duty counsel.
b.
section 24(2) remedy

the trafficking is wholly disconnected from any
alleged breach. mr. chen was arrested after the traffic and no evidence was
obtained or attempted to be obtained subsequent to the arrest. if the court
were to find a
charter
breach, the breach itself is technical in nature
given the dynamics at play. the police displayed no bad faith and the public
interest in a case alleging trafficking of ketamine in a public place being
determined on its merits is highly important. the evidence should be included.
c.
section 24(1) remedy

a stay of proceedings is a drastic remedy. here
the test in
r. v. babos,
2014 scc 16 (canlii), 1 s.c.r. 309 is not met. the alleged
breach does not effect fair trial rights nor effect trial fairness. similarly,
the residual category is not engaged. if a remedy is to be considered by the
court, then the flexible approach taken should limit the remedy to a possible
sentence reduction should the defendant be found guilty.
charter
analysis

“everyone has the right on arrest or detention
to be informed promptly of the reason therefor” (s. 10(a)
charter
). 
this informational component does not engage magical words, but simply requires
sufficient information to properly instruct counsel. an individual who is
detained or arrested is at the mercy of the state (see
r. v. nguyen,
2008 onca 49, at para.
21
).

section 10(b) of the
charter
states,
“everyone has the right on arrest or detention to retain and instruct counsel
without delay and to be informed of that right.”

this right is triggered at the commencement of
an individual’s detention (see
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33 (canlii), 2009 2 s.c.r. 460). this
informational component must be fulfilled immediately subject to “concerns for
officer or public safety, or limitations prescribed by law and justified under
s. 1 of the
charter.”

the significance of the interplay is observed in
nguyen
(supra)
at para 20:
[w]hile the main purpose of s. 10(a) is to
inform an individual of why he or she is being detained, it also has an
important secondary aspect as an adjunct to the right to counsel conferred by
s. 10(b). specifically, the purpose of s. 10(a) is also to inform an
individual of the extent of his or her jeopardy such that he or she can
exercise the right to counsel conferred by s. 10(b) in a meaningful way.

in
suberu
the key issue before the
supreme court was whether the words “without delay” permitted a brief interlude
between the detention and the conveyance of her right to counsel. the supreme
court held “without delay” to mean “immediate” as this was consistent with its
purpose to have access to a lawyer in situations where an individual
experiences significant deprivation of liberty on detention or arrest leaving
the individual vulnerable and in a position of jeopardy. this right is to
assist detainees with the ability or path to regain their liberty and to
protect against the risk of involuntary self incrimination.

further, the “immediate” is not necessarily or
always synonymous with instantaneously. the facts require a lens of context recalling
safety concerns, legal limitations and/or justification under s. 1 of the
charter.

once a detainee has requested to speak to
counsel it is well settled that “the police are obliged to ‘hold off’ from
attempting to elicit any incriminatory evidence from the detainee until he or
she has had a reasonable opportunity to reach counsel” (see
r. v. prosper,
1994 canlii 65 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 236 at p. 269). in
r. v. ross,
1989 canlii 134 (scc),, 1 s.c.r. 3 at p.
11, the court confirmed detainees have the right to choose their counsel and
they are not expected to choose another lawyer if the chosen lawyer is
available within a reasonable time. although duty counsel may be readily
available, this cannot be used as a means to “trump a detainees right to
counsel of choice” (see
r. v. kumarasamy,
 o.j. no. 303 at para.
21
).

jian chen was arrested at 8:37 p.m. on june 26,
2020. immediately, he was informed that he was being arrested for trafficking
and after moving jian out of his vehicle to a sidewalk area for safety,
detective constable hamburg read jian his rights to counsel. it is the
defendant’s response of “no english, no english” in my view that crystalized
that there was a language barrier and concern that not only did he not
understand his 10(b) rights but also his 10(a) rights. the team of officers
were aware that the undercover’s communication with the target was in another
language, however for d.c. hamburg he experienced compliance from the defendant
once the officers were at his window; including jian passing the vehicle’s keys
and following the request to exit the vehicle and to move towards the
sidewalk. the officer i find acted based on jian chen’s response appropriately
to reading the defendant’s rights to counsel. again, it is at the point the
rights are being read that it is realized an alternative needs to be had and
the officers acted in a way which would be appropriate. the officer called for
an officer to attend for both translation and transport. five district, as the
evidence disclosed, has a diverse population and the police force is reflective
of their community. on each shift there is an officer who is fluent in both
mandarin and cantonese. requesting the officer to attend to help with translation,
given the believed availability of an officer, as well as five district being
in close proximity and there was the underlying need for a transport officer was
done to ensure best practices.

however, this was a compliant plan until it was
not. the transporting officer sent could not assist with translation. this in
itself would delay rights, and the delay was further exacerbated as the vehicle
did not have its stock of police property bags.

the delay continued after the transport of the
defendant as he waited for an extended period in the “sally port” area prior to
eventually being brought into the booking hall and speaking to p.c. tong in
mandarin.

the one hour and nine minutes of delay did not
occur in a vacuum. the other arrests, which were unforeseen, created a unique
circumstance adding to the delay as each of the four other individuals arrested
by the drug team all required the assistance of p.c. tong for rights and
booking. three of those individuals arrived at five district in advance of
jian chen.

in 2020 the police had at their disposal an
interpreter telephone line that they could call and could be utilized as a means
to ensure rights to counsel are provided as required. in fact, the members of
the team that arrested the target used this to ensure
charter
compliance. in the evidence before me, i also was made aware that the google translate
technology was known to the police. i do accept that both the interpreter line
and google translate were new resources known to some police officers and they had
not yet become widely known. i cannot say that had the arrest occurred today
that i would not expect officers in complex and unexpected situations to
utilize these now well-known and easy to navigate services to ensure complying
immediately with a detainee’s s. 10(a) and s. 10(b)
charter
rights.

the facts involving the providing of 10(a) and
10(b) rights in this case are uniquely context driven. the events of june 26,
2020 display a series of remote events which i find were not foreseeable. the
core objective for the targeted drug investigation was to attempt to arrange a
sample buy while observations were placed on a single suspect (and not jian
chen). given the situation and its array of dynamics, i find that a short
delay for use of a translation officer, or a short delay to transport to a
district to facilitate translation, or the use at the roadside of an
interpreter’s line or google translate would have complied with informational
rights. however, the fact that no officer on the evidence before me accepted a
lead role in supervising this team of officers, guiding them with the simple
use of radio communication to ensure that all detainees that evening, once it
became apparent and obvious there might be a language issue or barrier in the
officers’ obligation to provide 10(a) and 10(b) rights, in my view assist me in
coming to the conclusion that mr. jian chen’s 10(a) and 10(b) informational
rights were breached.

additionally, and notwithstanding the backlog in
processing the individuals arrested and requiring information, the booking
sergeant should have also assisted. he was aware of the incoming detainees and
instead of undertaking a linear role, which i am sure was stressful and
possibly administratively challenging, he could have, given his role, as i
understand it, done more, including getting phones connected to the translation
line to the detainees while they waited so that officers at a minimum could offer
them rights even if there was a short subsequent delay to exercise those rights
in a private setting.

the backlog of prisoners and the delay in the
booking process can never abrogate an individual’s right to counsel of choice. 
p.c. tong was wrong to respond to jian chen, when jian indicated he had in
immigration lawyer, that he needed a criminal lawyer. this shut down an
opportunity to find counsel of choice. this information should have been
shared and considered by the booking sergeant, but it was not and jian chen was
steered, in my view, to duty counsel, violating his s. 10(b) rights. the
booking sergeant did not act with reasonable diligence.

in
r. v. maciel,
2016 oncj 563 (canlii), o.j. no. 4789,
justice stribopoulos discussed the standard:
if the police did not assume this
responsibility, those in detention would be expected to exercise reasonable
diligence in contacting their lawyer of choice. where the police take on this
function on behalf of the detainee, it seems eminently sensible to subject
their efforts to the same standard. anything less would encourage token
efforts by the police and imperil the right of those in detention to consult a
lawyer of their choosing. (at para. 43)

in
r v. ali,
2018 oncj 203 (canlii), o.j. no. 1662, the
court succinctly stated the following, which i adopt contextually. justice
burstein said, at para. 59:
59
notwithstanding my concerns about how best to phrase the legal test, i fully
agree with the proposition that when the police choose to maintain control over
the tools necessary for a detainee to exercise their s. 10(b) rights, the
police thereby assume constitutional responsibility for using those tools in
the same manner as any reasonable detainee facing an urgent need to contact
counsel. in my view, the issue of whether the police discharged their duty to
facilitate contact with a detainee’s counsel of choice should be determined by
what a
reasonable detainee would likely have done to contact counsel had
the police provided them with the tools for doing so.
that is exactly
how stribopoulos j. approached his assessment of the constitutional adequacy of
the police efforts to contact counsel of choice in
maciel
28:
…[w]here the police have assumed the
responsibility to contact counsel of choice, i think it sensible to outline the
sort of steps that should be undertaken to obtain counsel’s contact details in
order to satisfy the reasonable diligence standard. in my view, common sense
suggests that at a minimum this should include:
*
asking the person in custody if they have a
telephone number, or know anyone who has a telephone number, for the lawyer
they want to contact;
*
giving the person in custody access to their
cellular phone or smart phone, where they advise that they have the lawyer’s
number stored on such a device;
*
conducting an internet search to determine if
the lawyer has a website and consulting any such website to locate a cellular
phone number or e-mail address for the lawyer, and calling, texting, and/or
e-mailing these;
*
using the internet to search any available
online directories, for example
canada 411, canadianlawlist,
or the law society
of upper canada’s paralegal and lawyer directory.
*
using any available conventional paper based
directories, both for lawyers and for phone numbers more generally (i.e. the
white or yellow pages).
in my view,
in this day and
age, these are the sorts of very basic steps that any reasonably diligent
individual who was attempting to contact a lawyer would undertake.
these are entirely in keeping with the supreme court’s direction that the
police are required to take proactive steps to turn the
right
to counsel
into
access
to counsel…[emphasis added.]
in deciding what efforts are “reasonable”,
a court must not lose sight of the fact that the methods available today for
locating counsel of choice are undoubtedly different today than what was
available to a detainee in the past. accordingly, the standard of care
required of the police today must not be defined by what may have seemed
reasonable ten years ago.

the booking sergeant should have made fulsome
inquiries of what was being said to p.c. tong. had that occurred, knowledge of
the existence of the immigration lawyer and the proper inference that access of
contact information within jian chen’s cell phone could have been easily obtained
through controlled access of jian’s phone without any fear of losing potential
evidence. the right to counsel of choice rests fully with the defendant and
not in some false belief that counsel of choice is restricted to a criminal
lawyer.
section 24(2) of the
charter

as i have found a breach of the defendant’s s.
10(a) and s. 10(b) rights the applicant bears the onus of establishing on a
balance of probabilities that the evidence sought to be excluded would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute.

in
r. v. grant,
2009 scc 32, the supreme
court of canada set out an analysis comprised of three lines of inquiry. the
analysis is on the overall generally held belief in the administration of
justice and the public’s confidence.

the first line of inquiry addresses the
seriousness of the state infringing conduct. i note the court’s guidance at
paras. 74 and 75:
state conduct resulting in
charter
violations varies in seriousness. at one end of the spectrum, admission of
evidence obtained through inadvertent or minor violations of the
charter
may minimally undermine public confidence in the rule of law. at the other end
of the spectrum, admitting evidence obtained through a wilful or reckless
disregard of
charter
rights will inevitably have a negative effect on
the public confidence in the rule of law, and risk bringing the administration
of justice into disrepute.
extenuating circumstances, such as the need
to prevent the disappearance of evidence, may attenuate the seriousness of
police conduct that results in a
charter
breach:
r. v. silveira,
1995 canlii 89 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 297,
per
cory j. ‘good faith’ on
the part of the police will also reduce the need for the court to disassociate
itself from the police conduct. however, ignorance of
charter
standards
must not be rewarded or encouraged and negligence or wilful blindness cannot be
equated with good faith:
r. v. genest,
1989 canlii 109 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 59, at p. 87,
per
dickson c.j.;
r. v. kokesch,
1990 canlii
55 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 3, at pp. 32-33,
per
sopinka j.;
r. v. buhay,
2003 scc 30 (canlii), 1 s.c.r. 631, at para.
59. wilful or flagrant
disregard of the
charter
by those very persons who are charged with
upholding the right in question may require that the court dissociate itself
from such conduct. it follows that deliberate police conduct in violation of
established
charter
standards tends to support exclusion of the
evidence. it should also be kept in mind that for every
charter
breach
that comes before the courts, many others may go unidentified and unredressed
because they did not turn up relevant evidence leading to a criminal charge. 
in recognition of the need for courts to distance themselves from this
behaviour, therefore, evidence that the
charter
-infringing conduct was
part of a pattern of abuse tends to support exclusion.

in my finding of a breach of both s. 10(a) and
s. 10(b) the police failed to provide jian chen both his informational and
implementational rights. the defendant was without understanding what he was
charged with or his ability to seek a ‘lifeline’ for over one hour and nine
minutes.

the facts though need to be placed in context. 
d.c. hamburg tried to immediately provide rights, only upon doing so he discovered
a language barrier restricting his ability to dispense his duty. he acted
diligently in my view in that time frame. he sought a solution to have an
officer attend to provide 10(a) and 10(b)
charter
rights so that they
could be understood by the defendant. five district have an officer on each
platoon who can speak mandarin and/or cantonese. other alternatives to access
interpretation, such as an interpreter line or an available internet tool, were
available, however in 2020 were not well-known nor frequently employed. this,
together with the myriad of unforeseen arrests that came out of a single
investigation over an extremely short period of time make this not a case
where, in my view, the police failed or neglected to make contingencies for a
takedown of multiple suspects as part of a project investigation.

i also look at the actions of the booking sergeant
in light of the arrest date being approximately three months into lockdowns due
to the onset of the covid-19 world-wide pandemic. the sergeant should have
known better to both expedite translation for the defendant but to also take
appropriate steps to access counsel of choice. his choice to steer jian chen,
i infer, was not out of bad faith but his need to manage efficiently those
coming into a type of congregate setting while attempting to keep individuals
apart. my finding would be skewed if not applying a lens of common sense as to
what was occurring not only in the regional community but also world-wide. as
a result, my findings do not equate to a finding of
bad
faith. no officer utilized the breaches in any manner to obtain any further
evidence, admissions or a statement from the defendant. in
my view this
line of inquiry favours inclusion of the impugned evidence.

the second line of inquiry assesses the
violation’s impact on the defendant’s
charter
-protected interest. this
favours exclusion.

jian chen was entitled upon detention to be
informed of his 10(a) and 10(b) rights. he was entitled to obtain advice and
entitled to be provided a reasonable opportunity to access his own lawyer for
that legal advice. this is simply fundamental.

the last line of inquiry assesses society’s
interest in the adjudication of matters on their merit. in this line, i ask
whether vindication of a
charter
violation exacts too great of a toll on
the truth-seeking function of the trial process (see
r. v. kitaitchik
(2002),
2002 canlii 45000 (on ca), 166 c.c.c. (3d) 14 (ont. c.a.) at para.
47
) and in my view it would. 
this line of inquiry tips toward inclusion.

i conclude that when i balance the three lines
of inquiry, and consider all the circumstances and in context, that i am
satisfied that the admission of the evidence will not bring the administration
of justice into disrepute.
section 24(1) of the
charter

in 1989, justice lamer of the supreme court
stated that “to create a right without a remedy is antithetical to one of the
purposes of the
charter
which surely is to allow courts to fashion
remedies when constitutional infringements occur” (see
nelles v. ontario,
1989 canlii 77 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 170 at p. 196).

in
r. v. omar,
2019 scc 32, the supreme
court articulated the possibility that judges should consider the availability
of non-exclusionary remedies. brown j. stated at para. 1:
…the majority adds this. it may be that
consideration should be given to the availability, under
s. 24(1)
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms, of remedies other than
exclusion of evidence when dealing with s. 24(2), but the majority would leave
this question for another day.

the
s. 10(a)
and
s. 10(b)
charter
breaches,
as i have found, were discreet to the facts and context. in my view they do
not include a breach of
s. 7
of the
charter. nothing before me
indicates any prejudice to the defendant’s right to a fair trial, nor does it
assail the integrity of the justice system.

the test in
r. v. babos,
2014 scc 16 (canlii), 1 s.c.r.
309 is not met on my findings for this court to grant a stay of proceedings or
for the exclusion of the evidence of trafficking.
the
more appropriate and proportionate remedy is a sentence reduction.
this
mitigation adopts a flexible approach as the supreme court followed in
r. v.
nasogaluak,
2010 scc 6 (canlii), 1 s.c.r.
206.
the trial proper

the definition of trafficking includes sell,
administer, give, transfer, transport, send or deliver.

the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt,
(i)
the substance was a controlled substance, namely
ketamine;
(ii)
the defendant trafficked in ketamine;
(iii)
the defendant knew the nature of the substance;
and
(iv)
the defendant had the intent to traffic.

the evidence before me arises from the oral
evidence, exhibits and admissions heard on the blended
voir dire.

on the record before me there exists sufficient
evidence that the substance was ketamine. the substance was tested by health
canada and found to be ketamine, which is a controlled substance.

the evidence is clear and uncontested that jian
chen was the driver of the black audi suv that on june 26, 2020 arrived at the
pacific mall in markham, stopping briefly perpendicular to the target’s
vehicle. that the target went up to jian chen’s passenger side of the car and
the ketamine that had been transported and delivered was transferred and given
to the target through the passenger window. the package was quickly discovered
when the police stopped and arrested the target. there was no other item in
the target’s possession but the package delivered and transferred from the
defendant to the target. there were continuous and congruous observations and
i find complete continuity.

the crown must also prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that jian chen knew the package contained ketamine and that he had the
intent to traffic ketamine.

from the totality of the evidence i draw the
only reasonable inference available, that he was aware of the specific
controlled substance and he intended to give it to the target as part of the
target’s pre-arranged sale of one kilogram of ketamine to the undercover police
officer.

in coming to the conclusion, i have included the
following in my consideration:
(i)
the objective of the day included the undercover
request to purchase a sample of ketamine from the target.
(ii)
at 7:42 p.m. the undercover requested one
kilogram of ketamine from the target. the target agrees but needs 30 minutes. 
meeting is set.
(iii)
the target is home and remains under complete
and continuous surveillance. officers observe removal of a small pouch from
one of the vehicles at the target’s residence and he leaves to attend the
pacific mall. he is followed and is under police watch at all times.
(iv)
at 8:25 p.m. the target informs the undercover
he needs five further minutes.
(v)
the target is observed to drive north of the
8:30 p.m. agreed meeting location, and at 8:29 is north of the td bank in a
different area of the pacific mall. the target parks his vehicle in a defined
parking spot.
(vi)
at 8:33 jian chen arrives and stops his vehicle
in a live lane perpendicular to the target’s vehicle.
(vii)
the target approaches jian chen’s vehicle and
reaches at the passenger window where the package is passed to him. the target
next moves straight back to his vehicle. jian chen quickly leaves.
(viii)
the location of this transfer is not at an identifiable municipal
address or location.
(ix)
the target is arrested and the only package
found resembling what was viewed contains one kilogram of ketamine.
(x)
at 8:37 jian chen is stopped and arrested.
(xi)
the one kilogram of ketamine has a significant
value.

jian chen attended in quick response to obvious
communication from the target. this deal was going to occur and occur
quickly. jian arrives and passes a package that is not sealed but in an
obviously used japanese mochi ice cream box and has a large dollar value. jian
chen stops his vehicle at the target’s vehicle, a random location not connected
to a defined address or location. the target had said he needed a further five
minutes and in the interim short wait period jian arrives with the drugs. it
is fair to conclude that he was aware of the contraband, and he purposely
attended in a means of limited contact as part of a trafficking to minimize his
own exposure.

in my view this is the only reasonable inference
and conclusion that can be drawn from the evidentiary record. di luca j.
concisely writes in
r. v. lu,
2021 onsc 7889
at para.
117
as follows:
where the evidence in relation to an
offence or an essential element of an offence is circumstantial, the crown must
prove that the defendant’s guilt is the only reasonable inference available,
see
r. v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33. consideration of circumstantial
evidence requires the drawing of reasonable inferences based on logic,
experience and common sense. speculation and conjecture are impermissible, but
the line between speculation and reasonable inference may be, at times,
difficult to draw. however, the ease of drawing the inference is not the
standard. the standard is whether the inference is based in logic and reason. 
the analysis must be based on the totality of the evidence before the court.

i have turned my mind to whether the defendant
was just a hired unsuspecting delivery dupe. in my view this makes no sense
given the facts itemized from which i drew my conclusions. it is not
reasonable to suggest jian chen was simply delivering ice cream in the last
week of june in the summer of 2020 to a random location in a mall where most
members of the community would attend such commercial establishments to
purchase like items.

jian chen was aware the substance was ketamine
and chose to traffic. in my view his intention was clear. the defendant not
only trafficked, but had knowledge and control, and dominance over the ketamine
when he trafficked.

the crown has proven the charge beyond a
reasonable doubt and a conviction will be registered on the one count of
trafficking.
released: april 16, 2025
signed:
justice paul m. cooper