source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj726/2025oncj726.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. g.c.,
2025 oncj 726
date: may
7, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 998 23 31101266
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
g.c.
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 06 and 07 may 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 07 may 2025
s. gerdun................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
d. pledge.............................................................................. counsel
for the defendant g.c.
reasons for judgment following a trial
renwick j.:
introduction

the defendant is charged on a five-count
information alleging assaults and one threat to his wife, s.k. the prosecution
proceeded summarily.

the prosecution called one witness, the
complainant. some photographs and an affidavit made by the complainant were
also introduced into evidence during this brief trial. the defendant did not
call any evidence.

the sole issue for determination is whether the
prosecution has met its burden of proof in respect of the allegations.
governing legal
principles

the supreme court of canada has recently
reiterated the legal principles that govern the fact-finding process engaged
during a trial.


the onus during a criminal trial begins and ends with
the prosecution to prove the guilt of a defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
everyone charged with a criminal offence is presumed innocent and that
presumption remains throughout the whole of the trial, unless and until the
court is satisfied that the charges have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
the prosecution’s burden of proof never shifts during the trial. in this case,
if at the end of my consideration of the evidence and submissions i am not
satisfied that the prosecution has proven any element of an alleged offence
beyond a reasonable doubt, and more specifically, if i have a reasonable doubt
that the defendant committed any assault or threat, he will be acquitted of the
charges.

a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or
frivolous doubt. it must be based upon reason and common sense and it logically
derives from the evidence or the lack of evidence adduced during a trial. while
likely or even probable guilt is not enough to meet the criminal standard,
proof to an absolute certainty is inapplicable and unrealistic. the supreme
court of canada has cautioned that there is no mathematical precision to proof
beyond a reasonable doubt, but it lies much closer to absolute certainty than
to proof on a balance of probabilities.

if after considering all of the admissible evidence, i am sure that
the defendant committed an alleged offence and i am not left with any
reasonable doubt, i must convict him since this demonstrates that i am
satisfied of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. likewise, if i am not sure,
or some reasonable doubt remains, then the charge has not been proven to the
required degree and an acquittal must follow.

this case involves credibility and reliability assessments. in
assessing credibility and reliability i have considered the general capacity of
the witness to make her observations, to remember what she perceived, and her
ability to accurately testify and communicate her recollections. it is also
important to determine whether the witness was trying to tell the truth and
whether the witness was sincere, candid, biased, reticent, or evasive. a court
may accept some, none, or all of what a witness says while testifying.

a valuable means of assessing the credibility of any witness is to
examine the consistency between what the witness said throughout their
testimony. i must also assess what is testified to in the context of all of the
evidence in the case and not on an isolated basis. this is true for any
inconsistencies and whether these are significant or inconsequential to the
case. if an inconsistency is significant, then i must pay careful attention to
it when assessing the reliability of the witness' testimony.

admissibility and the weight attached to evidence are two distinct
considerations. in addition to the testimony received, there are photographs
and an affidavit to consider. the probative value of evidence is not presumed.
in all cases, a trier of fact must determine the appropriate weight to give
each piece of evidence and what, if anything, is established or proven and to
what degree.

triers of fact must consider both credibility
and reliability in determining the facts in a given case. credibility is
shorthand for truthfulness and believability. reliability is the lens through
which one evaluates the accuracy of evidence. trial judges must be careful not
to conflate credibility with reliability otherwise the fact-finding net might
entangle even the least reliable piece of evidence.

it is important to remember that in some cases
credibility takes a back-seat to reliability. for example, there are
prosecutions where the suspect is unknown to the complainant and the latter may
be honestly mistaken about the identity of the perpetrator. in such a case,
reliability concerns govern the analysis because credibility does not guarantee
accuracy. credible witnesses can be mistaken or otherwise inaccurate. thus,
credibility is not a proxy for reliability.


where witness testimony is highly credible,
consistent, plausible, not inconsistent with other evidence, not found to be
the product of bias or motive, largely undisturbed upon a vigorous
cross-examination, and not found to be otherwise unreliable, truth and accuracy
are likely established.

assessments of credibility and reliability can
be the most important and challenging judicial determinations in a criminal
trial. our highest court has reminded us:
credibility
and reliability assessments are also context-specific and multifactorial: they
do not operate along fixed lines and are “more of an ‘art than a science’.”
with respect to credibility in particular, while coherent reasons are crucial,
it is often difficult for trial judges to precisely articulate the reasons why they
believed or disbelieved a witness due to “the complex intermingling of
impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and
attempting to reconcile the various versions of events.” the task is further
complicated by the trial judge’s ability to accept some, all, or none of a
witness’ testimony.


judicial fact-finding is often based on
inductive reasoning and evaluations of “probable interpretations of the
evidence.”

it necessarily depends on common-sense inference-drawing.

to again quote the supreme
court:
reasoning
about how people generally tend to behave, and how things tend to happen, is
not only permissible, it is often a necessary component of a complete
testimonial assessment.

the
evidence

in this part, i will outline some of the evidence and provide an
assessment of the testimony, with references to specific portions of the
evidence. although i will not refer to all of what the witness said, i listened
to the witness carefully, i have taken detailed notes, and i have assessed all
testimony for intrinsic and extrinsic consistency, plausibility, balance,
motive, and the witness’ ability to recall and communicate.

i
will not recapitulate all of the evidence received during this trial. suffice
it to note that i have used several opportunities during the trial and
subsequent to the completion of the submissions to review my notes and to
listen to parts of the digital audio recordings of the proceedings. i have
thoroughly reviewed the evidence in this case, and i will only discuss parts of
the evidence where it serves to underscore my findings. lastly, despite any
verbal exchanges during the evidentiary phase of the trial or submissions, i
came to no conclusions about any of the evidence received until all of the
closing submissions were made and my review of the evidence, submissions, and
the law was complete.
the
testimony of the complainant

the complainant testified about her marriage to the defendant.
initially, things were smooth. they married abroad and she came to canada in april
2021, before her spouse. the defendant arrived in september 2022. things in the
marriage began to deteriorate within months of his arrival. within six months
of the defendant’s arrival, the complainant attended the police station on 30
january 2023 and made the allegations before the court.

the complainant first testified about the incident that gave rise
to her attendance at the police station. on 30 january 2023, the couple were
headed to their local temple for religious observance. at a bus stop, the
complainant told the court about the defendant “pushing and pulling” her
because she only had one ear bud to listen to music, not two (apparently, the
other was inadvertently left at home). she also said that the defendant had “pushed”
her on her face, he punched her on her face, and he tried “pushing” on her
neck. the complainant also used the word, “abusing” to describe how the
defendant had been blaming her and her parents for her behaviour.

it was obvious that the complainant spoke english as a second
language. she did not wish to use a court interpreter to testify, and this may
explain her use of the word “push” to mean several things: to push, to punch or
to grab (as in around her neck).

the complainant testified that the defendant first “beat” her at
the bus stop, on their way to the temple. as a result, the complainant returned
home, to their basement apartment. the defendant presumably went to the temple
and returned home later that evening.

the arguing and physical violence continued, according to the
complainant. the defendant confronted the complainant in the kitchen and the
complainant testified that during this argument, the defendant punched her on
the right side of her face. exhibit 1a and 1b are photographs taken that night
by the upstairs tenants. the right side of the complainant appears red in ex.
1b. interestingly, when the complainant demonstrated this assault, she held a
closed fist up to the
left
side of her face. the defendant also
allegedly grabbed the complainant by the throat and held onto her for either
one or two minutes or two to three minutes, depending on the which account she
gave during her evidence in chief. at this point, the complainant had “a little
bit, not that much” trouble breathing and she began shouting. this gained the
attention of the upstairs neighbours and when they came downstairs the violence
ended.

the complainant was uncertain when she called police. she
believed it was about an hour after she had gone to sleep. when the complainant
called the police, the defendant was not present.

the complainant also testified about a threat that the defendant
made about 10-15 days before the assaults of 30 january 2023. on that occasion,
the defendant told her that he was not afraid of the police. the complainant
had mentioned that she would call the police, because the arguments were
happening every two or three days. she was clear that there was no violence in
these interactions, only arguments. in that context, the defendant said that he
would kill the complainant and then he would go to jail.

cross examination of the complainant was
fruitful.

the complainant confirmed that 30 january had
been the only time when things became physically violent.

the complainant became uncertain that the
defendant had left their home after the punch to the face and neck grab. when
asked if they slept together that night, the complainant answered, “i didn’t
remember, maybe.” it was put to her that they slept together and when the
defendant left for work, she called the police. to this suggestion, the
complainant responded, “maybe, i’m not sure.”

the complainant was also cross examined about
the photographs from that time period. interestingly, photo 1a shows redness on
the complainant’s face, but when the police took the photograph that became
exhibit 1c, the redness was gone and two small scratches were present. the
complainant had no explanation for this.

cross examination also covered an affidavit that
the complainant swore on 27 july 2023, some six months after making her
statement to the police. this became exhibit 2. the affidavit contradicts much
of the complainant’s testimony. she explained that she felt pressured to write
it because after he was charged, the defendant’s family kept calling her and
her family every 15-20 minutes.

lastly, there was another incident at a bus stop
that the complainant mentioned in her statement to the police, that she claimed
not to remember when she was testifying in chief. during that incident, the
defendant allegedly threw the complainant’s cap into the road and he was
pulling her “hairs.”
analysis

the complainant was a poor witness, overall. i
found her evidence to be shifting and inconsistent, internally. i was troubled
by her apparent willingness to lie in a sworn affidavit and her poor memory on
the whole. several examples of the difficulties i had in the evidence follow.

when asked in chief how hard she was pushed into
the mirrors at the bus stop, she said, “not that much, just a little bit.” apparently,
it did not hurt her. she also described being pushed on her shoulders. this is
a stark contrast from the “beating” she initially said had happened at the bus
stop.

i do not find that the exhibits support the complainant’s
version of events. if anything, the photographs undermine the complainant’s
testimony, because the redness on the complainant’s cheek/upper jaw line
conflicted with the side of her face she used to demonstrate the closed fist
punch while testifying. also, the redness in photograph 1b is not visible in
1a. lastly, the redness on the complainant’s neck in 1a is replaced with
scratches, without any apparent redness, in photograph 1c. i have some doubt
about the lack of a police photo of the complainant’s face. the complainant
testified that her pain lasted one to two days, but one strong inference is
that there was no mark on her right (or left) cheek) when she spoke to the
police.

i am not as perplexed by the complainant’s
affidavit. i understand why victims of intimate partner violence may be coerced
into recanting their statements. i would say, however, that the complainant is
not believable when she said that the defendant’s family members called her and
her family every 15-20 minutes. there was no period of time given for this
apparent pressure, but even if this lasted for one day, it is excessive and
incomprehensible. there was no evidence that the complainant went to the police
about this pressure. instead, she resiled from her police statement. none of
which explains why she testified that she told the lawyer drafting the
affidavit to include that she did not want to resume cohabitation with the
defendant. this is the one detail she wanted to see included and it is not; the
end of paragraph 5 suggests she wanted to resume cohabitation.

in the end, even if i believed the complainant,
which is difficult in the circumstances of the totality of her testimony and
all of the other evidence, she is completely unreliable as a witness for
several reasons:
i.
she was inconsistent in her testimony;
ii.
she has a poor memory in significant areas (did
the defendant sleep at their home after the assaults on 30 january 2023; when
did the complainant call and go to police to report the assaults);
iii.
was the threat made in person or on the
telephone as alleged;
iv.
was there a history of physical violence as
alleged, or merely a history of arguments and possibly a threat;
v.
why did the complainant swear to a false
affidavit; and
vi.
why was the complainant’s one wish about the
affidavit (the reason she was willing to sign it) missing.

where, as here, there are significant indicators
that undermine a witness’ reliability, the court must exercise caution before
accepting the uncorroborated testimony of a single witness.
conclusion

i find that i have a reasonable doubt about what
happened on 30 january 2023 and in the month or so leading up to that date.

in the circumstances, it would be unsafe to rely
upon the complainant’s testimony.

for these reasons, the charges are not proven
beyond a reasonable doubt and g.c. is acquitted of all counts.
released: 07 may 2025
justice
g. paul renwick

r.
v. kruk,
2024 scc 7
at paras.
59-62.

r.
v. starr,
2000 scc 40 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 40 at para.
242.

r.
v. h.c.,
2009 onca 56
at para.
41.

r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7
at para.
81.

kruk, supra, at paras.
71 and 75.

ibid.

kruk, supra, at para.
72.