source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj554/2025oncj554.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. bridgeraj, 2025 oncj 554
date: 
2025 10 23
court
file no.: toronto, ontario 24-48124843
24-48101458
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
kevin bridgeraj
before
justice caolan moore
heard
on september 17 and 18, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 23, 2025
ledya abdalla.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
michael engel............................................................................. counsel
for the defendant
moore j.:
introduction

kevin bridgeraj is charged with failing or
refusing to comply with a demand to provide a sample of his breath into an
approved screening device (“asd”). he was pulled over for speeding on july 15,
2024. the officer who pulled him over had an asd in his possession and made a mandatory
alcohol screening demand pursuant to
section 320.27(2)
of the
criminal code.

mr. bridgeraj alleges breaches of his section 8,
9, and 10(b) rights under the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms. he
submits that, should i find any
charter
breaches, the incriminating
evidence against him should be excluded under
section 24(2)
of the
charter,
or, in the alternative, the proceedings should be stayed under
section 24(1).
in any event, he asserts the prosecution has failed to prove the charge against
him beyond a reasonable doubt. mr. bridgeraj called no evidence in his defence.

mr. bridgeraj is also charged with speeding,
driving 135 kilometers per hour in a 100 kilometers per hour zone, contrary to
section 128
of the
highway traffic act. it was conceded at the beginning
of trial that the evidence would also be considered in relation to this
provincial offence. his guilt on this offence was conceded by counsel at the
end of trial.
evidence

on july 15, 2024, cst. osborn was acting
sergeant in uniform for the ontario provincial police (“opp”) detachment
charged with monitoring highway 401 in toronto.

around 12:44 a.m. he was on patrol driving
westbound on highway 401 near mccowan road. he had set his cruise control to
135 km/h in a posted 100 km/h zone to catch cars driving in excess of that
speed. his attention was drawn to a white pickup truck driving westbound in the
collector lanes and overtaking his position. he sped up, weaved through
traffic, and crossed into the collector lanes to catch the truck. he believes
he drove in excess of 150 km/h because the in-car camera (“icc”) in his scout
car activates automatically at that speed. he could not say how much faster
than 150 km/h he had driven.

he caught up to the truck as it exited onto
kennedy road. he came up behind it at a red light and watched it make a rolling
stop before turning and taking another right at a red light. cst. osborn
activated his emergency equipment and pulled the truck over.

as cst. osborn approached the truck, the driver,
conceded to be mr. bridgeraj, opened the front door of the vehicle. cst. osborn
noticed what appeared to be an x-acto knife in the driver’s side door. he asked
mr. bridgeraj to close the door and he complied.

cst. osborn informed mr. bridgeraj he had
stopped him for speeding and failing to stop at a red light. he then explained that
the opp were administering mandatory alcohol screening demands for all highway
traffic stops. around 12:46 a.m. he made a demand that mr. bridgeraj provide a
sample of his breath into an asd.

cst. osborn conducted a self-test on the asd to
show mr. bridgeraj how to use it and to ensure it was in proper working order. the
screen display said “ready” and there was a flashing green light indicating it
was ready to receive a sample.

cst. osborn asked mr. bridgeraj to blow into the
device while he was seated in the driver’s seat of his vehicle. he provided him
with a new mouthpiece, reset the unit, explained that he needed to make a tight
seal with his mouth, and asked him to blow with a constant breath until he was
told to stop.

on mr. bridgeraj’s first attempt, he barely
touched the mouthpiece with his mouth. cst. osborn heard a short tone,
indicating there was some breath, but the asd displayed “blow interruption”,
which occurs when there is insufficient breath for the device to provide an
analysis.

cst. osborn checked the device and was satisfied
there were no obstructions. he again told mr. bridgeraj to make a tight seal
on the mouthpiece and blow. mr. bridgeraj tried again to the same effect. he
kept saying he was blowing, but cst. osborn observed that he failed to make a
tight seal with his mouth on the mouthpiece. a third attempt was then made in a
similar manner with the same result.

cst. osborn checked to ensure there was no
physical reason mr. bridgeraj was unable to blow into the device. he examined his
seatbelt and made sure there were no restraints on his chest or lungs. he then
cautioned mr. bridgeraj, saying that if failed to comply with the demand he
would be arrested and charged criminally, and that the penalties for failing to
comply were the same if not more significant than if he were to provide a
sample that was over the legal limit. cst. osborn reminded him to make a tight
seal on the mouthpiece.

at 12:50 a.m., mr. bridgeraj was presented with
the asd for the fourth time. he made the same effort to blow with the same
result and error message. he was asked to step out of the vehicle and was
placed under arrest.

once outside the vehicle, cst. osborn handcuffed
mr. bridgeraj and patted him down to ensure he had no dangerous items. around
12:53 a.m., cst. osborn placed him in the rear of the scout car, told him again
the reason for his arrest, and read him his rights to counsel. the iccs in opp
scout cars at that time did not capture audio outside of the vehicle, only
inside. cst. osborn explained that he took mr. bridgeraj to the scout car so
that his rights to counsel would be audio and video recorded.

mr. bridgeraj indicated he wanted to call a
lawyer and needed the number from his phone. cst. osborn went to the truck. he retrieved
mr. bridgeraj’s phone and conducted a brief inventory search of the vehicle. a
little over two minutes later, cst. osborn was back in the scout car. he
cautioned mr. bridgeraj and asked him questions about his personal information
to conduct background checks to determine if he was suitable for release from
the scene. he noticed some signs of impairment during his interactions with mr.
bridgeraj which caused him some concern about his release, including an odor of
alcoholic beverage, slurring some of his words, slow blinking and closing of
his eyes, and being argumentative.

at 12:59 a.m., cst. osborn informed mr.
bridgeraj he was suitable for release from the scene if he would agree to
appear in court and appear to have his fingerprints taken. cst. osborn also offered
to drive him home, which mr. bridgeraj said sounded “amazing”. he told him he
had to do paperwork that takes 15-20 minutes – 30 minutes at most. cst. osborn
gave mr. bridgeraj the option of speaking to a lawyer in the scout car but
warned him he would be video, but not audio, recorded so he would not have as
much privacy. alternatively, he could speak to a lawyer after he took him home.
after some back and forth over several minutes, mr. bridgeraj indicated he
wanted to speak to his lawyer after he was released. this conversation ended
around 1:05 a.m.

mr. bridgeraj was initially handcuffed to the
rear. he asked for the handcuffs to be removed at 1:03 a.m. and cst. osborn explained
he could not do so. around 1:15 a.m., mr. bridgeraj asked again if the
handcuffs could be removed. cst. osborn explained it was policy and procedure
to keep them on but indicated he could have him handcuffed in the front and did
so, which took a minute or two.

the paperwork to release mr. bridgeraj and for the
tow of his vehicle were completed around 1:45 a.m. cst. osborn testified the
paperwork took longer than he had expected, even though he was being assisted
by another officer who arrived on scene. mr. bridgeraj did not complain. at one
point he told cst. osborn he did not care how long it took and at another point
fell asleep. cst. osborn admitted he probably could have completed the tasks faster
but took time to make sure he completed everything because mr. bridgeraj did
not seem concerned.
alleged
charter
breaches
section 8

a mandatory alcohol screening demand can be made
during the lawful exercise of an officer’s powers when the officer has the asd
in their possession. counsel asserts that by driving 135km/h on cruise control,
and the manner in which he drove over 150 km/h, in a 100 km/h zone without
activating his emergency equipment, cst. osborn was not acting within his lawful
powers. because of this conduct the demand is unlawful for failing to comply
with one of the requirements of
section 320.27(2).

cst. osborn testified he had been employing this
speed enforcement tactic for several years to catch stunt drivers, starting
when roads were completely open during the covid-19 pandemic. cst. osborn did
not testify as to how often he employed this tactic. he testified he had not been
doing it for very long on july 15, 2024. he did not activate his emergency
equipment right away because, in his experience, it causes confusion and danger
on the highway as drivers start to suddenly slow down or pull over.

section 128(13)
(b) of the
highway traffic act,
r.s.o. 1990, chapter h.8, stipulates that speed limits do not apply to police
department vehicles used in the lawful performance of an officer’s duties. there
is no question cst. osborn was engaged in police duties in attempting to
apprehend speeding drivers. what is at issue is the manner in which he carried
out that duty. police must exercise caution in exercising their powers to avoid
and minimize danger to the public. failure to do so could result in civil
claims or provincial offences act or criminal charges: see
r. v. brown,

o.j. no. 4848, at paras. 110-113.

cst. osborn was driving at a high rate of speed on
a controlled-access, multi-lane, 400 series highway in the early morning hours
with little traffic and what appeared to be clear conditions. while he
increased his speed to catch up to mr. bridgeraj’s vehicle and had to change
lanes quickly to do so, i do not find that his actions fell remotely outside of
the lawful execution of his duties. in any event, i fail to see any link
between the officer’s driving and mr. bridgeraj’s
section 8
charter
rights.

mr. bridgeraj was speeding. cst. osborn was
unquestionably exercising his lawful powers when he pulled him over. there was
no breach of his section 8 rights.
section 9

mr. bridgeraj argues that the length of time he
spent handcuffed in the scout car exceeded the amount of time that was
necessary to process his release and amounts to an arbitrary detention. it was
approximately 55 minutes from the time of arrest at 12:50 p.m. to the time of his
release at 1:45 a.m. it was approximately 40 minutes from the time mr.
bridgeraj indicated he wanted to speak to a lawyer after being driven home, between
1:05 a.m. and 1:45 a.m.

cst. osborn told mr. bridgeraj the paperwork
would take 15-20 minutes, 30 minutes at most. it took ten minutes longer than
his outside estimate. cst. osborn explained why it took additional time, noting
the paperwork was slower than anticipated and he had to assist and wait for the
tow truck. there is no evidence as to what portion of this time involved
completing the paperwork for mr. bridgeraj’s release or related to the tow
truck.

cst. osborn testified he handcuffed mr. bridgeraj
for mr. bridgeraj’s safety as well as his own. he believed mr. bridgeraj may
have been impaired and found him hostile and argumentative at times, which
created concerns about the predictability of his behaviour. there is no
evidence the handcuffs were applied too tightly or caused mr. bridgeraj any
injury. i find that handcuffing him reasonably flowed from cst. osborn’s safety
concerns in all the circumstances:
r. c. viti,
 j.q. no. 1972, at
paras. 73-76, 84-88, and 94.

counsel relies on the case of
r. v. fisher,
 o.j. no. 5201
for the proposition that keeping an individual in custody
in the back of a police car for more than roughly fifteen minutes – the approximate
time it should normally take to prepare and serve the proper documentation for
his release – amounts to an arbitrary detention. i do not think
fisher
stands
for this proposition. in
fisher,
justice berg found that it took fifteen
minutes for the officer to arrange for mr. fisher’s release for the criminal
offence in that case. the additional 74 minutes mr. fisher spent detained were
unlawful because the officer was issuing tickets for provincial offences.

cst. osborn detained mr. bridgeraj until he had
completed the paperwork for his release. he had the lawful authority to detain
him and detained him only so long as was reasonably necessary. cst. osborn did
not busy himself with unrelated tasks. it is not clear how much of this time
was spent working on the paperwork for the tow truck. the time it took for him
to complete the paperwork was ten minutes longer than his outside estimate. i
do not find it amounted to an arbitrary detention. his evidence he did not work
as quickly as he could have because mr. bridgeraj seemed fine and fell asleep was
an honest reflection that, had mr. bridgeraj been demanding, he could have worked
quicker or potentially completed a more succinct report. he was not asked how
much faster he could have worked or how much time working at a faster pace
would have saved. i do not find his testimony that it was possible for him to
complete his tasks faster indicative of any carelessness in his obligations or indifference
towards mr. bridgeraj’s rights. i find no breach of mr. bridgeraj’s
section 9
charter
rights.
section 10(b)

at issue are the three minutes between the time
mr. bridgeraj was placed under arrest and when he was read his rights to
counsel.

cst. osborn saw a knife in the driver’s door and
had no idea who mr. bridgeraj was. he deemed it appropriate to handcuff him and
pat him down to ensure he had no weapons before reading him his rights to
counsel. the additional delay, approximately one minute, was spent taking him
to the scout car to ensure the reading of his rights to counsel was audio recorded.

the law in this area is well established: rights
to counsel must be provided immediately upon arrest or detention, subject to some
exceptions, including officer or public safety:
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33 (canlii), 
s.c.j. no. 33,
at paras.
2 and 42. it must be kept in mind that rights
to counsel must be provided “immediately, not instantaneously”:
r. v. fisk,
 o.j. no. 707, at para. 51.

i accept that the search of mr. bridgeraj was
done for valid officer safety reasons: see
r. v. rossi,
 o.j. no.
3494, at paras. 29-36.

i take no issue with the short amount of time it
took to escort mr. bridgeraj to the rear of the scout car or his reasons for doing
so. cst. osborn did not busy himself with administrative or investigative tasks
or attempt to elicit information from mr. bridgeraj: see
r. v. davis,
2023
oncj 358, at para.
28;
r. v. danyliuk,
 o.j. no. 844, at para.
115; r. v. santos escutin,
 o.j. no. 5780 at para. 7;
r. v.
aliyak,
 nu. j. no. 23, at para. 24.

when asked when rights to counsel must be given
after arrest, cst. osborn answered, “as soon as practicable”. when asked what
he meant by that, he testified he was to provide rights to counsel after he
determined it was safe for him to do so. while the phrase “as soon as
practicable” should be removed from the acceptable lexicon of words used to
describe the implementation of this right, its use alone does not mean there
was a breach. cst. osborn’s articulation of what he meant is
charter
compliant:
officer safety is a valid reason to delay providing an accused their rights to
counsel. his actions and explanations align on the evidence before me.

i find cst. osborn was diligent in providing mr.
bridgeraj with his rights to counsel. there is no merit to the alleged
violation of his
section 10(b)
charter
rights.
fail or refuse

mr.
bridgeraj is presumed innocent. the burden of proof is never his. it is not
enough for me to believe he is probably or likely guilty. beyond a reasonable
doubt is an exacting standard that can arise from the evidence or from the
absence of evidence. while the crown is not required to prove its case to an
absolute certainty, proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls much closer to an
absolute certainty than a balance of probabilities. while mr. bridgeraj did not
testify, any exculpatory evidence before me is considered in light of the principles
in
r. v. w. (d.). to convict mr. bridgeraj, i must be satisfied on the
totality of the evidence that there is no reasonable doubt as to his guilt.

the
onus is on the crown to prove every element of this offence beyond a reasonable
doubt. it must prove a lawful demand was made, failure or refusal of the
accused to provide the required breath sample, and that the accused
intentionally failed or refused to provide a breath sample or knew that his
conduct would have this result:
r. v. khandakar,
 o.j. no. 3767, at paras. 18-19.

i
find a valid demand was made under
section 320.27(2)
of the
criminal code.
cst. osborn was engaged in the lawful exercise of his police powers when he
pulled mr. bridgeraj over and had an asd in his possession.

i also find mr. bridgeraj failed to provide a
sample of his breath as required.

counsel argues there is insufficient evidence
the asd was in proper working order. while the officer satisfied himself the
asd was in proper working order by checking to ensure it was properly
calibrated, observing it indicated it was “ready”, noting a green light that
confirmed it was ready, and conducting a self-test, the officer failed to note
if the asd made a tone when turned on to indicate it was ready or inspect it
for damage as described in the manual for this device. the same manual also
indicates that when the asd registers “blow interruption” a light should flash
red. cst. osborn did not make any observations of the colour of the light after
each attempt by mr. bridgeraj.

while failing to follow practice manual
directions is some evidence undermining the reasonableness of an officer's
belief, there is no evidence of the impact a failure to note the functions
above may have had on the device’s proper functioning. cst. osborn did not fail
to follow any directions so much as he failed to observe all the features the
asd uses to show it is operating effectively. the officer’s failure to record
or observe these additional aspects of the device’s function does not necessarily
negate the reasonableness of the officer’s belief. failing to follow a practice
manual direction is not dispositive: see
r. v. jennings,
2018 onca 260 (canlii), o.j.
1460, at para.
17.

any failure to follow manual directions in this
case had no bearing on the reasonableness of the officer’s belief the asd was
functioning properly when the tests were administered. while there is no
assumption that the device was working properly, i find that it was based on
the totality of the evidence before me, including the observations and checks
of the device made by cst. osborn, his self-test just prior to its use, and his
observations and actions when mr. bridgeraj attempted to provide samples of his
breath. there was no suggestion that cst. osborn improperly administered the
tests.

in july of 2024, opp officers did not have
body-worn cameras. the iccs in their scout cars only recorded two angles: the
area in front of the vehicle and the back seat. only the latter camera recorded
sound. counsel argues that by conducing the tests while mr. bridgeraj was
seated in his truck, cst. osborn deprived the court of video evidence that
would have captured the alleged offence. he should have conducted the test in
front of the scout car. cst. osborn indicated it was opp practice to conduct mandatory
alcohol screening tests while the driver was sitting in their vehicle.

it would have been ideal to capture mr.
bridgeraj’s efforts on video. that being said, cst. osborn was obliged to act
with dispatch in making the demand and obtaining breath samples: see
r. v.
breault,
2023 scc 9 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 9. a practice of conducting mandatory alcohol
screening tests with the driver seated in their vehicle is consistent with that
obligation. counsel argues the officer should have obtained the breath samples
in front of the scout car. an extension of that logic would be to have the
samples taken in the back of the scout car to capture audio as well, an act
that likely would have been subject to scrutiny in the circumstances of this
case: see
r. v. kelln,
 s.j. no. 176, at paras. 65-67 and 97. the
fact counsel also argues that the one-minute delay caused by placing the
accused in the back of the scout car before reading him his rights to counsel
and the additional time the accused spent in the back of the scout car while the
officer completed paperwork necessary for his release were violations of mr.
bridgeraj’s rights illustrates the complexity of these investigations.

the lack of video evidence is a factor i
consider on the whole of the evidence. having done so, i accept cst. osborn’s
testimony as to what occurred. i found his evidence straightforward, detailed,
and credible. what is captured on video corroborates his evidence. the absence
of more complete video and audio recordings does not leave me in any doubt.

counsel also argues that cst. osborn did not
give mr. bridgeraj a “last chance” to blow and that he should have done so in
this case. in examining the circumstances of the entire transaction, i find
cst. osborn was diligent in enquiring throughout if there were any physical or
other reasons to explain why mr. bridgeraj could neither follow his
instructions to form a tight seal on the mouthpiece nor blow consistently. he
was diligent in inspecting the mouthpiece for obstructions and observing mr.
bridgeraj to ensure there were no physical restrictions impeding him from
blowing properly. i find his warning that the consequences for failing to
provide a sample were the same or more severe than for blowing over the legal
limit would have brought home to mr. bridgeraj the importance of complying. mr.
bridgeraj did not ask for the opportunity to make another attempt: see
r. v.
kitchener,
2012 onsc 4754 (canlii), o.j. no. 3857, at paras.
29-35.

finally, i find mr. bridgeraj did not
legitimately attempt to provide a sample of his breath into the asd. his
feigned attempts amount to an unequivocal refusal. he knew he was obliged to
comply and that his conduct would lead to this result. given his conduct, there
was no need to provide him with further opportunities to provide a breath
sample. none were requested. the only reasonable inference to be drawn from his
insufficient attempts is that he was intentionally choosing to provide
inadequate samples: see
r. v. slater,
 o.j. no. 1592, at paras. 12-15.
i find he subjectively intended not to comply with the demand:
r. v. soucy,
2014 oncj 497 (canlii), o.j. no. 4518, at paras.
50-55;
r. v. emereuwa,
 s.j. no.
235, at para. 54. i am not left in any doubt by the evidence, or the lack of
any evidence, before me.
conclusion

in conclusion, i dismiss mr. bridgeraj’s
charter
application. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that he failed or
refused to comply with a demand to provide a sample of his breath into an
approved screening device and find him guilty. i also find him guilty of
speeding under the
highway traffic act.
released: october 23, 2025
signed:
justice caolan moore

there is disagreement in the case law about the mental element
of this offence. i need not address it given my findings below.