source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj295/2025oncj295.html

citation:
r. v. paypompee, 2025 oncj 295
date: 
may 29, 2025
court
file no: 4211-998-23-42101639
o n t a r i o c o u r t of j u s t i c e
b e t w e e n:
his majesty the king
-and-
jonathan paypompee
­­­­­­
­­­­­­­­­­­
before
justice m. g. march
submissions
heard on january 31, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on may 29, 2025
lilian taylor………………...…………….…………………………………….crown
counsel
amanda gallo..………………………………………………………………...defence
counsel
march, m.g., j.:
introduction:
1.
on january 31, 2025, jonathan paypompee (“paypompee”) entered pleas of
guilty before me to the following offences:
a)
operating
a conveyance, knowing it was involved in an accident with a person and failing
to stop contrary to
s. 320.16(3)
of the
criminal code of canada
(“the
code
”),
b)
operating
a conveyance in a manner that was dangerous to the public and thereby causing
the death of carson johnson (“johnson”) contrary to
s. 320.13(3)
of the
code,
and
c)
operating
a conveyance in a manner that was dangerous to the public and thereby causing
bodily harm to nicole smith (“smith”) contrary to
s. 320.13(2)
of the
code.
2.
due
to several outstanding decisions unrelated to this case which i had under
reserve, the release of these reasons for sentence were inordinately delayed. i
apologize to paypompee and his surviving victims for the further, four months
this matter has been left hanging over their heads.
circumstances of the offences:
3.
the facts underlying the commission of paypompee’s offences are set out
in an agreed statement of facts (“asf”). i am grateful to crown and defence counsel
for having worked together on them and filed them for the benefit of the court.
4.
the asf provides as follows:
a)
on
july 3, 2023, at approximately 15:20, the thunder bay police service and
thunder bay emergency services received multiple calls about a serious motor
vehicle collision on simpson street at northern avenue in thunder bay, on.
b)
information
from the 911 calls indicated that there had been an incident at simpson street
and northern avenue involving pedestrians struck by a red dodge journey suv (“the
journey”).
c)
upon
police arrival, the officers observed two pedestrians later identified as
johnson and smith, who were receiving medical care from paramedics.
d)
officers
further observed the journey bearing license plate cysv 598 north of the
pedestrians on the road with significant front-end damage. there was no driver
present in the vehicle. officers noticed a crack pipe on the passenger seat.
e)
police
spoke with a civilian witness, trevor baguley (“baguley”), on scene, who stated
that he saw the journey driving north on simpson street, where it then went up
on the sidewalk. baguley described the driver of the journey as a male,
wearing tan shorts, a black hat, a black t-shirt, black framed glasses, and
with short black hair. baguley added that the driver exited the journey, left
the scene, and was last observed walking towards the bridge over the mcintyre
floodway.
f)
based
on tire and skid marks observed at the scene of the collision determined that
the journey appeared to have driven off the road while travelling northbound on
simpson street, up onto the curb, and travelled along the sidewalk for
approximately 45 m before re-entering the roadway. while on the sidewalk, the
vehicle struck smith and johnson from behind.
g)
it
was estimated that smith travelled approximately 12 m from the area of impact
to where she was located laying in a driveway near the southeast corner of a
residence at 1071 fort william road.
h)
it
was believed that johnson came to rest approximately 38 m from the area of
impact and was located beside the northwest corner of 1069 fort william road.
the journey collided with him near the centre of its front end. he landed on
the hood. he struck his head on the windshield. he was then propelled off the
vehicle travelling through the air and striking the ground until he slid to his
final point of rest.
i)
the
journey stopped approximately 100 m from its point of impact with the
pedestrians. it sustained heavy front-end damage including an oval hole near
the passenger side of the windshield, the front grill, hood, fender, and passenger
side mirror were torn off. the right front tire and suspension were also
damaged with the right front tire pointing approximately 90° to the right.
j)
both
pedestrians were transported to the thunder bay regional health sciences
centre.
k)
following
arrival at the hospital, johnson was pronounced deceased. the cause of death
was determined to be blunt force head injury and crushing chest injuries
sustained because of the collision with the journey. johnson was 42 years of
age at the time of his death.
l)
smith
suffered a fractured elbow, a fractured ankle, multiple abrasions determined
likely to have been caused by road friction, a large gaping laceration
overlying her nasal bridge approximately 3 cm in length, a nasal bone fracture,
and a large laceration from her midline forehead to the top of her head. smith
required emergency surgical intervention to address the fractures to her elbow
and her ankle. she also required stitches, which were conducted
intraoperatively, to close her facial lacerations. smith was 37 years of age at
the time of the collision when she sustained these injuries.
m)
police obtained video
surveillance from the area of the collision.
n)
surveillance
from a thunder bay eye on the street camera, located on a light pole on the
east side of the bridge that crosses the mcintyre floodway, approximately 400
feet north of where the journey came to rest, captured part of the collision.
the camera recorded the vehicle already travelling northbound on the sidewalk
once visible. a cloud of dust erupted, as well as what was believed to be
johnson separating from the vehicle and travelling toward the house before the
vehicle went back onto the road and came to rest.
o)
the eye
on the street camera further captured an individual exit the journey
approximately three minutes after the collision. the individual stood around
the vehicle for a further two minutes before walking toward and crossing the
mcintyre floodway bridge, and later walking to isabel street. this individual,
as captured on the surveillance, appeared to be a male wearing a black t-shirt,
tan shorts, and he had short black hair.
p)
surveillance
from intercity shopping centre in thunder bay captured the same male as the eye
on the street. the male could be seen wearing a black t-shirt and tan shorts. 
he had short black hair and wore black glasses. he was observed walking
northbound across the mcintyre floodway bridge on the east side of fort william
road approximately seven minutes after calls were made to 911 reporting the
collision. further surveillance from intercity shopping centre also depicted
the same man walking into the mall and proceeding north through it before
exiting out the east entrance by marshall’s.
q)
on
july 4, 2023, at approximately 10:00 am, the thunder bay police service held a
media event providing details of the collision, as well as photos and videos
from surveillance taken at intercity mall. the police asked anyone with
information about the collision to come forward in an attempt to identify the
driver, who remained unknown at that point. in response to the appeal for the
public’s help, paypompee was identified as the male who exited the journey by two
anonymous callers as well as his sister, tina paypompee, who contacted police
to say who he was.
r)
police
also reviewed body worn camera footage from an unrelated incident from november
2023 during which time officers spoke with paypompee. they were able to
confirm the identity of the male on the surveillance video following this
collision by matching his features, glasses, and tattoos. mto records also revealed
that paypompee was not in possession of a driver’s license at the time of the
collision.
s)
police
then located and arrested paypompee at approximately 7:30 pm on july 4, 2023. 
he was charged with dangerous operation of a conveyance causing death,
dangerous operation of a conveyance causing bodily harm, failing to stop after
an accident resulting in death, failure to stop after an accident resulting in
bodily harm, and operation of a conveyance while prohibited.
t)
at
the time of paypompee’s arrest, he was wearing the same black t-shirt, tan
shorts and black glasses he was wearing at the time of the collision the day
before. his clothing was seized.
u)
on
july 5, 2023 at approximately 9:30 am, paypompee gave a voluntary statement to
the police at the balmoral police station in thunder bay. during that
interview, paypompee was cooperative and forthcoming with the officers. he
answered all their questions. he admitted to being the driver of the journey
involved in the collision, to have been driving without a licence at that time,
and to having left the scene after the collision.
v)
he
informed police he was alone in the vehicle at the time of the collision. he
admitted to using crack cocaine earlier that morning. paypompee also provided
police with a narrative of where he went after the collision, which was
corroborated by the surveillance video the police had already obtained and
reviewed.
w)
during the
interview as well, paypompee admitted to police that he caused the collision by
having dozed off at the wheel and having hit the gas pedal instead of the
brake. he acknowledged seeing the pedestrians he struck at the last second. he
told police that he was in shock after having seen one of the pedestrians hit the
window of the vehicle.
x)
paypompee
expressed his remorse during the interview to police, saying, “my life changed
after that. i changed a lot of lives: the guy i killed, his family, kids he may
have, relatives.” he agreed with the officer’s suggestion immediately thereafter,
that the collision was impactful, but replied, “it must be harder for them
because they didn’t deserve it.” when asked what he would like to say to the
people who were affected by the collision, paypompee replied that he was sorry
for their loss, for the life he took, and that they did not deserve what
happened to them.
y)
paypompee
further acknowledged that on july 3, 2023, he drove the journey bearing license
plate cysv 598 without a license in a manner dangerous to the public and while
doing so, he struck smith and johnson from behind. he agreed that in so doing,
he caused johnson’s death and smith’s injuries, which amounted to bodily harm.
z)
after
the collision, he also failed to remain at the scene.
circumstances of the offender:
5.
a pre-sentence report (“psr”) and a gladue

report (“gr”) were prepared on february 22, 2024 and august 12, 2024
respectively. both reports comprehensively chronicle paypompee’s personal
circumstances.
6.
paypompee is a 41-year-old man of indigenous heritage. he is a member of
the big grassy first nation, an ojibway community.
7.
he was born and raised in and about rainy river, ontario. his parents
separated when he was very young. his mother, who had constant struggles during
her life with alcohol, moved to winnipeg, leaving behind his father, sister and
him.
8.
paypompee did not have a stable upbringing. his youth probation records
indicated that he would often steal from his father and extended family
members. he would not return home for days at a time. he was generally
characterized as “defiant”.
9.
nevertheless, throughout his childhood, paypompee recalled participating
in positive prosocial activities including riding bikes, swimming, playing
soccer, hockey, basketball, and skiing. his father and his sisters were his
main supports.
10.
paypompee
struggled in school. he could become disruptive in class. he began skipping
at age 12 to consume drugs and alcohol. however, he managed to obtain a grade
12 high school diploma.
11.
in
2013, he went on to complete a diamond drilling course. later in 2017, he completed
a general arts and sciences program in thunder bay and fort frances.
12.
in
2016, he was diagnosed with hodgkin’s lymphoma and underwent chemotherapy
treatments. he is now cancer free, but he still attends for regular checkups
with cancer care.
13.
he
remained steadily employed for the most part between 2002 to 2022 working as a
guide for fishing and hunting expeditions, landscaping, in construction at
times, for a local airline company for five years, and lastly with a
specialized science and laboratory service provider. he expects to return to work
with that service provider upon his release from custody.
14.
substance
abuse has marred paypompee’s life. he began drinking alcohol at age 16. his
consumption became problematic by age 18. he then started drinking hard liquor
daily with friends and experiencing constant blackouts. he also used at
varying points demerol, cocaine and marijuana. he entered a methadone program
in 2012, but he stopped attending in december 2021.
15.
to
his credit, he participated in a two-week, ‘outpatient’ family healing program between
april 11 and april 28, 2023. the program offered counseling for identification
of triggers, learning positive coping skills for living a healthy lifestyle, positive
communication skills, and dealing with historical trauma including grief brought
on by the loss of loved ones, abandonment, and abuse. he actively participated
and put genuine effort into the program.
16.
at
the time of preparation of the psr, paypompee was single. he had previously
been in a three-year unstable relationship with the mother of his two younger children.
his relationship with his former partner ended in early 2022. he has a
6-year-old son and a 4-year-old daughter, who he raised from birth until
december 2022, when they were taken into care by an indigenous child welfare
agency. he last saw his children in may 2023. he continues to connect with them
by phone.
17.
he
also fathered a 10-year-old son with another woman with whom he was involved in
a short-term relationship.
18.
he presented to the psr
author with a flat affect when she interviewed him at the thunder bay district
jail. he expressed his remorse for his actions. he admitted to being under
the influence of alcohol at the time of committing the offences, but he denied
any drug use. he has remained in custody since the date of his arrest on july
4, 2023.
19.
the
psr author described paypompee as an individual who struggles to communicate
his thoughts and feelings. she ventured he could be harbouring significant
resentment and anger related to familial issues. she added that he lacked
insight, positive guidance, and stability throughout most of his life, which
has impacted his ability to cope.
20.
given
the likelihood for the imposition of a lengthy carceral sentence for paypompee,
the psr author recommended that he serve his sentence at a facility where
assistance for addiction, trauma, grief and loss of indigenous culture can be
offered to him, such as the stony mountain institution federally, or the algoma
treatment and remand centre (“algoma”) provincially.
21.
while
in jail, paypompee has worked in the kitchen and actively participated in several
institutional programs receiving certificates for:
a)
jhs-eating
right, a food and nutritional manual (2 hrs.),
b)
gangs,
learning about them, living without them (2 hrs.),
c)
living
with pain and loss: a manual on grieving (2 hrs.),
d)
jhs-repairing
the harm: an introduction to restorative justice (2 hrs.),
e)
an
anxiety toolbox (unknown length),
f)
change
is a choice – substance use (7.5 hrs.),
g)
men’s
educational-changing habits (2 hrs.),
h)
men’s
educational-planning for discharge (2 hrs.),
i)
men’s
educational-goal setting (2 hrs.),
j)
men’s
educational-healthy relationships (2 hrs.),
k)
men’s
educational-managing stress (2 hrs.),
l)
men’s
educational-problem solving (2 hrs.),
m)
men’s educational-supportive
relationships (2 hrs.),
n)
men’s
educational-substance use (7.5 hrs.),
o)
men’s
educational-understanding feelings (2 hrs.)
p)
men’s
educational-use of leisure time (2 hrs.),
q)
men’s
educational-thoughts to action (2 hrs.),
r)
relapse
prevention (7.5 hrs.),
s)
jhs-relapse
prevention (2hrs.), and
t)
smart
recovery (unknown length).
22.
paypompee’s
gr author conducted four telephone interviews with him, and one with his father
to gather information. paypompee offered to the author that he did not have
much information about his family history. he did not know his paternal
grandparents, who passed away before he was born. he could not provide their
names.
23.
he
explained that his father rarely spoke of his upbringing with his parents. the
gr author confirmed with paypompee’s father that he never attended a residential
school. however, paypompee was aware that his mother attended an indian residential
school and a day school in kenora, on, he thought.
24.
paypompee
heard from his maternal aunts after his mother’s death that his mother suffered
physical abuse at the hands of teachers at the school. she was “thrown in a
closet for hours on end with no food or water”. she had “her hair cut off and
her head soaked with kerosene (lice treatment).”
25.
sadly,
he described his relationship with his mother as “non-existent”. he had very
limited contact with her after she left the family unit when he was very young.
26.
paypompee
remembered fondly growing up in “big grassy”, his anishinaabe first nation,
located approximately 50 kms. north of the canada/u.s. border. he liked to attend
powwows. he would take community trips to winnipeg and into the u.s. for
powwows as well.
27.
big
grassy was a small, tight knit community. as of june 2024, it had a registered
population of 912 people with 262 members living on the reserve.
28.
paypompee
was raised by his father, who worked in the commercial fishery. paypompee enjoyed
spending time with his father when he would take him fishing, or they would go hunting. 
paypompee learned how to take care of the bounty they harvested. this practice
continued until paypompee left the reserve when he was 16 or 17 years old.
29.
paypompee
engaged in other traditional indigenous practices as a child such as attending
sweat lodges, grass dancing and participating in naming ceremonies. he took
the name “white cloud”. he lamented that he did not learn to speak ojibway and
could not say his name in the language. his father, on the other hand, was
bilingual in both ojibway and english.
30.
at
times during his childhood, paypompee remembered living with his aunt when his
father struggled to find housing. in paypompee’s early days, there was also no
family vehicle to travel to kenora. transportation was “an issue” until his
father was able to acquire a used pickup.
31.
paypompee
remembered being subjected to racism when he attended school in rainy river. 
some of the white parents did not want their kids attending school with
indigenous children. as paypompee explained to the gr author, “kids were being
beaten up on the weekend, being bullied... being called dumb or dirty
indians”. it led to him attending school in fort frances where it was “a lot
better” and “there was no racism”.
32.
regarding
his alcohol use, paypompee shared with his gr author that after finishing
school, he drank almost daily, “hard liquor: vodka, whiskey”. this pattern of
consumption continued until he reached the age of 30. he estimated that his
heavy drinking spanned a period of some 12 to 13 years. it coincided with the
loss of four close family members, aunts and uncles, who at times cared for him
as a child, and friends who committed suicide.
33.
through
it all, paypompee emphasized that he managed to raise his children. only
recently were they placed in the care of his sister.
34.
his
father corroborated for the gr author that paypompee was a very responsible
father to his children. according to his father, paypompee took really good
care of them, making sure they ate, got their shots, and received regular
dental care.
35.
regarding
his mental health, paypompee stated that he suffers from depression and
post-traumatic stress disorder. he was attacked in 2019 and had a pot of
boiling water thrown on him. this led to a period of hospitalization in
thunder bay.
36.
he
returned to big grassy thereafter with his children where they stayed for a few
years. he requires prescription medication to this day to manage his pain. unfortunately,
he later began abusing the medication.
37.
from
2015 to late 2022, paypompee enjoyed his longest period of abstention from
alcohol and cocaine, but by late 2022, he was using both daily again. his
substance abuse issues remain “unresolved” in his gr author’s view.
38.
while
in custody for almost the last two years, paypompee has been taking
anti-depressants to cope with his grief. repeatedly, he hears from his father
or sisters about the deaths of family members, an uncle, an aunt and two
cousins, as well as friends, some to overdose, and some to a motor vehicle
accident. he also sees a psychiatrist, who visits him in jail once per month.
39.
paypompee
reported to his gr author that there is an issue of overcrowding in the jail. most
often, there are three prisoners to a cell. there are lockdowns almost every
weekend. there is no time to shower. he attributes the cause of the problem
to the facility being short-staffed. he claimed he saw one inmate try to hang
himself three times.
40.
regarding
his remorse for the crimes he recently committed, he stated that he feels
“regretful with all that happened”. he added, “it pretty much changed me –
what happened that day.”
41.
he
would like to serve his time at a “healing lodge” in sault ste. marie, on. the
gr author clarified that he was referring to algoma.
42.
he
indicated a willingness to engage in an in-patient treatment program and to
take counseling
when he is released back into the community. 
he would like to move home to big grassy, to try to find housing, “get back on
track”, to obtain a job and to seek support for his substance dependence.
43.
in
addition to a recommendation that paypompee be permitted to serve his sentence
at algoma, or another facility geared to offering a correctional healing lodge
with a low density capacity for inmates (60) located north of edmonton, ab, the
gr author emphasized the importance of paypompee’s attendance at a gladue
aftercare program upon his release. such programs offer counseling and support
for addiction, grief and loss, low self-esteem, and reintegration into the
community. one is in fort frances, on, only 120 kms. from big grassy.
44.
paypompee
has an extensive criminal record, mostly for breaches of court orders and crimes
of dishonesty. his one related driving conviction was entered on april 20, 2015,
in fort frances, ontario. he was found guilty of operating a motor vehicle
while his ability to do so was impaired by alcohol, for which he received a
$1500 fine, and he was prohibited from operating a motor vehicle for a period
of one year.
the victim impact
statements:
45.
crown
counsel filed with the court six victim impact statements. all speak to the
horror of what occurred on july 3, 2023.
46.
eloquently
in hers, smith described how her “life was completely destroyed” that day. she
spoke of how she met her deceased fiancé, johnson in april 2006. he was
outgoing and confident. she was quiet and shy. their friendship quickly
developed into an intimate relationship. afterwards, they were “always
together”. they were so close they could “finish each other’s sentences”.
47.
she
described johnson as her “protector”. she constantly felt safe with
him.
he would “always walk on the outside of [her] everywhere” they went “to make
sure nothing would happen” to her. when they would see elderly couples in their
80s, they would promise each other, they too would someday be like that.
48.
they
planned on going to see doctors to find out why after the time they had been
together she had not gotten pregnant. they wished to explore options to start a
family before they became any older than they were. she lamented how, because
of the accident, she will never realize any of these dreams.
49.
succinctly
she stated, “i lost the love of my life that day.” she described herself as “a
shell” of the person she once was – a strong,
independent
woman who was lucky enough to have found her soulmate. she was happy and
trusting, loved helping people, and worked hard to get where she was.
50.
she
feels as though everything in her life has now been taken away. she struggles
to get out of bed every day. she has never felt so broken. she wishes she had
died that day, not johnson.
51.
she
had two surgeries following the accident to repair her left elbow and her left ankle.
she received 50 stitches to her head. she had a gash going all the way from her
nose to the top of her head. the cut was so deep at points it penetrated to her
skull.
52.
a
second surgery to her ankle saved her foot from amputation. however, she can
never walk properly again, and walking was her livelihood. that is how she was
able to get to and from everywhere she had to go. now when she walks for any
significant period, she experiences “pain, swelling and limping”. she is in
constant pain and discomfort.
53.
when
driving in a vehicle, she suffers from “really bad anxiety”. she panics
whenever a car comes near her. she feels as though something bad is going to
happen again.
54.
by
the time she returns home, she feels exhausted and has a terrible headache. she
attributes this to the stress and anxiety the experience of driving in a
vehicle puts her body through.
55.
she
has a hard time concentrating on anything. she cannot remain focused. she is
not interested in anything at all. often she sits and scrolls aimlessly through
videos on her phone.
56.
one
of her doctors has diagnosed her with ptsd in consequence of what happened to
her. she tends to be “withdrawn from anyone and everything”. she has trouble
sleeping. she wakes up frequently from flashbacks to the accident.
57.
she
has pondered suicide but understands the pain it would cause to her parents,
her brother, her friends and johnson’s relatives.
58.
aptly,
she concludes, “nothing will bring the love of my life back to make me whole
again”.
59.
smith’s
mother, in her victim impact statement, speaks of the severe mental and
physical damage her daughter suffered. prior to the accident, mother described
daughter as “very strong-willed”, and an “extremely independent individual”, but
“not so much anymore”. smith has trouble sleeping. every noise makes her jump.
she experiences extreme anxiety and overwhelming
tension
when outdoors walking or driving in a car.
60.
smith
questions why she lived and johnson did not. understandably, this terrifies her
mother.
61.
smith’s
mother bears witness to the pain her daughter tries to hide from everyone. she notices
that her daughter is now subject to mood swings. she realizes that her daughter
will never be the same physically, emotionally, or mentally. mother shares that
her daughter’s condition will only worsen with time.
62.
smith’s
cousin, in her victim impact statement, spoke of their close relationship. the
cousin emphasized how much she looked up to smith. the cousin knows the pain
smith suffers, especially to her ankle. she describes smith as a young woman,
who will never fully heal and return to full mobility again. she knows how hard
this is for smith to accept.
63.
johnson’s
cousin, in her victim impact statement, spoke of the violent way johnson, with
whom she was so close, was taken from her, and “the devastation of it all” has deeply
impacted her mental health. depression, anxiety and hopelessness consumed her.
she struggled with suicidal thoughts.
64.
she
condemned the choices made and actions taken by paypompee. they caused her
family “endless pain”. as she put it, “seeing him walk away from the scene of
the accident, indifferent to the lives he destroyed, made everything worse.”
65.
she
spoke of how johnson was proud of his ojibway background. he kept the memories
of their family “alive”. he revered their grandmother, the matriarch, who
survived the trauma of residential schools. the grandmother taught them to love
and support each other.
66.
with
the loss of johnson, his cousin’s mental health quickly deteriorated, making it
impossible for her to work. in turn, this led to significant financial
difficulties for her.
67.
johnson’s
sister, in her victim impact statement, described the loss of her older brother
by seven years as a “senseless act”. she pointed out how his death changed
the
lives of so many people directly and indirectly involved in the accident.
68.
she
recalled how when the police detective told her about the hit-and-run accident in
which both her brother and sister-in-law were involved, that her brother had
died, and that her sister-in-law was in hospital, she was initially
“emotionless”. she remained in that state of shock for many months afterwards.
69.
for
days she could not sleep. she kept wishing that she was having “a nightmare”.
she was upset and fearful that while paypompee had “fled the scene”, and was
“still running free”, he “would hurt others”. she characterized his decision
not to turn himself in as “a lack of accountability and remorse”. she allowed
nevertheless for the possibility that paypompee’s decision
to
walk away from the accident was prompted by “a fight or flight response”.
70.
she
recounted how she spent almost every day at the hospital while her
sister-in-law, smith, who had undergone multiple surgeries owing to the
injuries paypompee caused, was there. all the while, johnson’s sister was
making funeral arrangements for her brother, caring for smith’s and his cats,
and constantly going back to their apartment for things for him and her.
71.
johnson’s
sister spoke of how her mental health severely declined “making it impossible
for [her] to work”. her shock gradually turned into “deep depression and
anxiety”. she was forced to take a leave of absence from her work for seven
months. she is a mental health nurse, and realized she was in no position to
help others given her own state. she underwent extensive therapy to recover.
72.
she
described her brother, johnson, as “independent, kind, caring, funny,
supportive, intelligent, brave, talented and so much more”. he was “amazing at
drawing and writing”. he was “one of the smartest people” she knew.
73.
she
shared that their childhood was not good, but she always knew that if johnson
was
with her, she was going to be “safe and okay”. he protected her, loved her and
supported her.
74.
she
stated how she always admired him and will forever miss him. his passing
created a huge void in her life. she bemoans the fact that smith must find a
way to go on without her brother. the two were inseparable.
75.
she
reckoned that “no sentence.... will ever let [her] forgive [paypompee] for
the damage that [he] caused [to her] family and [her]”, but she hoped paypompee
“could learn from [his] mistakes and work on becoming a better human being”.
76.
another
of johnson’s cousins who lives in british columbia, in her victim impact statement,
spoke of how her annual summer vacation plans, and how they were derailed by
his death. she was called upon to help johnson’s sister to make funeral
arrangements in thunder bay.
77.
johnson’s
cousin stated, “he was not ready, the creator was not ready to have him back;
he was taken.” she expressed her anger over johnson’s loss. she described him
as someone who was “weaved into the fabric that makes our family whole; now a
piece
of us is missing”.
78.
she
attributed his support for and encouragement of her as the reason she felt she
“could and wanted to go to university”. she wished she had told him about the
influence he had on her before he passed away. she lamented the fact that she
thought he would be with her family “for a long time”.
79.
she,
of course, loved him deeply.
crown’s position on sentence:
80.
crown
counsel seeks a total period of incarceration of seven and a half to eight years
in the penitentiary for paypompee. denunciation and deterrence are the salient
sentencing principles to be taken into account by the court, she submits.
81.
in
terms of breakdown, the crown submits that a sentence of six years for the
offence of dangerous driving causing death is entirely fit. a four year,
concurrent sentence would be appropriate for the dangerous driving causing
bodily harm, given how johnson’s death and smith’s injuries arose out of the
same incident. however, the crown asks for the imposition of a consecutive
sentence of one and a half to two years for paypompee’s failure to remain on
the scene to identify himself and to offer assistance.
82.
the
crown further seeks a lifetime driving prohibition, and an order of the court
that paypompee shall provide a sample of his dna to the authorities to be
maintained on the rcmp confidential databank.
83.
last,
but not least, crown counsel asked for an order under
section 743.21
of the
code
prohibiting any contact by paypompee with smith, her family members, and any of
the surviving family members of johnson. she took no position on the victim
fine surcharges.
84.
regarding
aggravating features, the crown firstly points out that under
section 320.22
of
the
code,
it is statutorily so, since paypompee caused either death or
harm to more than one person. his victims were multiple.
85.
secondly,
it was cowardly and morally reprehensible for paypompee to flee the scene
taking no steps to offer assistance to the people he knew he had run over in
his vehicle. he did not voluntarily turn himself in to police. rather, with the
assistance of the public, he was located 28 hours after the fact by police.
86.
crown
counsel reminds the court as well that a crack pipe was found on the passenger
seat of the journey when it was abandoned at the scene of the collision.
87.
thirdly,
paypompee is not a first-time offender. he has a lengthy criminal record
including an entry for a driving-related offence in 2015 for impaired
operation. crown counsel reminds the court that driving is a privilege, not a
right.
88.
fourthly,
paypompee’s inability to deal with his substance abuse issues makes him a
menace to the public. he shows little insight into the consequences that flow
from his addiction to alcohol and cocaine. even though he has been given in the
past the counseling
and therapy tools to avoid triggers and to
remain abstinent, he cannot do so.
89.
by
way of mitigation, the
crown offers that paypompee entered
guilty pleas, which saved precious court resources, and more importantly,
spared witnesses the trauma of having to testify at trial. nevertheless, he was
faced with an overwhelmingly strong crown case against him.
90.
the
crown also invited the court to take into account his indigeneity - the
accompanying grief and loss he has suffered through the course of his life, and
to appropriately give it weight in assessing his moral blameworthiness.
91.
crown
counsel provided me with numerous authorities to assist and guide this court in
reaching an appropriate length for the carceral component of paypompee’s
sentence. i will refer to some of those decisions, which i found particularly
helpful, later in these reasons.
92.
crown
counsel lastly emphasized the significant impact the offence has had upon the
victims. one life ended; others changed and worsened interminably owing to
paypompee’s criminal conduct.
defence position on sentence:
93.
defence
counsel submitted that a total penitentiary sentence of six years would be
appropriate for the court to impose. agreeing that a consecutive sentence ought
to be meted out for the failure to remain offence, she specified that five
years would be a fit sentence for the dangerous driving causing death, along
with a shorter, but concurrent sentence, for the dangerous driving causing
bodily harm. a one year consecutive sentence for the fail to remain offence
would be adequate, she submits.
94.
the
defence did not oppose a lifetime driving prohibition, nor an order requiring
paypompee to submit a sample of his dna to the authorities. however, she asked
this court to waive the imposition of any victim fine surcharges for her client.
95.
defence
counsel emphasized that paypompee has led a tragic life. he bears the scars of
racism as an indigenous child,
who was called names
and made to feel lesser than others. notwithstanding, he has worked virtually his
entire adulthood and raised his children as best he could.
96.
sadly,
he has used drugs and alcohol to cope with his pain and sense of loss. between
2011 and 2021, he participated in the methadone program; however, at the end of
2022, he relapsed. he lost custody of his children.
97.
he
also admitted to having smoked crack the morning of the accident, as well as
actually being under the influence of alcohol at the time he committed the
offences for which he is to be sentenced.
98.
he
is a victim of crime himself and suffers from ptsd as a result.
99.
as
aggravating factors, defence counsel pointed out that:
a)
paypompee
has a criminal record for a driving offence, impaired operation, although
dated, stemming from 2015,
b)
on
july 3, 2023, he was not a licensed driver,
c)
self-admittedly,
he had been drinking on the day in question, and
d)
the
nature of his crimes is particularly grave; he killed a man and
catastrophically injured a woman.
100.
the mitigating
factors, defence counsel submits, are as follows:
a)
paypompee,
during his interview with police following arrest, was genuinely remorseful and
acknowledged the harm and devastation he caused,
b)
there
is a gap in his criminal record from 2015 to present coinciding with a
sustained period of sobriety, which paypompee has proved himself to be capable
of maintaining,
c)
he
pleaded guilty, as was his intention from the beginning, to spare the crown and
court the expense of a trial, and to obviate the need for witnesses to testify,
who would otherwise have to be called upon to relive the horror of what
occurred, and
d)
he
has insight into his substance dependence and has expressed his intention to
seek institutional treatment for his addiction, as well as aftercare upon his
release.
101.
of course, the defence
submits that in addition to summers

credit
for the 695 days of actual pre-sentence custody paypompee has accumulated to
date, he ought to receive enhanced duncan

credit
for his harsh conditions of confinement while awaiting sentence.
102.
defence counsel
provided helpful charts made exhibits 6 and 7 respectively at paypompee’s
sentencing held january 31, 2025, to set out the timeframes when he would have
been subject to triple bunking or a lock down at either the thunder bay jail or
the toronto south detention centre. i will, of course, take those factors into
account in settling upon what i consider to be an approportionate sentence for
the offences he committed.
analysis:
103.
in arriving at a fit disposition
for paypompee, i must, of course, apply the relevant principles of sentencing,
now codified at
sections 718
to
718.3
of the
code. sentencing is always
a unique, individualized exercise. no two cases are completely alike. nor are
any two offenders completely the same.
104.
paypompee’s sentence
must also reflect a measured consideration of the circumstances of the offences
he committed, as well as his personal circumstances. i must also consider and
apply the
gladue
factors at play given paypompee’s
indigeneity.
105.
most importantly, the
punishment i impose must be proportionate to the seriousness of his offences
and the degree of his responsibility for them.
denunciation and deterrence:
106.
the principles of
denunciation and deterrence are paramount when one sentences an offender who commits
the serious crimes of dangerous driving causing bodily harm and dangerous
driving causing death (see
r. v. rawn,
2012 onca 487
at paras. 33, and 41-45,
and
r. v. altiman,
2019 onca 511
at paras.
31 and 48
).
107.
in
r.
v. lacasse,
2015, scc 64
at para.
6, the supreme court of canada stated:
“
while
it is normal for trial judges to consider sentences other
than imprisonment in appropriate cases, in the instant case, as in all cases in
which general or specific deterrence and denunciation must be emphasized, the
courts have very few options other than imprisonment for meeting these
objectives, which are essential to the maintenance of a just, peaceful and law‑abiding
society.”
separation from society:
108.
offenders must be
separated from society
where necessary.
clearly, incarceration
must always be the penal sanction of last resort.
109.
i must exhaust all
other forms of punishment available as sanctions under the
code
before i
can turn my mind to jailing paypompee, especially given his indigenous status
(see
s. 718.2
(e) of the
code
).
rehabilitation:
110.
paypompee needs serious
help. hopefully, he can receive, through the sentence i impose for him,
appropriate education and counseling for his chronic substance abuse issues, his
impulsivity, and his unresolved grief over the losses he suffered in his own tragic
life.
111.
only then will paypompee
be fully able to rehabilitate himself and become a productive member of society.
promotion of a sense of responsibility and
acknowledgement of harm:
112.
i do not know how to
bring home to paypompee the horrific consequences of his criminal conduct other
than to express them, as best i can, in these reasons. he will have much time, of
course, to reflect on how his actions ended one life, drastically changed others
and leaving one of his surviving victims, smith, in so much pain and suffering.
aggravating circumstances:
113.
upon review of the
offences committed by paypompee, i find the following factors to be
aggravating:
a)
there
were multiple victims of his crimes; the commission of the offences resulted in
johnson’s death and serious bodily harm for smith (see
s. 320.22
(a) of the
code
),
b)
in
addition to a lengthy criminal record, paypompee has one related driving
offence, impaired operation, committed in 2015,
c)
he
was a suspended driver at the time of the offences; he was illegally operating
a motor vehicle on the day in question, and
d)
by
his own admission, he was under the influence of alcohol on that fateful day, fell
asleep at the wheel, mounted a sidewalk on a busy, city street and mowed down
two innocent pedestrians leaving a path of horror and devastation in his wake.
mitigating circumstances:
114.
i consider as
mitigating that:
a)
paypompee
entered pleas of guilt sparing the victims the need to testify, and saving
precious court resources,
b)
although
his criminal record is lengthy, there was a gap from 2015 to present,
demonstrating paypompee is capable of achieving and sustaining sobriety,
c)
his
remorse is genuine, heartfelt, and was expressed from the outset indirectly to
police when he gave an inculpatory statement to the officer who interviewed him,
d)
he has
experienced in his own life significant trauma, grief and loss, all of which,
to a limited extent, diminishes his moral blameworthiness, and
e)
he
was subjected to harsh conditions of pre-sentence confinement.
parity:
115.
section 718.2
(b) of
the
code
provides:
“a sentence
should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar
circumstances.”
the case law:
116.
none of the cases
referred to me by counsel are on all fours with the facts in this case. of
course, this is not surprising in the slightest. nor is this observation on my
part intended as a criticism of counsel. as mentioned earlier, and as trite but
true as it may be, no two cases are completely alike.
117.
crown counsel drew to
my attention to the decision of justice pratt in
r. v. obermok,
2023
oncj 401. the offender in that case was a 56-year-old man who went through a
flashing red light at 105 km/h in a 60 km zone without slowing down. in doing
so, his vehicle collided with another, which had the right-of-way. the other
driver was seriously injured; her 2-year-old son, her only passenger, died.
118.
it
was determined that mr. obermok had a blood alcohol concentration at the time
of the motor vehicle collision in the range of 30 to 90 mg of alcohol in 100 ml
of blood.
119.
justice
pratt imposed a total five year jail sentence for the offences of dangerous
driving causing death and dangerous driving causing bodily harm.
120.
at
paragraph 42, his honour held:
“while the cases are
factually different, the underlying principles are of great assistance. so too
is the review of case law undertaken by justice caponecchia [in
r. v. robertson,
2022 oncj 240
]. at paragraph 79 and onward, her honour reviewed cases where a
single death had resulted from dangerous driving. i will not repeat her summaries
but i have reviewed them. they suggest a range of five to twelve years’
imprisonment, with one exception. the exception was
r. v. romano
2021 onca 211 (canlii), 
o.j. no. 1858 (c.a.), where a police officer in an unmarked vehicle sped
through a residential area. he struck and killed a pedestrian. he received an
eight-month sentence after trial. that case is clearly an outlier and is of
little assistance to me.”
121.
justice
pratt went on to say at paragraph 53 of
obermok:
“firstly, parliament
changed how these offences can be punished. as of 18 december 2018, a whole new
regime governing driving offences came into effect. among the myriad changes,
maximum sentences for dangerous driving causing bodily harm or death were
increased. prior to the changes, the maximum sentences were ten years and fourteen
years respectively. under the new legislation, the maximums have increased to
14 years and life imprisonment. while no one is advocating for the maximum
sentences in the present case, the changes are still important because they
signal parliament’s wishes. as stated by justice watt in
r. v. lis,
2020
onca 551
at para.
49:
maximum sentences determine the objective gravity of an offence by
indicating its relative severity. parliament’s decision to increase the maximum
sentence for a crime demonstrates its intention that the offence be punished
more harshly. this shifts the distribution of proportionate sentences for the
offence:
lacasse, at para.
7;
friesen
at paras. 96-97. to respect
parliament’s decision to increase maximum sentences, courts should generally
impose higher sentences than those imposed in cases that preceded the increase
in the maximum sentences:
friesen
at para. 100.
122.
i agree with the reasoning employed by my colleague, justice pratt, in
obermok
as to the range of sentence for the offence of dangerous driving causing
death, as well as the effect of increasing maximum penalties.
123.
in
r. v. rees, unreported, justice lynch commented:
“the case law
illustrates the need for this court to focus on denunciation and deterrence as
the primary sentencing principles to be considered when dealing with counts of
impaired driving causing death and dangerous driving causing death.
124.
further,
his honour stated:
“we have said that,
courts have said that, advertisements have said that, media has said that, over
and over and over again. yet, also over and over, courts address individuals
that instead treat it as their right to operate a motor vehicle in any manner
that they choose and while their ability to do so was impaired. they place
their own self-interests above the safety and well-being of all others on or
near our roadways. driving should and must involve a high degree of
responsibility. to exercise that responsibility is a moral and legal
obligation.
for many years,
parliament has attempted to compel responsible conduct through increasingly
severe penalties for impaired operation, and also for dangerous driving.
despite this, persons such as mr. rees act irresponsibly and recklessly. as
such, his degree of moral blameworthiness is high, and the consequences of his
actions are severe despite being totally avoidable. lives are shattered and, as
evidenced in this case, the pain crosses generations.”
125.
i
concur completely in these observations made by justice lynch.
126.
crown
counsel also referred me to the decision of justice moore in
r. v. norris,
2024 onsc 1284. while analogous,
norris
is not on all fours with this
case in establishing a proper range of sentence for dangerous driving causing
death, as identified above by justice pratt in
obermok. the focus in
norris
was on the ambit of sentence for impaired driving causing death. i know that
paypompee was under the influence of alcohol at the time he committed the
subject offences. police also, of course, saw a crack pipe in his vehicle. paypompee
also admitted to having smoked crack the morning of july 3, 2023. however, i
cannot be sure whether his ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by
either alcohol or drug on the day in question when he fell asleep and ran into
johnson and smith around 3:15 p.m. that day. i suspect he may have been, but
if he was, and to what degree, one will never know.
127.
where
i do find
norris
is helpful is in the remarks made by moore j. at paragraph
87 where he wrote:
“i do not find that
an addiction in and of itself is a mitigating factor unless it reduces the
moral culpability of the offender in committing the particular offence. i
cannot say that mr. norris’s addiction issues operated in such a way to reduce moral
culpability in this case. the evidence
before the court was that he was on a steady state of methadone and had been on
the methadone program for some time. he was being prescribed medications for
his anxiety and depression issues. he had been warned not
to take lorazepam and he was not prescribed
this drug. he also been warned multiple times by the social worker at the
clinic or medical personnel not to drive if his abilities were impacted.
128.
paypompee
definitely has substance abuse issues. however, they do not affect his moral
culpability in this case. drinkers and drug abusers must know, as a matter of law
and principle, as do all responsible drivers, that the decision
not to drive
must be made well in advance of ever getting behind the wheel, if one intends
to drink to the point of being impaired.
129.
in
r. v. francis,
2020 oncj 581, monahan j. at para. 18 identified the
range of sentence for failing to stop as three months at the low-end and two
years at the high-end. sentences will usually fall within the ambit of five to nine
months, unless the offender has a prior criminal driving record. he clarified
that sentences in the 12 to 15 month range for failing to stop tend to involve
a prior criminal record, or a companion impaired driving offence, having been
committed immediately prior to the failure to remain.
130.
he
further characterized ‘failure to remain’ as “a serious offence” and the
conduct underlying as not only “contrary to the
criminal code, but
contrary to any standard of decency”, relying on longstanding, appellate authority:
r. v. ramdass
 o.j. no. 177 (c.a.) at para. 5. when coupled with
another charge, the offence of ‘failing to stop’ is deserving of a sentence to
be imposed consecutively, since it is a separate and distinct delict.
131.
i
am, of course, guided by the ranges ascertained and the observations made by my
colleague, monahan j. in
francis.
132.
lastly,
crown counsel brought to my attention the decision of
r. v. cunningham,
2023 onca 36. at paras. 59 - 61, benotto j.a. explained:
“the
sentencing judge reduced the sentence by 12
months to reflect a
duncan
credit
for time spent in custody during covid 19. he quoted from
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344
at paragraph
52, and recognized that the
duncan
credit is
distinct from
summers
credit and, thus, should be treated differently.
the
duncan
credit is not a deduction from the otherwise appropriate
sentence, but is one of the factors to be considered in determining the
appropriate sentence. particularly punitive pre-trial
incarceration conditions can be a mitigating
factor to be considered with the other mitigating and aggravating factors in
arriving at the appropriate sentence, from which the
summers
credit will
be deducted.
the sentencing judge
also recognized that a
duncan
credit cannot justify the imposition of a
sentence which is inappropriate, having regard to all the mitigating or
aggravating factors. that said, he reduced an already inappropriate sentence of
seven years by a further one year. by treating the
duncan
credit like a
number of months and not a mitigating factor, the sentence was artificially
reduced to an even more unfit sentence.
as doherty j.a. said
in
marshall
at para.
53:
often times, the
specific number of days or months are given as “
duncan
” credit. while
this quantification is not necessarily inappropriate, it may skew the
calculation of the ultimate sentence. by quantifying the “
duncan”
credit, only one of presumably several relevant factors, there is a risk that “
duncan”
credit will be improperly treated as a deduction from the appropriate sentence
in the same way as the “
summers
” credit. if treated in that way, the “
duncan”
credit can take on an unwarranted significance in fixing the ultimate
sentence imposed:
r. v. j.b.
(2004),
2004 canlii 39056 (on ca), 187 o.a.c. 307 (c.a.). arguably,
that is what happened in this case, were on the trial judge’s calculations, the
“
duncan”
credit devoured three-quarters of what the trial judge had
deemed to be the appropriate sentence but for pretrial custody.”
133.
as a
provincial court judge, i must obey the dictates of the court of appeal for
ontario as articulated by benotto j.a. in my treatment of
summers
and
duncan
credit to be given to paypompee. i will follow the preferred method of
calculation for
duncan
credit (see
cunningham
at para.
63
).
134.
defence
counsel
drew my attention to two
cases.
135.
in
r. v. altiman,
2019 onca 511, the court of appeal for ontario was
dealing with a sentence appeal only. the offender was an indigenous man, who
pleaded guilty to two counts of impaired driving causing death, two counts of impaired
driving causing bodily harm, two counts of criminal negligence causing death and
two counts of criminal negligence causing bodily harm.
136.
the
facts involved the offender driving on the streets of london, ontario while
heavily intoxicated in the early morning hours. he was then 30 one years old.
he ran a red light at a high rate of speed and collided with another vehicle.
137.
there
were four occupants in the other vehicle. in consequence of the collision, two died
and two others suffered severe injuries.
138.
mr.
altiman at the time of his sentencing had been married to his wife for 14
years. they had three children together ranging in ages from one to 15.
139.
the
offender was a member of the walpole island first nation. the sentencing
hearing was conducted in a
gladue
court in london.
140.
the
court of appeal for ontario reduced the custodial sentence of ten years imposed
at first instance to seven years.
141.
i
will quote at length from the decision of brown j.a. in
altiman
given the
emphasis he placed on the necessity for a consideration of gladue factors by
sentencing judges in every case. brown j.a. wrote at paragraphs 77 through 85
the following:
the
gladue
factors
the analytical framework
mr. altiman is an aboriginal
offender, which requires considering as part of the sentencing analysis the
principles found in s. 781.2(e) of the
criminal code.
in
r. v. f.h.l,
2018 onca 83,
360 c.c.c. (3d) 189, this court attempted to synthesize those principles, as
elaborated in
gladue
and
ipeelee. in
f.h.l.,
at paras.
38-40,
this court summarized the proper approach to the application of the
s.
718.2
(e) principles:
the law, reviewed
above, is clear. in order to be relevant to sentencing, an offender’s
aboriginal background need not be causally connected to the offence(s) for
which a sentence is being imposed. in what circumstances, then, will an
offender’s aboriginal background influence their ultimate sentence? the answer
is “not so easily ascertained or articulated”:
r. v. whitehead,
2016 skca 165,
344 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at para.
60.
clearly, the mere assertion of one’s aboriginal heritage is insufficient
–
s. 718.2
(e) does not create a “race-based discount on sentencing”:
ipeelee,
at para.
75.
although aboriginal offenders are not required to “draw a straight line”
between their aboriginal roots and the offences for which they are being
sentenced, more is required “than the bare assertion of an offender’s
aboriginal status”:
r. v. monckton,
2017 onca 450,
349 c.c.c. (3d) 90, at para.
115.
it is also
insufficient for an aboriginal offender to point to the systemic and background
factors affecting aboriginal people in canadian society. while courts are
obliged to take judicial notice of those factors, they do not “necessarily
justify a different sentence for aboriginal offenders. rather, they provide the
necessary context for understanding and evaluating the case-specific
information presented by counsel”:
ipeelee, at para.
60
(emphasis
in original);
r. v. radcliffe,
2017 onca 176,
347 c.c.c. (3d) 3, leave to appeal refused, s.c.c.a. no. 274, at para.
54.
the correct approach
may be articulated as follows. for an offender’s aboriginal background to
influence his or her ultimate sentence, the systemic and background factors
affecting aboriginal people in canadian society must have impacted the
offender’s life in a way that (1) bears on moral blameworthiness, or (2)
indicates which types of sentencing objectives should be prioritized in the
offender’s case. this approach finds support both in
ipeelee
and
decisions of this court.
in dealing with the
role played by systemic and background factors in the analysis, this court
stated, at para. 47:
systemic and
background factors, however, do not operate as an excuse or justification for
an offence:
ipeelee, at para.
83.
they are only relevant to assessing the “degree of responsibility of the
offender”, and to considering whether non-retributive sentencing objectives
should be prioritized. accordingly,
gladue
and
ipeelee
do
not detract from the “fundamental principle” that a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender:
ipeelee
at para.
73.
what
gladue
and
ipeelee
recognize
is that evaluating the degree of responsibility of an aboriginal offender
requires a “different method of analysis”:
ipeelee, at para.
59.
a different method of analysis does not necessarily mandate a different
result:
kakekagamick, at para. 36. crafting a just and appropriate
sentence may, in some cases, require giving greater weight to sentencing
objectives such as deterrence and denunciation:
gladue, at
para.
78;
r.
v. wells,
2000 scc 10,
 1 s.c.r. 207, at para.
44.
as this court recognized in
kakekagamick, at para. 42:
to be clear,
s.
718.2
(e) does not require, nor is there a general rule, that aboriginal
offenders must be sentenced in a way that gives the most weight to the
principle of restorative justice. it may be that in certain cases the objectives
of restorative justice articulated in
s. 718.2
(e)
and gladue will not weigh as favourably as those of separation,
denunciation and deterrence.
in considering the
first factor dealing with moral blameworthiness,
s. 718.2
(e) does not
require an automatic reduction of a sentence or a remission of a warranted
period of incarceration simply because the offender is aboriginal:
ipeelee,
at para.
71.
instead, the section directs the sentencing judge “to pay particular attention
to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders in order to endeavour to achieve a
truly fit and proper sentence in any particular case”:
ipeelee, at
para.
75.
part of that inquiry involves ascertaining whether the constrained
circumstances of an aboriginal offender – situations of social and economic
deprivation with a lack of opportunities and limited options for positive
development – may diminish the offender’s moral culpability:
ipeelee,
at para.
73.
in considering
the second set of circumstances – the types of sanctions which may be
appropriate – the “
gladue
principles direct sentencing judges to
abandon the presumption that all offenders and all communities share the same
values when it comes to sentencing and to recognize that, given these
fundamentally different world views, different or alternative sanctions may
more effectively achieve the objectives of sentencing in a particular
community”:
ipeele
e, at para.
74.
before reviewing
the
gladue
factors concerning mr. altiman disclosed by the
record, i wish to comment on the portion of the sentencing judge’s reasons that
reproduced the summary of principles contained in para. 93 of the
gladue
decision,
the last of which states:
it is unreasonable
to assume that aboriginal peoples do not believe in the importance of
traditional sentencing goals such as deterrence, denunciation, and separation,
where warranted. in this context, generally, the more serious and violent the crime,
the more likely it will be as a practical matter that the terms of imprisonment
will be the same for similar offences and offenders, whether the offender is
aboriginal or non‑aboriginal.
that summary
paragraph echoed the statement made earlier by the court in
gladue,
at para.
79,
that: “generally, the more violent and serious the offence the more likely it
is as a practical reality that the terms of imprisonment for aboriginals and
non-aboriginals will be close to each other or the same, even taking into
account their different concepts of sentencing.”
having quoted para.
93 of
gladue, the sentencing judge did not go on to recite the
strong reminder subsequently issued in
ipeelee
about the
application of that part of the
gladue
decision. at paras. 84,
85 and 87 of
ipeelee, the supreme court stated:
numerous courts have
erroneously interpreted this generalization [in
gladue
para.
79]
as
an indication that the gladue
principles do not apply
to serious offences… whatever criticisms may be directed at the decision of
this court for any ambiguity in this respect, the judgment ultimately makes it
clear that sentencing judges have a
duty
to
apply
s. 718.2
(
e
): “there is no discretion as to whether to
consider the unique situation of the aboriginal offender; the only discretion
concerns the determination of a just and appropriate sentence” … similarly,
in
wells,
iacobucci j. reiterated, at para. 50, that
[t]he generalization
drawn in
gladue
to the effect that the more violent and
serious the offence, the more likely as a practical matter for similar terms of
imprisonment to be imposed on aboriginal and non-aboriginal offenders, was not
meant to be a principle of universal application. in each case, the sentencing
judge must look to the circumstances of the aboriginal offender.
the sentencing judge
has a statutory duty, imposed by
s. 718.2
(
e
)
of the
criminal code
to consider the unique circumstances of
aboriginal offenders. failure to apply
gladue
in any case
involving an aboriginal offender runs afoul of this statutory obligation…
while the sentencing
judge’s reasons would have benefitted from a reference to
ipeelee’s
clarification
of
gladu
e on this point, his are not the only reasons to have
lacked that completeness. for example, this court in
r. v. fraser,
2016 onca 745,
referred to the passage in
gladue
about the seriousness of the
offence without also mentioning
ipeelee: at para.
26.
the key point is
that the
gladue
analysis conducted by a sentencing judge must
focus on the circumstances of the offender that may bear on the offender’s
moral culpability for the offence. a sentencing judge cannot let the
seriousness of the offence deflect the court away from that focus. by the same
token,
gladue
reports filed to assist sentencing judge
in this task should not stray from the requisite focus on the circumstances of
the offender.
142.
in
effect, brown j.a. did not find any error in the sentencing judge’s assessment
of mr. altiman’s moral blameworthiness. the sentencing judge assessed it to be
high because:
“it was his choice
to drink to excess and then to drive a motor vehicle in the early morning hours
when this event took place.”
143.
the
majority of the three-member panel in
altiman
agreed with that holding
by the sentencing judge. (see
altiman,
para.
104
)
144.
the
criticism of the court of appeal focused on the sentencing judge’s failure to
take into account the absence of any criminal or driving offence record
possessed by mr. altiman. by neglecting to do so, the sentencing judge erred in
his application of the proportionality and parity principles of sentencing.
(see
altiman, para.
105
)
145.
the
majority for the court of appeal also stated that there was nothing “in the
record that would suggest the sanction of incarceration for the offences of
impaired driving causing death and bodily harm would not be appropriate” for an
aboriginal offender such as mr. altiman. nor did the record indicate that “the
aboriginal communities in which he has lived and with which he still maintains
very strong ties hold different world views or values when it comes to
sentencing for the offences of impaired driving causing death and bodily harm”.
(see
altiman, para.
115
)
146.
the
other case referred to me by defence counsel was
r. v. direk,
2024 onsc
3743.
147.
the
facts giving rise to the case involved the offender driving a mercedes
convertible at a high rate of speed on a downtown toronto street in the wee
hours of the morning of april 14, 2022. the vehicle collided with a pedestrian.
she flew over the roof and landed on the road striking her head on the
pavement. two days later she passed away in hospital due to blunt head trauma, multiple
skull fractures, facial and neck fractures and bleeding from the brain.
148.
the
offender fled the scene. he parked the mercedes convertible in an underground
parking garage and left the building in a different mercedes. five days after
the accident, the offender turned himself into police.
149.
the
offender had a long criminal record with multiple driving offences including two
prior dangerous driving convictions in 2005 and 2013.
150.
crown
and defence counsel made a joint submission for sentence of four and a half
years of imprisonment. the issue for determination by the sentencing judge,
himel j., was the amount of
duncan
credit, if any, to be given to the offender
for lockdowns and conditions in the jail. at the time of the sentencing
hearing, the offender had spent 91 days in full and partial lockdowns.
151.
at para. 52,
himel j. cited with approval the decision of schreck j. in
r. v. donison,
2022 onsc 741, where the latter stated at para. 59:
“i note that “
duncan
”
credit is conceptually distinct from “
summers
” credit and that it is a
factor to be considered in determining an appropriate sentence rather than a
deduction from the appropriate sentence:
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344
at paras.
51 – 52. however, it is not appropriate to quantify a specific
amount of time when determining the effect of harsh custodial conditions;
marshall,
at para.
53.”
152.
at
para. 89., himel j. wrote:
“[t]here
is no
mathematical formula to determine the amount of [duncan] credit, but the
message must be sent that inmates awaiting trial should not be punished with
harsh conditions.”
153.
ultimately,
himel j. credited the offender in accordance with
duncan
and
marshall
principles to reflect lockdowns and his medical issues with an additional.5 days for each day of lockdown.
a fit sentence
for paypompee in the circumstances of the offences he committed and his
personal circumstances:
154.
it
warrants repeating that the length of time for which i will incarcerate paypompee
must pay adequate respect for the principles of
denunciation and deterrence.
155.
i
must nevertheless assess paypompee’s prospects for rehabilitation. i will exercise
some restraint, even though he is hardly a stranger to the criminal justice
system.
156.
drawing
on the direction offered to me in
altiman, knowing as i do by paypompee’s
own admission, that he was under the influence of alcohol at the time he fell
asleep at the wheel and drove his motor vehicle up onto the sidewalk of a busy downtown
street in thunder bay, striking two pedestrians, killing one and maiming
another, i will send a strong message to him that such conduct will never be
tolerated. it must be loudly denounced and deterred. so too must his decision
to flee the scene to avoid apprehension by the authorities.
157.
notwithstanding
gladue
factors, i consider the moral blameworthiness of paypompee’s
conduct to be extremely high in light of the offences he committed. it is not
tempered to any great extent by his deprived upbringing, nor the grief and loss
he has suffered over the course of his life. nor do i find that there is any
evidence put before me to suggest the indigenous people of big grassy, or
elsewhere in canada, would stray from imprisonment as the only available
sanction for paypompee, given the seriousness of the crimes he committed.
158.
reflecting
upon the poverty, the racism, the deprivation and the sense of hopelessness
faced by so many aboriginals in our country, paypompee being no exception, i will
settle upon a term of imprisonment at six months under the low-end of the range
submitted by crown counsel.
159.
to my mind, a total penitentiary sentence of seven years imprisonment
is the correct length of time and a fit term of incarceration for paypompee.
nothing below seven years would sufficiently pay adequate respect to the
salient principles at play in his case, namely, deterrence and denunciation.
160.
i would break the total sentence down into its component parts as
follows:
a)
six years for the offence of dangerous driving
causing death.
b)
five years for the offence of dangerous driving
causing bodily harm to be served concurrently to the offence in a) above, and
c)
one year for the offence of failing to stop to
be served consecutively to the offence in a) above.
161.
seven years translates
to 2,555 days.
162.
paypompee is owed
summers
credit at the typical multiplier of
1.5 for the 695 days of actual pre-sentence custody he has served from the time
of his arrest on july 4, 2023 to today’s date, may 29, 2025. 695 multiplied by
1.5 equals 1042.5. rounding that fractional number up one day brings the total
amount of time deemed to have been served to 1043 days. 2,555 (total days)
minus 1043 (time served) equals 1,512 days, or roughly four years and two
months.
163.
i must now turn my mind to any
duncan
credit to be granted to
paypompee. using the charts made exhibits 6 and 7 at his sentencing setting out the
number of days he was either:
a)
partially or fully locked down in his cell, or
b)
triple-bunked,
i have tallied 75
days for a) above, and 225 days for b) above.
164.
i will apply no fixed
multiplier to reduce the balance of the 1,512 days, or roughly four years and two
months, left to be served by paypompee. however, it is a factor i must
consider. harsh conditions of confinement deserve recognition by all sentencing
judges. hard time is hard time.
165.
owing of this reality, i will shorten somewhat paypompee’s term of
imprisonment to four years.
166.
i must comment as well that i do not see his case as one which would
attract the application of the totality principle.
167.
perhaps most fittingly, i will impose a lifetime driving prohibition
upon paypompee.
168.
let me be crystal clear. times are changing, but to this day, the
vast majority of north americans pray at the altar of the automobile. we
structure our communities around allowing for a free flow of vehicular
traffic. cars, vans and trucks weigh thousands of pounds. they become
potentially lethal objects in an instant in irresponsible hands. they hurtle
down our public highways routinely like projectiles, every single day.
169.
driving is conceived by many members of the public to be akin to a
constitutional right. young people dream of getting their first car. it symbolizes
freedom. our reliance upon the automobile continues through adulthood well
into old age. the car is regarded as an essential to everyday living. we lose
sight of the fact, time and again, that driving is not a right at all, but very
much, a privilege.
170.
paypompee’s conduct was
so egregious on the day in question that he is simply not to be trusted behind
the wheel of a motor vehicle ever again. he cannot be relied upon to be a
responsible driver. he has completely lost that privilege.
171.
i will also require him to provide a sample of his dna to the
authorities today, if it can be done, and if not, within 30 days of today’s
date. it is a just sanction in light of the ‘failure to remain’ conviction to
be registered against him.
conclusion:
172.
upon assessment of all relevant provisions of the
code, i am sentencing
paypompee to a period of seven years imprisonment, prohibiting him from driving
for life, and requiring him to provide a sample of his dna to the authorities as soon as possible.
173.
the sentence of seven years, when adjusted for
summers
and
duncan
credit, means paypompee must serve a four year sentence going forward from
today’s date.
174.
i will waive the imposition of any victim fine surcharges for paypompee.
i find it will cause him undue hardship to face any
type of monetary penalty upon his release from custody, given the significant
length of time he will likely be incarcerated, and the financial struggle he
will face upon release.
175.
under s. 743.21 of the
code, he is to refrain from any form
of contact with smith or her immediate family members, or johnson’s immediate
family members.
176.
i will also recommend that he serve his sentence at stony mountain
institution where he can receive assistance for a pressing concern – his
substance dependence - as well as obtain programming geared to his indigenous roots and cultural background. a healing lodge
would be ideal for paypompee, if one exists and he can be classified for it within
the federal correctional system.
177.
of course, no sentence i impose today can bring johnson back, comfort
his loved ones, relieve smith’s pain and suffering, or ease her sense of devastation
and loss. i can only hope that, with time, they will all be able to find some
solace and peace of mind. my heart goes out to all of paypompee’s victims.
released: 
may 29, 2025
march,
m.g., j.

see
r. v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (s.c.c.)

see
r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26 (canlii)

see
r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754 (canlii)