source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj559/2025oncj559.html

citation:
r. v. marineland of canada
inc.,
2025 oncj 559
court file no.: 4521-999-23-1028-00
date: 2025 07 18
ontario court
of justice
between:
his
majesty the king
respondent
—
and —
marineland
of canada inc.
appellant
before justice r.c.b. watson
appeal decision on july 18, 2025
danielle mueleman and jason kirsh for
the ministry of the attorney general – legal services branch – ministry of
the solicitor general
scott k. fenton and michelle psutka....................................... for
marineland of canada inc.
watson
j.:
overview:

this matter
proceeded before me on march 19, 2025, in welland, ontario, pursuant to an
appeal filed under
s. 116
of the
provincial offences act
by marineland
of canada inc. (the “appellant”).

the appellant
appeals a decision of her worship justice of the peace e. walker dated march 7,
2024, regarding an application by the appellant, then the applicant, on a
motion for a stay of proceedings under s. 24(1) of the
charter
for an
abuse of process.
history of the proceedings:

the history of
these proceedings is not in dispute. the history is contained in the
appellant’s factum and the respondent’s factum and will not be exhaustively
repeated in this decision. i find it was necessary for this appeal that the
parties had to in essence re‑argue the issues which were at play in the
motion for the stay for a proper context to be given to their respective
positions.
the
march 7, 2024 proceedings:

on march 7,
2024, the appellant was found guilty by justice of the peace e. walker of three
offences of failing to comply with an order issued on june 18, 2021 (the
“order”) pursuant to
s. 30(1)
of the
provincial animal welfare services act,
2019, s.o. 2019, c.13, as amended (the “
paws act
”).

convictions
were entered based on an agreed statement of facts (the “asf”) at trial. the
asf was the only evidence called at the trial.

it was agreed
upon by the appellant that the asf put forward sufficient evidence for her
worship to make findings of guilt. counsel for the appellant stipulated and the
parties agreed that although not a plea of guilt that her worship could
reasonably conclude that the appellant was guilty of the offences alleged.

prior to those
proceedings the appellant brought a stay application on the basis that the
integrity of the judicial system would be undermined by the continuing
prosecution. this would amount to an abuse of process warranting a stay of
proceedings.

the respondent
argues that her worship properly dismissed the abuse of process application and
that the instant appeal should be dismissed.
position
of the appellant:

the appellant
submits that her worship properly stated the test for a residual category abuse
of process as being whether the impugned conduct “risks undermining the
integrity of the judicial process” because the conduct is “offensive to
societal notions of fair play and decency.” the appellant agrees that her
worship properly quoted from
r. v. babos,
2014 scc 16.

moldaver j.
writing for the supreme court of canada stated commencing at para. 30:
a. abuse of
process and stays of proceedings
 a
stay of proceedings is the most drastic remedy a criminal court can order (
r.
v. regan,
2002 scc 12,
 1 s.c.r. 297,
at para.
53
). 
it permanently halts the prosecution of an accused. in doing so, the
truth-seeking function of the trial is frustrated and the public is deprived of
the opportunity to see justice done on the merits. in many cases, alleged
victims of crime are deprived of their day in court.
 nonetheless,
this court has recognized that there are rare occasions — the “clearest of
cases” — when a stay of proceedings for an abuse of process will be warranted (
r.
v. o’connor,
1995 canlii 51 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 411, at para.
68
). these cases
generally fall into two categories: (1) where state conduct compromises the
fairness of an accused’s trial (the “main” category); and (2) where state
conduct creates no threat to trial fairness but risks undermining the integrity
of the judicial process (the “residual” category) (
o’connor, at para.
73
). 
the impugned conduct in this case does not implicate the main category. 
rather, it falls squarely within the latter category.
 the
test used to determine whether a stay of proceedings is warranted is the same
for both categories and consists of three requirements:
(1) there must
be prejudice to the accused’s right to a fair trial or the integrity of the
justice system that “will be manifested, perpetuated or aggravated through the
conduct of the trial, or by its outcome” (
regan, at para.
54
);
(2) there must
be no alternative remedy capable of redressing the prejudice; and
(3) where there
is still uncertainty over whether a stay is warranted after steps (1) and (2),
the court is required to balance the interests in favour of granting a stay,
such as denouncing misconduct and preserving the integrity of the justice
system, against “the interest that society has in having a final decision on
the merits” (
ibid., at para. 57).
 the
test is the same for both categories because concerns regarding trial fairness
and the integrity of the justice system are often linked and regularly arise in
the same case. having one test for both categories creates a coherent
framework that avoids “schizophrenia” in the law (
o’connor, at
para.
71
). but while the framework is the same for both categories,
the test may — and often will — play out differently depending on whether the
“main” or “residual” category is invoked.
the
four areas where the appellant argues the justice of the peace erred:

at pages 7-10
of the appellant’s factum the appellant outlines the following areas where they
argue the justice of the peace erred:
b. her worship erred in
finding that the prosecution was not an abuse of process.
c. her
worship incorrectly interpreted s. 30(5) of
paws.
d. her worship erroneously
applied the test for imposing a stay of proceedings in determining whether an
abuse of process was established.
e. her
worship mischaracterized the consequences of a stay of proceedings.
discussion:
b. her worship erred in
finding that the prosecution was not an abuse of process.

the appellant
relies on the arguments presented in their original factum at paragraphs 25-39
dated december 29, 2023. those arguments include [
inter alia
] that an
abuse of process can flow simply from the very existence of a prosecution, the
fact that the decision to prosecute was made in good faith is not fatal and
consideration should be given to the precedent it would set to allow the
prosecution. the appellant
cites
r. v. macphee,
2014 nspc 89
at paras.
36, 46-48, 71, 75-77 for this proposition.

it is a
relevant observation that this decision is a decision from the provincial court
of nova scotia from 2014 and thus is not binding on this court.
macphee
was charged with manslaughter in 2014 for an offence which occurred in 2005.

the court in
para. 2 of
macphee
sums up the issue in that case the following way:
 a
seven-year hiatus between the act and the consequence is itself enough to take
this case into uncharted territory. add to it the fact that in 2007 mr.
macphee was sentenced for aggravated assault for the very same deed, and one
has a truly extraordinary situation.

moreover, at
para. 71 of
macphee
the court stated the following:
 if
this matter proceeds, it will set a precedent. it seems inevitable that
pressure will mount in other such cases to seek redress yet again when the
natural consequences of the original offences become manifest. one may
well ask, if this prosecution is allowed to proceed, whether accused in such
cases as
kaotalok, walkem, nduwayo, smith, m.g.j., nyoni, etc. will be
charged again with culpable homicide when their victims die.

i find
macphee
is of no assistance to this court given the issues argued and the potential
outcomes which could flow from that case.

the appellant
further argued in their factum of december 29, 2023, and in the argument before
me that the ministry simply could have sent the appellant a letter indicating
that given the bears had been removed that compliance with the order was no
longer necessary. the legislation does not contemplate a letter being sent. they
argue instead that the ministry issued a formal revocation saying that the
order had been complied with.

i reject this
argument. for this to be the case it would mean that the revocation order
would effectively nullify what were valid grounds to prosecute marineland. i
find this would result in an absurdity. the ministry acted fairly and their
course of action i find was not an abuse of process. i am mindful that i am
not retrying the case and am sitting as an appellate court to determine the
issue of whether the justice of the peace erred. in consideration of the
appellant’s original arguments which they rely on and her worship’s decision i
find she did not err in not granting a stay of proceedings.

the appellant
also argues that the doctrines of
estoppel
and
autrefois acquit
apply. they did not argue these doctrines were directly applicable in the
instant case but rather they offered them in support of the notion that the
prosecution itself offended notions of fair play and decency. i find that the
notions of fair play and decency would be offended had the prosecution not
proceeded.

i find the
appellant’s arguments on this appeal take an unduly narrow interpretive role of
the wording and application of the legislation.

i do not find
the doctrines of
estoppel
and
autrefois acquit
of help in this
case. i find assistance in this regard from the supreme court of canada case
cited by the appellant of
r. v. mahalingan,
2008 scc 63, at para.
39
wherein
mclachlin c.j. stated:
 in
my view, it is clear that fairness to the accused requires that an accused
should not be called upon to answer allegations of law or fact already resolved
in his or her favour by a judicial determination on the merits. this is
the most compelling rationale for retaining issue estoppel in criminal
law, as it goes to the core tenets of our criminal justice system. the state
has the right to charge an accused and to prove the facts at a trial of the
charge. if a judge or jury conclusively decides a fact in favour of the
accused, including via a finding of a reasonable doubt on an issue, then the
accused should not be required in a subsequent proceeding to answer the same
allegation. to require, in effect, a second defence of the issue would be
to violate the fundamental function of
res judicata.

in the instant
case i find that these doctrines are not applicable as marineland has not been
called upon to answer allegations of fact or law already resolved in its favour
by a judicial determination on the merits. the court held that to require a
second defence of the issue would be to violate the fundamental function of
res
judicata.
marineland was not tried and acquitted on the merits nor was a
decision decided by triers of fact.

i find that in
the instant case the notice of revocation was not akin to having factual issues
determined one way or the other and is not an issue of “relitigation” as per
mahalingan
at para.
46. the only decision on the merits in this case was the original
proceeding where it was determined by way of a stated case.
c. her
worship incorrectly interpreted s. 30(5) of
paws.

the appellant
argues that the proper approach to statutory interpretation is to read the
words of the act “in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary
sense harmoniously with the scheme of the act, the object of the act and the
intention of parliament.” the appellant cites
wawanesa mutual insurance
company v. axa insurance (canada),
2012 onca 592, at paras.
33-35
for this
proposition.

i find paras.
34 and 35 of
wawanesa
of assistance:
 the purposive
approach to statutory interpretation requires the court to take the following
three steps: (1) it must examine the words of the provision in their ordinary
and grammatical sense; (2) it must consider the entire context that the
provision is located within (
bell expressview, at para. 27); and (3) it
must consider whether the proposed interpretation produces a just and
reasonable result (
bapoo v. co-operators general insurance co.
(1997),
1997 canlii 6320 (on ca), 36 o.r. (3d) 616, o.j. no. 5055 (c.a.), at para.
8
).
 the
factors comprising the "entire context" include the history of the
provision at issue, its place in the overall scheme of the act, the object of
the act itself, and the legislature's intent in enacting the act as a whole and
the particular provision at issue: pierre-andre coté, the interpretation of
legislation in canada, 3rd ed. (scarborough, ont.: carswell, 2000), at p. 387.
a just and reasonable result promotes applications of the act that advance its
purpose and avoids applications that are foolish and pointless (ruth sullivan,
sullivan on the construction of statutes, 5th ed. (markham, ont.: lexisnexis,
2008), at p. 299).

examining the
words of the provision in their ordinary and grammatical sense, and
upon
consideration
of the entire context of the
provision and whether the proposed
interpretation
produces a just and reasonable result i find, the word “shall” in
s. 30(5)
of the
paws act
is
mandatory.

however, i find
this is not an end to the issue because considering the words of
s. 30(5)
in
their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously “with the scheme of the act,
the object and intention of parliament” the justice of the peace did not err.

her worship
considered these issues in her decision of march 7, 2024, averted her mind to
and applied the correct test in the case before her and specifically referred
to [
inter alia
]
wawanesa,
babos, macphee
in coming to her
conclusion to not stay the proceedings.

i do not find
she erred in focusing on the meaning of revoke. she considered it, in
conjunction with a harmonious interpretation of the act. she did not fall into
err.

i reject the
appellant’s argument in this regard.
d. her
worship erroneously applied the test for imposing a stay of proceedings in
determining whether an abuse of process was established.

i find that her
worship as the respondent agreed did conflate the test at paragraph 35 and
following of her decision. however, in conflating the criteria for determining
whether there has been an abuse of process with the
babos
requirements
for determining whether a stay of proceedings was warranted i find she did not
err.

i do not find
as the appellant asserts at paragraph 30 of their factum and in oral argument
that this conflation “…cut the appellant’s argument for a stay off at the knees
- had her worship assessed whether an abuse was established under the correct
test, she may well have concluded that the prosecution was abusive
before
turning to whether a stay was appropriate.” based on a consideration of the
record before me, the legislation, the written materials, the case law and oral
argument i do not find that her worship erred in declining to issue a stay. i
find in fact that she arrived at the correct result, perhaps not as cleanly and
as concisely as she could have, but she arrived at the correct result.
e. her
worship mischaracterized the consequences of a stay of proceedings.

i disagree with
the appellant’s argument that it is an abuse for the ministry to issue a
revocation on the basis that the order had been complied with, and then
prosecute the appellant for the opposite. i find that the offences had
crystallized and that the appellant is placing undue emphasis and too narrow an
interpretation on the issue of revocation and not considering the overall
context and intent of the legislation at issue. see
ontario (attorney
general)
v.
norwood estate,
2021 onca 493
generally and para. 66.

when the
revocation notice was issued the bears were gone, there was no practical need
to comply with the order. the revocation order was a permissible step for the
ministry to take. could they have sent a letter to marineland saying, “we have
your bears so you don’t need to take further steps to comply with the order?” yes,
they could have, but issuing the revocation order was a legislative step
available to them, and they took it.

her worship did
not err by rejecting the appellant’s arguments. i reject the argument that the
revocation order effectively erased the offences themselves and disentitles the
ministry from prosecuting. i reject the appellant’s arguments and decline to
quash the conviction and enter a stay.
position
of the respondent:

the respondent
submits that her worship at paragraph 35 of her decision of march 7, 2024,
correctly sets out the criteria for determining if the residual category of
abuse of process applies, but at paragraphs 35-39 and elsewhere in her decision
conflates the criteria for determining whether there has been an abuse of
process with the requirements set out
in
babos
for determining whether a
stay of proceedings is warranted.

the respondent argues
that at paragraph 37 of her worship’s decision she sets out the three stay
requirements
in
babos, but then incorrectly characterizes these as the
requirements for a determination of whether the residual category of abuse of
process was made out. the respondent fairly points out that at paragraph 38 of
her worship’s decision the category for abuse of process is properly set out. 
however, the respondent illustrates that at paragraph 39 of her decision her
worship incorrectly sets out the positions of the parties on the test for a
stay and conflates the analysis of whether an abuse of process is made out with
a further assessment of whether a stay is warranted.

the respondent
argues that her worship correctly found that the integrity of the judicial
system was not undermined when she stated at paragraph 70 of her decision:
70
as the crown submitted, granting a
stay in this matter and not proceeding to trial where the facts of this case
could be properly put forth would in itself bring the integrity of the judicial
system into disrepute. other statutes and regulations rely on compliance as an
expectation and deadlines hold members of society accountable. where there are
not potential consequences for non-compliance, such orders become meaningless. 
such a decision could have severe consequences to our statutory and regulatory
regimes. societal interests are best served and confidence in the
administration of justice can only be maintained by hearing this case on its
merits. i accept that the decision to prosecute marineland had been undertaken
in good faith, after appropriate deliberation, and with public interest factors
in mind. the application for abuse of process is denied the s. 24(1) stay will
not be granted. this matter will proceed to trial on its merits, with the
defendant marineland having entered a not guilty plea.
r. v. marineland of canada inc.,
 o.j. no. 3763, at para. 70

i accept the
respondent’s arguments as outlined in their factum and in oral argument before
me. particularly i have reviewed and considered the respondent’s position
outlined in their factum at paragraphs 24-39 and i agree with them.

the respondent
in their factum at paragraphs 40-68 outline their position as to why a stay was
not warranted. this section of the factum is a generalized interpretation and
argument on determining whether a stay was warranted. the respondent
articulates at paragraph 52 that marineland asserts a technical statutory
interpretation of s. 30(5) of
paws
which nullifies an order. i agree
with the respondent’s arguments and find that her worship did not err in not
staying the proceedings. i agree as the respondent argued that this is not an
exceptional case or the rarest or clearest of cases warranting a stay.

i have
considered the ontario court of appeal decision in
r. v. boise cascade
canada ltd.,
1995 canlii 1579 (on ca), wherein the court cites the supreme
court of canada in stating:
wilson j. affirmed this
statement
in
r. v. keyowski,
1988 canlii 74 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 657
at pp. 658-59,
40
c.c.c. (3d) 481
at p. 482:
a stay should be
granted where "compelling an accused to stand trial would violate those
fundamental principles of justice which underlie the community's sense of fair
play and decency", or where the proceedings are "oppressive or
vexatious" [
(1985),
1985 canlii 47 (scc),
21 c.c.c. (3d) 7
at p. 14,
20 d.l.r. (4th) 651
at p.
658
] 2 s.c.r. at pp. 136-7). the court
in
jewitt
also adopted
"the caveat added by the court in
young
that this is a power which
can be exercised only in the 'clearest of cases'" [(p. 14 c.c.c., p. 659
d.l.r.] p. 137.

i find that to grant
a stay in this case would “…
would violate
those
fundamental principles of justice which underlie the
community's sense of fair play and decency.”

the
ontario court of appeal in
boise
went on to note:
more recently, writing
for the majority
in
r. v. power,
1994 canlii 126 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 601
at p. 616,
89
c.c.c. (3d) 1, she held that a finding of an abuse of process "requires
overwhelming evidence that the proceedings under scrutiny are unfair to the
point that they are contrary to the interest of justice".

i also agree
with the respondent’s position that the appellant in this matter as was the
case before her worship implicitly observed that the appellant is turning the
paws
into a sword and not a shield:
i agree with mr.
fenton's submission that the respondent's argument turns the principle in
macmillan
bloedel
from a sword into a shield. the logic of the respondent's position
dictates that once it can demonstrate construction of the crossing would cause
a "teaspoon" of sediment to be deposited, the court should protect it
from prosecution even if it dumped sediment in the water at will. this position
flouts the abuse of process doctrine and the principles in
wholesale travel.

i
find as the ontario court of appeal found in
boise:
counsel advised
the court that cabinet has not passed any regulations under this section. mr.
cassidy submits that the crown could have addressed the respondent's abuse of
process argument by appropriate regulations. i agree that the crown could have
done so, but i do not agree that the absence of regulations enhances the respondent's
position. the respondent must still show that prosecuting it for the sediment
deposits caused by its inadequate construction would be unfair or oppressive.
in my view it has not done so and the summary conviction appeal court judge
erred in law in holding that it had. this prosecution does not offend the
community's sense of fair play. indeed i think that the community would be
offended if the respondent were not prosecuted for its conduct.
the respondent's
situation would be different if it had complied with the conditions of its
permit. the respondent would still have deposited sediment in the water during
construction. but the m.n.r.'s issuance of the permit, not the respondent's
failure to meet environmental requirements, would bring about this deposit.
then if the respondent were prosecuted it might have a due diligence defence or
be entitled to a stay of proceedings for abuse of process. that situation,
however, does not arise on the record before us. on this record prosecuting the
respondent did not amount to an abuse of process.

in the case
before me the crown could have sent a letter advising marineland they no longer
needed to comply because the bears were gone. they did not do so, but this
does not nullify that marineland was in breach of the order prior to the notice
of revocation being issued. the respondent argues and this court agrees that
in paragraphs 56-60 and in oral argument that “marineland was obligated to
comply with the act. the act states a person must comply with the terms of an
order until such time as it may be revoked and failure to comply with the order
until it is revoked
is an offence…” i find that her worship’s did not
err in not entering a stay.
the
standard of review in this proceeding:

the respondent
agrees that the appellant at paragraph 22 of their factum set out the proper
standard of review on this appeal when they stated:
22. matters of statutory
interpretation, and whether impugned conduct amounts to an abuse of process,
are questions of law, reviewable on a correctness standard. findings of fact
that inform whether conduct amounts to an abuse are subject to deference unless
the trier of fact made a palpable or overriding error. with respect to s.
24(1)
charter
remedies including stays, appellate intervention is
“warranted only where a trial judge misdirects him or herself in law, commits a
reviewable error of fact, or renders a decision that is so clearly wrong as to
amount to an injustice.
duchesne v. st. denis,
2012 onca 699
at para.
7
r. v. derbyshire,
2016 nsca 67
at paras.
72-75
law society of saskatchewan v.
abrametz,
2022 scc
29
at para.
30
babos
at para.
48

r. v. babos,
supra,
at para.
48:
 the standard
of review for a remedy ordered under s. 24(1) of the
charter
is
well established. appellate intervention is warranted only where a trial
judge misdirects him or herself in law, commits a reviewable error of fact, or
renders a decision that is “so clearly wrong as to amount to an injustice” (
bellusci,
at para. 19;
regan, at para.
117;
tobiass, at
para. 87;
r. v. bjelland,
2009 scc 38,
 2 s.c.r. 651, at
paras.
15 and 51
).

the supreme
court of canada in
law society of saskatchewan v. abrametz,
2022 scc 29, at
para.
83
noted
the following:
(2)
stay of
proceedings
 a
stay of proceedings is the ultimate remedy for abuse of process. it is
“ultimate” because it is “final”; the process will be permanently stayed:
regan,
at para.
53. in disciplinary matters, that means that charges will not be
dealt with, any complaint will go unheard and the public will not be protected.
given these consequences, a stay should be granted only in the “clearest
of cases”, when the abuse falls at the high end of the spectrum of seriousness:
blencoe,
at para. 120,
citing
power, at p. 616.
 the
decision whether to grant a stay involves a balancing of public interests. on
one hand, the public has an interest in ensuring that a tribunal established
for its protection follows fair procedures, untainted by an abuse of process.
on the other hand, the public has an interest in the resolution of
administrative cases on the merits. a balance must be struck between
the public interest in a
fair administrative process untainted by
abuse
and the competing public interest in having the
complaint
decided on its merits:
blencoe, at paras. 118-21 and 154;
conway,
at p. 1667;
robertson v. british columbia (commissioner, teachers
act),
2014 bcca 331,
64 b.c.l.r. (5th) 258, at paras.
78-80;
diaz-rodriguez,
at paras. 71-73;
law society of upper canada v. abbott,
2017
onca 525,
139 o.r. (3d) 290, at paras.
61-63
(leave to appeal
refused, 1 s.c.r. v).
 when
faced with a proceeding that has resulted in abuse, the court or tribunal must
ask itself: would going ahead with the proceeding result in more harm to the
public interest than if the proceedings were permanently halted? if the
answer is
yes, then a stay of proceeding should be ordered.
otherwise, the application for a stay should be dismissed. in conducting this
inquiry, the court or tribunal may have regard to whether other available
remedies for abuse of process, short of a stay, would adequately protect the
public’s interest in the proper administration of justice.
conclusion:

in
considering
the reasons of the justice of the
peace they do not show a misdirection. i find they rather show a proper
application of
the
test was applied.

however, if a
conflation of the test does constitute a misdirection on the law i adopt the
curative proviso in the
provincial offences act,
r.s.o. 1990 c. p.33:
orders on appeal against conviction, etc.
120
(1)
on the hearing of an appeal against a
conviction or against a finding as to the ability, because of mental disorder,
to conduct a defence, the court by order,
(a)
may allow the appeal where it is of the opinion that,
(i) the finding should
be set aside on the ground that it is unreasonable or cannot be supported by
the evidence,
(ii) the judgment of
the trial court should be set aside on the ground of a wrong decision on a
question of law, or
(iii)
on any ground, there was a miscarriage of justice; or
(b)
may dismiss the appeal where,
(i) the court is of the
opinion that the appellant, although the appellant was not properly convicted
on a count or part of an information, was properly convicted on another count
or part of the information,
(ii) the appeal is not
decided in favour of the appellant on any ground mentioned in clause (a), or
(iii) although the
court is of the opinion that on any ground mentioned in subclause (a) (ii)
the appeal might be decided in favour of the appellant, it is of the opinion
that no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice has occurred.
idem
(2)
where the court allows an appeal under clause (1)(a),
it shall,
(a)
where the appeal is from a conviction,
(i)
direct a finding of acquittal to be entered, or
(ii)
order a new trial; or
(b)
where the appeal is from a finding as to the ability, because of mental
disorder, to conduct a defence, order a new trial, subject to section 44.
idem
(3)
where the court dismisses an appeal under clause
(1)(b), it may substitute the decision that in its opinion should have been
made and affirm the sentence passed by the trial court or impose a sentence
that is warranted in law.
r.s.o. 1990, c. p.33, s. 120.

in
coming to this conclusion that the justice of the peace arrived at the correct
decision i have also considered the following cases.

r. v waisanen,
2015 onsc 5823 (canlii), at paras.
26-28:
 from his reasons for
judgment, it is apparent that the trial judge simply did not apply the correct
legal standard in concluding that the just and appropriate remedy in all of the
circumstances of this case was a permanent stay of proceedings.
 as i understand the
governing authorities, there are two categories of cases where a stay of
proceedings may be an appropriate remedy. the first or “main” category is where
the state misconduct compromises the fairness of the accused’s trial. the
second or “residual” category is unrelated to trial fairness, but comprises
cases where failing to stay the proceedings risks undermining the integrity of
the judicial process. the test used to determine whether a stay of
proceedings was warranted is the same in both types of cases. in either
type of case, before a stay of proceedings is justified, the court must be
satisfied of the following three criteria. first, there must be prejudice
to the accused’s right to a fair trial or to the integrity of the justice
system that will be manifested, perpetuated or aggravated through the conduct
of the trial, or by its outcome. in other words, the remedy is directed at
prospective, ongoing prejudice, and is not to redress past
prejudice. second, there must be no other alternative remedy that is
capable of redressing the prejudice. third, where there remains
uncertainty over whether a stay is warranted, the court must balance the
interests in favour of staying of proceedings, such as denouncing misconduct and
preserving the integrity of the justice system, against society’s interest in
having the case tried and decided on its merits. this third criterion
requires the court to examine the particulars of the case, the circumstances of
the accused, the nature of the charges, the interest of any victim and the
broader interest of the community in having the particular charges disposed of
on the merits.
see
r. v. babos, at paras.
30-47;
r. v.
o’connor,
1995 canlii 51 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 411, at paras.
68, 73, 75, 82;
canada
(minister of citizenship and immigration) v. tobiass, at paras. 89-92;
r.
v. regan, at para.
54-57;
r. v. zarinchang,
2010 onca
286,
 o.j. no. 1548, at paras.
57-61.

r. v. james,
2023 onsc 6935 (canlii), at paras.
41-43:
issue 2: did the trial
judge err in declining to grant a stay of proceedings?
 the
appellant challenges the trial judge’s decision to deny a stay of proceedings
as a s. 24(1) remedy for the lost in-car camera video. the standard of
review for this decision is a highly deferential one. moldaver j.
held in
r. v. babos,
2014 scc 16
at para.
48
that “appellate intervention
is warranted only where a trial judge misdirects him or herself in law, commits
a reviewable error of fact, or renders a decision that is ‘so clearly wrong as
to amount to an injustice.’”
 the
appellant contends that the trial judge applied the wrong standard to this
issue, pointing to her holding that there had not been “gross negligence” on
the part of the crown or police and noting that “unacceptable negligence” is
the standard to be applied in determining whether the loss of evidence amounts
to a
charter
breach. i do not agree. the trial
judge found a breach of the appellant’s s. 7 right. this
necessarily implies that she
did
find unacceptable
negligence. on a fair reading of her reasons, she referred to “gross
negligence” to situate the seriousness of this breach on the spectrum of
unacceptably negligent conduct. i see no error.
 the
trial judge granted a substantial remedy for the breach, finding breaches of s. 10(a)
and 10(b) where the lost evidence would have assisted in resolving relevant
factual issues, and excluding the breath samples. i cannot say that she
was “clearly wrong” in finding that this remedy was sufficient and that this
was not the clearest of cases for which a stay would be appropriate.

in
this case a stay was not warranted. the appeal is dismissed.
released:
july 18
th, 2025
signed:
“justice r.c.b. watson”
justice r.c.b. watson