source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj196/2025oncj196.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that
the following notice be attached to the file:
a non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding
has been issued under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
of the
criminal code. 
these subsections and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code, which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2), read as follows:
486.5 order restricting publication
— victims and witnesses — (1)
unless an order is made under section 486.4, on application of the prosecutor
in respect of a victim or a witness, or on application of a victim or a
witness, a judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is of
the opinion that the order is in the interest of the proper administration of
justice.
(2)
justice system participants —
on application of the prosecutor in respect of a justice system
participant who is involved in proceedings in respect of an offence referred to
in subsection (2.1), or on application of such a justice system participant, a
judge or justice may make an order directing that any information that could
identify the justice system participant shall not be published in any document
or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is of the
opinion that the order is in the interest of the proper administration of
justice....
(2.1) offences –
the offences for the purposes of subsection (2) are
(a) an
offence under section 423.1, 467.11, 467.111, 467.12, or 467.13, or a serious
offence committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association
with, a criminal organization;
(b) a terrorism offence;
(c) an
offence under subsection 16(1) or (2), 17(1), 19(1), 20(1) or 22(1) of the
security
of information act; or
(d) an
offence under subsection 21(1) or section 23 of the
security of information
act
that is committed in relation to an offence referred to in paragraph
(c).
(3)
limitation
– an order made under this section does not apply in respect
of the disclosure of information in the course of the administration of justice
if it is not the purpose of the disclosure to make the information known in the
community....
486.6 offence
—
(1)
every person who fails to comply with
an order made under any of subsections 486.4(1) to (3) or
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. lewin, 2025 oncj 196
date: 2025 04 09
court file no.: 24-48105095
toronto region
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
tiena lewin
before justice cidalia c. g. faria
heard on april 8, 2025
reasons for judgment released on april 9, 2025
stuart rothman................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
roma mungol.................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant tiena lewin
faria j.:
i.
introduction

tiena lewin, an ece (early
childhood educator) student while on a placement at a daycare in toronto, is
charged with assault on a 17-month-old child on january 23, 2024, contrary to
s. 266
of the
criminal code.

the crown called a
witness to the event, a.m., and filed three photos of the injury the child
sustained. ms. lewin testified in her own defence.

the issue is the
credibility and reliability of each witness, and the amount of force ms. lewin
used to pull the chair the child was sitting on.
ii.
legal principles

as in every criminal
case, ms. lewin is presumed innocent. the burden is on the crown to prove each
element of the charge beyond a reasonable doubt. the burden never shifts.
reasonable doubt is based on reason and common sense from the evidence or lack
of evidence. it is higher than a balance of probabilities, yet less than proof
to an absolute certainty.


the definition of an
assault, pursuant to s. 265(1)(a) is when a person:
without the consent of
another person, applies force intentionally to that other person, directly or
indirectly;

when considering the
credibility and reliability of a witness, i may accept some, none, or all, of a
witness’ evidence. credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the
truth.
reliability relates to the actual
accuracy of the testimony. the credibility and reliability of a witness must
be “tested in the light of all the other evidence presented.”


as ms. lewin testified in her
defence, the applicable analytical framework is that of
w. (d.).:
i.
if i accept the evidence of ms.
lewin, i must acquit her.
ii.
even if i do not accept the
evidence of ms. lewin, if her evidence raises a reasonable doubt, i must acquit
her.
iii.
even if i do not accept the
evidence of ms. lewin, nor does it raise a reasonable doubt, on the totality of
the evidence i do accept, i must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the
crown has proven every element of the offence.
iii.
summary of evidence

a.m. is an eca (early
childhood assistant) who has worked at the l.j.d. for almost 25 years. she testified
that on january 23, 2024, her supervisor s.m. asked her to move from her infant
room, to assist in the toddler room after nap time. the toddler room is for
children ages ranging from 18 months to 2 and half years.

ms. a.m. arrived in the
toddler room at approximately 5 minutes before 3:00 p.m. mm, a child who had
been in the infant room with her, and who had transitioned to the toddler room
3 weeks before, was crying with a runny nose and ran to her. ms. a.m. wiped her
tears, cleaned her nose, hugged her, and sat her down at a table with a winnie
the pooh electronic book. the other two staff were busy, one with diaper change
and the other cleaning a cot that had been soiled during nap time.

ms. a.m. was facing mm
and able to see all the children when she heard the new student, ms. lewin, who
had started at the daycare the day before, tell mm in a loud voice to pick up
the blocks from the floor. this confused ms. a.m. as mm had not been playing
with the blocks and was reading a book. she then heard ms. lewin say to mm, “i
told you to pick up the blocks” in a bossy tone and saw ms. lewin pull the
chair “hard” from under the child.

mm went “flying” as she
described it, hit the table, and fell to the floor. ms. a.m. saw ms. lewin pick
mm up, try to console her and wipe the blood from her face. ms. lewin then
passed mm to ms. a.m., who asked ms. lewin to get ice.

ms. a.m. was asked to
call the child’s mother who works in the building which she did. the child’s
mother came soon after. ms. a.m. heard ms. lewin tell the mother that mm was
throwing blocks. ms. a.m. testified she told ms. lewin to tell the truth that
she had pulled the chair from under the child, and the child fell, and ms.
lewin did. the child’s father came a while later, he was upset and spoke to ms.
lewin.

the child attended the hospital,
which is shown in the photos filed. mm is on a hospital bed. the photos show a cut
mm sustained above her left lip.

ms. a.m. testified that
the child was one of the younger children at 17 months in the toddler room, and
weighs about 20 lbs.

during
cross-examination, ms. a.m. testified:
•
students are placed at
the daycare to learn and get experience.
•
ms. a.m. did not give
ms. lewin any instructions.
•
ms. lewin had been
organizing the children and telling them what to do before interacting with mm.
•
mm was sitting at the same
table with the book ms. a.m. had given her from the time ms. a.m. sat her down
to the time ms. lewin pulled the chair. mm did not change tables to the block
table. she did not play with blocks or throw any blocks at children.
•
ms. lewin was standing
by mm when she spoke to the child.
•
she saw ms. lewin pull
the child’s chair only once, and with sufficient force that the child fell.

it was suggested to ms.
a.m. that she was on her phone during the incident. she responded that she was
not and did not remember where her phone was. she testified she observed the
entire incident.

ms. lewin testified
that she is an ece student at humber college and started her placement at the l.j.d.
the day before the incident. on january 23, 2024, she was assigned to the
toddler room although she had no experience with children that young. that day
she assisted with the programming and after nap time, she was asked to set up 3
play tables, which she did. one table had large structures, one with blocks
and one with books.

she testified mm was
one of the children who had gone to the block table and was throwing blocks at
the other children. she testified that she kneeled by mm’s chair to be at eye
level with her, and to get the child’s attention, she turned the chair mm was
sitting on toward her. she testified that she asked mm to pick up the blocks
and play with the blocks nicely.

ms. lewin testified that
she pulled the chair a second time, and then the child fell forward and got
hurt.

ms. lewin described
going behind mm’s chair, placing both hands on the back of the chair and
“gently” pulling the chair to get mm away from the table. this is when mm fell.
she testified was kneeling the whole time and made the child “aware of
everything that was going to happen” before it happened.

ms. lewin testified
that ms. a.m. had come into the room, had looked at her, and had given her no
instructions. she testified ms. a.m. was sitting at the rectangular table
directly opposite from the child and was on her phone during the incident.

after the child fell,
ms. lewin testified she picked up the child, wiped the blood from her face and
gave the child to the supervisor. ms. lewin theorized that mm’s tooth had cut
her upper lip when her face hit the table.

in cross-examination,
ms. lewis testified that:
•
ms. a.m. was on her
phone most of the time she was in the room.
•
she did not appreciate
how light mm was when she first moved the chair.
•
she did not put a hand
in front of mm while she pulled the chair away.
•
she did notice mm was a
younger and smaller child in the room, but did not know she was 17 months, and
did not know she weighed about 20 lbs.

ms. lewin was firm that
she did not intend for mm to get hurt.
iv.
position of the
parties

defence counsel submits
that the court should accept ms. lewin’s evidence that when she gently pulled
the chair while mm was sitting on it, she had no intention of hurting mm, and
unfortunately the child fell forward and got hurt. she submits that the court reject
ms. a.m.’ evidence as she was on her phone, and did not see everything, she
should have been supervising ms. lewin and watching the children. she submits the
crown has not proven every element of the charge beyond a reasonable doubt.

the crown acknowledged
that ms. lewin did not want to injure mm. however, he submits that ms. lewin
used unreasonable force when she pulled the chair from under the child causing her
to fall and sustain an injury. he submits ms. a.m.’ evidence is reliable and
credible, it was not shaken, and the photos of the injury support his
submission that the force used was excessive.
v.
analysis

on all the evidence
heard, there is no dispute that ms. lewin pulled the chair the child was
sitting on. as a result, 17-month-old mm fell forward, hit her face on the
table, and fell to the floor. she sustained a cut on the left side of her upper
lip that bled immediately. mm’s injury was attended to with ice, and she went
to hospital where the photos of the injury were taken.

ms. lewin intentionally applied
force to mm indirectly by pulling the chair she was sitting on and caused her
to fall and sustain an injury. all the elements of the offence are proven
beyond a reasonable doubt.

the issue is the amount of force applied.

on ms. a.m.’ evidence, ms. lewin
pulled the chair “hard”, with “medium” force, so hard that the child went
“flying straight” at the table. on ms. lewin’s evidence, she pulled the chair
gently and mm accidently fell forward.

ms. a.m. was facing mm
at the time, which ms. lewin confirmed. she paid particular attention to mm
because she knew her. she had just cleaned and consoled her. she had just given
her a book to look at and even remembered it was a winnie the pooh book. ms.
a.m. made reasonable and fair evaluations. ms. a.m. thought ms. lewin was loud
and her tone was bossy. however, because she did not know how ms. lewin spoke normally,
given that it was her second day, she thought she would speak to the supervisor
first before she made any comment directly to ms. lewin. she agreed that
children get hurt in daycare.

ms. a.m. appeared to
have no
animus
toward ms. lewin. in fact, she went out of her way to
testify positively and sympathetically for ms. lewin.

for instance, ms. a.m. testified
ms. lewin had just started in the daycare the day before, and she was there to
learn. she testified that maybe ms. lewin had not been speaking loudly to the
children all day. she thought maybe she had not calculated how light mm was.
she did not think ms. lewin wanted to hurt the child. she testified ms. lewin
tried to console the mm after she fell, and that ms. lewin looked sad that the
child was hurt.

i accept ms. a.m.’
evidence. she was not on her phone, and she saw the entire event.

i reject ms. lewin’s
evidence that:
•
she spoke gently to mm,
•
mm went from one table
to the other,
•
mm threw blocks at
other children,
•
she kneeled and first
pulled mm’s chair toward her,
•
she told mm “everything
that was going to happen” before she pulled the chair from under mm
and that ms.
a.m. had missed all of these events because she was on her phone.

nor does ms. lewin’s
evidence raise a reasonable doubt. the child would not have fallen with such
force as to cause the injury that is easily observable in the photos if ms.
lewin had ever so gently pulled the chair from under the table as she
demonstrated to the court.

a word on
de minimis
as it was discussed during submissions, i refer to the ontario court of
appeal’s discussion
i
n
r. v. murdock,
2003 canlii 4306, at para.
29:
“…the “
de minimis
”
defence at common law operated to prevent the conviction of those whose
conduct, while falling within the four corners of the penal provision, were so
trivial as to pose no risk to the public interest:
stuart,
supra,
at pp. 594-98. the harm principle also underlies the long accepted rule
of statutory interpretation which directs that criminal statues, where
possible, should not be read so as to encompass conduct which is trivial or
harmless (citations removed)…”

the force ms. lewin
applied was not trivial, nor harmless, particularly in a daycare setting,
dealing with an obviously light and vulnerable toddler. i accept ms. a.m.’
description that ms. lewis did pull the chair “hard” and this intentional
application of indirect force on mm is an assault.
vi.
conclusion

i find tiena lewin
guilty of the charge.
released: april 9, 2025
signed: justice cidalia c.g. faria

r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320 at para.
14.

r. v. b (bw), no. 758 at
para. 28.

r. v. w.(d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 1 scr 742.