source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj81/2025oncj81.html

warning
an order restricting publication in
this proceeding under
ss. 486.4(1),
(2),
(2.1),
(2.2),
(3)
or
(4)
or
486.6(1)
or
(2)
of the
criminal code
shall continue. these
sections of the
criminal code
provide:
486.4(1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the victim or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(a) 
any of the following offences;
(i) 
an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1,
170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) 
any offence under this act, as it read at any time before the day on which this
subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged involves a violation of
the complainant’s sexual integrity and that conduct would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(iii) 
repealed: s.c. 2014, c. 25, s. 22(2), effective december 6, 2014 (act, s. 49).
(b) 
two or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of
which is an offence referred to in paragraph (a).
(2) 
in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or
(b), the presiding judge or justice shall
(a) 
at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of
eighteen years and the victim of the right to make an application for the
order; and
(b) 
on application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
(2.1) subject to subsection (2.2),
in proceedings in respect of an offence other than an offence referred to in
subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18 years, the presiding judge
or justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify
the victim shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way.
(2.2) in proceedings in respect of
an offence other than an offence referred to in subsection (1), if the victim
is under the age of 18 years, the presiding judge or justice shall
(a) as soon
as feasible, inform the victim of their right to make an application for the
order; and
(b) on
application of the victim or the prosecutor, make the order.
(3) 
in proceedings in respect of an offence under section 163.1, a judge or justice
shall make an order directing that any information that could identify a
witness who is under the age of eighteen years, or any person who is the
subject of a representation, written material or a recording that constitutes
child pornography within the meaning of that section, shall not be published in
any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way.
(4) 
an order made under this section does not apply in respect of the disclosure of
information in the course of the administration of justice when it is not the
purpose of the disclosure to make the information known in the community.
2005,
c. 32, s. 15; 2005, c. 43, s. 8(3)(b);
2010, c. 3, s. 5;
2012, c. 1, s. 29;
2014, c. 25, ss. 22, 48;
2015, c. 13, s. 18.
486.6(1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
(2)
or
(3)
or 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary
conviction.
(2) 
for greater certainty, an order referred to in subsection (1) applies to
prohibit, in relation to proceedings taken against any person who fails to
comply with the order, the publication in any document or the broadcasting or
transmission in any way of information that could identify a victim, witness or
justice system participant whose identity is protected by the order.
2005, c.
32, s. 15.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. i.d., 2025 oncj 81
date: 2025·01·30
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
i.d.
judgment at trial
t.
surmanski....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
c.
laperriere.................................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
felix
j.:
table of contents:
r. v. i.d.
i.
introduction
5
a.
introduction
5
ii.
assault
– may 5
th, 2023
5
a.
the evidence – allegations from may 5
th, 2023
5
iii.
assault
– july 22, 2023
7
a.
living room assault allegation
7
b.
bedroom assault allegation
8
iv.
the
burden of proof and general criminal law framework
9
1.
the presumption of innocence
9
2.
reasonable doubt
9
3.
credibility and reliability
assessments
9
4.
the guidance of w.(d.)
10
5.
w.(d.)
applies to all of the evidence
10
6.
other relevant legal guidance
on credibility
10
v.
analysis
11
a.
the counts and “similar fact”
11
b.
prior consistent statements
12
c.
credibility and reliability overall – complainant
12
d.
credibility and reliability overall -- defendant
12
e.
photographs of injury
13
f.
animus, bias, and motive to fabricate
13
g.
july 23
rd
14
1.
“failure”
to leave
14
2.
the
text messages
14
h.
may 5
th
15
1.
the
defendant’s alcohol consumption
15
2.
facebook
messages
15
3.
the
complainant’s reluctance and delayed disclosure
15
4.
prejudicial
information
17
5.
photographs
of injury
17
i.
conclusion
17
i.
introduction
a.
introduction

the defendant is charged with two counts of assault on his
intimate partner on july 23rd, 2023, and two counts of assault by choking on
his intimate partner on may 5
th, 2023.

as is the case with many intimate partner trials the central
issue is the credibility of the complainant and defendant as analyzed through
the framework of the criminal burden of proof. the crown submits that the
complainant was credible. the defence position is that the complainant
fabricated the allegations before the court and there is reasonable doubt.

i found the complainant to be a credible and reliable witness
at trial.

i found the defendant to be a somewhat credible and reliable
witness at trial.

in a criminal trial, any reasonable doubt must be resolved in
favour of the defendant. i am unable to conclusively arrive at factual
findings as it concerns the allegations. this state of mind necessarily means
that the prosecution has not proven these counts beyond a reasonable doubt.

the defendant is found not guilty of all counts. the purpose
of this written judgment is to explain the reasoning behind these findings.
ii.
assault – may 5
th, 2023
a.
the evidence – allegations from may 5
th, 2023

the information alleges in two separate counts that on may 5
th
the defendant assaulted the complainant by choking, suffocating, or strangling
the complainant.

the complainant testified that she and the
defendant were in their basement apartment. there was a discussion about
the defendant’s drinking problem. this was often a topic of discussion as the
complainant held the view that the defendant had a “problem”. the defendant
did not share that perception.

the discussion escalated into to a heated argument. the
defendant began to call her names and use profanity. she began to cry. she
explained that at one point she went to put something down and her back was to
the defendant. the defendant came up behind her, placed both hands around her
neck, and applied pressure. the pressure was “pretty hard”. she explained
that this action affected her vision a “little bit” and she could not breath. 
the duration of this assault was estimated to be approximately 30 seconds long.

the
complainant testified that she struggled against the defendant and was trying
to call for help. in so doing, she was able to turn her body around and face
the defendant. during this short period of time, she described the defendant
as angry that she was physically fighting back and trying to extricate herself
from his grasp. there was screaming and name-calling (e.g., calling her a
loser). the complainant believes she said: “what are you doing!”.

the
complainant testified that after this brief respite, the defendant once again
grabbed her by the throat. this time, he did so while facing her from the
front. the pressure applied during this second assault was described as “quite
hard – maybe even a little bit harder than the first time”. the complainant
testified that the duration of this assault was shorter than the first
assault. she estimated that the application of force was perhaps 20 to 40
seconds long. as a result of this second application of force, the complainant
could not breath very well, her vision was blurred, and the room was spinning.

in
the aftermath the complainant collapsed in the corner of the kitchen trying to
catch her breath. she felt dizzy. she was crying. she then described the
defendant being aggressive as she cowered in the corner.

the
incident ended with the defendant taking his jacket to go outside. while he
was leaving, the defendant broke the drywall near the entrance of the door as
he left either by use of his hand or something in the pocket of the jacket.

the
complainant testified that other than the intervening period between the two
assaults where she fought to extricate herself from the defendant’s grasp, she
did not physically engage the defendant in any way. it was implicit in her
testimony that she did not consent to any assaultive physical contact with the
defendant.

the
complainant took photographs of injuries received as a result of this assault. 
she also took a photograph of the damage to the drywall.

the
defendant testified that he did not have any particular recollection of the
events of may 5
th
or 6
th. he explained that given their
relationship, the lack of any particular recollection probably meant they had a
good day. nothing stood out from that day.

the
defendant adduced facebook messages from may 5
th
and 6
th

documenting some
electronic contact that day. he testified that when the relationship was good,
they would often communicate loving messages such as those displayed in the
facebook messages.

during
cross-examination the defendant conceded that it was probable that he was
physically present with the complainant in the basement apartment on the day in
question. but he was clear that no assault occurred. he did not place his
hands on the complainant’s neck, shove her, or engage in any inappropriate
physical contact that day. nor had he ever engaged in such activity.
iii.
assault – july 22, 2023
a.
living room assault allegation

i
adopt the criminal law framework for analysis set out above in this judgment as
it concerns the allegations of july 22,2023.

as
it concerns the july allegations the complainant testified to a disagreement
with the defendant commencing in the morning. the defendant went to work.
while he was at work, she sent him several electronic communications by text
message. she perceived he was ignoring her messages. this disagreement
ultimately ended up with the defendant telling the complainant to leave his
property.

the
defendant came home from work in the afternoon. he then went to a local bar. 
the complainant understood that the defendant had asked her to leave. she
engaged in a dispute with the defendant over who would pay for the uber. she
began packing her things. in the end, the complainant did not leave. in the
early hours of the morning, she contacted a friend but received no answer. she
had nowhere to go. given the number of items in the residence, her items
upstairs, and a pet cat, the complainant resolved to leave in the morning and
ceased efforts to leave in the early hours of the morning.

when
the defendant returned from the bar, the complainant’s described him as
intoxicated. they continued the argument from earlier in the day.

the
complainant testified that the argument became physical. the defendant was
trailing after her within the apartment calling her names and saying anything
he could to demean her. at one point near the sofa, he “puffed” himself over
top of her in a threatening manner while yelling and screaming. the
complainant testified that she was crying and telling him to stop.

as
she continued to move her things the defendant shoved her using both of his
hands against her shoulders. she fell backwards into a table and sofa. she
struck her legs on the coffee table
b.
bedroom assault allegation

approximately five to ten minutes after the assault in the living
room the complainant described an assault that occurred after the defendant
entered the bedroom. again, he was looming over her in a threatening manner. 
the complainant continued packing and the argument continued. the complainant
testified that following her screams and profanities the defendant pushed her
with both hands. she fell backward. there was no injury. the complainant
described this assault as similar in nature to the living room assault.

the defendant at some point went outside to smoke a cigarette. the
complainant called a friend seeking assistance to leave but with no success. 
the defendant called the police to have her removed from the premises.

the defendant testified that he and the complainant had an argument
that morning after it was revealed that he had been smoking while driving to
work. as a result of that argument the complainant sent him text messages at
work. the text messages were persistent. he heard the “dinging” all day and
could not deal with it at work.

he left work approximately 3 pm. when he got home, he did what he
normally did when they had a “tiff” – went to a bar. he went there to do the
scheduling for work and have a drink. the defendant testified that he told the
complainant to leave. he also recalled calling the complainant from the bar,
and had a discussion with her. he remained at the bar because he did not want
to be in the apartment while the complainant was packing to leave. since she
was still in the house he remained at the bar until 1030 pm or later. he
consumed approximately three beers during this time. having regard to his
consumption of alcohol that afternoon and evening he was not intoxicated.

the defendant testified that upon leaving the bar around 11:15 pm
and arriving home, he found the complainant was still in the premises. he
again told her in person that she was required to leave. he called an uber and
went to another bar and waited her out until last call. he had another three
beers at this location. he ubered home by 1 am feeling “tipsy but not
hammered”.

the defendant testified that he arrived home around 1:45 am and told
the complainant that if she did not leave, he would call the police. the
complainant refused to leave. he called the police. while on the phone with
the 911 dispatcher he was asked to pass the phone to the complainant. when he
did, the complainant told the operator “he hit me”. the defendant then went
back on the phone and told the operator that he would be waiting outside for
the police to arrive. the defendant denied that any physical contact occurred
during his interaction with the complainant.
iv.
the burden of proof and general criminal law
framework

criminal trials are informed by a number of well-known legal
principles. i will briefly set out the framework for the proper approach to the
analysis of the evidence.
1.
the
presumption of innocence

the central tenet in our criminal justice system is the
constitutional entrenchment of the presumption of innocence. a criminal
defendant begins a trial with the presumption of innocence. the defendant is
not required to testify. the defendant is not required to present any
evidence. the presumption does not shift during the trial. the presumption of
innocence is only dislodged if the prosecution presents evidence establishing
the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt:
r. v.
lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320, at para.
27;
r. v. starr,
2000 scc 40, at para.
242.
2.
reasonable
doubt

the reasonable doubt standard applies to the final determination of
guilt or innocence. it is not applied piecemeal to individual pieces of
evidence or categories of evidence:
r. v. menard,
1998 canlii 790 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 109;
r.
v. morin,
1988 canlii 8 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 345.

reasonable doubt is based on “reason and common sense”, is not
“imaginary or frivolous”, does not “involve proof to an absolute certainty”,
and must be “logically connected to the evidence or absence of evidence”.:
r.
v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33, at paras.
28,36 [
villaroman
].

it is important to note that the defence bears no burden to prove
foundational facts in support of an inference of innocence:
villaroman,
at para.
35;
r. v. khela,
2009 scc 4. nor is the defendant required to
adduce evidence providing foundational support for a “finding” of reasonable
doubt:
villaroman, at para.
28. a defendant is free to point to
anything in support of reasonable doubt including the presence or absence of
evidence.
3.
credibility
and reliability assessment
s

in many criminal trials the credibility and reliability of the
central witnesses at trial must be resolved. i rely on the description of
“credibility” and “reliability” explained by watt j.a. in
r. v. c.(h.),
2009 onca 56, at paragraph
41, and the guidance of the supreme court of canada
in
r. v. g.f.,
2021 scc 20, at paragraph
82
[
g.f.
] and
r. v.
kruk,
2024 scc 7, at paragraphs
146-149
[
kruk
].
4.
the
guidance of w.(d.)

in assessing the criminal standard of proof beyond a reasonable
doubt, trial judges have a responsibility to consider the entire record at
trial and to resolve material issues relevant to the credibility analysis. the
w.(d.)
decision sets out the three-step process for analyzing credibility in the face
of conflicting evidence. the guidance is as follows:
1.
if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must
acquit;
2.
even if you do not believe the testimony of the accused, but you are
left in a reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit; and,
3.
even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused,
you must ask whether, on the basis of the accepted evidence, has the
prosecution established guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

i am in favour of an additional instruction. i acknowledge that a
criminal trial is not simply a competition between the version of events
provided by the complainant, and the version of events provided by the
defendant. but, if after considering the totality of the evidence, i am unable
to decide whom to believe, this state of mind translates into a reasonable
doubt and an acquittal must be the result:
r. v. s. (j.h.),
2008 scc 30,
at para.
12
[
s.(j.h.)
];
r. v. austin,
2006 canlii 39077 (on ca), o.j. no. 4660
(c.a.), at para.
20.
5.
w.(d.)
applies to all of the evidence

the
w.(d).
test applies to more than
the defendant’s evidence. the test requires consideration of any defence
evidence and any admissible exculpatory evidence no matter the source:
r v.
savage,
2023 onca 240, at para.
37;
r v. n.p.,
2022 onca 597, at
para.
29;
r. v. smith,
2020 onca 782, at para.
12;
r. v. m.p.,
2018 onca 608, at para.
60.).
6.
other relevant legal guidance
on credibility

where the guilt or innocence of the defendant is driven by an
evaluation of credibility as between prosecution witnesses and defence
witnesses, it is important to remember that “credibility contests” are not
permitted in criminal law. a trial judge is not permitted to determine guilt
or innocence by simply picking a preferred version of events from amongst
competing versions. this approach offends the criminal burden proof:
r. v.
vuradin,
2013 scc 38, at para.
26;
s.(j.h.),
at para. 9;
w.(d.),
at p. 409. a trial judge cannot permit the analysis of credibility to
degenerate into a mere choice between competing prosecution and defence
witnesses (or competing evidence for that matter):
r. v. hull,
2006 canlii 26572 (on ca), 
o.j. no 3177 (c.a.) at para.
5.

in a criminal trial, witnesses testify as to their subjective
observations and experiences. a trier of fact is entitled to accept some, all,
or none of a witness’ testimony:
kruk, at paras.
82,145-146;
r. v.
c.p.,
2021 scc 19, at paras.
35, 274;
r.
v. le,
2019 scc 34,
at para.
266;
s.(j.h.), at para. 10;
r. v. w.h.,
2013 scc 22, at
para.
32
[
w.h.
];
r. v. francois,
1994 canlii 52 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 827, at para.
14.

the trier of fact is entitled to determine the weight assigned to
different parts of the evidence of a witness that the trier of fact accepts:
w.h.,
at para.
32;
r. v. j.h.,
2005 canlii 253 (on ca), o.j. no. 39 (c.a.), at para.
44.

the trier of fact is entitled to decide how much weight to assign to
a testimonial inconsistency and any explanation provided by the witness for the
inconsistency:
w.h., at para.
32;

a trial judge must endeavour to fairly and evenly evaluate the
defendant’s evidence and the complainant’s evidence:
r. v. bartholomew,
2019 onca 377, at paras.
30-33
[
bartholomew
];
r. v. radcliffe,
2017 onca 176;
r. v. gravesande,
2015 onca 774. it is also an error to
move directly from disbelief of the accused's evidence to a positive finding of
guilt:
r. v. dore
(2004),
2004 canlii 32078 (on ca), 189 c.c.c. (3d) 526 (ont. c.a.), at p. 527
(leave to appeal refused, s.c.c.a. no. 517);
r. v. h.(s.),

o.j. no. 118 (c.a.), at paras. 4-6.

finally, it is critical to note that acceptance of evidence
presented by prosecution witnesses does not mandate automatic conviction. a
trial judge could conceivably accept prosecution witness testimony, but still
harbour a reasonable doubt.
v.
analysis
a.
the counts and “similar fact”

the crown has proceeded with four counts covering four sets of
allegations on two separate days. the crown did not bring a “similar fact
application across the counts”. as such, the guilt or innocence of the
defendant must be assessed only based on the admissible evidence on each count
independently. the prosecution may not rely upon evidence across the counts to
prove the case.

credibility assessments are not bound by this restriction. as concerns
the credibility and reliability of the witnesses, i may consider the totality
of the evidence given by a witness across all counts:
r. v. p.e.c.,
2005 scc 19;
r. v. d.m.
2022 onca 429, at para.
97;
r. v. d.r.,
2021 onca 460, at para.
25;
r. v. m.r.s.,
2020 onca 667, at para.
64.
b.
prior consistent statements

the defence position is that the complainant fabricated the
allegations. the prosecution has not sought the substantive admission of any
prior consistent statement made by the complainant (e.g., “he hit me” to the
911 dispatcher). as such, this evidence is admissible as narrative. i may not
use the evidence to rebut the allegation of fabrication or for any other
substantive purpose.
c.
credibility and reliability overall – complainant

the
complainant’s testimony was clear, specific, and illustrative of the contours
of the relationship with the defendant. as i will elaborate below, i tended to
believe her evidence. some of her evidence as to the defendant’s smoking and
drinking habit was corroborated by external sources (e.g., text messages). 
there was no significant credibility issue other than a caution for the
potential for bias or animus. i certainly preferred the evidence of the
complainant – especially as it concerned the may 5
th
allegations. were
this a civil trial i would find in her favour. but this is a criminal trial
where the burden of proof is beyond a reasonable doubt.
d.
credibility and reliability overall -- defendant

while
i found the complainant credible and reliable, the defendant was also somewhat
credible and reliable.

he
testified in a clear and straightforward manner. he acknowledged his boorish
behaviour and poor performance as an adult partner of the complainant. he did
not engage the support she provided with the aim of improving himself and their
relationship.

the
defendant also acknowledged stress at the time, heavy consumption of alcohol,
and challenges in the personal relationship with the complainant. he
acknowledged the support provided by the complainant as it concerned his child
and the household. the defendant was also clear that he was not a supportive partner
during the timeframe of these allegations.

he
was less reliable in that he provided a less detailed recount of the events on
july 23
rd. but overall, i credited his testimony with some weight.
e.
photographs of injury

i tend to accept the photographs of injury and the complainant’s
testimony as to the cause. but i also acknowledge a mild concern about the
fact that the complainant took the photographs -- not the police. it is also
notable that the prosecution did not adduce objective electronic evidence
documenting the date and time of the creation of the photos. in today’s modern
age any cellphone camera documents such data, and it is easily accessible. this
impacted the weight i assigned to the notion that they were taken by the
complainant proximate in time to an assault.
f.
animus, bias, and motive to fabricate

defence counsel submits that the complainant has fabricated the
allegations. the crown attorney submits that the complainant is a credible and
reliable witness. as such, the prosecution position implies that there is no
evidence of a motive to fabricate, bias, or animus on the part of the
complainant.

implicit in the defence position that the complainant has fabricated
the allegations is the suggestion that the complainant is biased, and possesses
a motive to fabricate the allegations.

the defendant has no onus to demonstrate that the complainant has a
motive to fabricate:
r. v.
batte,
2000 canlii 5751 (on ca), o.j. no 2184, (c.a.) at
para.
120-121
[
batte
]. trial judges may consider the presence or the
absence of a motive to fabricate:
r. v. gerrard,
2022 scc 13, at para.
4
[
gerrard
];
r. v. ignacio,
2021 onca 69, at paras.
38-44. but
it is an error to equate the absence of evidence demonstrating a motive to
fabricate with a proven lack of a motive to fabricate:
gerrard, at para.
4;
bartholomew,
at paras.
21-23;
batte, at paras.
121,125.

i do not believe that the complainant fabricated the allegations. 
but the prosecution has not disproved a motive to fabricate. i subscribe to
mild caution in this case for several reasons.

first, there was clear animus between the parties.

second, the complainant and the defendant engaged in some sort of
disposition of property dispute as evidenced by the complainant’s attendance at
a police station to follow up. while i do not have the details of this
dispute, i do not need them. the dispute existed.

third, the complainant clearly perceived that the defendant treated
her improperly, separate and apart from the allegations of assault.

fourth, at times during questioning the complainant would drift from
a directly responsive answer, to provide prejudicial information (e.g., the
cross-examination about the defendant going to a hotel provoked an answer about
the defendant potentially engaging prostitutes).

finally, the involvement of the police in july 2023 was precipitated
by the defendant kicking the complainant out of his residence.
g.
july 23
rd
1.
“failure” to leave

the issue of the complainant “failing to leave” when directed by the
defendant has less to do with landlord tenant issues, property rights, or a
justification for assault. it is more about it being a central feature of the
conflict and the defendant’s testimony.

i find that the defendant told the complainant to leave his property
several times. the complainant acknowledged this but explained that at 2:00 am
she had contacted a friend but could not reach anyone to help her. the
complainant testified that she was not going to leave with all of her stuff in
the middle of the night with nowhere to go. she resolved to leave first thing
in the morning. she “barricaded” herself in the bedroom until morning. i
accept her testimony and do not view the “failure to leave” as a credibility
issue against her.
2.
the text messages

the defendant adduced eighteen pages of text messages with the
complainant. the text messages corroborate the defendant’s position that on
july 23
rd
he had repeatedly asked the complainant to leave his
residence. the text messages also support the defendant’s position that he
remained at a local bar and stayed away from the residence because he
anticipated problems with the complainant.

but the text messages also corroborate the complainant’s testimony
as it concerns the friction between them around smoking, drinking, cleaning,
therapy, child care, promises, and following through on actions. these text
messages powerfully corroborate the complainant’s historical record on the
problems in the relationship. they also document her perception that she left
him, returned, and was met with unfulfilled promises to change.
h.
may 5
th
1.
the defendant’s alcohol consumption

a feature of the may dispute concerned the subject matter of the
defendant’s consumption of alcohol. she explained that on may 5
th
the argument began because the defendant had drunk “quite a lot”. she
testified that it was not unusual for the defendant to drink ten or even
fifteen beers. the complainant consumed alcohol rarely. from the perspective
of the complainant this was a common source of argument.

the defendant was forthright during this testimony that he was not
sober in either may or july 2023 and that he would frequently consume volumes
of alcohol.
2.
facebook messages

the
facebook messages are relevant to the credibility assessment of the complainant
and also as foundation for reasonable doubt. the defence position is that the
facebook messages demonstrate that there was no discord on may 5
th
and may 6
th
and that the relationship was positive as evidenced by
the content of the messages.

the
complainant testified that these messages did not evidence that the
relationship was positive. she explained that the relationship was cyclical. 
there would be conflict, then they would make-up. she explained that after
every argument it was up to her to fix things and smooth things over. if she
pressed the source of the dispute or suggested that they needed to seek help
“all hell would break loose”. she had to be the sweetest most caring version
of herself to avoid continued volatility.

i
found the complainant’s evidence to be quite powerful on this issue. it
engaged a concept well understood by criminal court participants as it concerns
intimate partner violence cases. i do not require expert opinion evidence to
understand a phenomenon demonstrated in many cases over many years. in
umpteenth trials i have heard a variety of witnesses describe a continuous
cycle of intimate partner conflict, a “make-up” period, a calm period, and
then a return to conflict.
3.
the complainant’s reluctance and delayed disclosure

the
complainant was cross-examined on the following issues:
1.
why she refused to provide a “formal” statement to the police;
2.
why she delayed reporting the assaults; and
3.
why she stayed in the relationship and the defendant’s residence after
the may 5
th
incident.

the
contention that the complainant did not provide a “formal” statement is not a
credibility issue. the complainant acknowledged that she was reluctant to
address the police involvement because of the potential impact on the
defendant. she did not want the defendant to get in trouble. she was aware of
the circumstances of his custody and access to his son and did not want to do
something to jeopardize access to his son. in any event, it is clear that the
complainant perceived her discussion with the police captured on
body-worn-camera footage as being a “statement”. she did not recognize or
understand the difference between that statement and a “formal” statement until
it was made clear to her during cross-examination.

it
is also clear that the complainant was focused on trying to get the defendant
to access help and resources for alcohol addiction. the complainant testified
during direct examination that when she spoke to the 911 operator on july 23rd,
she told the operator that she just wanted the defendant to get help for his
alcoholism. she testified at trial that she understood that alcoholism was an
illness, and she simply wanted the defendant to address the issue. she
testified that the operator told her that the police would attend and would
have greater access to resources. no one played the 911 call during the trial. 
the complainant was not challenged on this issue during cross-examination. the
text messages from july corroborate her viva voce testimonial perception that
the defendant needed help. during those messages she addressed counselling and
sent him links to mental health addiction and treatment resources.

the
complainant was cross-examined about her delayed disclosure of the may 5
th
incident. in
r. v. d.d.,
2000 scc 43, the supreme court of canada
stipulated that as it concerned the issue of child abuse and the timing of
disclosure, no presumptive adverse inference is available based on the timing
of the disclosure, standing alone. the timing of the disclosure is simply one
factor in the context of the case as a whole:
d.d., at paras.
59-65.

there
is some basis in law to take the same approach as it concerns intimate partner
violence cases: (
r. v. j.p.s.,
 o.j. no. 1890 (c.a.) at para. 11,
aff’d
2014 scc 47;
r. v. safdar,
2018 onsc 7067
). in any event, i am
aware that i should refrain from engaging in stereotypical reasoning as it
concerns the actions of alleged complainants. some complainants report an
offence immediately. some complainants delay reporting. some complainants
never report an offence to the police.

the
complainant in this case explained that there was a cyclical nature to the
relationship as outlined above. she had left before, and the defendant would
implore her to return and undertake to improve his behaviour. the defendant
would promise to change his ways and that he needed her in his life. the
complainant testified that she loved the defendant.

finally,
i would observe that there is no “rule book” governing how complainants are to
act in the aftermath of intimate partner violence. some partners immediately
report incidents to the police. others never report. the delay in reporting,
standing alone, is not a credibility issue in this case. the complainant
provided a logical and rational explanation for remaining with the defendant
and not immediately reporting the assaults to the police.
4.
prejudicial information

it
is often difficult to conduct a trial without some inadmissible or prejudicial
information seeping into the record. this occurs despite the best intention of
the parties. trial judges must address such issues on a daily basis. trial
judges are expected to disabuse their minds of such evidence.

the
complainant provided some potentially prejudicial information about the
defendant. intimate partners often have intimate information about each other’s
habits and practices. i have disabused my mind of any uncharged conduct given
the prosecution did not intentionally adduce this evidence and there was no
application to adduce discreditable conduct.
5.
photographs of injury

the complainant testified that she took pictures of her injuries
around her neck from may 5 and injuries to her legs from july 23, 2023.

the
crown attorney asked the defendant if he had any explanation for the injuries
present in the photographs. the purpose of this line of questioning during
cross-examination was to address the possibility of innocence cause (e.g., a
circumstance where the defendant was aware that an injury had otherwise been
caused or caused innocently through consensual activity.) notwithstanding the
crown attorney’s stated objective in this regard, i am aware that it would be
an error to require the defendant to provide an explanation for why the
complainant had injuries. the defendant has no burden to provide an innocent
explanation for prosecution evidence. i have not reversed the burden of proof.
i.
conclusion

i tend to accept and believe the evidence of the complainant
overall. i found her to be a credible and reliable witness with a detailed
recall of the circumstances surrounding the assault allegations.

the defendant provided a detailed account of his interaction with
the complainant as it concerns the july 2023 assault allegations. he was forthright
in testifying that he had no specific recall of any significant events on may 5
th. 
in sum, the defendant denies assaulting the complainant at any time.

at stage one of
w.(d.)
i would not credit the defendant’s
testimony overall. but at stage two of
w.(d.)
i must endorse some
reasonable doubt.

based on my assessment of the totality of the record at trial, am
unable to
conclusively
determine what happened during each
assault. the notion that i found the complainant credible, and the defendant
is most probably guilty, is not permitted in criminal law. probable guilt is
insufficient. where i am simply unsure or unable to conclusively determine
what happened, this state of mind mandates an acquittal:
s.(j.h.).

the defendant is found not guilty of all counts.
released: january
30
th, 2025
signed: “justice
m.s.v. felix”

exhibit 6