source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj377/2025oncj377.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. russell, 2025 oncj 377
date: 
2025 07 14
court
file no.: pembroke 24-37100746
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ashley russell
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on june 11, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on july 14, 2025
richard morris and grace dazé.................................................... counsel
for the crown
nemee bedar................................................................................ counsel
for the defendant
richardson, j.:
introduction

this is my ruling on whether a crown witness, constable
emmanuelle boucher of the ontario provincial police (“opp”), can testify
remotely at the trial in this matter.

the accused is charged with operating a conveyance
while being prohibited from doing so contrary to
section 320.18(1)
(a) of the
criminal
code. the offence is alleged to have taken place on june 20, 2024 at the
city of pembroke.

the crown proceeded summarily.

the matter is set for trial on september 8, 2025.

the crown makes the application for the following
reasons:
a)
at the time of the incident, constable boucher was assigned to the
upper ottawa valley detachment of the opp. she is now assigned to thunder
bay.
b)
if required in person, constable boucher would be required to be
away from her position in thunder bay for a “prolonged period.”
c)
by affidavit evidence, which was not contested, constable boucher
stated that she has the technology and a private space where she can testify
without interference. she suggests that she give evidence by zoom.

defence opposes the application for the following
reasons:
a)
the trial is only scheduled for one day. constable boucher will, therefore,
not have the sort of uncertainty as to when she would testify which she would
have if the matter was a multi-day trial.
b)
there is plenty of time for her to make travel arrangements to
appear for trial – the trial is in september and the application was heard in
june.
c)
constable boucher would appear by making a “short flight” to ottawa
or toronto and then driving to pembroke.
d)
constable boucher is the only officer who interacted with ms
russell. she is the officer in charge of the investigation.
e)
there was confusion at the scene as to whether ms russell was
prohibited.
f)
ms russell was detained at the scene for over an
hour and a half while this determination was being made.
g)
the crown is seeking a custodial sentence on conviction. this is,
therefore, a serious matter.
h)
“in
person” evidence is “different” and “adds something” to the quality of the
evidence that is not captured when a witness testifies remotely.

during argument, the parties agreed as follows:
a)
the
authenticity of transcripts, court documents, transcript of previous conviction
are all admitted.
b)
ms
russell was operating a conveyance when she was pulled over by constable
boucher.
c)
ms
russell made admissions to constable boucher about driving.
d)
there
was confusion at the scene as to whether ms russell was prohibited.
e)
the
issue at trial will be whether ms russell had a “reasonable excuse”.
analysis
trials are presumed to take place in person

section 715.21
of the
criminal code
states: 
“except as provided in this act, a person who appears at, participates in or
presides in a proceeding shall do so in person.”

thus, there is a presumption in the
code
that
witnesses will testify in person.

bad habits attributable to covid-19 have resulted in an environment
where participants feel entitled to appear remotely. it has been difficult to
put the zoom genie back in the bottle.
section
714.1 – when the presumption of in-person evidence for witnesses can be
overcome

section 714.1
of the
criminal code
states:
a court may order that a witness in canada give evidence by
audioconference or videoconference, if the court is of the opinion that it
would be appropriate having regard to all the circumstances, including
(a)
the
location and personal circumstances of the witness;
(b)
the
costs that would be incurred if the witness were to appear in person;
(c)
the
nature of the witness’ anticipated evidence;
(d)
the
suitability of the location from where the witness will give evidence;
(e)
the
accused’s right to a fair and public hearing;
(f)
the
nature and seriousness of the offence; and
(g)
any
potential prejudice to the parties caused by the fact that the witness would
not be seen by them, if the court were to order the evidence to be given by
audioconference.

after considering the argument in this case, i find that this is a
case which will largely turn on two issues:
a)
whether ms russell was in fact prohibited.
b)
whether ms russell knew that she was prohibited.
general
interpretation of section 714.1 and the issue of credibility

this case does not, on the limited record before me, appear to be a
case that turns on the credibility of constable boucher.

the courts of appeal of three provinces have weighed in on the
interpretation of section 714.1.

in
r. v. sdl,
2017 nsca 58
at paragraph
32,
the nova
scotia court of appeal established the following principles when considering
section 714.1 applications:
1.
as long
as it does not negatively impact trial fairness or the open courts principle,
testimony by way of video link should be permitted. as the case law suggests,
in appropriate circumstances, it can enhance access to justice.
2.
that
said, when credibility is an issue, the court should authorize testimony via
714.1 only in the face of exceptional circumstances that personally impact the
proposed witness. mere inconvenience should not suffice.
3.
when the
credibility of the complainant is at stake, the requisite exceptional
circumstances described in #2 must be even more compelling.
4.
the more
significant or complex the proposed video link evidence, the more guarded the
court should be.
5.
when
credibility will not be an issue, the test should be on a balance of
convenience.
6. 
barring unusual circumstances, there should be an evidentiary foundation
supporting the request. this would typically be provided by affidavit. should
cross examination be required, that could be done by video link.
7. 
when authorized, the court should insist on advance testing and stringent
quality control measures that should be monitored throughout the entire
process. if unsatisfactory, the decision authorizing the video testimony should
be revisited.
8. 
finally, it is noteworthy that in the present matter, the judge authorized the
witnesses to testify “in a courtroom…or at the offices of victims’ services…”.
to preserve judicial independence and the appearance of impartiality, the video
evidence, where feasible, should be taken from a local courtroom.

in
r. v. kz,
2021 oncj 321
at paragraph
11, justice kenkel of
this court declined to follow
sdl
for the following reasons:
•
the
sdl
decision considered a prior
version of s 714.1 that set out minimal criteria for the order.
in the subsequent amendments,
parliament expanded the relevant considerations but did not adopt a special,
discrete test for witness credibility cases.
•
criminal
trial courts have decades of experience in assessing the credibility of
complainants and other witnesses who testify by way of video technology. courts
have gained further experience during the covid pandemic. no special test is
required beyond the statutory criteria.
•
during
the pandemic in a province where lockdown stay-at-home orders are in place and
courtrooms have added restrictions for public health and safety, the use of
videoconference technology can provide a better opportunity to assess
credibility than in-person testimony.
•
videoconference
technology shows and records both the demeanour and the responses of a witness.
when evaluating concerns about the ability to fully assess demeanor, it’s
important to remember the limited role demeanour plays in assessing witness
credibility.
•
in
my view, courts should decline to add a special, highly restrictive test that
will be often be applied in matters of alleged sexual assault such as
sdl
and
this case, that would limit access to videoconference technology where an
application otherwise meets the statutory criteria.

in
r. v. jlk,
2023 bcca 87, the british columbia court of
appeal declined to follow
sdl
on the basis of justice kenkel’s decision
in
kz.
most recently, in
r. v. dms,
2025 mbca 16, the manitoba
court of appeal followed suit. as simonsen, j.a. wrote in
dms
at
paragraph
84:
the goal of
section 714.1 is to balance the practical and logistical issues of testifying
in court with any potential impact from remote testimony on the fairness of the
trial and on an accused person’s right to make full answer and defence (see
jlk
at para
50
). an order is appropriate having regard to the circumstances
when it strikes this balance.
it is not necessary
to have the best trial, but rather a fair trial.
(emphasis
mine)

thus, even if constable boucher’s credibility is in issue, given the
issues in this particular case, i am not satisfied that her personal attendance
in pembroke is necessary.

i agree with the principles first enunciated by justice kenkel and
followed in
jlk
and
dms.
i agree that the court must take a flexible
approach to applications of this nature, particularly in cases such as this.
the
location and personal circumstances of the witness

there is no evidence that constable boucher will suffer any personal
hardship if she were required to appear personally in pembroke. i am not
satisfied that she will have to be absent from thunder bay for “a prolonged
period” in order to testify in pembroke. this factor works in favour of
requiring her to appear personally.
the costs
that would be incurred if constable boucher were to appear personally

her employer, the ontario provincial police, or the crown, would be
responsible for covering the cost of her flights and accommodations.

i am mindful, however, of the need to be prudent with the public
purse when considering these applications. in 2025, the notion of the
“unlimited resources of the state” is not necessarily accurate. courts should
not be seen as being unnecessarily spendthrift with the public purse.

i find that if constable boucher is required to testify personally, travelling
and testifying will likely consume three days: one day for travel from thunder
bay to pembroke (which will involve flying to toronto and/or ottawa and renting
a car), one day for her evidence, and one day for travel to return to thunder
bay from pembroke.

thus, the crown would be required to go to the expense of constable
boucher’s flights, rental car, overnight accommodations, meals and incidentals
in addition to two additional days away from her work as a police officer in
thunder bay. this is not insignificant.

this factor works in favour of permitting her to appear virtually.
the
suitability of the location from which constable boucher would give evidence

i am satisfied that if the order permitting constable boucher to
testify remotely is made, she will be able to appear from a suitable location.

i note, in passing, that it is not appropriate for police witnesses
who testify remotely to appear from their police car or a busy squad room.

testifying remotely is a privilege, not a right.

this factor works in favour of permitting her to appear virtually.
the
accused’s right to a fair and public hearing

i further find that ms russell’s right to a fair and public hearing
will not be compromised if constable boucher testifies remotely. i say that
for the following reasons:
a)
on the limited record before me, the case appears to be largely a
technical one and turns on whether the crown can prove the offence beyond a
reasonable doubt.
b)
as i have pointed out, on the limited record before me, it does not
appear that constable boucher’s credibility will be a live issue. even if it
is, observing constable boucher give evidence will not be of much assistance to
the court given the limited weight of observations of a witness’ demeanour.
c)
everyone else involved in this trial will be appearing personally. 
only constable boucher will be appearing remotely. members of the public can
also observe the proceedings remotely.
d)
there is no concern that constable boucher will have to be monitored
while she is giving evidence to ensure that other persons do not contaminate
her evidence or that she does not contaminate the evidence of other persons.
the nature
and seriousness of the offence

i accept that in light of the fact that the crown is seeking a
period of custody, for ms russell, this is a serious matter. her liberty is
potentially at stake.

in the grand scheme of the nature of the offences that this court
routinely hears, however, this is not so serious as to require that all
witnesses are to appear personally.

this factor is neutral.
prejudice
to the parties if the witness testifies by audioconference

in light of the fact that constable boucher will appear by zoom, with
a fully operable camera, the provisions of section 714.1(g) do not apply. i
will not permit constable boucher to appear by audioconference only.
any other
applicable factor that favours remote or in person testimony

the law is clear that the factors set out in section 714.1 are not
exhaustive and the court is free to consider any other factors necessary to
make the determination of whether the order for remote testimony should be
made:
r. v. jlk, supra,
at para.
52
and
r. v. dms, supra,
at
para
86.

i am not aware of any other factor that would work to the advantage
of either cause in this case. no other factors were pointed out to me by
counsel in their submissions.
order to go

accordingly, i find that the presumption that constable boucher will
testify in person has been overcome and the following order is made:
a)
subject to the terms of this order, constable emmanuelle boucher may
testify remotely from thunder bay at the trial of this matter.
b)
constable boucher shall give her evidence in the following manner:
i) by
audio and videoconference (zoom), at coordinates to be provided by the court
prior to giving evidence.
ii) she
shall testify in a quiet place where the public is excluded. she will be the
only person in the room when she testifies.
iii)
she may not testify from a motor vehicle.
iv)
she shall test the computer equipment with the
court at least seven days in advance of the trial.
v)
she will not look at her notes, reports or any
other documents until she is advised by the court that she may do so. if
referring to notes, reports or other documents, they shall be visible and she
shall make it clear that she is referring to them.
c)
crown and defence counsel shall ensure that all documentary evidence
on which constable boucher will be questioned, or might reasonably be
questioned will be in appropriate electronic form so that it may be produced in
court and referred to by constable boucher without undue delay.
released: july 14, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson

on this point, see most recently, the decision of the court of appeal
in
r. v. reimer,
2024 onca 519
at paragraphs
91 to 93.