source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj508/2025oncj508.html

warning
the
court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the
file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the victim or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153,
153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173,
213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2,
286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read
from time to time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force,
if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if
it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with
in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in
paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on
application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in
paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity,
inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right
to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the
prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections
486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. r.b., 2025 oncj 508
date: 2025 10 01
court file no.: windsor
23-81100989
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
r.b.
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 10
september 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 1 october 2025
sarah torelli................................................................................. counsel
for the respondent
john sitter....................................................................................... 
 counsel for the applicant
pratt j.:

the
applicant r.b. is charged with the following offences:
(1)
28
july 2021, sexual assault on m.t.
(2)
28
july 2021, sexual interference on m.t.
(3)
between
30 – 31 august 2021, invitation to sexual touching to m.t.
(4)
30
– 31 august 2021, sexual assault on m.t.
(5)
30
– 31 august 2021, sexual interference on m.t.

trial
of this matter is scheduled to begin today, 1 october, and conclude on 9
october. the applicant seeks a stay of proceedings on the ground that his
right to trial within a reasonable time, as guaranteed by
s. 11(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms, has been violated. he argues the
delay in this case is above the prescribed ceiling for matters in the
provincial court with no legally sufficient reason.

the
crown opposes the application and would put responsibility for much of the
delay in this matter on the applicant. deducting that portion of the delay,
they say, brings this matter back under the ceiling.

the
crown also argues for summary dismissal of the application for a failure to
follow the rules of the court and the relevant practice direction. the
applicant says that any such failure was inadvertent.

for
the reasons that follow, the application will be dismissed on its merits.
summary dismissal

the
information in this matter was sworn on 3 march 2023. it was set for trial on
12 november 2024, with trial dates of 1 and 9 october 2025. when that date was
agreed, it was clearly outside the 18-month limit set by
the supreme court of
canada in
r.
v.
jordan
2016 scc 27. no mention of this issue was
made on the record when the date was set.

the
first mention of delay concerns came on 18 august 2025, 43 days before trial
and nine months after the date was set. that mention came in an email sent to
the windsor virtual crown account and to the ontario court of justice trial
co-ordinator’s office. that email stated:
we are looking to
file a delay application and would need a date for a 2 hr application please. 
thank you shelly

this
began a correspondence chain with the trial co-ordinator, the crown’s office,
and applicant’s counsel’s office. a judicial pre-trial was held with my sister
justice doucett on 22 august. i was not advised what came of that meeting.

i
see from the transcripts filed that they were all ordered on 6 august. i was
never told why, when delay was clearly on the mind of counsel at least as of 6
august, no one else was told until the email of 18 august, nearly two weeks
later.

materials
for the application were received by the crown and the court on 29 august. 
this was 12 days before the scheduled hearing and 32 days before trial. the
hearing itself was set for 20 days before the trial date.

i
received the crown’s responding materials on 9 september 2025.
the criminal rules of the ontario court of
justice

proceedings
in the ontario court of justice are governed, on the criminal side of the
court’s work, by the criminal rules (hereinafter “the rules”). the preamble to
the rules found on the court’s website states:
the criminal rules of the ontario court of
justice set out procedural rules that apply to criminal proceedings in the
ontario court of justice. the objective of the criminal rules is that
proceedings are dealt with justly and efficiently.

this
objective is repeated in rule 1.1. just and efficient dealings require fair
treatment of both the prosecution and the defence, the recognition of the
rights of the accused and the interests of witnesses, and the careful
scheduling of matters based on their seriousness and complexity, and based on
the overall needs of all cases.

rule
2.4 includes s. 11(b) hearings among pre-trial applications. pre-trial
applications are to be heard at least 60 days before trial, unless the court
orders otherwise.

rule
3.1(1) requires application materials to be served and filed at least 30 days
before the scheduled hearing. subrule 3.1(3) permits alteration to that
requirement if permitted by the court.

finally,
rule 5.1 empowers the chief justice of the ontario court of justice to issue
practice directions that are consistent with the rules. such directions may be
applicable only to one area of the province or to the entire province.
practice direction

effective
1 november 2023, the chief justice issued a practice direction for the whole of
ontario related to applications under
s. 11
(b) (hereinafter “the direction”). 
the direction sets out certain requirements.

first,
an application for relief based on
s. 11
(b) “
shall be heard at least four months
before trial, to allow the scheduled trial dates to be utilized for other
matters should the proceedings be stayed.”

second,
delay is an issue to be canvassed during judicial pre-trials. defence counsel
is required to advise if they intend to bring an application.

third,
delay should also be canvassed when a date that falls outside the jordan limit
is set, either in date-setting court or in the trial co-ordinator’s office. if
such a date is set, a delay application hearing is to be scheduled unless
counsel confirms on the record that they are not pursuing the issue.

these
directions apply both to initial trial dates and to subsequent dates set on
adjourned matters.

turning
to the present case, the application before me violates both the rules and the
direction.

it
was served on the crown on 29 august, 12 days before the scheduled hearing
date. this violates rule 3.1. the hearing was set for 10 september, 20 days
before the start of trial. this violates rule 2.4.

scheduling
the hearing less than three weeks before the start of trial also violates
paragraph 2 of the direction.

when
asked to explain these violations, counsel candidly admitted the application
was only brought when it was through inadvertence.

the
rules and direction exist for a reason. the ontario court of justice is the
busiest trial court in canada. for the 12-month period ending 31 march 2025,
the court received nearly 250,000 new cases across the province. nearly 50,000
of those were in the west region, and 7,760 were in windsor. these numbers
come from the court’s public website and reflect the volume the court deals
with every day. specific to windsor, our jurisdiction also had the highest
trial rate in the west region. around the province, toronto, hamilton, ottawa,
and sudbury all had lower trial rates than windsor. among large jurisdictions,
only brampton had a higher trial rate. windsor is also significantly higher
than the provincial average.

all
of which is to say, court resources are scarce. we cannot afford to use them
inefficiently.

this
matter was set in november 2024 for trial in october 2025. it was known to all
that the dates set were well outside the jordan limit. it was known only to
the applicant, however, that this was an issue. nothing was said on the topic
for nine months. when it was brought up, counsel was given a judicial
pre-trial and hearing date in short order. the justice system accommodated his
desire for a hearing despite his violation of multiple court directives.

counsel
has stated that the delay in giving notice of the application was caused by
inadvertence. he asks me not to dismiss summarily a meritorious application
and not to impose a consequence on the applicant for his error.

it
is tempting to dismiss this application outright for lack of compliance with
the rules and direction. in my view, there was nothing stopping this
application from being brought many months ago. if it had been, the parties
could have worked to address it and likely obviated the need for it. instead,
the delay has crystallized, and judicial resources may be squandered.

i
have no evidence, however, that the applicant himself played a role in how this
application was brought. had there been such evidence, and had i found the
applicant was part of the reason the matter was not brought to anyone’s attention
until mid-august, i would almost certainly have dismissed it summarily. as
there is no such evidence, i am extremely reluctant to visit the effects of
counsel’s actions on a defendant who is presumed innocent of these charges.

this
is a close case. i should not be taken as condoning the manner in which this
application has been brought. but i will exercise my discretion, bearing in
mind the applicant’s right to make full answer and defence, and permit the
application to proceed.
the
law

in
jordan,
supra, the supreme court of canada simplified the manner
in which delay applications are assessed. the framework was
summarized by
justice gillese in the case of
r.
v.
coulter
2016 onca 704
from
paragraph
34
onward:
34 calculate the
total delay, which is the period from the charge to the actual or anticipated
end of trial (
jordan, at para.
47
).
35 subtract
defence delay from the total delay, which results in the "net delay"
(
jordan, at para.
66
).
36 compare the
net delay to the presumptive ceiling (
jordan, at para.
66
).
37 if the net
delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, it is presumptively unreasonable. to
rebut the presumption, the crown must establish the presence of exceptional
circumstances (
jordan, para.
47
). if it cannot rebut the presumption, a stay
will follow (
jordan, para.
47
). in general, exceptional circumstances fall
under two categories: discrete events and particularly complex
cases (
jordan,
para.
71
).
38 subtract delay
caused by discrete events from the net delay (leaving the "remaining
delay") for the purpose of determining whether the presumptive ceiling has
been reached (
jordan, para.
75
).
39 if the
remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the court must consider
whether the case was particularly complex such that the time the case has taken
is justified and the delay is reasonable (
jordan, at para.
80
).
40 if the
remaining delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is on the defence
to show that the delay is unreasonable (
jordan, para.
48
).

in
the present case, counsel are essentially in agreement as to the total delay. 
the applicant says it is 951 days, while the crown says it is 950. the crown
did, however, note that its calculations may be somewhat different from the
applicant’s as their numbers do not include the first and last day of every
time period. for the sake of this application, i will use the applicant’s
total delay number of 951 days.

dividing
that number of days by 30.417 (the divisor used by the court of appeal for
ontario
in
r.
v.
shaikh
2019 onca 895
) leads to a total delay of
31.26 months. as this is well over the ceiling for provincial court matters,
the issue requires further scrutiny.

the
parties do not agree on the total amount of defence delay in this case.

the
applicant argues the period from 18 april to 4 november 2024 should be counted
as defence delay. this reflects the adjournment of the first trial date, which
was granted due to a personal circumstance of counsel. the period is 200 days.

this
is the only period of defence delay admitted by the applicant.

the
crown agrees the delay resulting from the first adjournment should fall at the
feet of the applicant, but says it should really be 235 days. that extended
period begins from 14 march 2024, which was the date counsel brought the matter
forward to begin seeking an adjournment of the april trial dates.

respectfully,
i disagree that defence delay should be calculated from the march date. 
counsel brought the matter forward to be addressed rather than waiting until
the trial date itself. bringing matters forward in advance of trial dates when
an adjournment is sought should be encouraged. if the adjournment application
is successful, witnesses can be cancelled and court resources can be put to
other uses. beginning the defence delay from the application date would
penalize the applicant for acting quickly. it would be a disincentive to bring
matters forward when adjournments are being sought and would lead to less
efficient use of both witnesses’ time and court resources.

the
crown would also attribute a further 30 days of delay to the applicant for his
failure to bring the matter forward in advance of the march date to seek
earlier dates. by not doing so, they argue, he implicitly waived delay on at
least a portion of the initial time to trial.

i
do not accept this submission. the information was sworn on 3 march 2023. the
first trial dates were set on 9 january 2024 for 18 and 19 april 2024. those
trial dates were approximately 13 ½ months from the swearing date, and well
within
jordan
timelines. i see no basis for ascribing any sort of
waiver of delay to the applicant related to the setting of this first trial
date.

finally,
the crown argues that the time from the setting of the current trial dates up
to the time they were advised of the
s. 11
(b) issue should be attributed to the
defence. by not bringing the issue to anyone’s attention until shortly before
trial, the applicant frustrated the crown’s ability to mitigate the delay. 
this period runs from 12 november 2024 to 18 august 2025, a total of 278 days.

the
caselaw related to s. 11(b) is replete with admonitions that the crown is under
a duty to mitigate delay. but is that duty only triggered when the crown is
told delay is an issue?

certainly,
the duty on the crown to mitigate arises when it is faced with an exceptional
circumstance. beyond that, however, the responsibility on the crown is the
same responsibility that is on all justice system participants. as the supreme
court of canada said at paragraph 1 of
r.
v.
cody
2017 scc 31:
as we will explain, the crown, the defence
and the system each contributed to that delay. this leads us to stress, as the
court did
in
jordan, that every actor in the justice system has a
responsibility to ensure that criminal proceedings are carried out in a manner
that is consistent with an accused person's right to a trial within a
reasonable time.

as
the majority said at paragraphs 137 and 138 of
jordan:
137 real change
will require the efforts and coordination of all participants in the criminal
justice system.
138 for crown
counsel, this means making reasonable and responsible decisions regarding who
to prosecute and for what, delivering on their disclosure obligations promptly
with the cooperation of police, creating plans for complex prosecutions, and
using court time efficiently. it may also require enhanced crown discretion for
resolving individual cases. for defence counsel, this means actively advancing
their clients' right to a trial within a reasonable time, collaborating with
crown counsel when appropriate and, like crown counsel, using court time
efficiently. both parties should focus on making reasonable admissions,
streamlining the evidence, and anticipating issues that need to be resolved in
advance.

i
have not been referred to any caselaw that places a duty on the crown to
mitigate delay other than in situations where it is faced with an exceptional
circumstance. i have been provided with no authority that requires the crown
to bring matters in delay jeopardy forward to canvass earlier dates. 
certainly, where that can be done, it would be beneficial to all concerned. 
but i do not see any past case where this has been changed from a practice to
be encouraged to an affirmative duty. i am not prepared to make that change in
the present case.

i
am especially reluctant to impose such a duty on the crown when, as in this
case, not a word of discomfort regarding delay was spoken until shortly before
the trial. as i said to counsel during the hearing of this application, it is
the applicant’s right. it is up to him to assert a violation of it. if he
does, and states that delay is an issue, it is incumbent on the crown and the
court to accommodate the case as swiftly as possible. but if he does not, if
he remains silent on the issue, there is no duty to assume he is aggrieved by
the situation. often, delay works to the benefit of a defendant. fading
memories, lost witnesses, cooling tempers. all these factors can come into
play when a case takes a long time to get to trial. it cannot be assumed a
defendant wishes to proceed to trial as quickly as possible. if he says so, he
must be listened to. but if he doesn’t, no one is required to step into his
shoes and assert a right he may not want to assert.

i
should not be taken as reducing the crown’s duty, as a justice system
participant, to act proactively to keep cases moving forward. that duty
remains. in making the finding i do, i am saying there is no burden on the
crown to go behind the silence of a defendant and solve a problem that may not
exist.

if
a defendant does wish to assert his right to trial within a reasonable time, he
must be proactive in doing so. as noted above from paragraph 138 of jordan,
defence counsel’s responsibility includes “actively advancing their clients'
right to a trial within a reasonable time”. failing to mention the issue until
shortly before trial handcuffs the crown and the court and prevents meaningful
steps from being taken to fix the problem.

the
situation is similar to the one faced by justice roberts in the case of
r.
v.
osei-bekoe
 o.j. no. 2752 (s.c.j.). this is from paragraph 28:
notwithstanding that the
s.11
(b) issue
crystallized at that time the trial date was set, defence counsel waited to
raise
s.11
(b) until the delay was locked in and he confirmed that the court and
the crown could not mitigate the delay. this is inconsistent with the general
duty to be proactive, and manifestly inconsistent with a meaningful sustained
effort to expedite the proceedings.

i
do note that in that case, there were concerns that defence counsel actively
sat silent and ignored attempts to find earlier dates. that is not the case
before me. still, justice roberts’ words continue to apply in that the late
notice of a delay application prevented a meaningful response to the issue.

in
the result, i find there was no burden on the crown to mitigate delay it was
not told was an issue.

in
the case of
r.
v.
hillier
 o.j. no. 5705 (s.c.j.)
justice
mcvey considered
s. 11
(b) applications brought in an untimely manner:
68 later, in r v
j.f.,
2022 scc 17, the supreme court specifically addressed the accused's
obligation to raise delay in a timely manner. the issue before the court was
whether the jordan framework permitted an accused, in the context of a retrial,
to challenge delay from their first trial. the court held that, absent
exceptional circumstances, only retrial delay is counted towards the total when
s. 11
(b) is raised during a retrial:
j.f., at para.
60.
69 in so holding,
however, the court made general comments about an accused's duty to act
proactively with respect to delay. once again, the court stressed that all
participants in the criminal justice system, at all stages of the trial
process, must take proactive measures to remedy delay, including acting
diligently and expeditiously when launching
s. 11
(b) applications:
j.f., at
paras.
3, 30, and 34.
70 though the
court's comments must be viewed in light of the context in which they were
made, i.e., whether delay from a first trial can be raised during a re-trial, i
find that the court's dicta apply outside that limited context. as noted above,
requiring accused persons to act promptly when raising
s. 11
(b) issues is not
unreasonable because the jordan framework now allows them to identify with
greater predictability when their rights have been presumptively infringed:
j.f., at para.
31. an accused must "be an active part of the solution to
the problem of delay in criminal
cases":
j.f., at para.
31.
71 the court
found that an accused who raises delay for the first time after conviction is
generally not acting in a timely manner:
j.f., at para.
35.
and though the
court did not specifically address what constitutes "timely action"
within the context of a single trial, in my view, whether delay is raised after
conviction or so close to trial that the delay cannot conceivably be remedied
is a distinction without a difference in terms of how the associated delay
should be allocated in the
s. 11
(b) analysis. such inaction should be deterred
and, where appropriate, called out as contrary to the supreme court's clear
direction
in
jordan
that all parties adopt a collaborative and proactive
approach to delay.
72
failing to
promptly launch a
s. 11
(b) application, though not amounting to a waiver, can
deprive the parties of the opportunity to address the impugned delay, a result
that runs counter to the collaborative approach espoused
in
jordan. late action
on the part of an accused also undermines the purpose of s. 11(b) which is to
ensure that accused persons are tried within a reasonable time, not to avoid
trials on the merits:
see
j.f., at para.
32.
73 numerous trial
courts have recently
relied on
j.f.
to apportion some of the delay between the
set date appearance and the trial date to defence where it fails to launch a
s.
11
(b) application in a timely manner. the emerging trend is for the court to
extend a 30-day grace period to the defence following the setting of trial
dates, during which time the defence can contemplate a
s. 11
(b) application.
thereafter, if
s. 11
(b) is not raised promptly, the delay to trial is
shared equally or near-equally between the parties.
74 based on my
review of this developing jurisprudence, the theory underpinning this approach
is that 1) the accused is generally aware by the time trial dates are set of
whether their rights have been presumptively infringed and, therefore, their
duty to act arises at or near the set date appearance:
j.f., at para.
31; 2)
the late filing of a
section 11
(b) motion will often deprive the parties of the
ability to collaborate and satisfactorily mitigate the delay, likely through
seeking earlier dates through trial coordination, if appropriate: see e.g., r v
nigro,
2023 oncj 41, r v wright,
2024 onsc 1893; r v osei-bekoe,
2024 onsc
3490; and 3) where delay is raised close to the anticipated trial date, the
court may be unable to re-purpose the court time should the matter be stayed,
resulting in a waste of limited court resources: r v vallotton,
2024 onca 492,
at para.
30; r v c.m.,
2024 onsc 4777, at para.
51.
in r v mengistu,
2024 onca 575, the court of appeal for ontario recently held that if the crown
seeks to apportion some of the trial delay to the defence due to an untimely
s.
11
(b) application, the crown must establish 1) that the defence failed to raise
s. 11
(b) concerns in a timely way; and 2) that the failure contributed to the
delay in bringing the matter to trial within the presumptive
jordan
ceilings:
para.
40
…
(emphasis added)

in
the present case, the crown seeks to apportion all of the 278 days, from the
setting of the current trial dates to the first notice of an impending
s. 11
(b)
application, to the defence. i adopt the two-part test set out by justice
mcvey. to attribute this time to the applicant, the crown must show that delay
was not raised in a timely way, and that failing to do so contributed to the
delay.

as
to the first prong, it is essentially agreed that the issue of delay was not
brought up in a timely way. counsel has admitted inadvertence on his part. 
the second prong of the test is also satisfied. by not bringing delay to
anyone’s attention, the applicant contributed to the delay in that he prevented
any other justice system participant from addressing it. the delay was, to use
justice roberts’ words
in
osei-bekoe, “locked in” by the time the 18
august email was sent.

i
agree with the crown that at least some of those 278 days should be attributed
to the applicant. i will follow justice mcvey’s notion of a 30-day grace
period to contemplate a delay application. this would reduce the period in
question to 248 days.

where
i depart from justice mcvey’s position is in the idea that the remaining delay
should be “shared equally or near-equally between the parties.” doing so, in
my view, takes responsibility that is properly on the shoulders of the
applicant and places it on the shoulders of the crown. as i have already noted
above, there was no reason for the crown to assume the applicant was unhappy
about the pace of the litigation. absent any sort of intimation from him that
he was, there was no burden on the crown to step into his shoes and solve the
problem. attributing any of the delay beyond that 30-day grace period to the
crown would effectively impose such a burden. had the crown been told after
those 30 days, and had it tried to obtain earlier dates but been unsuccessful,
then certainly responsibility would fall to it. but that is not the evidence
before me. we will never know what could have been done to address delay as
the crown was never given the opportunity.

the
crown has argued that the applicant has implicitly waived delay for the 278-day
period. i recognize there is some limited support for that notion in the
caselaw. i am bound, however, by the supreme court of canada on this point. 
at paragraphs 48 and 49 of
r.
v.
j.f.
2022 scc 17 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 17
chief
justice wagner stated the following:
48 waiver must be
proved by the prosecution (askov, at p. 1229). for a court to find that delay
has been waived, the accused must therefore take "some direct action from
which a consent to delay can be properly inferred" (askov, at p. 1229).
the "mere silence of the accused is not sufficient to indicate a waiver of
a
charter
right" (askov, at p. 1229; see also mills, at p. 929). to be
inferable, implicit waiver "requires advertence to the act of release
rather than mere inadvertence. if the mind of the accused or his or her counsel
is not turned to the issue of waiver and is not aware of what his or her
conduct signifies, then this conduct does not constitute waiver" (morin,
at p. 790).
49 lateness in
bringing a
s. 11
(b) motion for a stay of proceedings nonetheless remains an
important factor in determining whether an accused has waived delay. in rabba,
arbour j.a., as she then was, noted that the fact that such a motion is brought
after trial "would, in most cases, be fatal" and "would normally
amount to a waiver of any claim which may arise under
s. 11(b)
of the
charter
" (p. 447). while lateness in bringing a motion for a stay of
proceedings may be a relevant factor, it cannot in itself establish waiver.
this is how arbour j.a.'s comments in rabba must be interpreted. waiver is
established on the basis of an accused's conduct (askov, at p. 1228), having
regard to the circumstances of each case (see, e.g., warring, at paras. 11-13
and 27).

justice
mcvey, in
hillier, confirmed that a failure to file an application in a
timely manner did not amount to a waiver (see paragraph 72).

the
entire point of the crown’s argument is that the applicant did nothing in the
months leading up to trial. counsel has candidly taken responsibility for this
inaction by saying it was through his inadvertence. the record discloses no
“direct action from which a consent to delay can properly be inferred”. without
more, late filing of the application cannot by itself establish a waiver. i
see no evidence in this case on which to infer an implicit waiver of the
applicant’s
s. 11
(b) rights.

in
the circumstances, the entirety of the remaining 248 days will be found to be
defence delay.

to
be found to be defence delay, the conduct of the defence does not need to be illegitimate
in the sense of being improper or nefarious. a failure to take timely action
can also be seen as illegitimate, as noted at paragraph 33 of
cody:
as well, inaction
may amount to defence conduct that is not legitimate (
jordan, at paras.
113 and
121
). illegitimacy may extend to omissions as well as acts (see, for example in
another context, r. v. dixon,
1998 canlii 805 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 244, at para.
37
). accused
persons must bear in mind that a corollary of the
s. 11
(b) right "to be
tried within a reasonable time" is the responsibility to avoid causing
unreasonable delay. defence counsel are therefore expected to "actively
advanc[e] their clients' right to a trial within a reasonable time, collaborat[e]
with crown [page674] counsel when appropriate and... us[e] court time
efficiently" (
jordan, at para.
138
).

the
supreme court offers no exception to this reasoning in cases of inadvertence. 
i suspect this is because the result is the same, regardless of the cause: the
ability to grant a defendant a trial within a reasonable time is stymied. by
including inaction as a potential example of illegitimate conduct, the court
has expressly underscored the seriousness of failing to move in a timely
manner. that is the situation in the present case.

total
defence delay, therefore, is 448 days.

when
this amount is subtracted from the total delay of 951 days, i am left with net
delay of 503 days, or 16.5 months. as this is below the presumptive ceiling of
18 months, i do not need to consider if any exceptional circumstances are
present in this case.

i
have not been presented with any evidence to suggest that, despite the net
delay being below the ceiling, it was nonetheless unreasonable.

i
have not addressed the disclosure issue that brought about the adjournment of
the second trial dates in november 2024. it is not necessary to do so. i
adopt justice gage’s ruling in granting the adjournment that it was appropriate
in the circumstances given the amount and nature of new disclosure provided
close in time to the trial dates. the adjournment was not a result of defence
conduct, and no waiver of delay was made.

likewise,
i do not believe counsel availability played a relevant role in the setting of
trial dates and so that issue has not been explored in this ruling.
result

the
application will be dismissed.
released: 1 october 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt