source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj521/2025oncj521.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. imanuel, 2025 oncj 521
date: 
2025 10 02
court
file no.: central west region - brampton – 25-31102397
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
tony
imanuel
before
justice andrew f. falls
heard
on september 22, 2025
reasons
for sentence delivered on october 2, 2025
m. bedini............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
m. chernovsky.................................................. counsel
for the defendant, tony imanuel
reasons for
sentence
a. falls, j.:
the circumstances of the offence

tony imanuel pleaded guilty to importing a schedule
1 substance, ketamine, pursuant to s. 6(1) of the controlled drugs and
substances act.

on march 7, 2025, mr. imanuel arrived at the
toronto pearson airport from frankfurt, germany. authorities ultimately
discovered 10 packages concealing
7.985 kg
of
ketamine in mr. imanuel’s suitcase.
the circumstances of the offender
a)
mr. imanuel’s background

i was aided in understanding tony imanuel’s background
through his counsel’s submissions.

mr. imanuel is 42 years old. he was born in
suriname. he has a high school education, which he upgraded to qualify as a
forklift driver.

mr. imanuel is married with five children,
ranging in age from seven to twenty-two years old.

before this offence, he was employed full-time
as a forklift driver in belgium. on weekends, he worked with his wife cleaning
hotels.

mr. imanuel does not have a criminal record.
b)
mr. imanuel’s explanation for the offence

seven months before this offence, mr. imanuel
became ill. he was unable to work, and his financial situation became strained. 
these financial pressures were the motivating influence behind the commission
of this offence. he also experienced some pressure to carry the drugs;
however, it did not rise to the level of raising a legal defence of duress.

mr. imanuel has accepted responsibility for his
offence. during the sentencing hearing, he spoke of his separation from his
family and the loss he is feeling.

although i am not sure that he fully appreciates
the seriousness of the offence he has committed, i do accept that he
understands the resulting consequences of his actions.
positions of the parties

counsel provided helpful, though divergent, sentencing
submissions.

the crown submitted that a custodial sentence is
appropriate. the crown asked this court to impose a sentence of eight years jail
in addition to:
1)
a s. 109 weapons prohibition order for 10 years.
2)
a dna order - s. 487.051, and
3)
a forfeiture order.

defence counsel asked me to consider a sentence
of four years less enhanced presentence custody. should i accept counsel’s
argument regarding pre-sentence custody, mr. imanuel’s net sentence would be two
and one-half years. counsel submitted that this is an appropriate sentence for
this offence and mr. imanuel’s circumstances. counsel highlighted the
circumstances of pre-trial detention at the maplehurst correctional complex. in
addition, counsel pointed to mr. imanuel’s personal circumstances as a factor
deserving of significant mitigation.
legal principles & analysis

the
criminal code
instructs
that the goal of any criminal sentence is to protect society, contribute to
respect for the law and help maintain a just, peaceful, and safe
society." (see s.
718
).

sentencing judges attempt to achieve this goal
by imposing just sanctions that address one or more of the traditional
sentencing principles outlined in the
criminal code. these include
denunciation, general and specific deterrence, rehabilitation, making
reparation to victims of crime, and promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders,
as well as an acknowledgment of the harm they have caused to the community and
specific victims within it. (see s.
718(a) – (f)
)

ultimately, the fundamental principle of
sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence committed and the degree of responsibility of the person who committed
it. (see s.
718.1
) this means that, for the
sentence i impose to be appropriate, it must be tailored to mr. imanuel’s circumstances, and the
circumstances of the offence he committed.

section 718.1 of the code ensures that
proportionality is the fundamental principle of sentencing. however,
proportionality is not the sole principle to be considered. a sentence should
be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances.


similar sentencing principles can be found in s.
10(1) of the controlled drugs and substances act.

as a sentencing tool, imprisonment is to be used
only as a last resort when required by the circumstances of the crime and the
background of the offender.

the principle of restraint requires that the shortest period of incarceration
that will meet the penological aims in a given case is the appropriate length
for a jail sentence.
sentencing for importing ketamine

courts have consistently emphasized the
importance of deterrence and denunciation in cases involving the illegal importing
of drugs.

in considering the appropriate range of
sentence, i am mindful of the caution in
lacasse, at paragraph
60, that “sentencing ranges are primarily guidelines, and not hard and fast
rules”.

as noted in
nasogaluak

at paragraph 44,
[i]t must be
remembered that, while courts should pay heed to these ranges, they are
guidelines rather than hard and fast rules. a judge can order a sentence
outside that range as long as it is in accordance with the principles and
objectives of sentencing. thus, a sentence falling
outside the regular range of appropriate sentences is not necessarily unfit. regard must be had to all the circumstances of the offence and the
offender, and to the needs of the community in which the offence occurred.
nature of ketamine

the defence did not challenge the crown’s
characterization of the nature of ketamine.

ketamine is a schedule 1 substance under the
controlled drugs and substances act.

the cases provided by the crown describe
ketamine
as a serious drug that poses a danger to
society. on a scale of seriousness, ketamine is less dangerous than fentanyl,
heroin, or cocaine; however, it is more serious than marijuana. it is more
closely compared to mdma or ecstasy.

though ketamine possesses fewer addictive
qualities,
it is sometimes used illegally with other, more serious drugs. ketamine can
produce feelings of euphoria and an out-of-body experience in the user. ketamine
is sometimes used as a party drug and a date rape drug.

ketamine is dangerous to human health.

i accept this to be an accurate representation
of both the nature of and dangers associated with ketamine.
appropriate range of sentence

the maximum sentence for the importation of
ketamine is life in prison.

there are not many reported cases considering an
appropriate sentence for the importation of ketamine.

the crown helpfully provided several cases
considering the appropriate sentence in cases involving ketamine. many of the
cases referred to consider an appropriate range for possession for the purpose
of trafficking ketamine.

the crown submits that an appropriate range of
sentence for importing ketamine is between six and ten years, depending on
relevant factors.

as a starting point, i will note that on a scale
of culpability, the importation of drugs into canada is more serious than
trafficking. 
some courts have considered importing to be equally culpable as the production of
drugs. in both instances, the offender is the principal means for the drug to
become available to a consumer.

the only case provided by the crown for
importing ketamine was
r. v. kwok

from the british columbia court of appeal. the court imposed a twelve-year
custodial sentence for two accused convicted of importing and possession for
the purpose of trafficking. an eight-year concurrent sentence was imposed for
the possession offence. the crown acknowledges that
kwok
is factually
distinct in that it was a sentence imposed after trial for importing over 1,000kg
of ketamine. the accused in that case displayed some level of organization and
higher involvement in the importing.

nonetheless, the
kwok
case is helpful in
considering the harmfulness of ketamine. an important aspect that the ontario
court of appeal

has adopted.

in 2022,
the ontario court of appeal considered the appropriate sentence for possession
for the purpose of trafficking of 1.39 kg, 1.6 kg & 11 grams of liquid ketamine. 
the court considered that a sentence of five to eight years would normally be
imposed for possession of that quantity. the court saw no basis to interfere
with the trial judge’s six-year sentence after a jury conviction.

in
r. v. lin,
the ontario court of appeal reduced a 15½-year sentence to a global sentence of
10 years for production and possession for the purpose of trafficking of 60 kg
of ketamine. the court noted that a “sentence of between five and eight years
would normally be imposed for possession for the purpose of trafficking in
ketamine, with a slightly higher range, perhaps six to ten years, for
production of ketamine.” the court of appeal, citing
kwok, remarked on
the serious nature of ketamine, noting that importing is a more serious offence
than trafficking. the court further stated at paragraph 31 that an eight-year
sentence for production and a six-year consecutive sentence for trafficking
would have been appropriate, but for the specific circumstances of the offender.

the crown provided three additional cases

to illustrate how other
courts have imposed sentences for possession for the purpose of trafficking of
ketamine. each of these cases predated the ontario court of appeal’s recent
decisions. in
sadikov, a three-year sentence was imposed for 1 kg. in
phan, a
conditional sentence of two years less one day was imposed for 600 grams of
ketamine. finally, in
zhang, for a pill pressing operation involving
seized substances that included ketamine mixed with other illegal drugs and 245
grams of ketamine powder, the court imposed a three-year concurrent sentence
for possession for the purpose of trafficking of ketamine.

drawing guidance from these authorities and
considering that the importation of ketamine is equally
culpable as its production, i accept the crown’s
position that the appropriate range of sentence for importing ketamine is
between 6 and 10 years.
aggravating & mitigating factors

as i noted, in any sentencing, the court must
identify and consider the principles and objectives of sentencing as set out in
sections 718 and following of the
criminal code. a court must consider the
aggravating and mitigating factors of the crime, the impact on any victim, the
circumstances of the offence and the circumstances of the offender. ultimately,
a court must balance all these factors and arrive at a fair and proportionate
sentence. in doing so, the court should strive to impose sentences similar to
those in other cases of a similar nature, recognizing that no two cases are
identical.

listing the applicable aggravating and
mitigating features assists me in evaluating this case properly and imposing a
sentence that is just and appropriate. i have noted the following aggravating
and mitigating factors in this case.

i find the following to be aggravating facts.
1)
the circumstances and seriousness of the offence:
(i)
mr. imanuel imported just less than 8kg of
ketamine into canada. this is a large quantity.
(ii)
ketamine is classified as a schedule 1 substance. while it is not
considered the most serious schedule 1 substance, parliament has designated it
as such because of its danger and potential harm to society.
(iii)
by bringing this drug into canada, mr. imanuel has breached the integrity
of canada’s borders. his actions created a risk that a serious substance would
become available to canadian consumers.

i find the following to be mitigating factors.
1)
mr. imanuel pleaded guilty. his guilty plea is
an expression of his remorse.
2)
his guilty plea has relieved the crown from
prosecuting this offence. this is a significant savings of court time.
3)
mr. imanuel is a first-time offender with no
criminal record.
4)
mr. imanuel has family support. he is married
with five children.
5)
he is educated and commonly gainfully employed,
working two jobs.
6)
mr. imanuel’s pre-sentence detention at the maplehurst
correctional complex has been difficult.
7)
mr. imanuel has expressed an understanding of the
consequences of his actions, what caused them, and how he can avoid a
repetition of this criminal activity. i accept his insight as genuine, and i
accept the sincerity of his statement to the court. i have no hesitation in
concluding that he regrets his conduct.
8)
further, mr. imanuel’s moral culpability for
committing this offence is to some degree mitigated by the pressure he felt to
commit the offence.

though not a mitigating factor, i have
considered that mr. imanuel’s involvement in this offence was as a courier. 
there is no suggestion that he was part of any organized enterprise.
pre-sentence custody
summers credit

mr. imanuel has served 210 days of pre-sentence
custody. enhanced on a 1.5:1 basis, that is 315 days.
duncan credit

defence counsel argued that mr. imanuel should
be given enhanced credit for the conditions he experienced while in custody at
the maplehurst correctional complex.

the burden falls on mr. imanuel, on a balance of
probabilities, to establish facts supporting the impact of the conditions in
accordance with
s. 724(3)
of the
criminal code of canada.

the granting of this credit is not determined by
a mathematical formula. it is the obligation of the sentencing judge to review
all relevant factors and decide what credit, if any, should be given.
maplehurst correctional complex

according to records obtained from the maplehurst
correctional complex, as of september 16, 2025, mr. imanuel spent 170 days in
pre-sentence custody. ninety-seven of those days, or 57% were spent in
lockdown – 36 full days of lockdown and 61 partial lockdowns.

mr. imanuel was triple-bunked for 149 of the 170
days – 88% of his stay at the maplehurst correctional complex. he has no
instances of misconduct.
london – elgin-middlesex
detention centre

mr. imanuel spent a shorter period in detention
at the elgin-middlesex detention centre. evidence was not presented about the
conditions of his detention in that facility.
total lockdown calculation &
enhanced credit

for this sentencing, neither counsel sought to
differentiate between the full and partial lockdowns.

in total, mr. imanuel has spent 97 days in
lockdown at the maplehurst correctional complex.

defence counsel invited me to take a punitive
view of mr. imanuel’s custodial conditions. counsel asked me to publicly
indict the institution and the solicitor general for years of inaction to
address the deplorable conditions at the maplehurst correctional complex. counsel
argued that it has been years, and circumstances have not changed. the court's
condemnation should be reflected in an increased tariff imposed for harsh
conditions.

defence counsel submitted that i should consider
applying a 3:1 ratio for lockdown credit.

the crown conceded that enhanced credit should
be given in consideration of the lockdown records. the crown left the
determination of the amount of credit in my hands.

i have carefully considered the defence
submission. although a court might soon be prepared to make such a
pronouncement, i am not prepared to do so without a more comprehensive
evidentiary record. the only evidence before me consisted of the lockdown
records, along with defence counsel’s submissions. this evidence was
uncontested. no evidence was presented regarding institutional considerations,
such as evidence heard by other courts deciding this issue. aside from a
general reference in the records that “all lockdowns are the result of
correctional officer/staff shortages or redeployment, searches, contraband
issues, unscheduled maintenance repairs on unit etc.”, i do not know why mr.
imanuel was subjected to lockdown at the maplehurst correctional complex. the
crown did not provide any additional submissions on this issue. aside from
counsel’s helpful submissions, no authority was provided on how other courts
have considered the conditions at the maplehurst correctional complex.

in short, i lack the necessary breadth of knowledge to take
judicial notice of longstanding systemic issues at the maplehurst correctional
complex. i am prepared to take judicial notice that a current problem exists. however,
in my view, a more comprehensive evidentiary record is required. the evidence
before me does not meet this threshold.

i do not say this to excuse the conditions mr.
imanuel endured. i am prepared to acknowledge the conditions he experienced
and view them as mitigating, however, not to the extent as requested by
counsel.

in support of this position, i rely on my local
knowledge as a presiding justice in peel, where the maplehurst correctional
complex serves. i am also aware of recent decisions that describe the ongoing
unacceptable conditions within maplehurst.

in a recent decision, justice mirza

of the superior court of
justice stated:
 …in r v.
duncan,
2016 onca 754, the ontario court of appeal agreed that the appropriate
circumstances, particularly harsh presentence incarceration conditions, can
provide mitigation apart from and beyond the one point five credit referred to
in section 719(3.1) of the code. in considering whether any enhanced credit
should be given, the court will consider both the conditions of the
pre-sentence incarceration and the impact of those conditions on the accused.
 i can
reasonably infer how hard it has been to be in maplehurst for him over the
almost three years. every judge and justice of the peace in this court
routinely hears about the hardships from frequent lockdowns, triple-bunking,
violence and health concerns at maplehurst.
 there is no
doubt that it is an institution that is punishing, at times cruel, and it is
not a suitable setting for any person long-term.

the case of
r. v. beals

provides a helpful reference
on how similar conditions were treated by other judges in this jurisdiction.

justice durno in
r. v. andrew, applying a broad stroke
approach, attributed approximately half a day’s credit for every day spent in
lockdown.

while i am obligated to consider harsh
conditions, how that influences the final sentence is a matter of discretion,
with no fixed formula for determining the credit to apply. in
r. v. abraham, the court considered the
difficulty in establishing a specific ratio for calculating an appropriate
amount of duncan credit when evaluating all factors holistically. this becomes
more complex when considering a mix of partial and full lockdown experiences. that
court noted that a better approach would be to assess the impact of lockdowns
qualitatively and to mitigate the sentence based on that assessment. i adopt a
similar approach in mr. imanuel’s case by considering the entire record and the
arguments presented by counsel.

in the circumstances of this case, the
conditions mr. imanuel endured must lead to a substantial
duncan
credit.
 in making this determination, i have considered the guidance provided in
marshall.
it is one of many factors in determining an appropriate sentence. i have
chosen to express this as a discrete number in my assessment of a proper
sentence to highlight the seriousness and the importance that the court
attaches to the issues at the maplehurst correctional complex.

i am prepared to credit mr. imanuel 194 days for
the prolonged lockdowns. i view this as an appropriate mitigation in the
circumstances of this case.
what is a fit & appropriate sentence

i now turn to my analysis and determination of a
fit sentence.

though sentencing is an individualized process,
and i must consider mr. imanuel’s circumstances, there exists legal authority to
conclude that a strong deterrent and denunciatory message must be sent to the
community. i must turn my mind to deterrence and
impose a sentence that sends a message to the community and mr. imanuel that this behaviour will not be tolerated.

however, my analysis cannot end there. i must
also consider mr. imanuel’s level of participation in the offence. he has no prior
criminal involvement, which suggests that there may be prospects for rehabilitation.

the principles of proportionality and restraint
require that any sentence imposed should not be unduly long or harsh. while sufficient
punishment is required, no more than what is necessary is to be ordered. though
not a primary consideration, i must consider whether
the imposition of a sentence is so harsh that it would be crushing for mr. imanuel’s rehabilitation.

i remind myself that
section 718.2
of the
criminal code of canada
directs me to consider the least onerous sentence
consistent with the purposes and principles of sentencing.

albeit on different facts, as justice doherty
noted in
nur,
different judges, correctly applying the law to the same facts, could properly
impose different but fit sentences.

when i balance all the factors i have outlined
in this decision, i am satisfied that a custodial sentence of six years is appropriate
for the offence mr. imanuel committed. for a first-time offender, this is a
considerable sentence.

i considered the four-year sentence submitted by
the defence. though i appreciate that sentencing is an individualized
exercise, in my view, this sentence does not adequately reflect the seriousness
of this offence. as i noted, i draw on the authorities presented by the crown
for support in this conclusion.

after considering reductions for summers and
duncan credit, along with mr. imanuel’s personal circumstances, including his level
of involvement in the offence, i conclude that the mitigating factors support a
sentence at the lower end of the range.

from six years, i deduct the following:
1)
315 days of summers credit, and
2)
194 days of duncan credit.

the net result is a further jail sentence of four
years and seven months.

i find this to be a fit and proportionate
sentence for this offence. considering the individualized nature of a
sentencing hearing, in my view, it most appropriately reflects the gravity of
the offence and mr. imanuel’s degree of responsibility.
ancillary orders

in addition, the ancillary orders will be made
as requested.

this is a secondary designated offence. ordering
the taking of dna is discretionary.

considering it is in the best interests of the
administration of justice, the nature of the offences and the surrounding
circumstances, including that mr. imanuel imported a significant amount of a
dangerous drug, and the minimal impact on mr. imanuel’s privacy, the taking of mr.
imanuel’s dna shall be ordered and entered into the dna databank. mr. imanuel
shall forthwith provide a sample of his dna while in custody to the peel
regional police.

section 109 is mandatory for this offence. you
are prohibited from possessing any firearm, crossbow, restricted weapon, firearm
part, ammunition, or explosive substance for 10 years, and you are prohibited
from possessing any prohibited or restricted firearm, prohibited weapon,
prohibited device, firearm part, and prohibited ammunition for life.

the victim surcharge is waived, as it would
cause undue hardship if imposed due to mr. imanuel’s unemployment.

a forfeiture order is made as requested by the
crown.
released: october
2, 2025
signed:
justice andrew f. falls

subsection 718.2(b) of the code.

subsections 718.2 (d) and (e) of the code.

r v hamilton,
72 or (3d) 1,
2004 canlii 5549
(c.a.)
at
para.
96 & 98.

r v
lacasse,
2015
scc 64
at para.
60.

r v nasogaluak,
2010 scc 6
at para.
44:

r v kwok,
2015 bcca 34
at para.
114.

there appears to be conflicting dicta in the caselaw about
whether ketamine has addictive properties. in
kwok
at para.
66, it was
noted that it is not physiologically addictive. however, in
r. v. phan,
2015 onsc 4681, it was noted at para. 56 that users can
become psychologically addicted to ketamine. my reasons for sentence do not
turn on this disparity. notwithstanding, the caselaw supports a finding that
ketamine is harmful to human health.

r v ling,
2014 onca 808
at para.
12.

kwok, supra. at para. 112;
r v lin,
2020 onca 768
at para.
24.

r v ngo,
2023 onsc 282
at
para.
18.

kwok, supra.

r v lin,
2020 onca 768
at para.
24.

r v lin,
2022 onca 289.

r v lin,
2020 onca 768.

r
v sadikov,
2015
onsc 4447;
r v phan,
2015 onsc 4681;
r v zhang,
2014 onsc 3132

in
phan, significant distinguishing mitigating factors were
considered by the court, including the accused was a paraplegic, experienced
chronic pain, had a supportive family and acted completely out of character.

r v
suliman,
2025
onsc 5281
at paras.
70-72.

r v
beals,
2023
onsc 555
at para.
113, 132-137.

r v
andrew,

oj no 2911
at paras. 58-97.

r v
abraham,
2023
onsc 4592
at para.
29-46.

r. v. nur,
2013 onca 677 (canlii)
at para.
109.

i considered six years as equaling 2191 days. 2191 less 509
(194+315) = 1,682 days or 4 years and seven months.