source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj239/2025oncj239.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. manigbas, 2025 oncj 239
date: 
2025 04 29
court
file no.: 22-70007888
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
marcial
katimaba manigbas
before
justice c. faria
heard
on february 21, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on april 29, 2025
david spence...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
the defendant marical katimaba manigbas.................................... 
on his own behalf
faria j.:

i found marcial katimaba manigbas guilty of
sexual assault on december 2, 2024, after a trial.

the matter was adjourned to
february 21, 2025 for the preparation of a pre-sentence report (psr) and
submissions.

these are my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts

on november 9, 2022, tn, called the
superintendent of her building to open the storage room for her so she could
put her luggage and air conditioner away for the season. mr. manigbas was her
superintendent. although she did not request him to come to her apartment to disassemble
her air conditioning unit, he insisted on doing so. once inside her apartment,
mr. manigbas hugged tn from behind, touched her genital area and grabbed her
breast over her clothes. the sexual assault lasted only a minute or two. tn pushed
mr. manigbas away, confronted him, and he left.
ii.
circumstances of mr. manigbas

mr. manigbas is 64 years old and was 61 at the
time of the offence. pursuant to the psr,

he is the eldest of 10 children and grew up in a positive environment in the
philippines, though, in financially strained circumstances. he started
contributing to his family of origin early. he completed his university degree
and became an industrial technician. he got a job, married, and started a
family.

in 2010, at the age of 49, he immigrated to
canada with his wife and children. he became a canadian citizen 2 years later. mr.
manigbas has been married for almost 40 years. he has 4 adult children, and 4 grandchildren.
his children are all university educated, three of whom live across canada and
the youngest lives at home.

the family has been able to live in three
different buildings in which he has been employed as a maintenance manager. he
provided two letters of employment that spoke very well of him.

it is a product of his hard
work that his family was able to purchase a home in oshawa in 2019 where he now
resides.

as a result of these charges, he has chosen
early retirement in fear of having to disclose this conviction to prospective
employers. he now cares for one of his grandchildren who has special needs.

his children provided letters of support and
describe mr. manigbas as a loving, attentive, supportive father, grandfather,
and husband. they describe his generosity, his commitment to them throughout
their lives, and his integrity.


both of his daughters-in-law wrote he is a
pillar of the family who makes positive contributions to their lives and
supports his grandchildren.

he is also well-regarded by his lifelong friends and those in his faith
community.


all the letters either refer to or explicitly state
that the conduct before the court is out of character for mr. manigbas.

mr. manigbas has no substance use issues,
gambling problems, or mental health concerns. he spends his leisure time in
positive, pro-social environments participating in church activities and his church
community.
iii.
positions

the crown recommends a 4-month jail sentence, a 12-month
probation order with terms, a dna order, a s.110 weapons prohibition and a
soira
order (
sex offender
information registration act
order). the
crown emphasizes denunciation and deterrence, although the crown acknowledges
the principles of restraint and parity also apply.

mr. manigbas, on his own behalf, submits that a
custodial disposition is not appropriate. he submitted this is the first time
he has been before the courts, and relies on his letters of reference to
persuade the court to be considerate and mindful of his role in his family.
iv.
legal principles

sections 718
of the
criminal code
guides
sentencing judges in the task of determining a fit sentence.

every sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence, and the responsibility of the offender (s.718.1).

the objectives of sentencing are set out in s.
718:
•
to denounce unlawful conduct
•
to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences
•
to separate offenders from society where
necessary
•
to assist in rehabilitating offenders
•
to provide reparations from harm done to victims
or to the community
•
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims and to the community

the
principle of parity, that sentences for similar offences committed by similar
offenders in similar circumstances should be similar, applies (s.718.2(b)). 
restraint, that sentencing judges consider the least intrusive sentence and the
least quantum which will achieve the overall purpose of being an appropriate
and just sanction, also applies, (s.718.2(d)).

aggravating
and mitigating circumstances must be considered (s.718.2(a).

sexual
assault is a serious offence, and the primary principles are denunciation and
deterrence.
v.
analysis

it is aggravating mr. manigbas was tn’s
superintendent. tn was dependent on him to perform certain professional tasks
such as to open the storage room door for her. it was in the context of this
professional relationship that the sexual assault occurred.

it is also aggravating that the offence occurred
in tn’s home, where she is to feel the safest, but was where she was violated.

finally, this offence had a negative impact on tn
mentally, physically, and financially. she has had difficulty trusting others
and sleeping, while therapy has cost her financially. unfortunately, tn also
sustained a workplace injury just weeks after this offence which has
exacerbated her recovery, though that is of no fault of mr. manigbas.


in addition, mr. manigbas maintains his
innocence which he is entitled do. this is not an aggravating factor, but a
factor that precludes the mitigating benefit of remorse.
mitigating factors

mr. manigbas is a 64-year-old first offender,
with no previous criminal involvement.

the psr was a positive one. it demonstrated that
mr. manigbas has led a pro-social, productive life, and is known to be
hardworking, generous, and committed to his family’s well-being and success.

he has suffered collateral consequences in that
he is no longer able to go back to his job and retired earlier than expected.
any carceral sentence will also significantly impact his family as he has
become the main care-giver for one of his grandchildren with special needs
since his early retirement.
caselaw

the crown provided me with
r. v. al-handani,
2024 oncj 314
for consideration. in that case, mr. al-handani, too had no
criminal record. he was training to be a registered massage therapist when he removed
his patient’s underwear and placed his hands on her unclothed body. he was
sentenced to a 90-day intermittent sentence. although he had being living a
pro-social life, he had not received counselling nor had he been assessed,
which left the jurist with concern about his risk to re-offend and a
soira
order was imposed.

i distinguish that case from the one at bar for
two reasons. firstly, although all sexual assaults are serious in that they are
an offence of significant personal violation, the nature of the offence in
al-handani
was much more serious and intrusive than the circumstances of mr. manigbas’
offence. secondly, mr. al-handani’s offending occurred over a longer period of
time, and the breach of trust was significantly more severe than in the case at
bar.

as a self-represented accused, mr. manigbas did
not provide any caselaw.

however, i am aware of several cases, which were
of more serious sexual violations than the one before me, and in each instance,
the offender was sentenced to a conditional sentence.

for this reason, i requested
the crown provide submissions on the appropriateness of a conditional sentence,
rather than a custodial one.

it is the position of the crown that a
conditional sentence is insufficient to reflect the denunciation and deterrence
required in this case.
conditional sentence

it
is well-recognized that for sexual violence offences, denunciation and
deterrence are the primary guiding principles.

how a sentence reflects these principles must be customized to
the offender. the supreme court has stated that the “determination of a just
and appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a
purely mathematical calculation. it involves a variety of factors that are
difficult to define with precision”.


in
addition, the ontario court of appeal has long stated that a first
sentence of imprisonment especially for a first offender should be as short as
possible and tailored to the individual circumstances of the accused."


given the circumstances of the offence, mr.
manigbas’ circumstances, age, and positive antecedents, i must consider whether
a conditional sentence is appropriate in this case.

there are five pre-conditions that must be
satisfied before a conditional sentence can be considered available and fit
pursuant to
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code
and
proulx:
i.
the offence is not an excluded offence for a conditional
sentence.
ii.
there is no minimum sentence for the offence.
iii.
the court has determined both a probationary
sentence and a penitentiary sentence are inappropriate.
iv.
the offender would not endanger the community.
v.
a conditional sentence is consistent with the
fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
ss. 718
to
718.2
of
the
criminal code.

the first four prerequisites are easily
satisfied in this case: sexual assault is not an excluded offence; the crown
elected summarily and there is no minimum term of custody; the seriousness of
the offence renders a probationary period as insufficient to reflect deterrence
and a penitentiary sentence is neither sought nor warranted; mr. manigbas has
no criminal record, and on all the evidence at the sentencing hearing, there is
no indication that he would be a danger to the community.

the issue is whether a conditional sentence is
consistent with the fundamental principles of sentencing in this case, specifically,
denunciation and deterrence.

a conditional sentence can have a denunciatory
and deterrent effect:
“the conditional sentence incorporates some
elements of non-custodial measures and some others of incarceration. 
because it is served in the community, it will generally be more effective than
incarceration at achieving the restorative objectives of rehabilitation,
reparations to the victim and community, and the promotion of a sense of
responsibility in the offender. however,
it
is also a punitive
sanction capable of achieving the objectives of denunciation and deterrence.’’
(underlined in the original)


in particular, the supreme court of canada
in
proulx
states at para.
114:
…a conditional sentence may provide
sufficient denunciation and deterrence, even in cases in which restorative
objectives are of diminished importance, depending on the nature of the
conditions imposed, the duration of the conditional sentence, and the
circumstances of the offender and the community in which the conditional
sentence is to be served.

mr. manigbas is 64 years old with no criminal
record, strong family ties, a long history of pro-social behaviour and given
his circumstances, a conditional sentence is a substantial sanction. it
appropriately reflects the severity of the offence, his circumstances, the primacy
of denunciation and deterrence as well as the principles of restraint and
parity. a conditional sentence is therefore consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing in
ss.718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code.
soira

the crown seeks a
soira
order.

although the onus is on mr. manigbas to satisfy
me that he should be exempt from complying with
soira,
he made no
submissions on the point as a self-represented litigant. however, given this
status as a self-represented litigant, it is necessary to review the criteria
for the order and determine if it is appropriate to issue in this case.

sexual assault is a primary designated offence
for a
soira
order. pursuant to s.490.012 (3), i am to make
a
soira
order “unless the court is satisfied the person has established
that:
a.
there would be no connection between making the order and the
purpose of helping police services prevent or investigate crimes of a sexual
nature by requiring the registration of information relating to sex offenders
under that
act; or
b.
the impact of the order on the person, including on their privacy or
liberty would be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in protecting
society through the effective prevention or investigation of crimes of a sexual
nature, to be achieved by the registration of information relating to sex
offenders under that
act.

the factors i am to consider per s. 490.012(4)
are:
a.
the nature and seriousness of the designated offence;
b.
the victim’s age and other personal characteristics;
c.
the nature and circumstances of the relationship between the person
and the victim;
d.
the personal characteristics and circumstances of the person;
e.
the person’s criminal history, including age at which they
previously committed any offence and the length of time for which they have
been at liberty without committing an offence;
f.
the opinions of experts who have examined the
person; and
g.
any other factors that the court considers relevant.

although the offence is a primary designated
offence, this sexual assault was of very short duration, the touching was over
clothes, the victim is a mature woman, and a power differential though present,
was not a significant one.

on this issue, again, mr. manigbas’ age, lack of
criminal record, and pro-social conduct, in the past and present all work in
his favour. there is no indication mr. manigbas is any risk to the public and
the crown did not submit there is any risk.

in addition, given his circumstances as a
caregiver, although not determinative, the impact of this order on mr. manigbas
would be significant. it would be disproportionate to the public interest in
protecting society, as he appears to be no to little threat to society.

considering the factors per s. 490.012(4), i find that mr. manigbas
should be exempt from complying with a
soira
order.
vi.
sentence

i sentence mr. manigbas to a 5-month sentence to
be served in the community, and a 12-month period of probation.

during his conditional sentence, mr. manigbas
will follow all the statutory terms, including reporting within 24 hours of
this order, and thereafter as directed by his supervisor, and remain in ontario. 
he will also not be outside his residence except:
•
to attend any medical emergency involving
himself, or his family, including his grandchildren;
•
to attend to his legal obligations;
•
to attend to, from, and while at his place of
worship;
•
for a period of 5 hours on saturday from noon to
5:00 p.m. to attend to his personal necessities, or any other 5-hour period for
that same purpose, with the prior approval of his supervisor;
•
to attend to, from, and while at medical, dental
and educational appointments involving himself, or his grandchildren with prior
written approval from his supervisor;
•
to attend to, from and while at any other
commitment with prior written approval from his supervisor.

while on his conditional sentence mr. manigbas
will also have no contact with tn directly or indirectly and he will not be
within 100m of where tn lives, works, or he knows her to be. mr. manigbas will
also not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal
code.

during the 12 month probation, in addition to
the statutory terms, mr. manigbas will report within 48 hours of the completion
of cso, he will have no contact with tn, he will not be within 100m of where
she lives, works, or he knows her to be, he will take counselling as directed
by his probation officer, and sign releases to ensure that his probation
officer can monitor his attendance and completion of such programs. he will
also not be in possession of any weapons as defined by the
criminal code
while on probation.
ancillary orders

i order that mr. manigbas provide a dna sample
today in this courthouse.

i will make a s.110 weapons prohibition order
for a period of 5 years.

i decline to make a
soira
order for the
reasons set out earlier.

i waive the victim fine surcharge, as mr.
manigbas is now retired and cares for his grandchild full time, and it would
thus cause him undue hardship.
released: april
29, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

r. v. manigbas,
2024 oncj 616

exhibit 16: pre-sentence report, marcial manigbas, february 18, 2025.

exhibits 1 and 2

exhibits 3, 4, 5, 6

exhibits 7 and 8

exhibits 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,,14,

exhibit 17: victim impact statement, tn, february 14, 2025. tn made several
inappropriate and/or unrelated comments in the statement which are not
considered as part of the impact of the offence on her.

r. v. browne,
2021 onsc 6097,
r.
v. g.t.,
2022 onsc 2619,
r. v. holland,
2022 onsc 1540,
r. v.
morgan,
2021 oncj 100,
r. v. r.s.,
2021 oncj 2263,
r. v. francis,
oncj 2023
unreported,
r. v. dickson,
2023 onsc 2776

r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58.

r. v. hayman, (1999)
1999 canlii 3710 (on ca), 135 c.c.c. (3d) 338 (ont. c.a.).

r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5
at para.
77.

r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5
at para.
22.