source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj11/2025oncj11.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dasilva, 2025 oncj 11
date: 
2025 01 09
court
file no.: brampton 23-31100519
23-31100351
22-31106813
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
christopher dasilva
before
justice p.t. o’marra
heard
on may 17, and december 19, 2024
reasons
for judgment on sentence released on january 9, 2025
reza raeesi........................................................................................ 
counsel for the crown
joseph ciraco......................................... 
counsel for the accused christopher dasilva
p.t. o’marra,
j.:
introduction:

on may 17, 2024, mr. dasilva pleaded guilty to
possession of child pornography contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal
code of canada
(“
code
”). this was a matter that i judicially
pre-tried on several occasions. i ordered a pre-sentence report.

on december 19, 2024, i heard submissions.
today, mr. dasilva is before me for sentencing. these are my reasons.

the facts that support the plea are as follows.

in september 2022, investigators from the peel
regional police internet child exploitation unit (ice unit) began an online
‘peer-to-peer’ file-sharing investigation over the bittorrent network. on
august 6, 2022, a user was identified as having possession of and making
available files believed to be child pornography. the user was observed
utilizing a rogers communications ip address geo-located in the city of
mississauga.

nine (9) files could be downloaded via a direct
connection to the user. several of these files were then viewed and determined
to meet the
code
definition of child pornography. a production order
was granted and forwarded to rogers communications for the associated account
subscriber records. mr. dasilva’s address was identified.

on october 18, 2022, a search warrant was
granted in relation to mr. dasilva’s residence for execution on october 24,
2022. ice investigators attended the address for its execution.

upon police arrival, they located mr. dasilva
and his common-law spouse, amber dalziel. during the search of the residence, a
‘child-like silicone sex doll’ was found in mr. dasilva’s bedroom and
determined to meet the
code
definition of child pornography.

as a result, mr. dasilva was arrested for
possession of child pornography and held for a bail hearing. investigators
located and seized several devices for further investigation, including an acer
laptop computer, five (5) cell phones, and eight (8) storage devices.

the investigation into the acer laptop produced
35,690 category 1 images and 194 category 1 videos. the files the police could
download via bittorrent were on mr. dasilva’s acer laptop.

on december 19, 2024, on consent, the crown
filed a supplementary agreed statement of fact. it stated that police searched
10,450 locally accessed files on mr. dasilva’s acer laptop. using the search
term ‘pthc,’ which means pre-teen hardcore, 755 files were produced with ‘pthc’
in the file path between january 10, 2021, and september 6, 2022.

the images were of prepubescent and pubescent
girls and boys sexualized, posing, and engaging in sexual acts. there was a
large proportion of anime/cartoon images of explicit sexual acts.
victim impact:

while i did not receive any victim or community
impact statement in this case, the courts now recognize that child pornography
offences are not victimless crimes.

victims of child abuse have to live with the
reality that their images and the imagery of their abuse continue to exist and,
in many cases, are circulated and viewed by others. if they are not, they live
in fear that they will be. this keeps their victimization always current. they
are powerless to destroy the images of their abuse permanently, and they are
victimized over and over every time their images are sought out, watched, and
retained.

there is no doubt that this is a serious offence
and that denunciation and deterrence must be front and centre in the sentencing
analysis. (see:
r. v. pike,
2024 onca 608, at para.
159;
r. v.
dunajski,
 o.j. no. 5340
and
s. 718.01
of the
code.)
the positions of the parties:

the crown seeks a sentence of imprisonment in the range of two
and a half (2½) years to three (3) years, followed by three (3) years of
probation. the crown also requested ancillary orders, consisting of a
soira
order for 20 years and a s. 161 order for ten
(10) years, with conditions outlined later. as another term of probation, the
crown submitted that there be control over mr. dasilva’s access to
internet-connected data-capable devices and his association with children under
the age of 16 years. the crown also seeks a dna sample for the primary
designated offence.

the parties agree regarding the forfeiture of specific devices
and other items.

the defence submits that the appropriate sentence in these
circumstances is a conditional sentence order for two years less one day followed
by twelve (12) months of probation. counsel does not oppose the corollary
orders, except for an exception that he can communicate with family members
under 16 years, in the order under
section 161
of the
code.
mr. dasilva’s circumstances:

i have gleaned much of mr. dasilva’s circumstances and background
from his psr and a psychosexual risk assessment dated june 30, 2023, prepared
by dr. monik kalia.

mr. dasilva is 41 years old and does not have a criminal record.

he was born in toronto but raised in mississauga. he has a close
relationship with his parents. he had a normal upbringing.

mr. dasilva has been in a long-term relationship with ms.
dalziel. they have lived together for 10 years. they do not have children. ms.
dalziel remains supportive, but the allegations have created an understandable
amount of anxiety and tension in the relationship.

mr. dasilva completed his high school education and did enroll in
college for some time but dropped out due to a self-diagnosis as having attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd) and as well as being dyslexic.

he started an arborist apprenticeship program in his late
twenties but did not complete it. however, mr. dasilva eventually started his
own arbour tree service business. he continues to work weekends as an arborist,
but presently, mr. dasilva works for a construction company that installs
watermains and sewers. he is the assistant to the supervisor.

mr. dasilva has received additional employment training through
his local union. he has enrolled in a course at sheridan college, continuing
and professional studies, which commences in january 2025.

mr. dasilva reported that he began to use powder cocaine, lsd, mdma
and psilocybin mushrooms when he started in the arbour industry. during covid,
his cocaine use escalated. he hid his drug use from ms. dalziel. since he was
charged, he has abstained from using any illicit drugs.

ms. dalziel has observed positive changes in mr. dasilva and
believes he is on the right path. he exercises daily and has been undergoing counselling.

mr. dasilva has supportive prosocial friends and a supportive
family. several friends and family, including ms. dalziel, wrote strong letters
supporting mr. dasilva. i have carefully reviewed the character letters filed
in these proceedings.

when the probation officer asked mr. dasilva about the offence,
he explained that he went down a social media website, “rabbit hole,” and
downloaded files like a basket of pictures and videos, then he would browse
through them. he acknowledged that the images were of underage girls that
aroused him. ever since he was a teenager, he has been interested in teens but
acknowledged that his interest crossed over to “illegal teens.” mr. dasilva said
he had learned his lesson and would never repeat his offending behaviour. he noted
that his cocaine use during the relevant timeframe may have impaired his
judgment.
forensic assessment:

before pleading guilty to this offence, mr. dasilva underwent a psychosexual
risk assessment, which dr. kalia performed. dr. kalia is an experienced
clinical and forensic psychologist. his practice includes personality
assessment, cognitive assessment, risk assessment and treatment, with a
principal interest in forensic evaluation for criminal and civil proceedings.
dr. kalia is a psychology member of the ontario review board.

the assessment focused on determining if there
is evidence of personality dysfunction, cognitive impairment or other
psychological disturbance which may have influenced mr. dasilva's behaviour and
judgment in connection with the offence and evaluating mr. dasilva’s risk of
recurrence moving forward.

dr. kalia received materials from the police disclosure supplied
by the defence, interviewed mr. dasilva at length, and had him undergo several
assessments and tests, including phallometric testing. dr. kalia also
interviewed ms. dalziel.

phallometric testing is an objective measure of physiological
sexual arousal. it is considered more reliable than self-reports. the results of the phallometric testing indicated that mr. dasilva
was sexually aroused to children of both genders and all age groups. his lowest
response was to adults of both genders. overall, the results were indicative of
pedophilic interests.

concerning risk measures, dr. kalia rated mr. dasilva
on the risk for sexual violence protocol (rsvp). based on the available
information, mr. dasilva’s risk factors are his sexual deviancy and intimacy
problems with his partner. he does not demonstrate any other risk factors
related to sexual violence. dr. kalia stated that to mr. dasilva’s credit, he
has not engaged in position or externalization of blame; instead, he takes full
responsibility for his behaviour and is committed to understanding it. based
on the rsvp risk appraisal, the likelihood that mr. dasilva will commit an act
of sexual violence is in the low range.

dr. kalia noted that there are no well-validated
actuarial risk assessment tools for child pornography-only offenders.
nonetheless, dr. kalia tested mr. dasilva with a recently developed child
pornography offender risk tool (cport). the cport is a seven-item structured
tool to assess the likelihood of future sexual offending over a five-year fixed
period with follow-up. the cport was developed and validated for use with
individuals convicted of child pornography offences. mr. dasilva scored on one
out of seven items on cport. to augment this test, dr. kalia screened mr. dasilva
for psychopathy. mr. dasilva does not come close to being a psychopath.

dr. kalia’s clinical summary indicated that mr. dasilva
approached the assessment in a forthright manner. testing indicated that he has
above-average intelligence. the personality evaluation did not suggest the
presence of a major mental illness or personality disorder. he confirmed that mr.
dasilva has a long history of compulsive pornography use that has been his
primary tool to assuage feelings of insecurity, low mood, and emotional
distress. his pornography use increased after his relationship with ms. dalziel
deteriorated.

dr. kalia stated that based on the nature of the
offence, reported history and results of the phallometric testing; it was his
opinion that mr. dasilva seems to have a problem with pedophilia limited to the
use of the internet. his pedophilic arousal can be considered non-exclusive as
he has shown a good capacity to establish sexual relationships with adult
females. at no time did mr. dasilva attempt to justify his actions.

during his interview with dr. kalia, mr. dasilva
acknowledged that he understood that sexual violence causes significant harm to
the victims but added that he limited his sexual interest to fantasies only on
anime pornography and had never had thoughts of acting on them. he stated that
he regretted not seeking professional help to address his issues. he is
remorseful for his actions and is coming to terms with the ramifications of his
offending behaviour.

dr. kalia stated that mr. dasilva was motivated to
explore the dynamics related to his offences and sexual fantasies in a
therapeutic setting.

clinically, dr. kalia found that mr. dasilva is
a low risk and did not see him reoffending similarly. since there is no history
of rule-breaking behaviour and with counselling, it is dr. kalia’s opinion that
mr. dasilva can be effectively supervised and managed in the community. however,
he should continue to abstain from drug use as it can lead to disinhibition.

dr. kalia recommended sex-offence-specific
counselling to address the underlying issues that lead to his criminal
behaviour.
counselling and therapy report:

as a result of mr. dasilva’s willingness to
pursue supportive therapy, on august 23, 2023, dr. kalia referred mr. dasilva
to a social worker, julie zikman.

ms. zikman prepared a report outlining a
treatment summary on behalf of mr. dasilva dated december 12, 2024. that report
was also filed.

ms. zikman has extensive experience in clinical
assessment and treatment of sexual offenders.

mr. dasilva has attended 29 one-hour sessions
between september 12, 2023, and december 30, 2024. he has presented as pro-social,
credible, and reliable, as well as being consistent in his resolve to maintain
the gains he has made. she commented that mr. dasilva’s commitment to therapy
is commendable. mr. dasilva has engaged in cognitive behavioural relapse
prevention counselling. he completed all the homework assignments to assist him
in identifying risk factors and developing skills and strategies to avoid
recidivism.

mr. dasilva has expressed profound remorse and regret
for his actions. he has demonstrated insight into his desire to learn more
about himself and his risk factors to continue making choices that will
mitigate his risk of reoffending.

to her knowledge, mr. dasilva has not engaged in
any activities that would place him at risk of violating the law.

nonetheless, suppose mr. dasilva is imprisoned
for this offence? in that case, ms. zikman has recommended that he be placed in
the ontario correctional institute in brampton, which offers specialized
treatment for men who have committed sexual offences. after his release, it is suggested
that mr. dasilva participate in relapse prevention treatment. ms. zikman is
also willing to continue meeting with mr. dasilva to facilitate his referral to
the sexual behaviours clinic at camh.
legal parameters:

in this case, the crown proceeded by indictment.

the range of punishment is set out in
s. 163.1
of the
code.
it provides for the offence of possession of child
pornography, pursuant to
s. 163.1(4)
(a):
every person who possesses any child
pornography is guilty of
(a) an indictable offence and is liable to
imprisonment for a term of not more than 10 years and to a minimum punishment
of imprisonment for a term of one year; …

the provision for it being a minimum punishment
has effectively been struck down as unconstitutional based on appellate case
law. (see
r. v. john,
2018 onca 702.)
mitigating and aggravating factors:

the court of appeal in
pike, at para.
7,
very recently emphasized the child-centred approach to sentencing that must be
taken in child pornography cases post-
friesen
(about
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
):
a child-centred approach to sentencing
requires judges to consider child victims and the wrongs and harms that people
who possess child pornography inflict on them, to reject myths that minimize
the perpetrator's responsibility and, finally, to apply a denunciatory
sentencing range that reflects the abhorrent and harmful nature of these
offences and their long-term negative impacts on children.

the court in
pike
updated a
non-exhaustive list of aggravating and mitigating factors that apply to
sentencing people who possess child pornography. (see paras. 166 and 173.)

first, i should consider the presence of a
criminal record. mr. dasilva has no record and is being sentenced as a first
offender. this is a significant mitigating factor.

pike
then directed me to consider
whether there was any production or distribution of the child exploitation
material. it points out that the absence of these factors is not mitigating; instead,
it is demonstrative of the absence of an aggravating factor. (see
pike,
para.
171.) i do not have any evidence that this was a factor in this case.

as for the collection size, mr. dasilva had 35,690
images and 194 videos. the crown advised that there were 21 hours of child
pornography within the videos. this is a massive collection of child
pornography. this is a significant aggravating factor.

as the court of appeal explained in para. 167,
the number should be placed in context. it needs to "be considered
together with the number of real child victims, the degree of organization, and
the ratio of videos to still images." (see:
r. v. liang,

o.j. no. 4586, at para. 39.)

i do not have evidence of any organization of
the collection here, but the number of actual victims is substantial. and while
there are more images than videos, the collection has many videos.

still, in terms of duration, this collection was
amassed over many months. when the warrant was executed, mr. dasilva had begun
downloading child pornography since january 2021. however, mr. dasilva
self-reported that he first started to download child pornography in 2017.

this is of some importance because "[t]he duration
of possession and the frequency of downloading and viewing images increase the
moral blameworthiness of people who possess child pornography by showing that
their conduct is entrenched and increasing the number of times they victimize
the depicted children." (see:
pike, at para.
170.) mr. dasilva is
morally blameworthy for having persisted in this conduct since 2017. therefore,
i would characterize this behaviour as deep-rooted.

this offending did not occur accidentally or
passively. as set out by
pike
at paras.
161 and 164, it is a myth that
this type of material can fall into your lap. it is and was deliberate. he also
downloaded it for potential later viewing.

according to
pike, in addition to
duration and frequency, "collaboration with other offenders, planning,
organization, sophistication, and participation in the child pornography
subculture" are relevant considerations. mr. dasilva was not part of any
child pornography subculture or community, nor did much planning or
organization go into obtaining the material.

the seriousness of the nature of the collection
is the next consideration. this factor turns on the depicted activity's degree
of harmfulness and wrongfulness:
thus, material depicting more physically
intrusive activities that feature additional violence beyond that inherent in
sexual offences against children is aggravating because those features may
cause additional harm:
warner, at p. 386;
friesen, at paras. 139,
152. some sentencing judges use image ranking tools to account for this, as in
r.
v. jonat,
2019 onsc 1633. but judges who do so must recognize that the
harms and wrongs of such recordings do not depend on penetration and that other
forms of exploitation can cause severe emotional harm, even absent additional
violence and even if victims appear to participate. for instance, recordings of
sexualized posing are serious because they show horrifying and profoundly
harmful sexual exploitation:
friesen, at paras. 140-146, 152;
snowden,
at para. 102;
d.p.p. v. watson, vsca 73, 259 a. crim. r. 327, at
paras. 41-46. (see:
pike, para.
168.)

in this case, the material found on mr. dasilva
is disturbing. the activities range from posing to penetration in cartoon anime
and reality. children are engaged in specific acts with other children and adults.
the degree of harmfulness and wrongfulness is, therefore, significant. while it
is not at the high end of the spectrum identified in
pike, at para.
190
(torture, aggressive sexual activity, and bestiality), all of which are
horrifying and would cause severe physical and emotional harm to the helpless
and actual victims of this abuse. the children depicted are almost exclusively teen
and pre-teen females.

the crown has characterized the collection as
very serious. i concur that this material is at the higher end of the range.

the next consideration is the risk that mr. dasilva
may pose to children.

dr. kalia opined that mr. dasilva presents a
low risk of re-offending as it relates to child pornography. however, the crown
challenged it to a certain extent due to mr. dasilva’s comments on page 6 of
the report, which stated, “when he was looking at illegal images, he justified
to himself that they are just images and not hurting anybody.” mr. dasilva seemed
to believe that the anime child pornography was less aggravating. i accept dr.
kalia’s opinion. the assessment properly supported his opinion. his opinion was
assisted by the intensive therapy that mr. dasilva has undertaken, which has
helped him understand the harmful impacts and suffering that child pornography has
on victims.

i accept that mr. dasilva does not present a
real risk of committing hands-on offences against children. he is an online
offender – which, to be sure, is still a perpetrator of abuse – but he has not
shown any notable interest in children in his community or surroundings. (see
dunajski,
para. 47.)

mr. dasilva does not deny or minimize the
wrongfulness of child pornography.

i then turn to mr. dasilva’s good character,
employment situation, and the stigma arising from this charge.

these are noted as less significant factors and
given limited weight in para. 172 of
pike, given that "many people
of otherwise good character... secretly commit the offence, and possession
usually involves repeated conduct over a significant period rather than an
out-of-character isolated act, and it is very blameworthy for people of
otherwise prior good character to fail to appreciate the wrongfulness of their
actions".

mr. dasilva recognized his morally blameworthy
actions. he stated that when downloading the material, he was taken “down a
rabbit hole as it sparked my interest.” (see: dr. kalia’s report at p. 4.) he
acknowledged that he would search for “preteen, lolly and younger looking
female pornography.” still, his character otherwise speaks to his potential for
rehabilitation. he has been a productive member of society and has a positive
support network, including his common-law spouse.

i believe that mr. dasilva has good prospects
for rehabilitation.

i next consider his level of insight and
remorse. as stated in
pike, at para.
173:
courts assessing remorse and insight should
focus on whether people who possess child pornography recognize and express
remorse for wronging and harming real children. conversely, these factors are
entitled to less weight if the people being sentenced continue to engage in
distorted thinking and minimize or excuse their actions as harmless fantasies.

i accept that mr. dasilva is genuinely
remorseful, embarrassed, and ashamed of his conduct. he has some insight into
what led him to commit this offence and garnered greater insight into the harm
he thereby occasioned on real children. he accepts that he is responsible for
these harms. he acknowledged that his actions were illegal and immoral. dr.
kalia noted on page 13 of his report about mr. dasilva’s insight: “to his
credit, he has not engaged in minimization or externalization of blame; rather,
he takes full responsibility for his behaviour and presented as committing to
understanding it.” therefore, these factors and his positive results on the
rsvp and cport speak to mr. dasilva’s low risk of re-offending. i believe he
has been deterred from engaging in such conduct in the future.

i also consider mr. dasilva’s guilty plea. i am
informed that he intended to plead guilty from the outset. he took full
responsibility for his actions and submitted himself to a psychosexual risk
assessment and sexual offender therapy to enable greater insight into his
conduct.
governing legal principles:

section 718
of the
criminal code
sets out
the purpose and objectives of sentencing:
718 the fundamental purpose of sentencing
is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce
unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is
caused by unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the
offender and other persons from committing offences;
(c) to separate
offenders from society, where necessary;
(d) to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide
reparations for harm done to victims or the community and
(f) to promote a
sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to
victims or the community.

in other words, the purposes of sentencing are
to be accomplished through the imposition of "just sanctions" that
reflect one or more of the traditional sentencing objectives: denunciation,
general and specific deterrence, separation of offenders, rehabilitation, reparation
to victims, the promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders and the
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and the community.
sentencing range for possession of
child pornography:

in
pike, at para.
174, the court of
appeal indicated that it was time to update the sentencing ranges in possession
of child pornography cases to account for
friesen
and the legislative
increase to maximum sentences.

the eighteen-month upper end of the range was
previously increased to a three-year sentence for possession as proportionate.
(see
r. v. l.m.,
2008 scc 31, 2 s.c.r. 163, at paras.
8, 53-54.)
in pre-
friesen
cases and cases before 2015, sentencing judges raised the
upper end of the range from three-one-half to four years. (see
r. v. lynch-staunton,
 o.j. no. 313 at para. 79;
r. v. branco,
2019 onsc 3591, at paras.
23-24, 101.) however, the
pike
decision has increased it to five years.

the court of appeal in
pike
declined
"to set a lower end for the possession range because... possession can be
committed in various circumstances and is sometimes prosecuted summarily, which
lowers the maximum sentence to two-years-less-a-day": para. 176. it also
recognized that some sentencing judges continued to impose lower sentences post-
friesen,
but this could merely reflect the various circumstances in which the possession
offence can be committed. (see para. 175.)

the court recommended that sentencing judges
situate cases on the range by assessing the aggravating and mitigating factors
by comparing them to the facts of decided cases. the most useful precedents are
post-
friesen, post-2015 legislative change cases, especially those that,
like the court's decisions in
inksetter,
john,
mccaw,
olivetti,
and
r. v. rule,
2023 onca 31, which show a deep understanding of the
gravity and degree of responsibility of those possessing these images
consistent with these reasons:
friesen, at paras. 108-110. (see para.
178).

crown provided the following cases to support
its position.

in
r. v. mccaw,
2023 onca 8 (canlii), 165 o.r. (3d) 179 (ca),
the offender pleaded guilty to one count of possession of child pornography. he
was a repeat offender, having been convicted of the same offence in 2002 and
receiving a one-year conditional sentence. in 2011, he was convicted of possessing
and distributing child pornography and received a sentence of two years less a
day with three years of probation. given his record, the crown sought a
three-year penitentiary sentence. counsel submitted that a fit sentence was
time served, followed by three years' probation. considering the offender's
challenges, his guilty plea and acceptance of responsibility, the lengthy gap
in his record and his pre-sentence custody and house arrest bail, the judge
ultimately imposed what purported to be a two-year conditional sentence
notwithstanding that a conditional sentence had to be less than two years. the
court found that the sentence was manifestly unfit and sentenced the offender
to three years less time served.

in
r. v. subia,
2022 onsc 1693, the 35-year-old
offender received a sentence of three years. he had entered guilty pleas to
various offences, including possessing and accessing child pornography. the
pleas were entered following a ruling on a pre-trial motion. while the offender
had a related criminal record for accessing child pornography, he was said to
have "no violent tendencies" and had attended several sessions with a
psychotherapist before sentencing. he had pedophilic tendencies and was
described as a moderate risk of re-offending. the size of the collection of
images (3396 unique images, no videos) was "relatively large and would
have taken some time to collect." the nature of the collection was at
"the high end of abusive material."

in
r. v. kardaal,
2022 oncj 441, just
over 13 months was imposed for possessing 276 images and no videos. the offender
was elderly and had significant health issues. he was also a first offender and
had strong family support. some material, however, depicted toddlers and
infants, and one image depicted bondage.

in
r. v. russell,
2020 o.j. no. 3841, the
offender pleaded guilty to possessing child pornography. the size and nature of
the collection was an aggravating factor. he had a collection of 1859 videos
and 1042 images, which included all forms of intercourse, including bondage and
bestiality. the offender had anxiety and depression and no criminal record.
however, he had limited insight. the sentencing judge discounted the risk
assessment because of the insufficient credentials of the assessor, who was a
family physician with no specialty in sexual behaviours or forensic psychiatry.
the offender was sentenced to two years imprisonment and two years probation.

in
r. v. kingdon,
 o.j. no 1004,
the offender pleaded guilty to distributing and making child pornography
available. the offender interacted with other individuals on skype and shared
materials. eight images were transmitted to two different recipients over five
months. the nature of the collection was aggravating. there were very young children
and very sexually intrusive acts. some of the children appeared to be between
two and four. children were degraded in some of them. the court referred to the
images as category 3 or 4 on the oliver scale. the quantum was eight images
shared, 121 images, and 61 videos found. the offender was 32 years old and did not
have a criminal record. he was remorseful and understood the implications of
his conduct on others. he had met with a doctor willing to engage in
counselling and programming, was a strong candidate for rehabilitation, and had
a supportive family. the court found that the nature of the collection and the
fact that he was trading the material were aggravating factors. the sentence
was 15 months incarceration and 18 months probation.

in
r. v. bekmambetov,
2021 onsc 6219, the offender collected material for over five years. he had
9500 images and 283 videos in his possession and had been diagnosed with
pedophilia. he was sentenced to two years following a guilty plea.

in
r. v. snead,
2021 onsc 7017, b.p. o'marra
j. allowed the crown appeal from an eight-month conditional sentence for
possession of child pornography concerning conduct in march and november 2018.
he held that the conditional sentence "failed to reflect the well-established
need for general deterrence and denunciation for such offences":
r. v.
snead,
supra, at para.
19. the offender had participated in
zoom rooms where child pornography was streamed with over 50 other individuals
watching.

justice b.p. o'marra stated at paras. 20-22, and
26:
 the possession of child pornography
harms children. it is child abuse:
r. v. sharpe,
2001 scc 2;
r. v.
inksetter,
2018 onca 474
at para.
22.
 viewers and purchasers of child
pornography fuel the market for producing "this odious material." the
victimization of children must be opposed with unremitting purpose.
condemnation through the imposition of harsh sentences is necessary to fight
against the evil of child pornography:
r. v. rytel,
2019 onsc 5541
at
para.
28.
 the primary focus for sentencing in
such cases has long been general deterrence and denunciation:
inksetter
at para.
16;
john
at para.
41...
 parliament has recognized the profound
harm of sexual offences against children and has determined that sentences for
such offences should be increased. the enactment of
s. 718.01
of the
criminal
code
relating to offences against children confirms that the paramount
consideration shall be to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence. this
calls for more severe sanctions for such offences:
r. v. friesen,
2020
scc 9
at paras.
95, 101-105.

a custodial sentence of 12 months for the
offence of possession of child pornography was imposed on appeal concerning the
principles of denunciation, general and specific deterrence, and rehabilitation.
(see
snead, at paras.
35 and 36.)

in
r. v. elkaderi,
2022 oncj 114, the
offender pleaded guilty to distributing, making available, and possessing child
pornography. for over three years, the offender searched the dark web in search
of trading child pornography. he also used the kik app. the nature of the
materials included penetration and child-on-child sexual abuse. the quantum was
486 images and 50 videos. the offender was 24 years old and had no criminal
record. the offender had demonstrated good insight and participated in
counselling, which made him a low future risk to re-offend. the collection was
not as depraved as others seen in court. however, the amount of time the
accused had indulged in engaging and viewing these materials and the collection
was described as significant. the sentence was 20 months incarceration followed
by two years probation.

in
r. v. murty,
2021 onsc 2801, the
offender pleaded guilty to possessing and making available child pornography.
he was sentenced to three years. the size of the collection was
"significant." he had collected 746 images and 801 videos. the
contents involved boys under age 12 or 13 with an emphasis on babies (some
described as a few days or a few weeks old) and toddlers and involved invasive
sexual conduct "at the higher end of relative depravity." the
offender was 49 years old, had no prior record, and had an employment history.
he had difficult personal circumstances, which included being rejected by his
parents because he was gay. he had become a recluse, suffered from anxiety and
depression, and had attempted suicide. he abused narcotics to cope. he was
found to be at a moderate risk of re-offending by committing a future child
pornography offence. in arriving at this sentence, the trial judge rejected the
suggestion that a conditional sentence was fit since it would not correctly
address the principles of denunciation and deterrence. however, in fixing the
length of the sentence, she noted the principles in
r. v. priest
(1996),
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca), 110 c.c.c. (3d) 289 (ont. c.a.) and
r. v. borde
(2003),
2003 canlii 4187 (on ca), 172 c.c.c. (3d)
225 (ont. c.a.) to the effect that a "first penitentiary sentence should
be as short as possible." the sentence was three years less than the time
served of ten months, for a further sentence of two years, two months to serve
in custody.

in
r. v. schock,
 o.j. no.7242,
the offender pleaded guilty to both making child pornography available and
possession of child pornography. the offences were committed on june 27, 2015.
at the time, both offences carried a minimum sentence of one year in jail. the
making available offence was committed on that day when the offender uploaded
and shared a single image with 100 ip addresses. he was found in possession of 204
videos and 4306 images. most of the videos depicted sexual activity with
adults. children as young as two years old were seen. there was bondage; a
child was hogtied, and another bound with duct tape and rope; group sex;
urination; sexual acts with animals; and attempted penetration of a
two-year-old. the offender was 24 years old at the sentencing date, with no
prior record, and employed. he had a history of being sexually assaulted and
being bullied. a sexual behaviours assessment was conducted, in which response
to paedophilic stimuli was observed. the assessment concluded that he had
paraphilic sexual interests. the offender was sentenced to one year on the
making available charge and two years consecutive on the possession charge, for
a total custodial sentence of three years.

the defence provided the following cases.

in
r. v. king,
2020 abpc 219, the
offender possessed, on several electronic devices, a collection of child
pornography containing 1112 images and 79 videos. he also possessed over 500
written child pornography stories. the offender was 40 years of age and without
a criminal record. the crown sought 30 months of incarceration; the defence suggested
a conditional sentence. the court considered
friesen, supra, and
wrote at para. 27:
in
r. v. friesen, supra, the
supreme court of canada had before it an appeal of a sentence imposed in relation
to an offence of sexual interference with a young child. however, the court
gave general guidance on the subject of sentencing on all sexual offences
involving children (paragraph 44). indeed, possession of child pornography was
one of the offences listed in the appendix which the court created to show that
parliament had increased maximum sentences for sexual offences involving
children.

the sentencing judge found that the appropriate
sentence for the offender would be less than two years and that a sentence
served in the community would not endanger the community's safety; however, he
ultimately determined that a cso would not meet the principles of deterrence
and denunciation.

nonetheless, the sentencing judge wrote in para.
36:
i wish to be clear: i am not saying that a
cso is never an appropriate sentence for possession of child pornography; such
a statement would constitute an error in law. an example of a cso being imposed
for a charge of possession of child pornography, with the learned sentencing
judge specifically considering the decision in
r. v. friesen,
supra,
is
r. v. nepon,
2020 mbpc 48
(man. prov. ct.). the sentencing principles
to be applied remain constant; it is varying circumstances amongst the cases
which cause differing sentencing outcomes.

in
r. v. nepon,
2020 mbpc 48, the offender
was sentenced to a 12-month conditional sentence followed by two years of
probation. he was partially blind, was on the autism spectrum disorder scale,
and had been assessed to be at a low risk of reoffending.

in
r. v. jongsma,
2021 onsc 796, the offender pleaded guilty
to possession of child pornography. he had in his possession 24 videos
depicting children between the ages of four and twelve years old engaged in
sexual acts with adults. the offender was a victim of sexual abuse. in para.
69, the court stated, “the enormity of this harm must be considered when
a former child victim of sexual assault is being sentenced for sexual offences
against children.” the court imposed a one-year conditional
sentence.

in
r. v. friesen,
2021 abpc 223, affirmed at

a.j. no. 523
r. v. friesen,
 a.j. no. 1178, the offender
pleaded guilty to one count of possession of child pornography. he had 100
unique images of child pornography depicting girls between six and 16 years of
age showing nudity, fellatio, and intercourse. he had also previously uploaded
images and videos of child pornography to various chat services—some of these
depicted sex and fellatio between underaged boys and underaged girls. he was 21
years old with no criminal record at the time of arrest. he had previously
suffered from substance abuse, his mother died from opioid addiction, and he
was diagnosed with persistent depressive disorder. he understood the gravity of
his offence, attended extensive therapy sessions at the rocky mountain program
and was at a low risk of reoffending. the publicity around his arrest was found
to be a mitigating factor. he was sentenced to a conditional sentence of 24
months, followed by two years probation.

in
r. v. dutchession,
2021, oncj 480
pleaded guilty to
possession of child pornography, which included 7537 images, the majority of
which were prepubescent female children between three and 14 years old. he was
51 years old with no criminal record and had served in three combat zones as a military
member. he actively participated in treatment, expressed remorse, understood
the gravity of the offence, and was considered a low risk. it was found that
his military service resulted in mental health issues. there had been some
delay associated with the case; however, during that period, the offender had
undergone extensive, successful therapy. the court was concerned he would not
receive sufficient rehabilitation in a provincial facility. a conditional
sentence was imposed for two years, less one day, followed by 24 months of
probation.

in
r. v. m.m.,
2022 onca 441 (canlii), o.j. no. 2527, the court of appeal
agreed that the sentencing judge erred in principle, and the conditional
sentence was demonstrably unfit, considering
friesen
(scc),
supra.
the offender was convicted of possessing and making child pornography
and sentenced to a 15-month conditional sentence and 12 months’ probation. the victim was the foster daughter of the offender's aunt. she met
the offender when she was 12 years old. the offender and the victim texted each
other over three years. the text messages became sexually charged, and the offender
told the victim of his romantic feelings for her. during their texting, the
victim sent the offender photos of her breasts and a video of her masturbating.
the offender sent the victim photos of his penis.

the offender and the victim planned to have
sex following the victim’s 16th birthday, but the trial judge found there was
no evidence they did so. the offender conceded that the images sent to him by
the victim met the definition of child pornography and that he possessed them.
he also conceded that he arranged to have sex with the victim. the victim was
15 years old at the time of the offences. the appellant was 31.

the
court of appeal accepted the crown's submission that a 15-month sentence of
imprisonment plus 12 months' probation would have been appropriate, albeit at
the low end of the range. however, in this case, the offender had already
served approximately 12 months of his 15-month conditional sentence. it was
decided that the interests of justice would not be served by substituting a
15-month sentence of imprisonment. the effect would require the offender
to serve only a brief portion of that sentence before statutory release. however,
it would not be appropriate to impose a sentence of imprisonment but stay its
enforcement. this would shorten the offender's sentence by relieving him of the
burden of serving the remainder of his conditional sentence. he was required to
complete his conditional sentence and one-year probation period.

in
r. v. rule,
supra, the offender appealed a
22-month jail sentence and argued that ruling out a conditional sentence was
one of the reviewable errors. the offender was 70 years old and had an
extensive collection (23,600 images). some of the victims were identifiable and
made victim impact statements, and the duration and frequency of accessing and
possession were high. despite several serious health issues and his being the
primary caregiver for his 92-year-old mother, the court upheld the sentence.
most notably, the court of appeal said in para. 8:
we are satisfied that having regard to the
nature of the offence, the size of the collection, the duration of possession
and frequency of examination of the images, it was appropriate for the
sentencing judge to rule out a conditional sentence which would have been
inconsistent with the fundamental purposes and principles of sentencing.

there has been a clear signal from the higher courts that sentences
for the possession of child pornography must increase.
would a conditional sentence be a
fit and appropriate sentence?

the defence seeks a conditional sentence order.

the court must consider the provision for this type of sentence, set
out in
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code. the relevant provisions are as
follows:
742.1: if a person is convicted of an
offence and the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of less than two
years, the court may, for the purpose of supervising the offender's behaviour
in the community, order that the offender serve the sentence in the community,
subject to the conditions imposed under section 742.3, if
(a) the court is satisfied that the service
of the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community
and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of
sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2;
(b) the offence is not an offence
punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment.

the crown is requesting a penitentiary sentence. the parties do not
agree that a reformatory sentence should be imposed. in my view, for the
circumstances of this offence, the guilty plea, mr. dasilva being a first-time
offender, and the case law, the appropriate range of sentence that aligns with
the principles of general deterrence and public denunciation falls between a mid
to upper reformatory sentence and a low-end penitentiary sentence.

a significant aggravating factor in this case is the volume and
nature of mr. dasilva’s collection and the length of time he was involved in
this criminal activity. phallometric testing results indicate that mr. dasilva
is aroused by children of both genders in all age groups. overall, the results
are indicative of pedophilic interests.

however, what does mitigate the sentence in mr. dasilva’s case is
that he has demonstrated insight and is committed to change and rehabilitation.
this does distinguish his case from others.

for instance, in
r. v. insanally,
2024 onsc 722, the offender
was sentenced to custody for two years less a day. he had little insight and
had also pled guilty to making child pornography available. he had 222 videos
and 2369 images ranging from infants to early teens. the material also included
bondage.

similarly, in
r. v. a.m.,
2023 oncj 181, the 38-year-old
offender was convicted of possession of a small collection of child
pornography. the trial judge did not find any exceptional circumstances to
justify a conditional sentence. the offender was sentenced to nine months in
the reformatory, followed by 18 months of probation.

post-
friesen
and
pike, the legal sentencing landscape
has changed, and special considerations usually apply when conditional
sentences are deemed appropriate in child pornography cases.

as the court of appeal stated in
r. v. m.m.,
supra, at
para.
15:
the supreme court's instructions from
friesen
could not be clearer: sentences for sexual offences against children must
increase. there are no qualifications here. sentences have been too low for too
long. denunciation and deterrence are of primary importance:
r. v. inksetter,
2018 onca 474, 141 o.r. (3d) 161, at para.
3. those who commit sexual offences
against children must understand that carceral sentences will ordinarily
follow.

the court of appeal noted further in para. 17:
conditional sentences for sexual offences
against children will only rarely be appropriate. their availability must be
limited to exceptional circumstances that render incarceration inappropriate -
for example, where it gives rise to a medical hardship that could not
adequately be addressed within the correctional facility. it would not be
appropriate to enumerate exceptional circumstances here and we make no attempt
to do so. suffice it to say that no exceptional circumstances are present in
this case. a sentence of imprisonment should have been imposed.

this case presents some aggravating factors and nothing exceptional
or otherwise sufficiently mitigating, including mr. dasilva's circumstances, to
render a conditional sentence appropriate. denunciation and deterrence must
remain at the forefront of the analysis.

some factors may have affected mr. dasilva’s judgment at this time
of his life, such as his drug use; however, in my view, he should have
immediately recognized the wrongfulness of the conduct and refrained from it.
mr. dasilva instead invaded the privacy of many children, and he indirectly
instigated the production and distribution of child pornography and, thus, the
sexual abuse and exploitation of children. this was neither a momentary lapse
nor an isolated act. his sentence will, therefore, be served in custody.
what is the fit and appropriate
sentence for this offender?

imposing a just and appropriate sentence can be difficult for a
judge. however, as difficult as determining a fit sentence can be, the process
has a narrow focus. it aims at imposing a sentence that reflects the
circumstances of the specific offence and the attributes of the individual
offender. sentencing is not based on group characteristics but on the facts
relating to the specific offence and offender, as revealed by the evidence in
the proceedings.

as doherty j.a., in delivering the judgment of the ontario court of
appeal in
r. v. hamilton
(2004),
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca), 186 c.c.c. (3d) 129, aptly stated:... a sentencing proceeding is also not
the forum in which to right perceived societal wrongs, allocate responsibility
for criminal conduct as between the offender and society, or "make
up" for perceived social injustices by the imposition of sentences that do
not reflect the seriousness of the crime.

generally, it is recognized that a fit sentence is the product of
the combined effects of the specific offence's circumstances with the specific
offender's unique attributes. the judge must also consider the nature of the
offence, the victims, and the community. as lamer, c.j. (as he then was) noted
in
r. v. c.
a.m.,
1996 canlii 230 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 500 sentencing should focus on the
individual, the victim, and the community. he stated:... it has been repeatedly stressed
that there is no such thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime...
sentencing is an inherently individualized process, and the search for a single
appropriate sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will frequently
be a fruitless exercise of academic abstraction. as well, sentences for a
particular offence should be expected to vary to some degree across various
communities and regions in this country, as the "just and
appropriate" mix of accepted sentencing goals will depend on the needs and
current conditions of and in the particular community where the crime occurred....

possessing child pornography is a grave offence that causes
significant harm to children. therefore, the principles of denunciation and
general deterrence must be the paramount considerations.

considering the mitigating circumstances and the
emphasis on the principle of restraint, i also recognize the necessity of
delivering a strong denunciatory and deterrent message to mr. dasilva and the community.
therefore, i believe the appropriate sentence for mr. dasilva should be 18
months of incarceration, followed by two years of probation. the probation
should include terms and conditions focused on addressing public safety needs
and supporting his rehabilitation.

i recommend that mr. dasilva serve his sentence at the ontario
correctional institute.

next, i turn to the terms and conditions for the probation and the
ancillary orders.
the probation order:

during mr. dasilva’s probation, he shall:
(a) keep the
peace and be of good behaviour.
(b) report to
probation as directed within 48 hours from the conclusion of his period of
imprisonment.
(c) notify
the probation officer of any changes of address or employment within 48 hours
of those changes coming into effect. maintain full-time employment either with
his own business or as an employee.
(d) continue actively
participating in and completing any counselling or rehabilitative programming
as directed by his probation officer, including counselling for sex offences.
(e) sign
releases as required to enable the probation officer to monitor counselling and
therapeutic compliance.
(f) abstain
from being in the company of a person under the age of 16 unless in the direct
company of any adult approved of in writing by the probation officer.
(g) abstain
from accessing the internet or other digital network, with the following
exceptions:
(i) on mr. dasilva’s
personal device, he provides his probation officer with the make, model, serial
number, service provider, and any phone number connected with the device.
(ii) he may
possess an internet-capable device and use it to access the internet by the
conditions below; however, he must do so on a device for which he is the sole
owner and user. further, the internet service must be in his name or provided
through his employer or the educational institution he attends, if applicable.
(iii) he
shall not use any encryption software or security program designed to prevent
access to the contents of his internet-capable devices or take independent
action to encrypt any digital storage devices in his possession. he shall not
install or permit any software or service designed to defeat forensic analysis
of his internet-capable device to be installed on his internet-capable device.
(iv) he shall
not use or permit any program or service designed to allow anonymous use of the
internet (
e.g., tor browser) to be installed on any device in his
possession.
(v) he shall
not use or permit any scrubbing software or software that saves files in an
encrypted fashion to be installed on any device in his possession.
(vi) he is
not to make any post or advertisement that targets persons under the age of 16,
including any advertisement for sales, services or products intended for use by
persons under the age of 16.
(vii) he is
not to access any peer-to-peer file directly or indirectly sharing networks
(including but not limited to motherless, limewire, gnutella, bearshare).
(viii) he is
not to access or participate in chatrooms, bulletin boards or other social
media that discuss or promote child exploitation, child pornography, sexualized
images of children or other child exploitation material.
(ix) he may
use any other telecommunication device under the direct and constant
supervision of any person approved in writing by the probation officer.
(x) under no
circumstances shall he be permitted to use any telecommunication device to
access the internet or other digital network to access child pornography,
access or participate in chatrooms, bulletin boards or other social media that
discuss or promote child exploitation, child pornography, sexualized images of
children or other child exploitation material.
ancillary orders:

possession of child pornography is a designated offence under
s.
490.01(1)
of the
criminal code. accordingly, it is appropriate that
i make an order under s. 490.012(1) requiring mr. dasilva to comply with
the
sex offender information registration act
(
soira
).
the order is effective today and will continue in force for 20 years in
accordance with
s. 490.013(2)
(b) of the
criminal code.

possession of child pornography is a primary designated offence
under s. 487.04(a) (i.8), and a dna order is mandatory
under s. 487.051(1). a dna sample shall, therefore, be provided.

it is appropriate to make an order under section 161(1)(a), (b), and
(c) for ten years from the date of this order.

under section 161(1)(d), for ten years, mr. dasilva's use of the internet
shall be in accordance with the following conditions:
a) he may
possess an internet-capable device and use it to access the internet in
accordance with the conditions below; however, he must do so on a device for
which he is the sole owner and user. further, the internet service must be in
his name or provided through his employer or the educational institution he
attends, if applicable.
b) he shall
not use any encryption software or security program designed to prevent access
to the contents of his internet-capable devices or take independent action to
encrypt any digital storage devices in his possession. he shall not install or
permit any software or service designed to defeat forensic analysis of his
internet-capable device to be installed on his internet-capable device.
c) he shall
not use or permit any program or service designed to allow anonymous use of the
internet (
e.g., the tor browser) to be installed on any device in his
possession.
d) he shall
not use or permit any scrubbing software or software that saves files in an
encrypted fashion to be installed on any device in his possession.
e) he is not
to make any post or advertisement targeting persons under the age of 16,
including any advertisement for sales, services or products intended for use by
persons under 16.
f) he is not
to access any peer-to-peer file directly or indirectly sharing networks
(including but not limited to motherless, limewire, gnutella, and bearshare).
g) he is not
to access or participate in chatrooms, bulletin boards or other social media
that discuss or promote child exploitation, child pornography, sexualized
images of children or other child exploitation material.

there will be a forfeiture order.
released:
january 9, 2025
signed:
justice p.t. o’marra