source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj557/2025oncj557.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. m.l.,
2025 oncj 557
date: october
23, 2025
court
file no.:24-82300969
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
m.l.
publication
ban
s.486.4
before
justice angela l. mcleod
trial
september 23, 2025, and october 20, 2025
katherine cinerai........................................................................ counsel
for the crown
lenny hochberg..................................................................... 
counsel for the accused
mcleod j.:
overview

m.l. and e.l (unrelated and not the same last
names) were neighbours whose families lived across the street from one
another. at the time in question, may 2022 – october 2023, he was 30-31 years
old and she was 13-14 years of age.

she had lived there since she was 2 years of age
and m.l. had watched her grow up. she lived with her parents and two younger
sisters, until her parents divorced, and her father moved away in june 2022. 
she did not remember a time when m.l. was not her neighbour.

m.l. had some puppies and the three sisters had
gone across the street to play with the dogs at some point shortly before the
incidents in question.

on may 22, 2022, m.l. commenced a series of
messages to e.l. via facebook messenger.

the parties agree that while it may be
inappropriate for a 30-year-old male to message a young teenage girl, it is nonetheless
not illegal.
the offence of child luring – the law

the
criminal code
categorizes the offence
as one which tends to corrupt morals. the section reads as follows:
172.1(1) luring a
child
every person
commits an offence who, by a means of telecommunication, communicates with
(a) a person who
is, or who the accused believes is, under the age of 18 years, for the purpose
of facilitating the commission of an offence with respect to that person under
subsection 153(1), section 155, 163.1, 170, 171 or 279.011 or subsection
279.02(2), 279.03(2), 286.1(2), 286.2(2) or 286.3(2);
(b) a person who
is, or who the accused believes is, under the age of 16 years, for the purpose
of facilitating the commission of an offence under section 151 or 152,
subsection 160(3) or 173(2) or section 271, 272, 273 or 280 with respect to
that person; or
(c) a person who
is, or who the accused believes is, under the age of 14 years, for the purpose
of facilitating the commission of an offence under section 281 with respect to
that person.

it is conceded that e.l. was at the requisite
times under the age of 16 years; and, that m.l. communicated with her by a
means of telecommunication. the act of messaging the child is not the legal concern;
the
content
and
purpose
of the messaging is.

the crown asks this court to find the accused
guilty of the offence of child luring based on a finding that the accused
communicated with a child under the age of 16 years for the purpose of
facilitating an offence under either/both ss. 271 (sexual assault) and 280
(abduction).
the messages

the entirety of the message exchange is
replicated below. left column contains the messages sent by m.l.; the right by
e.l.
may 22, 2022 at 21:30
heyy! if you ever want to come over and play with the puppies (puppy
emoji, smiling face emoji). you are more than welcome!!
jun 7, 2022 at 18:54
hey
hello
how’s it going
good how about you
that’s good. i’m great thanks. just out with the pups in the
backyard atm. then going to eat some dinner lol
cool
jun 8, 2022 at 12:55
m.l. unsent a message
jun 8, 2022 at 13:55
?
jun 8, 2022 at 18:27
hey (smiling face emoji)
hello
how’s your night going?
and i apologize for the random messages lol. hope you don’t mind
(tongue sticking out face emoji)
it’s going fine don’t worry about the message
right on. and okay cool (thumbs up emoji)
jun 12, 2022 at 13:37
heyy:)
hello!!
how’s it going beautiful:) !
good how about you
nice. yeah i’m good. just painting atm
cool what are you painting
my bedroom (smiling face emoji)
cool
yeah it’s almost done. so that’s good
yea
what are you up to today?
nothing much just a movie day
jun 12, 2022 at 14:09
oh nice!
yea
you don’t seem very interested in talking (tongue sticking out
emoji) i’ll let you enjoy your day. sorry for bothering you if i did.
if you ever wanna chat. msg me anytime (smiling face emoji)
jun 12, 2022 at 20:39
ok (smiling face emoji)
let’s hangout
sometime (tongue sticking out face emoji)
(enlarged shush
emoji face and enlarged tongue sticking out, squinty eyes emoji)
if you’d like too
i don’t know
it’s cool if you don’t want to
i just don’t know
okay. no worries, if you decide you’d like too. let me know:):
(enlarged thumbs up emoji)
ok
(enlarged smiley face emoji)
(enlarged thumbs up emoji)
jan 31, 203 4 at 12:27
(you unsent a message
(see review of evidence for explanation)
)
feb 1, 2023 at 00:01
hey: ) did you message me lol?
feb 1, 2023 at 07:11
no
feb 2, 2023 at 10:48
okay!
(screen shot of
their messages showing that she unsent a message)
that’s the only
reason i ask lol
but i didn’t so
well it said you
did. hence why i asked….
anyways. ttyl
(enlarged thumbs
up)
no we won’t talk later
then don’t message
me
bye
oct 20, 2023 at 01:01
sorry for the random message. i just wanted to apologize for the
misunderstanding a while back.
anyways have a
good night!
the evidence of e.l.

i will not refer to all of her evidence, but
summarize the salient points as follows:
(1)
m.l. initiated the messaging.
(2)
she thought it was casual.
(3)
her bedtime was close to 10pm.
(4)
she, her sisters and occasionally her mom had
visited the puppies now and then.
(5)
he called her beautiful for the first time in
the messages.
(6)
it was not normal for him to ask her to chat.
(7)
he was not someone that she confided in.
(8)
the tongue sticking out emoji and shush emoji
made her feel uncomfortable and she thought it was weird. she interpreted it
to mean not to tell anyone. she knew that she needed to tell her mom.
(9)
when she messaged that she didn’t know about
hanging out, she meant that it was not a good idea, that the age gap between
them was wrong and that “everything about the whole idea is disgusting”.
(10)
they had never hung out and had never been alone together.
(11)
she unsent an automated birthday notification message to him.
(12)
her mom had gone to speak to him about the messages in february 2023
(confirmed by the evidence of her mom). after that the only communication
between them was if they happened to both be outside at the same time and would
smile or nod their heads.
(13)
she blocked him between february and october 2023. she unblocked
him when her mom told her it “was all cool and it wasn’t going to happen
again”.

m.l. did not testify nor call any evidence that
requires review.
child luring – case law

i adopt and replicate below the very thorough, written
submissions of crown counsel:
•
bill
c-15a c. 13 s. 8 created the offence of child luring; it was assented to on
june 4, 2002. parliament criminalized child exploitation via the internet.
further, the new offence modernized and expanded the
criminal code
to keep in line with
the new and expanding forms of communication over the internet. its aim is to
prevent nefarious activities that exploit children and combat the very real
threat posed by adult predators who attempt to groom or lure children. of
particular concern was the predatory nature of would-be assailants to lure
children off the internet to engage in either sexually exploitive behaviours or
other criminal behaviours. parliament was alive to the role that the internet
played in child exploitation and swiftly criminalized this sort of conduct. it
criminalized the mere act of communicating with a child for the purpose of
committing an offence, regardless of the intention to commit the predicate
offence.
see house of commons debates,
37th parl., 1st sess., vol 137, no 097 (oct. 18, 2001), pp 6312-6317;
see also debates of senate, 37th parl.,
1st sess., vol 139, no. 66
(nov 1, 2001), p 1609.
r. v. bertrand-marchand,
2023 scc 26, at para
8.
r. v. morrison,
2019 scc 15,
at para
39.
•
since
the enactment of the offence, various appellate and trial courts have defined
child luring offences in an age of technology that opens the doors to accessing
vulnerable children as an offence that is intended to close the “cyberspace
door before the predator gets in to prey”. accordingly, s. 172.1(1) casts, and
in fact was intended to cast, a wide net of potential liability for those who
lure children in a virtual environment.
r. v. legare,
2009 scc 56,
 3 scr 551.
r. v. bertrand-marchand,
supra, at
para
10.
•
children
are particularly vulnerable in online settings, and the world of online communications
between adults and children warrants special regulation. therefore, child luring
helps to keep children safe from online predators. its very purpose is remedial
and preventative.
r. v.
bertrand-marchand,
supra, at
paras
7-8.
•
it
is an inchoate preparatory offence, designed to catch sexual predators
before
they act, not after.
it protects potential child victims by allowing the criminal law to intervene
before the harm caused by the commission of the secondary offences occur.
therefore, there is no requirement that the accused meet or even intend to meet
with the other person with a view to committing any of the designated offences.
criminal liability “crystallizes” before any actions that form the predicate
offences are taken.
r. v. legare, supra, at
paras 25 and 34.
r. v. morrison,
supra, at
para
40.
r. v. cooper,
2016 onsc
6384, at para.
39.
r. v. bertrand-marchand,
supra, at
para
11.
•
section
172.1(1)(b) makes it illegal to engage in communications with a person under
the age of 18 for the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence. in
r. v. legare,
supra,
at para
28, the scc defined “facilitating” in the following way: “facilitating”
includes helping to bring about and making easier or more probable — for
example, by “luring” or “grooming” young persons to commit or participate in
the prohibited conduct; by reducing their inhibitions; or by prurient discourse
that exploits a young person’s curiosity, immaturity or precocious sexuality.
•
this
offence produces its own distinct form of wrongfulness and harm. parliament, by
creating luring to be its own offence, signaled that the communications
themselves constitute and generate their own distinct harm, separate and apart
from those caught in the predicate offences. this is because courts have
recognized that the communications can constitute a form of psychological
sexual violence that has the potential to cause serious harm on their own. this
harm also can extend beyond the victim and destroy trust in friends, family,
social institutions and can cause children to shut their parents out.
r. v.
bertrand-marchand,
supra, at paras
12, 37-39, and
41.
•
in
r.
v. bertrand-marchand,
the court distinguished the harm in a standalone luring case between
contact-driven and entirely online sexual abuse.
r. v. bertrand-marchand,
supra, at
para
43.
•
the
elements of the offence must be determined using a purposive rather than a compartmentalized
approach. in
r.
v. legare,
supra, the scc articulated that the intention of parliament is to “shut
that door on predatory adults who, generally, for a sexual purpose, troll the
internet for vulnerable children and adolescents”. they further cited that
strict adherence to the essential elements of the offence is undesirable as it
“may well introduce an element of confusion in respect of both concepts”.
instead, [w]hat matters, i repeat, is whether
the evidence as a whole
establishes beyond a
reasonable doubt that the accused communicated by computer with an underage
victim for the purpose of facilitating the commission of a specified secondary
offence with respect to that victim.
r. v.
legare,
supra, at
para 2, 29, and 42.
•
while
many cases may involve multiple communications over a period of time, the
offence of luring does not require sustained or continuous contact, often
described as grooming. in fact, a single message can constitute the offence if
the other elements of the offence are satisfied. further, where initial
communications to an actual child are seemingly benign, they still create a
risk of harm to the child as they are aimed at gaining the child’s trust while
reducing their inhibitions, exploiting their curiosity, immaturity, or
precocious sexuality. it is this conduct that causes the harm, or the
significant risk of harm.
r. v. bertrand-marchand,
supra, at
para
13.
r. v. fox,
2023 onca 674,
at paras
41 and 44.
•
sexually
explicit language is not an essential element. while sexually explicit comments
may suffice to establish the criminal purpose of the accused, the content of
the communication is not necessarily determinative; it is the evidence as a
whole. in
r.
v. legare,
supra,
the scc recognized that “those who use their computers to lure
children for sexual purposes often groom them online by first gaining their
trust through conversations about their home life, their personal interests or
other innocuous topics”.
r. v.
legare,
supra, at
paras 29 and 32.
•
with
respect to the
mens
rea
element
of this offence,
in
r.
v. fox,
supra,
the court clarified that the ruling
in
r. v. morrison,
supra,
only
applies with respect to the
mens
rea
relating
to fictitious children (or children of an unknown or unprovable age). where the
crown can prove that the accused communicated with a real child, recklessness
also satisfies the
mens
rea
for
age. however, the
mens
reas
is
one of subjective intent.
r. v. fox,
supra, at
paras
15-18, and para 47.
•
in
the context of determining whether a section 161 order was appropriate for an
attempt abduction offence, the court
in
r. v. balasooriyan,
2025 oncj 68
held at
para
25
that the offence of abduction, s. 281, is captured as an enumerated
offence under section 161(1.1)(a). the offence does not require a sexual element.
parliament intended to extend the punishment to more than sexual offences,
distinguishing categories of offences into sections a, b, c and d. the
punishment is anchored in the protection of children and the mitigation of risk
thereto. section 281 is specific to the abduction of someone under the age of
16 years; a child.
•
given
the “inchoate” nature of the offence of child luring, the crown is not required
to prove that an accused, at the time of the telecommunication, intended to
commit or even attempted or were attempting to commit an enumerated offence (or
that the accused was even capable of bringing such a purpose to fruition).
furthermore, it is not necessary that an accused believed a child would
immediately respond positively to the accused’s invitation or request at the
time of the telecommunication. rather, the crown must prove that the accused
possessed the intention to make easier the potential future commission of an
enumerated offence.
r. v. bowers,
2022 onca 852, at para
17.
•
the
term “luring” is often viewed as too restrictive and unduly narrows the scope
of the language used by parliament. it was more broadly intended to protect
children from all persons who use telecommunications in
any
manner for the purpose
of “making easier” an enumerated offence in the future – however far off or
unlikely.
r. v. legare,
2008 abca 138
at para
63;
r. v. legare,
2009 scc 56
at para
29.
•
one
such way of helping bring about or make easier or more probably an enumerated offence
is via “grooming”. “grooming” is also inherent in a child luring offence. this
is the process of trust building that forges a relationship with a child to
gain trust, compliance, and secrecy. grooming involves rapport building,
incentivization, and disinhibition. it is a slow and gradual process but need
not result in the sexual act to be considered harmful.
r. v. bertrand-marchand,
supra, at
paras
51-53.
r. v. mcsween,
2020 onca 343,
at para
104-107.
r. v. w.w.,
2025 onca 115,
at para
46.
•
joking
is irrelevant and may very well be a method of normalizing adult-child sexual relationships.
it may be a tool of grooming, allowing a testing of the waters. further,
flirting or engaging in a flirtatious conduct between an adult-child
relationship can be considering part of the arsenal of tools used to groom
children. simply put, adults do not flirt with children innocently.
r. v. mcsween, supra, at
para
104-107.
r. v. w.w.,
supra, at
para.
76.
interpreting emojis

mr. hochberg submits that the court cannot take
judicial notice of what the emojis mean and instead would need expert evidence
to make a factual finding.

the messages included the following emojis:
(1)
smiley face
(2)
smiley face, tongue sticking out
(3)
smiley face, tongue ticking out squinting eyes
(4)
smiley face, squinting eyes
(5)
smiley face, eyes closed
(6)
smiley face, shush finger to mouth
(7)
thumbs up
(8)
dog face

words, phrases and emojis can have different
meanings and uses depending upon the speaker, listener, writer and reader. context
informs meaning.
r. v. schneider
2022 scc 34

as noted in
r. v. heywood
1994 canlii 34 (scc), 1994 3 s.c.r. 
761:
31 when a statutory provision is to be
interpreted the word or words in question should be considered in the context
in which they are used and read in a manner which is consistent with the
purpose of the provision and the intention of the legislature: elmer a.
driedger, construction of statutes, 2nd ed., at p. 87; r. v. hasselwander,
1993 canlii 90 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 398. if the ordinary meaning of the words is consistent with
the context in which the words are used and with the object of the act, then
that is the interpretation which should govern.
93 my suggestion that the meaning of loiter will
vary according to the specific statutory context is merely an illustration of a
caveat to the general rule that words be given their ordinary meaning.
pierre-andré côté expressed this caveat in the interpretation of legislation in
canada, 2nd ed., at p. 221, citing laskin c.j.c., in
peel (regional
municipality) v. viking houses,
(sub nom.
ontario (attorney general) v.
peel (regional municipality); ontario (attorney general) v. metropolitan
toronto (municipality))
1979 canlii 48 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 1134, at p. 1145,
in the following
terms:
the need to
determine the word's meaning within the context of the statute remains.
dictionaries provide meanings for a number of standard and recurring
situations. even the best of them will only tersely indicate the context in
which a particular meaning is used. the range of meanings in a dictionary is
necessarily limited. it cannot be sufficiently repeated "how much context
and purpose relate to meaning".

as noted in
r. v. 2747-3174 quebec inc. c.
quebec (regis des permis d’alcool)
1996 canlii 153 (scc), 1996 carswell que 965 scc:
153 … it should
not be forgotten that research in semantics has shown that words only take on
their real meaning when placed in context. the meaning of words and sentences
is crystallized by the context, and in particular by the purpose of the
message. any interpretation that divorces legal expression from the context of
its enactment may produce absurd results. [emphasis added.]

as noted in
r. v. manrique c. r.
2020
qcca 1170:
19… as a result,
it is also clear that these words and concepts do not bear one consistent and
coherent meaning but many meanings that vary with the context in which they are
relevant.

as noted in
kane v. church of jesus christ
christian-aryan nations,
1992 carswell alta 928, alberta board of inquiry:
65 of course,
the meaning of any sign or symbol is affected by the context in which it is
found. therefore, we also reviewed the events surrounding the display of the
various symbols and sign. we considered the extensive evidence presented to us
under four main headings: the aryan fest itself; the display of symbols and
sign at the aryan fest; the reaction to the symbols and sign by the townspeople
and complainants; and the assessment of the symbols and sign by the expert
witnesses.
285 the
meaning of a particular sign or symbol may change through time and is partly
determined by the context in which it is found.

as noted in
brampton (city) v. robinson
2017 oncj 567:
80 … moreover,
justice keyser had reasoned that the term "u-turn" is itself a
figurative expression and that the meaning of any symbol on a traffic sign,
whether verbal or other, cannot be ascertained in isolation from the context of
its use

as noted in
irwin toy, (1989)
1989 canlii 87 (scc), 1 s.c.r.
927 at p. 968:
'expression' has
both a content and a form, and the two can be inextricably connected. activity
is expressive if it attempts to convey meaning. that meaning is its content.

i conclude that the meaning of words, symbols
and thus emojis, can be ascertained by the context in which they are utilized.
judicial notice

in
r. v. spence
2005 scc 71, the supreme
court of canada reviewed judicial notice:
53 still less
can it be said that such favouritism satisfies the more stringent test of
judicial notice adopted by this court in
find, at para. 48, per
mclachlin c.j.:
judicial notice
dispenses with the need for proof of facts that are clearly uncontroversial or
beyond reasonable dispute. facts judicially noticed are not proved by evidence
under oath. nor are they tested by cross-examination. therefore, the threshold
for judicial notice is strict: a court may properly take judicial notice of
facts that are either:
(1) so notorious or generally
accepted as not to be the subject of debate among reasonable persons; or (2)
capable of immediate and accurate demonstration by resort to readily accessible
sources of indisputable accuracy.
56 it could
be argued that the requirements of judicial notice accepted in
find
should be relaxed in relation to such matters as laying a factual basis for the
exercise of a discretion to permit challenges for cause. these are matters
difficult to prove, and they do not strictly relate to the adjudication of
guilt or innocence, but rather to the framework within which that adjudication
is to take place. such non-adjudicative facts are now generally called
"social facts" when they relate to the fact-finding process and
"legislative facts" in relation to legislation or judicial policy.
juror partiality is a question of fact, and what the african canadian legal
clinic invites us to do is to take judicial notice of the "social
facts" of different aspects of racism.
57 
"social fact" evidence has been defined as social science research
that is used to construct a frame of reference or background context for
deciding factual issues crucial to the resolution of a particular case: see,
e.g., c. l'heureux-dubé "re-examining the doctrine of judicial notice in
the family law context" (1994), 26 ottawa l. rev. 551, at p. 556. as with
their better known "legislative fact" cousins, "social
facts" are general. they are not specific to the circumstances of a
particular case, but if properly linked to the adjudicative facts, they help to
explain aspects of the evidence. examples are the court's acceptance of the
"battered wife syndrome" to explain the wife's conduct
in
r. v.
lavallee,
1990 canlii 95 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 852 (s.c.c.), or the effect of the
"feminization of poverty" judicially noticed
in
moge v. moge,
1992 canlii 25 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 813 (s.c.c.), at p. 853,
and of the systemic or background
factors that have contributed to the difficulties faced by aboriginal people in
both the criminal justice system and throughout society at large
in
r. v.
wells,
 1 s.c.r. 207,
2000 scc 10 (s.c.c.), at para.
53, and
in
r.
v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 688 (s.c.c.), at para.
83.
58 no doubt
there is a useful distinction between adjudicative facts (the where, when and
why of what the accused is alleged to have done) and "social facts"
and "legislative facts" which have relevance to the reasoning process
and may involve broad considerations of policy: paciocco and stuesser, at p.
286. however, simply categorizing an issue as "social fact" or
"legislative fact" does not license the court to put aside the need
to examine the trustworthiness of the "facts" sought to be judicially
noticed. nor are counsel encouraged to bootleg "evidence in the guise of
authorities": public school boards' assn. (alberta) v. alberta (attorney
general),
1999 canlii 640 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 845 (s.c.c.), at para.
3.
61 to put it
another way, the closer the fact approaches the dispositive issue, the more the
court ought to insist on compliance with the stricter
morgan
criteria.
thus in
find, the court's consideration of alleged juror bias arising
out of the repellant nature of the offences against the accused did not relate
to the issue of guilt or innocence, and was not "adjudicative" fact
in that sense, but nevertheless the court insisted on compliance with the
morgan
criteria because of the centrality of the issue, which was hotly disputed, to
the disposition of the appeal. while some learned commentators seek to limit
the
morgan
criteria to adjudicative fact (see, e.g., paciocco and
stuesser, at p. 286; mccormick, at p. 316), i believe the court's decision in
find
takes a firmer line. i believe a review of our jurisprudence suggests that the
court will start with the
morgan
criteria, whatever may be the type of
"fact" that is sought to be judicially noticed. the
morgan
criteria
represent the gold standard and, if satisfied, the
"fact" will be judicially noticed, and that is the end of the matter.
62 if the
morgan
criteria are not satisfied, and the fact is "adjudicative" in nature,
the fact will not be judicially recognized, and that too is the end of the
matter.
65 when asked
to take judicial notice of matters falling between the high end already
discussed where the
morgan
criteria will be insisted upon, and the low
end of background facts where the court will likely proceed (consciously or
unconsciously) on the basis that the matter is beyond serious controversy, i
believe a court ought to ask itself whether such "fact" would be
accepted by reasonable people who have taken the trouble to inform themselves
on the topic as not being the subject of reasonable dispute for the particular
purpose for which it is to be used, keeping in mind that the need for
reliability and trustworthiness increases directly with the centrality of the
"fact" to the disposition of the controversy…
69 i accept
that, as finlayson j.a. pointed out in
koh,
sometimes expert testimony
is hard to come by and may in any event be beyond the resources of the
particular litigants. as will be seen, i think such considerations in the
context of challenges for cause are better addressed as part of the court's
concern for trial fairness and the necessary perception of fairness, rather
than being allowed to dilute the principled exercise of judicial notice.

emojis are sometimes used to emphasize written
language, sometimes to replace written language and indeed in today’s online
communication have in fact
become
a language. entire ‘sentences’ can be
written, and understood, with the usage of emojis alone. this is a social fact. 
one that this court takes judicial notice of.

emoji usage is pervasive, cross cultural and multi-generational. 
some replicate established universal symbols and their meaning for which
judicial notice is applicable. for example, giving a ‘thumbs up’ whether
physically or via an emoji is commonly understood to mean ‘ok’, or to give
approval.

the question in the matter before this court is
whether or not the shush emoji and the tongue sticking out emoji are universal
symbols or whether they meet the
morgan
criteria, such that judicial
notice can be taken as to their meaning.

i find that the shush emoji, a face with an
index finger placed over the mouth, is so notorious or generally accepted as
not to be the subject of debate among reasonable persons. it is a universal
symbol to be quiet or to not tell. i take judicial notice of this fact.

i find that the tongue stuck out emoji, a face
with the tongue extended beyond the lips is a universal symbol for playfulness,
silliness, joking around and or alternatively used for flirtation or sexual
inuendo. i take judicial notice of this fact.
contextual analysis of the messages and
determination of their meaning

the messages take place over an approximate 17-month
period. there is a lengthy gap of 8 ½ months between the second last and last
message from m.l., thus the bulk of the messages are exchanged over approximately
8 ½ months.

the initial message is seemingly innocuous,
inviting e.l. to play with the puppies, building upon the existing neighbour
relationship and past activity. e.l. does not respond.

a few weeks pass and m.l. again initiates
contact. again, the puppies are the subject of the exchange, again building
upon the existing neighbour relationship and past activity.

a day later m.l. initiates contact. i find that
he is testing the waters, so to speak, checking to see whether he can continue
in the contact by writing “and i apologize for the random message lol. i hope
you don’t mind”. the first tongue sticking out emoji is presented. as noted
above, the emoji is used to express playfulness, joking around or for flirtation
or sexual inuendo. i find, in the context of the messages, that m.l. is
ramping up the tone of the exchanges, using the tongue sticking out emoji for
playfulness, but also testing the waters for flirtation.

four days later m.l. again initiates contact. i
find that he is testing the waters again, asking “how’s it going beautiful!” i
find that his is ramping up the tone of the exchanges and is now flirting. once
e.l. responds and doesn’t repute his compliment /flirtation, he pushes forward
telling e.l. that he is painting his bedroom and adds a smiley face. i find
that this is intended to flirt, to open the conversation, to entice e.l.,
perhaps hoping that she will want to see the painting, to come to his bedroom. at
the very least, i find that he was attempting to lower her inhibitions.

when she responds simply “cool”, he writes
later in the same day, “you don’t seem very interested in talking (tongue
sticking out emoji) i’ll let you enjoy your day. sorry for bothering you if i
did. if you ever wanna chat. msg met anytime (smiley face emoji)”. i find
that he is again testing the waters, playing if you will, ‘cat and mouse’ game with
e.l.

when e.l. responds later by simply saying “ok”,
m.l. immediately ramps up the conversation writing “let’s hangout sometime
(tongue sticking out emoji)”, followed by enlarged shush emoji and tongue
sticking out emoji. e.l. responds with “i don’t know” and testified that this
message was weird, uncomfortable and caused her to tell her mom.

the game of ‘cat and mouse’ continues. e.l.’s
mom talks to m.l. about the messages and the 8 ½ month gap in the messages
occurs.

m.l., despite the mom’s conversation with him,
attempts to reconnect and initiates the contact with one final and unanswered
message in october 2023.

when read as a whole, and in taking judicial
notice of the use of the emojis, the only reasonable conclusion is that m.l.is grooming
e.l. his communication was founded on an innocuous subject – the puppies, then
ramped up to flattery, then mentioning the bedroom, flirtation via the tongue
sticking out emoji, and most telling the suggestion that the two hang out and
she keep that quiet.

as noted in
r. v. pes,
2018 mbca 124:
grooming and
predatory behaviour
36 if proven,
it is an aggravating factor that an offender groomed a person under the age of
18 for sexual at para 36; and
r v. sjb,
2018 mbca 62
(man. c.a.) at para
26
). the terms "grooming" or "predatory behaviour" are
often used by courts in sexual exploitation cases. they are used as a
description of conduct where "the perpetrator attempts to prepare the
child victim for increasingly more intrusive sexual abuse" (
r. v. g.
(a.)
(2004),
2004 canlii 36065 (on ca),
190 c.c.c. (3d) 508 (ont. c.a.)
at para
11
).
see also
r. v.
storheim,
2014 mbqb 141
(man. q.b.) at paras
46-47, leave to appeal to man
ca refused,
2015 mbca 14
(man. c.a.).

in
bertrand-marchand, supra, the court
notes that grooming can be seemingly innocuous, fleeting or may involve much
more:
13 many cases
of luring involve multiple communications over a period of time, or what is
sometimes described as "grooming". however, luring does not require
sustained contact. when the other elements of the offence are satisfied, the
offence can be committed even by sending one message.
51 evidence
of grooming may be present where child luring is made out. grooming is a
process which allows the offender to forge a close relationship with a victim
to gain trust, compliance and secrecy for the purpose of eventually engaging in
sexualization and abuse (
rayo,
at para. 149). the jurisprudence has yet
to identify a universal definition of
grooming. understandably, this is in large
part due to the difficulties in determining where the process begins and ends,
as well as the variety of
behaviours that may be
involved depending on the offender, the
victim, and the context. indeed, grooming can involve, but is not limited to
"rapport building, incentivization, disinhibition, and security
management" (i. a. elliott, "a self-regulation model of sexual
grooming" (2017), 18 trauma, violence, & abuse 83, at p. 88). it is
"a slow and gradual process of active engagement and a desensitization of
the child's inhibitions — with an increasing gain in power and control over the
young person" (
rayo,
at para. 139, quoting m. ospina, c. harstall
and l. dennett, sexual exploitation of children and youth over the internet: a
rapid review of the scientific literature (2010), at p. 7).
52 grooming
often goes hand in hand with the common features of luring, namely a
"prolonged, deliberate and careful cultivation of a young person with a
view to engendering trust and intimacy, all designed to promote sexual conduct
between the two parties" (
paradee,
at para. 20). while often a
preparatory process, grooming need not culminate in a sexual act to be harmful.
grooming allows an offender to gain power and control over the young person,
which in turn may lead to distinct psychological harm. this harm exemplifies
the vulnerability and exploitation of children facilitated by the internet that
parliament sought to protect against in enacting the luring offence (
rayo,
at paras. 138-39;
reynard,
at paras. 19-20;
alicandro,
at para.
36;
legare,
at para. 25).
53 the
identification of grooming should be left to the fact-finder in each case. in
assessing whether grooming is present, judges should focus on the character,
content, and consequences of the messages, as well as whether the communication
resulted in psychological manipulation of the child.

e.l., despite her young age and inexperience in
life, knew that the messages and the meaning behind those messages from m.l.
were weird, uncomfortable and something that needed to be reported to her
mother. it is not lost on this court that m.l. initiated contact and messaging
with e.l. during an unsettled time in her household in the days and weeks when
her parents were separating, and her father left the family home.
conclusion

it is conceded by the defence that:
(1)
there was intentional communication via
telecommunication;
(2)
with a person that the accused knew to be under
the age of 16 years.

the only live issue in this trial was whether that
communication was for a specific purpose to facilitate one of the designated
offences listed in s. 172.1(1).

i am satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
it was. as such, a conviction will register against m.l.
released: october 24, 2025
signed:
justice angela l. mcleod