source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj268/2025oncj268.html

citation:
r. v. naveed, 2025 oncj 268
date: 2025·05·14
court
file no.: 4815 998 23 48107163
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
talha naveed
before
 justice david porter
heard
 on september 18, 2024 and march 26, 2025
reasons
 for sentence released on may 14, 2025
l. will…………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 for the crown
h. tse................................................................................................................... 
 for the defendant
porter j.:

on september 18, 2024, talha naveed (“mr.
naveed”) entered a plea of guilty to dangerous driving causing death contrary
to
section 320.13(3)
of the
criminal code.

this offence is a pure indictable offence
with a maximum sentence of life imprisonment.
the circumstances of the offence

on monday, may 1, 2023, mr. naveed, who was
18 years old at the time, attended at a car dealership in scarborough with two
high school friends to test drive a car. mr. naveed drove the car, a toyota
camry, with his friend syed mehdi, age 18, in the front passenger seat and his
friend mahdi faizal, age 17, in the rear driver side seat. after proceeding
along lawrence ave. east eastbound past barrymore rd., mr. naveed did a u-turn
to travel westbound on lawrence ave. east in the middle lane.

he accelerated the car at a rapid pace
travelling at a very high rate of speed in a 50 km/hr posted senior safety zone
entering into the intersection at brimley road where he collided with a toyota
venza, driven by mr. john david stanley, who had just initiated a left turn.

mr. stanley, who was 60 years of age,
suffered grave injuries as a result of the collision, and tragically was
pronounced deceased a short time later at the collision scene.

there was a large debris field, heavy damage
to both vehicles and a pedestrian signal pole was ripped from the ground. the
toyota camry travelled a significant distance off the roadway coming to a stop
against a tree on the northwest corner. there was a cyclist on the northwest
corner of the intersection who narrowly missed being struck as the toyota camry
left the roadway after the collision.

the investigation showed that mr. naveed was
travelling at 119 km/hr five seconds prior to the collision and accelerated to
140 km/hr at the point of impact with mr. stanley’s car. this speed was almost
triple the posted speed limit of 50 km/hr in the posted senior safety zone.

mr. naveed and his two passengers were
transported to sunnybrook hospital with injuries after the accident.

mr. naveed has no prior criminal record, and
no prior record of provincial driving offences.
victim impact

the victim of this offence, john david
stanley, was the beloved spouse of christine stanley who refers to him as
“dave”. her victim impact statement eloquently expresses the enormous loss his
death represents for her. she describes dave as always making her feel safe
and protected, and states in her victim impact statement that while she tries
to cope, she misses him daily, noting that she does not have dave to give her
the support she always had from him.

tragically, mr. stanley died leaving his
elderly parents to mourn their loss. they state in their victim impact
statement that he was their only son who they described as “a giving loving
son, father and husband, he not only looked after his wonderful family he would
help anyone who needed it. he was truly the definition of a caring person.”

david stanley’s son, christopher, who with
other family members attended the sentence hearing, made his victim impact
statement to the court. his statement stressed the sadness caused by his loss
and states that not a single life event goes by where there isn’t something
that reminds him of the loss of his father. in particular, he mourns the
absence he and his fiancée felt about the loss of his father as an important
presence at their anticipated wedding.

j. anton stanley, another son of mr.
stanley, has suffered significant challenges as a result of the trauma
resulting from his father’s death including challenges in continuing his
education and significant mental and physical health challenges.

a family friend, sandra thatcher, describes
dave stanley as the husband of her best friend christine stanley. they
celebrated birthdays and holiday events together. she describes dave stanley
as always willing to lend a hand and as a person who was an important
confidante for her in her life.

other statements of the enormous loss
suffered as a result of this tragic offence were provided by mr. stanley’s
sister-in-law, elizabeth petluch, his mother-in-law regina stoeckl, and his
aunt carole stanley.

understandably this tragic loss created an
enormous hole in the lives of persons who knew and loved mr. stanley and
received his abundant love and support. he was truly loved and will be greatly
missed by his family and friends.
the defendant talha naveed

the defendant talha naveed (“mr. naveed”)
was born august 6, 2004 and therefore was 18 years old when he committed the
offence of dangerous driving causing death on may 1, 2023.

his background and circumstances are
detailed in a pre-sentence report dated march 10, 2025 which has been of great
assistance to the court. the presentence report is a very favourable report
for mr. naveed. it reports that he had a stable childhood living with his
parents and siblings with whom he has always had a positive relationship. he
continues to receive significant emotional and financial support from his
family.

it is clear from the pre-sentence report
that the commission of this offence is out of character for mr. naveed. apart
from this offence, his childhood and young adult hood has been characterized by
pro-social activity. he received excellent grades in high school. after
graduation, he was accepted into five local community college programmes, and
was engaged in the first year in the police foundations programme at centennial
college at the time of this offence. his ambition was to pursue a career as a
police officer. as a result of this offence, and the significant lasting
injuries which mr. naveed received in the motor vehicle collision, this goal is
most likely now unattainable.

his pro-social nature is exemplified by his
receipt of the lieutenant governor’s community volunteer award for students
which he received in june 2022. this was awarded for his completion of 1756
hours of community service in high school, far in excess of the requirement of
40 hours required for graduation. the pre-sentence report notes that in high
school he was extensively involved in numerous clubs and enjoyed positive
relationships with fellow students and teachers.

a letter from mr. naveed’s mother confirms
that after the tragic collision that is the subject of this case he was unable
to return to classes at centennial college, but he has obtained a cybersecurity
analyst diploma and, as confirmed in the pre-sentence report, received a
diploma in the help desk and network support program from a college in ottawa
he attended from may 6, 2024 to august 16, 2024.

he is currently employed by a friend of his
father’s doing desk work 2-3 hours per day due to his severe injuries caused by
the collision.

mr. naveed expressed great remorse to the
author of the pre-sentence report for the tragic loss he has caused to the
members of mr. stanley’s family. his sincere remorse is reflected in his plea
of guilty, and in his extensive statement to the court during the sentencing
hearing in which he expressed condolences to mr. stanley’s family and great
remorse for the commission of this offence.

it is clear from the pre-sentence report
that this offence has had a devastating impact on both mr. stanley’s family and
on mr. naveed himself. he has made several suicide attempts, and has been
diagnosed at north york general hospital as having “major depressive disorder,
occurring in the context of a very severe motor vehicle collision resulting in
the death of the driver of another vehicle”.

it is clear that his sadness and remorse in
relation to the commission of this offence has been increased for mr. naveed by
the death of his grandfather in 2020, who he misses greatly, and is no longer
available to him as a source of comfort and support which he had provided.

in addition to the mental health challenges
resulting from this tragic event, mr. naveed suffered severe injuries including
three spinal cord fractures which required surgery. he has had metal rods
placed in his back and continues to suffer pain and frequent blackouts. he is
currently undergoing multiple treatments including physiotherapy and
chiropractic care, psychotherapy and massage therapy. he is unable to walk for
long periods of time. he is only able to sleep 2-3 hours per night, and
experiences recurrent nightmares since the date of the offence.

the pre-sentence report notes that mr.
naveed does not engage in substance use, and the offence did not involve the
use of alcohol or substances.

the pre-sentence report notes that mr.
naveed is willing to complete community service hours.

the report concludes at p.7:
“based on
the information presented, the writer believes the subject would benefit from
addressing the following identified areas of concern to mitigate his risk of
reoffending: bereavement/grief counselling, employment assistance, and mental
health/well being supports. professional counselling supports, to address the
above noted concerns, are available within the community in group and one to
one settings.”
the law

the general principles of sentencing are
established in the following provisions of the
criminal code.
section
718
states:
“the
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute,
along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done
to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the offender, and other persons, from
committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from society, where
necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide
reparations for harm done to victims, or to the community; and
(f) to
promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm
done to victims or to the community”

section 718.2 states:
“a court
that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(
a
)
a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant
aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender, ….
(
b
)
a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(
c
)
where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be
unduly long or harsh;
(
d
)
an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions
may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(
e
)
all available sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the
circumstances should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention
to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders.”

the fundamental principle of sentencing is
the principle of proportionality.

section 718.1
of the
criminal code
states that a sentence,
“must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender”.

in
r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, the
supreme court of canada defined the principle of
proportionality
as follows at para. 37:
“the
fundamental principle of sentencing (i.e., proportionality) is intimately tied
to the fundamental purpose of sentencing — the maintenance of a just, peaceful
and safe society through the imposition of just sanctions. whatever weight a
judge may wish to accord to the various objectives and other principles listed
in the
code, the resulting sentence must respect the fundamental
principle of proportionality. proportionality is the
sine qua non
of
a just sanction. first, the principle ensures that a sentence reflects the
gravity of the offence. this is closely tied to the objective of
denunciation. it promotes justice for victims and ensures public confidence in
the justice system. as wilson j. expressed in her concurring judgment in
re
b.c. motor vehicle act,
1985 canlii 81 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 486, at p. 533:
it is
basic to any theory of punishment that the sentence imposed bear some
relationship to the offence; it must be a “fit” sentence proportionate to the
seriousness of the offence. only if this is so can the public be satisfied
that the offender “deserved” the punishment he received and feel a confidence
in the fairness and rationality of the system.
second,
the principle of proportionality ensures that a sentence does not exceed what
is appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender. in this
sense, the principle serves a limiting or restraining function and ensures
justice for the offender. in the canadian criminal justice system, a just
sanction is one that reflects both perspectives on proportionality and does not
elevate one at the expense of the other.”

as
noted by the supreme court of canada in
r.
v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at para.
4:
“
one of the
main objectives of canadian criminal law is the rehabilitation of offenders. 
rehabilitation is one of the fundamental moral values that distinguish canadian
society from the societies of many other nations in the world, and it helps the
courts impose sentences that are just and appropriate.”

the sentencing principle of rehabilitation
is important when sentencing a youthful first offender, as is the case with mr.
naveed.

the court of appeal has stressed the
principle of restraint in imposing a custodial sentence on a youthful first
offender. as gillese j.a. stated in
r. v. batisse,
2009 onca 114 (canlii), o.j. no. 452
at paras.
32-34:
“ the principle of restraint operates in three ways in the present
case. first, it is an important consideration because the appellant was a
first offender. as such, the restraint principle requires that the sentencing
judge consider all sanctions apart from incarceration and where, as here,
incarceration must be imposed, the term should be as short as possible and
tailored to the individual circumstances of the accused:
see
r. v. priest
(1996),
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca),
30 o.r. (3d) 538,
 o.j. no. 3369
(c.a.), at p. 545
o.r. [page 651]
 second, the principle of restraint requires the
sentencing judge to consider rehabilitation in determining the appropriate length
of the sentence. in lowering a sentence given to a first offender, this court
stated in
r. v. blanas,
2006 canlii 2610 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 364,
207 o.a.c. 226
(c.a.), at para.
5:
[g]eneral deterrence cannot be the sole consideration. the appellant is
relatively youthful and has no prior record and appears to have the full
support of her family and community. appropriate consideration must be given
to the rehabilitation of the appellant.
 in serious cases and cases involving violence,
rehabilitation alone is not the determinative factor -- general deterrence and
denunciation are also significant factors to be considered. however, as this
court ruled
in
r. v. dubinsky,
 o.j. no. 862,
2005 canlii 5668 (c.a.), at para.
1, it is an error to focus almost
exclusively on general deterrence and fail to consider individual deterrence
and rehabilitation, especially when sentencing a first offender.”

in its very recent decision in
r. v.
perry,
2025 onca 241, in an appeal in a
dangerous driving causing death case, the court stated at paras 9-10:
“the principle of restraint also directs courts, when sentencing a
youthful offender for a first offence, not to prioritize denunciation and
deterrence over rehabilitation:
r. v. habib,
2024 onca 830,
99 c.r. (7
th
)
110, at para.
31.
the principles of denunciation and deterrence, however, are
“particularly relevant to dangerous driving offences that are often committed
by first-time offenders and otherwise law-abiding citizens”:
r. v. frickey,
2017 onca 1024,
22 m.v.r. (7
th
) 184, at para.
4;
r. v. augustine,
2019 onca 119, at para.
11. as this court
stated in
r. v. rawn,
2012
onca 487,
294 o.a.c. 261
at paras.
48-49, “[a] motor vehicle can, in a moment
of recklessness, be transformed into an object capable of destroying lives”
and, accordingly, the license to drive is a privilege that comes with immense
responsibility.”
the crown sentencing cases

the crown relies upon the decision of the
ontario court of appeal in
r. v. rawn,
2012 onca 487, in which the crown
successfully appealed, and the court imposed a nine-month period of custody and
a five-year driving prohibition.

the court noted that the accused was a
40-year-old first offender with no previous criminal record. she had driven
137 km/hr in a 50 km/hr zone. she and the driver of another vehicle involved in
the collision were both charged with five counts of dangerous driving causing
bodily harm. the other driver was in his 20s and did not have a criminal
record and plead guilty. he was sentenced in a joint submission to a suspended
sentence and 18-month period of probation with three months of house arrest and
a one-year driving prohibition. the other driver had plead guilty to one count
of dangerous driving causing bodily harm.

unlike the other driver, ms. rawn plead not
guilty and was convicted of seven offences after an eight-day jury trial. the
court of appeal rejected the submission that ms. rawn should receive a sentence
similar to the sentence imposed on the other driver who also drove at 137 km/h
in tandem with ms. rawn and was involved in the collision of the two vehicles
resulting in the seven persons injured in the collision.

in upholding its position that ms. rawn
should be sentenced to a period of actual incarceration, in contrast to the
youthful offender who received a suspended sentence and probation, the court
noted at paragraphs 21-22:
“mr.
clazzer was a youthful first offender who took responsibility and demonstrated
remorse in the immediate aftermath of the accident. ms. rawn, while also a
first offender, at no time accepted responsibility. in fact, in her response to
the trial judge’s invitation to address the court in advance of being sentenced,
she maintained that “the other kid in the car was more guilty than i was.”

mr. clazzer early in the proceedings pleaded
guilty to one offence and six charges were withdrawn. his sentence was the
product of a joint submission. ms. rawn was convicted of seven offences after
an eight-day jury trial. ms. rawn’s sentence was hotly contested.

in
r. v. rawn, the court of appeal
emphasized that general deterrence and denunciation are important principles in
the determination of the proper sentence for dangerous operation of a motor
vehicle causing bodily harm or death. the court stated at para. 33:
“general
deterrence and denunciation are the most important factors in the determination
of a sentence in a case such as this one: see
r. v. nusrat,
2009 onca
31,244 o.a.c. 241. other like-minded people need to know that irresponsible use
of a motor vehicle on our highways will not be countenanced. a sentence can
only denounce conduct and deter others to the extent that it is punitive. the
essence of general deterrence is, therefore, punishment:
r. v. b.w.p.,
2006
scc 27... at paras 2-5.”

the court noted that, at this time, a
conditional sentence was not available in law.

at para. 45, the court re-iterated: “
it is worth repeating - dangerous driving causing bodily
harm is a serious offence. an appropriate sentence must give primacy to the
objectives of general deterrence and denunciation. to meet the
requirements of these principles, the sentence must clearly reflect the
seriousness of the conduct and its consequences, both actual and
potential. to meet the requirements of denunciation, it is necessary that
there be absolutely no ambiguity in the message that such conduct is completely
unacceptable.”

the court noted with
respect to the driving prohibition at para 48:
“second, in my view, a fit sentence in this case must
include an extended period of driving prohibition. i emphasize this
aspect of the sentence as driving is at the core of the criminal conduct being
addressed and at the core of the harm caused and potential harm created. 
a motor vehicle can, in a moment of recklessness, be transformed into an object
capable of destroying lives. the alberta court of appeal expressed this
view as follows
in
r. v. field,
2011 abca 48,
499 a.r. 178: “[d]riving a ton of glass and metal
through spaces where people can be expected to be present and at a speed where
it is likely to be impossible to stop the vehicle in time to avoid calamity
cannot be treated as a youthful indiscretion” (at para. 23).”

the court sentenced the
40-year old ms. rawn after an 8-day trial to 9 months of actual incarceration
and a 5 year driving prohibition concurrent with the mandatory licence
suspension under the
highway traffic act.

it is noteworthy that
the youthful offender who plead guilty to identical driving, and one count of
dangerous driving causing bodily harm, received a suspended sentence and a 1-year
driving prohibition demonstrating the mitigating effect of a plea of guilty and
acceptance of responsibility in sentencing.

the crown
relies on
r.
v. pandher,
2021 onsc 5787, in which a 21-year-old professional truck
driver plead guilty to one count of dangerous driving causing death and two
counts of dangerous driving causing bodily harm. he had no prior criminal
record.

he was involved in a
collision driving 105 km/hr as he approached a backlog of traffic near a
construction zone on highway 401.

at the time of the
collision, he was talking on the phone with a friend, and collided with the
vehicle in front of him killing the driver. the force of his tractor-trailer
truck that he was driving caused 4 more secondary collisions resulting in two
persons being seriously injured.

pandher was a
professional driver driving a tractor-trailer truck. he had falsified his
logbooks and was not complying with the regulations regarding hours of driving
and hours of rest applicable to commercial vehicle operators.

the judge noted at para.
37 the aggravating factor of mr. pandher’s falsification of his driving
records:
“mr. pandher’s actions leading up to the day of the
collision was fuelled by greed, he falsified his logbooks, drove double the
hours he was reporting for the sole purpose of making more money. he put his
personal economic interest ahead of public safety. mr. pandher’s moral
blameworthiness is heightened by his tampering of his logbooks and by driving
almost double the hours he falsely reported.”

in imposing the sentence,
the trial judge noted at para. 26 that there was “very little information about
the accused other than he was 21 when the collision occurred.”

the trial judge noted “i
have no evidence of remorse coming from mr. pandher other than what he has said
this morning.”

in
r. v. lake,
2023
oncj 452, mcleod j. sentenced a 31-year-old man to two years less one day of
custody for the defence of dangerous driving causing death.

mr. lake had 14 prior
mto convictions over 12 years including a conviction for careless driving less
than one year before the collision. in that case, mcleod j. rejected the
defence position that a conditional sentence was appropriate noting at
paragraphs 41-43:
“ mr. lake’s driver’s license was conditional. 
he was required to take his prescribed medication, to address his epilepsy, to
ensure that he was capable of operating his conveyance in a safe manner. 
he had a long history with the mto and his treating physician regarding this
need. he had a long history of disregarding his physician’s prescription
and treatment. his poor decision to not take his medication, despite his
prescription, license conditions and recent seizure, elevates his moral
blameworthiness.
 while
a conditional sentence is available, it is not appropriate. in these
circum­stances, for this offender, a conditional sentence would not meet the
principles of sentencing highlighted above. furthermore, given the
history of non-compliance, exacerbated by the poor history of mto convictions,
raises concerns for the safety of the public.
 the
appropriate sentence is 2 years less one day custody, a driving prohibition for
10 years, s.109 order for 10 years, a
dna
order and a
s.
743.21
order.”

the crown also relies
upon the decision of rose j.
in
r. v. paul,
2022 oncj 102, in which a
22-year-old accused with no criminal record was sentenced to two years of
imprisonment and a five-year driving prohibition in total upon pleading guilty
to dangerous driving causing death and failing to remain at the scene of an
accident causing death. the sentence for dangerous driving causing death was
18 months of incarceration and a six- month consecutive sentence for failure to
remain. in addition, a five-year driving prohibition was ordered.

there were a number of
aggravating features present in that case that are not present in the case at
bar. mr. paul was driving to work on a rural stretch of keele street with a
posted speed limit of 60 km/hr, but he was determined by a police officer doing
speed enforcement to be driving 125 km/hr. the police pursued mr. paul with
emergency lights activated. mr. paul accelerated while being pursued by the
police to a speed of 130 to 140 km/hr.

he lost control of his
car and struck a cyclist on keele street, leaving the road and becoming
airborne for 28 meters. the cyclist was killed in the collision.

mr. paul then fled the
scene on foot and was subsequently apprehended by the police after he fled the
scene of the accident.

an additional
aggravating feature was that mr. paul had been operating his car since 2018
without the insurance which was a mandatory statutory requirement.

rose j. noted the
mitigating circumstance of the plea of guilty and the fact that mr. paul was
gainfully employed with positive reports about his employment and noted that
there were very good prospects for rehabilitation. however, he stated at para.
26:
“the fact that mr. paul fled the scene is aggravating
insofar as first responders did not know if mr. bertini [the cyclist killed]
was the driver of the car. he made active attempts to flee, travelling through
rural wooded areas. on the facts before me, he would have continued his
attempts to evade the police were he not arrested.”

finally, the crown
relies upon the decision of de filippis j.
in
r. v. gawronski,
2023 oncj
67, in which a 23-year-old accused pleaded guilty to dangerous driving causing
death and for failing to remain at the scene of an accident involving death.

the accused had no prior
criminal record but had 3 prior
highway traffic act
speeding convictions.
 the accused was driving in a 60 km/hr zone at a speed of 80 km/h. he struck
an elderly pedestrian crossing the road resulting in her death. he then turned
down an alleyway. his car was located in the driveway of his residence and the
accused was located at 1:23 a.m. the following morning at an address close to
his home. at paragraph 19 of his decision, de filippis j. noted:
“the defendant’s personal circumstances are mitigating; he
has a supportive family and is hard-working and studious. he is engaged in
counselling. his remorse is genuine and substantial. i note that his speeding
was not precipitated by, or part of, other illegal activity such as flight from
police. however, he has a history of driving infractions, including speeding,
and his moral blameworthiness is enhanced because he fled the scene. i accept
that this was due to panic and not an attempt to avoid apprehension; he was
bound to be caught as he left an easily identifiable damaged car at his nearby
home. i also acknowledge that he could not have saved ms. parent had he
remained on the scene – but he did not know this.”

de filippis j.
imposed a 15-month sentence for dangerous driving causing death, a six-month
consecutive sentence for failing to remain at the scene and a driving
prohibition for five years.
the defence
cases

defence counsel cites
the decision of dellandrea j.
in
r. v. boutrous,
2023 oncj 266, in which
ms. boutrous plead guilty to dangerous driving causing death and was sentenced
to a conditional sentence of two years less one day. counsel notes the
similarities between that case and the case at bar.

the circumstances of the
offence were that ms. boutrous was driving southbound on torbram road at 151
km/hr, and collided with the victim’s car as he slowly initiated a u-turn
towards the northbound lanes of torbram road.

the speed limit on the
road was 60 km/hr in the area which was mainly residential. the evidence showed
that the deceased’s car turned left into the lane in which ms. boutrous was
speeding. in this sense the driving by the person who was killed factually
contributed to the collision’s occurrence, but it was also accepted that given
ms. boutrous’ excessive speed of 151 km/h there was virtually no opportunity
for her to react in any manner that could have avoided the collision. accordingly,
the court concluded at para. 33 that her dangerous driving was a significant
contributing cause to the harm occasioned by the collision.

ms. boutros was 18 years
of age at the time of the offence. she was working full-time as a shift
supervisor at mcdonald’s while completing high school. she did not have either
a criminal or a
highway traffic act
record. at the time of the offence,
she had just obtained her g2 license, and at the time of driving was in
contravention of the passenger limits applicable to that license category as
she had offered to drive 2 young co-workers home on her break from work instead
of them taking public transit home.

dellandrea j. found
that ms. boutros had experienced significant guilt and shame arising from the
enormity of her driving misconduct, resulting in a serious bout of acute
depression and a suicide attempt. she expressed her willingness to and desire
to continue in therapy.

in imposing the
conditional sentence, dellandrea j. noted at para. 51:
“owing to the obvious gravity of the offence, appellate
courts have recognized that denunciation and deterrence are the paramount
objectives when sentencing an offender for dangerous driving causing death:
rawn,
at para.
33;
singh,
2018 onsc 4598
at para.
22-25; aff’d
2019 onca
872.”

she also noted at para.
75 the importance of restraint and rehabilitation in sentencing a youthful
offender. she stated:
“deterrence and denunciation are paramount in this case,
but they are not the only principles of sentencing that apply. i must also
consider the principles of restraint and the objective of rehabilitation in the
sentencing of ms. boutrous as a young and deeply remorseful offender.”

dellandrea j. imposed a
conditional sentence of 2 years less a day with house arrest for the first 18
months, with gps monitoring and the remaining 6 months with a curfew from 11 p.m.
to 6 a.m. there was also a 2-year period of probation ordered with 100 hours
of community service.

dellandrea j. noted at
para. 77:
“it is true that a conditional sentence is not the
equivalent of a carceral jail sentence as incarceration remains the most
formidable denunciatory weapon in the sentencing arsenal:
killam, 1999
onca 2489, at para. 13. however, a conditional sentence is a punitive
sanction, capable of achieving denunciation and deterrence where the conditions
are designed to meet these objectives. a breach of a conditional sentence order
can lead to new charges which can collapse the sentence into one of real
custody. this mechanism serves the objectives of both specific and general
deterrence.”

of great assistance to
the court in the determination of the appropriate sentence in this case is the
decision of
the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. ryanov,
2008 onca 667.

in that case, two
18-year-olds who had just completed high school, and neither with a criminal
record, plead guilty to dangerous driving causing death in circumstances in
which they had jointly driven at an excessive speed in 2 cars up mount pleasant
ave. in toronto resulting in a collision with a taxi driver, mr. khan,
resulting in his death.

in particular, mr. khan,
the taxi driver, while driving southbound on mount pleasant had stopped at the
intersection of mount pleasant and whitehall ave. to turn left. he was driving
about 20 km/h and was partway through the left turn when mr. ryazanov’s car
crashed into the right side of his taxi travelling at 119 km/h at the moment of
impact.

prior to the collision,
both ryazanov and the other driver drove for approximately 1.5 km north on
mount pleasant rd. at speeds which varied from 80 to 140 km/h prior to the
collision involving ryazanov’s car hitting mr. khan’s taxi. each of ryazanov
and ross plead guilty to dangerous driving causing death.

at trial, the trial
judge imposed a conditional sentence of two years less a day involving house
arrest, with the usual exceptions for work, school, religious observance and
medical and legal appointments for a period of 12 months, followed by a curfew
of 12 months with general terms requiring counselling, performance of 150 hours
of community service and prohibition on driving a motor vehicle. there was a
separate driving prohibition order for four years concurrent to the conditional
sentence and a two-year period of probation.

the central issue on the
appeal was whether the term of house arrest for only 12 months of the 2 years
less a day conditional sentence, was adequate in the circumstances to reflect
the applicable sentencing principles of denunciation and general deterrence.

the court of appeal
allowed the crown’s appeal and found that the second half of the conditional
sentence, which it described as “merely being grounded without driving
privileges” was inadequate to satisfy the requirement that a conditional
sentence be consistent with the fundamental purposes and principles of
sentencing set out in
section 718
of the
criminal code.

the court stated at
paragraphs 74-78:
“conditions such as these fall far short of communicating
denunciation and general deterrence in sufficiently strong and clear terms. moreover,
the circumstances of this case require the added deterrent effect of
significant driving prohibitions to support the imposition of conditional
sentences. the sentences imposed, therefore, are not fit and call for this
court's intervention.
(4) variation of the sentences
 conditional sentences should be
punitive. as the supreme court of canada stated in
r. v. proulx, at
para.
117: “[p] unitive conditions such as house arrest should be
the norm, not the exception.” in my view, that comment applies throughout the
duration of a conditional sentence. therefore, the house arrest conditions
should be extended to the full term of the respondents' conditional sentences.
 turning to the
driving prohibition, it is driving that is at the core of this case. when young
people are granted the privilege of driving they take on a grave
responsibility. when that privilege is abused through irresponsible conduct --
in this case conduct that took a man's life -- the loss of the privilege must
be felt, both by the perpetrators and by others who would engage in similar
conduct.
 given that the
sentencing judge chose to impose conditional sentences, it was necessary that
he combine those sentences with sufficiently lengthy driving prohibitions to
convey the message that conduct similar to that which occurred in this case
will not be tolerated.
 in my view, the
driving prohibition should be extended from four years to seven years. a
driving prohibition that extends a further three years after the respondents
complete their conditional sentences and probation would, it is hoped, have a
meaningful impact, particularly in terms of general deterrence”.

in
r.
v. khan,
 o.j. no. 5300
on a plea of guilty to criminal negligence
causing death, and dangerous driving for street racing prior to the collision
that resulted in death, justice durno imposed the maximum conditional sentence,
of two years less a day, with house arrest for the entire conditional sentence,
240 hours of community service over 18 months, and the requirement of gps
monitoring for the entire period of the conditional sentence order (para. 185-190).
 the court also ordered a period of probation of 3 years with a requirement of
100 hours of community service (para. 232-233). there was a 3-year driving
prohibition at the time of sentencing, for the dangerous driving offence, noting
that he had already been prohibited from driving for 5 years while on a house
arrest bail (para. 163).

the
circumstances of the offence were that the accused khan was involved in racing
another vehicle on an urban road at 130-140 km per hour where the limit was 60
km/h. as a result of driving with excessive speed, coming into contact with
another vehicle and losing control, a passenger in his car was ejected from the
rear seat of the car and died at the scene. (para. 10 and 16). the accused was
20 years of age at the time of the offence and was studying at york university.

it
should be noted that the offence in that case related to the fatality was
criminal negligence causing death. the offence of dangerous driving related to
the racing and driving prior to the collision that resulted in the fatality.

defence
counsel relies upon
r. v. machado,
2012 onsc 4614. in that case, 2
brothers were driving to work at 120 km/hr in an 80 km/hr zone. in the
parallel case of the other brother, durno j. found that he could not conclude
that the two cars were racing. the accused before the court brian machado plead
guilty to two counts of dangerous driving causing death of two passengers in
another car. the court notes in paragraph 11 that, at this time, the maximum
sentence on a charge of dangerous driving causing death was 14 years. the
maximum sentence for this offence at the time of the offence before the court
is life in prison.

the
fatal collision occurred when brian machado pulled onto the right gravel
shoulder of the road to pass a dump truck, lost control of his car resulting in
a multiple vehicle collision that caused the death of two women.

brian
machado was 30 years of age, with no criminal record or negative driving
record. the crown and defence agreed that a conditional sentence was
appropriate. he had served seven days of pretrial custody and by the time of
sentencing had been under house arrest or curfew with reporting condition for
15 months with a driving prohibition and travel restrictions for a period of 30
months.

tulloch,
j., as he then was, presiding as a trial judge in the superior court, imposed a
conditional sentence of 18 months with nine months of house arrest. he also
imposed a three-year probation order and 100 hours of community service as part
of the probation order. in the probation period mr. machado could only drive to
and from work, and for medical emergencies. tulloch j. made specific note of
the fact that the accused had been subject to significant restrictions,
including a driving prohibition, for 30 months prior to the sentencing:
r. v.
machado, supra, at paras 28 and 43.
sentencing youthful first
offenders

the court of appeal has recently addressed
the particular principles applicable to sentencing youthful first offenders in
r.
v. habib,
2024 onca 830. tulloch, c.j.o. stated at pa
ras 31-36:
“sentencing judges must also respect several other settled
principles when sentencing youthful offenders for their first criminal offence.
 first, they must practice restraint. this requires them to avoid imprisoning
young adults when possible. when imprisonment is necessary, it also requires
them to make the sentence as short as possible to achieve the principles and
objectives of sentencing.
see
priest, at pp. 544-546. second,
they must prioritize rehabilitation as the paramount sentencing objective.
where necessary, they must also
prioritize specific deterrence. see
brown, at paras.
5 and 10. third, they cannot focus exclusively on denunciation and
general deterrence or elevate those objectives above rehabilitation and
specific deterrence. see
borde, at para.
36;
brown,
at para.
7.
 fourth, they must consider young adults’ reduced moral culpability and the
harsher impact that incarceration causes them due to their stage of life.
see
r. v. hills,
2023 scc 2,
477 d.l.r. (4th) 1, at paras.
161 and 165;
r. v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26,
487 d.l.r. (4th) 201, at paras.
132 and 152.
 sentencing judges
must always give serious and sufficient consideration to all these principles.
merely referring to them as relevant is not always sufficient to show their
proper application. failing to apply or unreasonably underemphasizing them is
an error in principle. see
ijam, at para.
52;
r.
v. faroughi,
2024 onca 178,
435 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at para.
81.
 the courts have long followed these
principles because they protect society, which parliament has made the
fundamental purpose of sentencing. because young adults are still maturing,
they have “high rehabilitative prospects.”
see
bertrand marchand,
at para.
152. often, the shock of arrest and conviction is a turning point that
leads them to reflect on their actions, avoid crime, and choose a pro-social
path. prioritizing rehabilitation thus helps protect society by preventing
reoffending. see
r. v. swann,

o.j. no. 137 (c.a.), at para. 4;
r. v. dunkley,
 o.j. no. 1663 (c.a.), at para. 4; and
r.
v. demeter and whitmore
(1976),
1976 canlii 1413 (on ca),
32 c.c.c. (2d) 379 (ont. c.a.), at pp.
381-382.
 in contrast, crushing sentences can
endanger society by “harden[ing]” young defendants into an anti-social path.
see
r.
v. desir,
2021 onca 486, at paras.
32 and 47; see also
dunkley, at para. 4. unfortunately,
despite the best efforts of correctional authorities, prisons sometimes
struggle to rehabilitate young adults.
see
hills, at para.
165. instead, they can become a “finishing school” for crime because they
may contain bad influences to which impressionable young adults are vulnerable,
such as drugs, gangs, bullying, violence, and negative peers and mentors who
share anti-social values and criminal experience.
see
r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5,
 1 s.c.r. 61, at para.
16;
see also
hills, at para.
165; and
r. v. wismayer
(1997),
1997 canlii 3294 (on ca),
33 o.r. (3d) 225 (c.a.), at pp. 242-243.
 these principles
also respect parliament’s direction to impose proportionate sentences. as
hamilton held,
at para.
91,
proportionality requires courts to consider factors that “decrease the offender’s
personal responsibility.” for young adults, immaturity is one such factor.
while as adults they are morally responsible for their actions, “[f]ull
maturity and all the attributes of adulthood are not magically conferred on
young [adults] on their 18th birthdays.” see
r. v. clarke,
 ewca crim 185, 1 cr. app. r. (s.) 52, at para. 5. instead, young
adults are more impulsive, emotionally volatile, and susceptible to negative
influences and bad judgment. this can make them less blameworthy than more
mature adults.
see
r. v. scott,
2015 abca 99,
28 alta. l.r. (6th) 78, at para.
13;
fournier
c. r.,
2012 qcca 1330, at paras.
42-45. by accounting for immaturity, courts ensure that turning
18 “does not present a cliff edge for … sentencing.” see
clarke,
at para. 5;
see also
bertrand marchand, at para.
132;
r. v. leask
(1996),
1996 canlii 17936 (mb ca),
113 man. r. (2d) 265 (c.a.), at para.
3.
 proportionality
also requires considering the greater impact of incarceration on young adults.
see
hills,
at para.
135. incarceration disrupts a transitional stage where they should be
“developing … job prospects and relationships that provide the base for a
productive life” and learning pro-social skills and values from positive
mentors and peers.
see
r. v. hutchings,
2012 nlca 2,
316 nfld. &. p.e.i.r. 211, at para.
107. each year is felt more keenly during this critical period of
transition.
see
r. v. lai,
2006 bcca 368,
229 b.c.a.c. 236, at para.
104.”

a proportionate sentence
must give significant emphasis to denunciation and general deterrence in light
of the gravity of any offence such as the case at bar which involves the tragic
death of a member of the public.

however, it is also
appropriate to bear in mind that a properly structured conditional sentence can
satisfy the sentencing objectives of deterrence and denunciation:
r. v.
wells,
2000 scc 10, at para.
35.

as
stated by lamer c.j.
in
r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5 (canlii)
at para.
22:
“the conditional sentence incorporates some elements of
non-custodial measures and some others of incarceration. because it is served
in the community, it will generally be more effective than incarceration at
achieving the restorative objectives of rehabilitation, reparations to the
victim and community, and the promotion of a sense of responsibility in the
offender. however,
it is also a punitive sanction capable of
achieving the objectives of denunciation and deterrence. it is this
punitive aspect that distinguishes the conditional sentence from probation,
…..”

in
r. v. proulx,
supra, the court rejected a presumption against conditional sentences for
certain categories of offences. lamer c.j. stated at
paras. 79, 81 and 83:
“79
thus, a conditional sentence is available in principle
for
all
offences in which the statutory prerequisites are
satisfied….
81 in my view, while the gravity of such
offences is clearly relevant to determining whether a conditional sentence is
appropriate in the circumstances, it would be both unwise and unnecessary to
establish judicially created presumptions that conditional sentences are
inappropriate for specific offences. offence-specific presumptions
introduce unwarranted rigidity in the determination of whether a conditional
sentence is a just and appropriate sanction. such presumptions do not
accord with the principle of proportionality set out in s. 718.1 and the value
of individualization in sentencing, nor are they necessary to achieve the
important objectives of uniformity and consistency in the use of conditional
sentences.
83 my difficulty with the suggestion that the
proportionality principle presumptively excludes certain offences from the
conditional sentencing regime is that such an approach focuses inordinately on
the gravity of the offence and insufficiently on the moral blameworthiness of
the offender. this fundamentally misconstrues the nature of the
principle. proportionality requires that
full consideration
be
given to both factors. as s. 718.1 provides:
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence
and
the degree of responsibility of the offender.”
[emphasis added.]”
analysis

as in any case, the
sentence in this case must be proportionate to the gravity of the fence and the
moral blameworthiness of the offender.

the offence in this case
is very serious as it resulted in the death of an innocent member of the
public. mr. stanley’s family has lost the love and support of a cherished
member of the family as a consequence of the offence in this case. sadly, no
sentence can compensate them for the loss they have suffered.

the moral
blameworthiness of mr. naveed is significant, as at the time of the collision,
he was driving at an extremely high speed which made it impossible for him to
avoid the fatal collision that resulted in mr. stanley’s death. this
represented an extremely serious error in judgement by mr. naveed in the
relatively short time in which he accelerated to his excessive speed prior to
the collision.

however, there was no
indication of any alcohol or substance use that contributed to the offence. mr.
naveed had no criminal record, or any previous driving offences. prior to the
offence his life was characterized by pro-social community service for which he
had received an award from the lieutenant governor of ontario. he was only 18
at the time of committing this offence, which demonstrated a tragic lapse in
judgment which had tragic consequences.

the aggravating factors
in this case are the very high speed being driven by mr. naveed at the time of
the collision, and the serious consequences involving the death of mr. stanley
resulting from the collision.

there are substantial
mitigating circumstances which must be taken into account. mr. naveed is truly
remorseful for this offence as reflected in his early plea of guilty and in his
statement to the court.

he has received a very
favourable pre-sentence report which demonstrates how out of character this
offence was for mr. naveed and which shows that, subject to the significant
physical limitations he now has caused by the accident, his prospects of
rehabilitation are excellent.

mr. naveed has suffered
severe collateral consequences to his physical and mental health as a result of
this offence. in this regard, he will pay dearly for his offence for the
foreseeable future. this is a relevant factor in sentencing:
r. v. suter,
2018 scc 34, at paras.
46-47.

the crown has
acknowledged that a period of incarceration of two years less a day is
appropriate in this case,
albeit
that the crown submits that the offence
is so serious that the period of incarceration must be served in actual
custody. the crown seeks a three-year period of probation, a seven-year
driving prohibition, a dna order and a non-communication order with the other
passengers in the car who were injured in the collision while mr naveed is in
custody.

the crown urges that the
principles of sentencing, which must reflect denunciation and general
deterrence in this case, requires that the period of incarceration to be served
is a period of actual custody.

the defence submits that
the applicable principles of sentencing including the principles of general
deterrence and denunciation may be given full effect in a maximum conditional
sentence, with substantial house arrest, which appropriately balances the
principles of general deterrence and denunciation with the rehabilitation of
this youthful first offender.

in my view, the
proportionate sentence in this case that can give full effect to denunciation
and general and specific deterrence, and the sentence that reflects the gravity
of the offence and the moral culpability of mr. naveed, is a two years less a
day conditional sentence, with house arrest for the full two years less a day.

mr. naveed will know
that, in the event that he breaches any of the terms of the conditional
sentence, he may be required to serve the remainder of his sentence in actual
custody. furthermore, the maximum conditional sentence of two years less a day
has a significant punitive aspect, as he will be required to remain in his
residence for the full two years less a day, subject to the limited exceptions
which i will order.

mr. naveed will be
required to perform 180 hours of community service in the first 18 months of
his conditional sentence, to be organized by his conditional sentence
supervisor, respecting the physical limitations currently experienced by mr.
naveed as a result of the motor vehicle collision.

as i am imposing a 5-
year driving prohibition starting today, mr naveed will be prohibited from
driving a car throughout his conditional sentence.

he will be permitted to
be absent from his residence only in the following circumstances:
1.
to pursue bereavement counselling, assessment
and counselling in relation to his mental health, and to take such treatment or
counselling for his mental health as is directed by his conditional sentence supervisor,
on a schedule to be provided to his conditional sentence supervisor;
2.
to attend employment and/or education or
training or counselling for employment, on a schedule to be provided in advance
to his conditional sentence supervisor, including to attend his graduation
ceremony on may 31,2025 at willis college in ottawa;
3.
to attend medical diagnostic or therapeutic
appointments with doctors, psychiatrists, physiotherapists, chiropractors or
other physical or mental health professionals to receive diagnosis or
treatment, on a schedule to be provided to his conditional sentence supervisor;
4.
to attend for religious services or observance,
on a schedule to be provided in advance to his conditional sentence supervisor;
5.
for 4 hours per week, at a time to be agreed
upon with his conditional sentence supervisor, to attend to the necessities of
life;
6.
for urgent medical or dental
care for himself or his immediate family;
7.
to attend appointments, or court or legal
proceedings, or appointments with legal counsel in relation to legal
proceedings;
8.
to perform his community service, on a schedule
to be provided to his conditional sentence supervisor.
9.
he must sign releases to
permit his conditional sentence supervisor to monitor his compliance with these
conditions.

mr. naveed will
have a 3-year period of probation, starting at the conclusion of his
conditional sentence, with the following terms:
1.
report by telephone or in
person to your probation officer within 3 business days of the completion
of your conditional sentence order, and thereafter as directed,
2.
take such assessment and
counselling for bereavement and mental health issues as may be directed by your
probation officer;
3.
make reasonable efforts to
pursue education and/or employment;
4.
perform 100 hours of
community service within the first 18 months of your probation, as directed by
your probation officer, after considering any applicable physical limitations;
5.
sign releases for your
probation officer to monitor your compliance with your terms of probation.

there will be a dna
order as dangerous driving causing death is a secondary designated offence: s. 487.04.

as mr. naveed has been
prohibited from driving for over 23 months since the date of his arrest, there
will be a further 5-year driving prohibition starting today.
dated: may 14, 2025 ____________________________
justice
david porter