source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj353/2025oncj353.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. singh, 2025 oncj 353
date: 
2025 06 26
court
file no.: 4810 998 23 48125988
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
samarpreet singh
before
justice sean gaudet
heard
on march 6, march 7, april 1, june 23, and june 26 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 26, 2025
p. harris................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
m. johal.......................................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
gaudet j.:
i.
overview

at the conclusion of this trial, i found mr.
singh guilty of committing an indecent act with the intent to insult or offend,
contrary to
section 173(1)
(b) of the
criminal code. this is my decision on
sentence.
ii.
circumstances of the offence

on december 9, 2023, the victim was alone in her
basement apartment when mr. singh, then working as a bell canada technician, responded
to a service call to come to her new residence to instal an installation cable
for her wifi router. after using the victim’s bathroom, mr. singh came out
with his pants unzippered and his un-erect penis exposed to the victim. he left
his penis out of his pants for a period of some twenty minutes. during this
time he made inappropriate comments to the victim about her physical attractiveness,
and asked her untoward questions about her dating status, and whether he could find
her a job with her employer. the victim was traumatised by this incident.
iii.
the position of the parties on sentence

the crown seeks a custodial sentence of 60 days,
followed by one year of probation, as well as a dna order and a
non-communication order with respect to the victim pursuant to
section 743.21
of the
criminal code.

counsel for mr. singh argues that a conditional discharge is a
suitable sentence as it would be in the best interests of mr. singh and not
contrary to the public interest. alternatively, counsel argues that a
suspended sentence would be appropriate, given that mr. singh has abided by his
undertaking following arrest.
iv.
sentencing principles

the goal of any criminal sentence is to protect society,
contribute to respect for the law and help maintain a just, peaceful, and safe
society, while encouraging rehabilitation of offenders and acknowledging the
harm does to victims and to the community. the fundamental principle of
sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence committed and the degree of responsibility of the offender. ultimately,
the sentence i impose must be tailored to mr. singh’s circumstances and the
circumstances of the offence he committed.

in deciding on the appropriate sentence i am guided by the
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in the
criminal code
which
list the factors a sentencing judge must consider. the principles of deterrence
and denunciation must be balanced against mr. singh’s prospects of
rehabilitation.

i must apply the principle of parity, in
other words that sentences for similar offences committed by similar offenders
in similar circumstances should be similar. i must also apply the
principle of restraint, in that i must consider the least intrusive sentence
which will achieve the overall purpose of being an appropriate and just
sanction.

i must also consider any relevant aggravating or mitigating
factors in determining the appropriate sentence.
v.
personal circumstances of the offender

mr. singh is 23 years old, and a citizen of
india. he has no prior criminal record. he came to canada on a student visa,
and was issued a work permit by immigration, refugees and citizenship canada (ircc)
in november 2022 that expires in november 2025. mr. singh has no dependents
in canada. his goal was to become a permanent resident and sponsor his family
members to come to canada.

in the course of making submissions on sentence
counsel for mr. singh provided the court with a letter dated june 18, 2025 in
which mr. singh was notified by the ircc that he may be inadmissible to canada
as a foreign national pursuant to
paragraph 36(2)
(a) of the
immigration and refugee protection act
(irpa) “for having been convinced (
sic
) in canada of an
offence under an act of parliament punishable by way of indictment”, although
he has been given the opportunity to provide additional information to ircc
before a final decision is made.
vi.
impact on the victim

the victim provided a victim impact statement
which was made exhibit 1 to the sentencing hearing, in which she describes the emotional,
physical and economic impacts the offence has had upon her, as well as the
fears for her personal safety resulting from the offence.

it is evident that the offence has had a
considerable impact upon the victim. she describes herself as being “tethered”
to the incident, and unable to move past it. she has built a wall around
herself, and has shut herself off from forming genuine connections with other
people.

the victim is less physically active. she experiences
anxiety going to the gym or running outside. she has stopped caring about her
physical appearance because she does not want to attract attention.

she is less attentive and more unfocussed at
work as a result of the mental fatigue and emotional distress caused by
the offence, which has led to a decline in her work performance and
corresponding feelings of guilt in letting down her employer and colleagues.

as a result of the offence, the victim is now
“hyper-aware” that harm can come to her from anywhere, at any time, and from
anyone, and this has affected how she moves through the world and how safe she
feels within it. she now experiences heightened sensitivity to
perceived threats, which causes her to overreact to everyday situations. she
ultimately moved out of the area she was living in at the time of the offence in
case mr. singh ever came back.
vii.
analysis
a.
aggravating
factors

there are a number of aggravating factors in
this case.

first, the offence took place in the victim’s
home and where she reasonably expected to feel safe and secure from harm. i
note that the victim had just recently moved in to this residence, and that
after the offence took place she moved away because she was afraid that mr.
singh would return.

second, the offence occurred over a significant
length of time – approximately twenty minutes. this was not a momentary event.

third, in committing the indecent act of
exposing his penis to the victim, i have found that mr. singh did not act
impulsively but deliberately with the intent to offend her. this was not a
spontaneous response to a provocation, as in the case of
boehler v.
r.,
2019 nbca 36, where the accused briefly mooned her
neighbours when provoked.

fourth, mr. singh’s actions constituted an abuse
of his position of trust, a statutorily recognized consideration pursuant to
section 718.2(iii). he attended the victim’s residence as a bell canada
service technician to instal her internet – an essential service in today’s society. 
she invited him in to her home, where she should feel most secure, because she
needed him to provide this essential service, and he abused his position and
treated her like a sexualized object in her own home.

most important, it is clear from the victim
impact statement, and the victim’s testimony at trial, that the offence has had
profound and significant psychological and emotional impacts upon her. this is
also
a statutorily recognized consideration
pursuant
to section 718.2(iii.1). mr. singh shattered the sense of security the victim
felt in her own home. the sense of security people feel when in
their own home is a highly cherished value in our society. mr. singh took this
away from her, and she is still experiencing a profound sense of social anxiety
and insecurity because of his actions.
b.
mitigating
factors

at the time of the offence mr. singh was 22
years old, and can be qualified as a youthful offender. he has no criminal
record.
c.
a discharge is not the appropriate sentence in this case

counsel for the defence argues that a conditional
discharge is the appropriate sentence in this case. i do not agree.

a discharge is available where the court
considers it to be in the best interests of the accused and where it is not
contrary to the public interest. a discharge is typically meant to be
limited to cases where the offence is minor, the accused is a first-time
offender, and/or the circumstances of the offence are so mitigating as to make
a conviction and ensuing criminal record unduly harsh.

given the seriousness of this offence, the
impact that it had upon the victim, and the prevailing principles of deterrence
and denunciation that are applicable in this case, it would be contrary to the
public interest to discharge mr. singh for this offence. a discharge
would not have the necessary or adequate denunciatory and deterrent effect.

counsel for mr. singh referred the court to a
number of cases in support of her position that a conditional discharge was the
appropriate sentence:
r v. leboubon, (2012) pcnl 1312a0034;
r. v. seyed-makki
(unreported, may 15, 2019);
r v. st. louis
 o.j. no. 4492
and, in
particular,
r. v. wei
 o.j. no. 5914.

in my view, all of these cases are
distinguishable from that of mr. singh.

all of these cases involved sentences following
guilty pleas, rather than findings of guilt at trial, as in this case.

in some of them (
seyed-makki,
wei
)
the offender had undergone counselling to address the underlying reasons for
their behaviour, and had accepted responsibility for their actions and/or expressed
remorse (
seyed-makki,
wei, st. louis
).

unlike this case,
lebourbon
involved a
joint submission on sentence.

three of these cases (
st. louis,
seyed-maki
and lebourbon
) were decided before the amendments to the
criminal code
introduced though bill c-75 that came into force in september 2019, which
increased the maximum sentence for
section 173(1)
from 6 months to two years. 
it is no longer the case that, as stated by the court in
st. louis,
section 173 is part of the least significantly grave
offences in the
criminal code
as measured by the potential maximum
penalty.

counsel relies primarily on the
wei
case,
where the offender pled guilty to two counts of committing an indecent act and
was sentenced to a conditional discharge with 18 months probation. mr wei’s
victims were reiki massage therapists. the offender attended massage therapy
sessions where he proceeded to masturbate and ejaculate in front of them. 
unlike mr. singh, the offender had completed upfront counselling sessions and
had received positive reports from his doctors and therapists. unlike mr.
singh, mr. wei had taken steps to address his offending behaviour, had
expressed remorse and shame for his behaviour, and
expressed awareness that his inappropriate behaviour caused his victims to be
fearful.

in deciding that a custodial sentence for mr.
wei was not required to satisfy the principles of sentencing, the judge noted
that there was agreement among his treating physicians
and therapists that he had obtained a level of understanding into why he acted
as he did, and that he had demonstrated insight into how his conduct impacted
his victims. these features are lacking in the case of mr. singh. there is no
evidence before the court that he has taken any counselling, therapy or treatment
to address his behaviour, or that he has any insight into how his actions have
harmed the victim of the offence he committed.

i am cognizant of the principle of restraint and its application,
particularly when sentencing a youthful first-time offender. however, in the
circumstances of this case, when applying the sentencing principle set out
in
s. 718.1
of the
criminal code
and having regard
to the aggravating and mitigating factors, as well as mr. singh’s prospects of
rehabilitation, my view is that a custodial sentence should be imposed.

the offence of indecent act encompasses a wide range of
activity. counsel for the crown provided two cases purporting to demonstrate
the range of conduct and sentences that can fall within this offence:
boehler,
supra
and
r. v. al khalifa,
2024 nbpc 9.

in
boehler, the accused was a middle-aged woman who, in a
moment of exhausted frustration, committed the impulsive act of mooning a
neighbour with whom she was feuding when she saw him filming her walking to her
home. the incident lasted only a few moments. in allowing the sentence
appeal, the new brunswick court of appeal substituted a suspended sentence with
an absolute discharge.

al khalifa
is on the other end of the spectrum. the
offender in that case was a taxi driver who was convicted of a summary count of
sexual assault and a summary count of wilfully committing an indecent act in a
public place, the interior of a taxi cab. in addition to touching the victim’s
breasts, the offender in this case opened his fly, pulled out his penis, and
guided the victim’s hand on to it for about five seconds, before she pulled it
away. the court in that case imposed 10 months imprisonment to be served
consecutively for both offences.

the conduct sanctioned in
al khalifa
was considerably more
morally blameworthy than that of mr. singh, who did not commit a sexual
assault. there are some similarities, however, that make it a case worth
considering. the offender in that case was in a position of trust as a taxi
driver, the victim was in an enclosed space, and the offender made similar
comments to those made by mr. singh, namely he told the victim that she was
“beautiful” and asked her whether she had a boyfriend.

the offence also had a similar impact on the victim, who was severely
impacted by it. the court noted, at para 17, that the victim feels
“constantly exhausted and drained”, noting “it’s hard for me to find the energy
to do even the simplest of things because i’m always on edge, always worried. i
feel like i’ve lost so much of myself”. this language is strikingly similar to
that used by the victim in her victim impact statement in this case.

given the aggravating factors in the case before me, i find a
conditional discharge would be contrary to the public interest and would fail
to suitably address the principles of general deterrence and denunciation. a
discharge allows for an offender to avoid a criminal conviction. future
employers of mr. singh should be aware that he committed this offence in the
course of his employment. a custodial sentence is required. the issue is
whether it can be served in the community.
d.
the appropriate sentence – conditional sentence and probation

the
preconditions required to allow the court to impose a conditional sentence are
set out in
section 742.1
of the
criminal code. most of
those preconditions have been met in the case at bar. the crux of the matter
before me lies in
s.
742.1
(a) which states:
the court is
satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not endanger
the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to 718.2.

i
am particularly mindful that a conditional sentence order must be
considered as a potentially reasonable alternative to jail for a first-time
offender.

i
am satisfied mr. singh would not endanger the safety of the community. he has
abided by his undertaking following the laying of the charge against him, and i
find that a conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing and, more specifically, would adequately
address the principles of denunciation and specific deterrence in this case.

in
r. v. proulx,
2000
scc 5 (canlii), the supreme
court of canada has held that
a conditional sentence can have a
denunciatory and deterrent effect, and that generally, the more serious the
offence, the longer and more onerous the conditional sentence should be.

a
conditional sentence is a substantial sanction. it appropriately reflects
the severity of the offence, the offender’s circumstances, the primacy of
denunciation and deterrence as well as the principles of restraint and parity.
a conditional sentence is consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing in
ss. 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal
code.

mr.
singh will serve a 90-day conditional sentence. after he has served the
conditional sentence, he will be placed on probation for 12 months. the
entirety of the conditional sentence will be served on house arrest. the terms
of that order will include a requirement that he have no contact with his
victim, always remain 100m away from her, and that he is prohibited from
possessing any weapons. he is also ordered to attend for counselling, treatment
or programming as directed by his conditional sentence supervisor. these
conditions will also be reflected in his probation order.
e.
the impact of immigration consequences on the appropriate sentence

counsel for mr. singh argued that a custodial sentence is not
warranted because of the collateral immigration consequences it would have upon
him, and that for a youthful offender such as mr. singh the primary
consideration should be rehabilitation.

as the sentencing judge, i am to determine the appropriate
sentencing range without consideration of any immigration consequences.
following that determination, i must consider whether a sentence that avoids
those consequences may nevertheless be appropriate (see
r. v. mckenzie,
2017
onca 128, at paras.
29-31.)

as
justice wagner, as he then was, stated in
r. v. pham,
2013 scc 15
(canlii), 1 scr 739, the collateral consequences of a sentence are not,
strictly speaking, aggravating or mitigating factors, since such factors are by
definition related only to the gravity of the offence or to the degree of
responsibility of the offender. collateral consequences must not be allowed
to dominate the exercise or skew the process either in favour of or against
deportation. moreover, it must not lead to a separate sentencing scheme with
a
de facto
if not a
de jure
special range of
sentencing options where deportation is a risk.

as justice pringle noted in
r. v. rudder,
2018 oncj 348.
at para 19, it is essential to appreciate precisely what collateral immigration
consequences may be caused in every case. weighing a consequence where the
defendant would be deported and at risk of harm or death is far different than
weighing a consequence where the defendant may have difficulty obtaining
permanent residence status.

in this case, mr. singh is a foreign national who would, by
virtue of
paragraph 36(2)
(a) of the
irpa, become inadmissible to canada upon
conviction of an offence punishable by way of indictment, even if prosecuted
summarily (as was this case here). the only way this outcome would be avoided
is if he were to be discharged.

as
i explained a conditional discharge would be contrary to the public interest
and is not appropriate in this case. as a result, a finding of inadmissibility
flows from the conviction. whether mr. singh is imposed a custodial or a
suspended sentenced has no impact on this collateral consequence.
f.
ancillary
orders

a
dna order will be issued for this offence.

my
decision on the balance of the conditions of the conditional sentence and probation
order will be provided orally.
released: june 26, 2025
signed:
justice s. gaudet