source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj430/2025oncj430.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. r.p.,
2025 oncj 430
date: 
2025 08 13
court
file no.: pembroke 24-37100877
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
r.p.
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on june 23, 25, 30, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on august 13, 2025
mariah calamai.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
matthew wolfson and jayme newton.................................. counsel
for the defendant
richardson,
j.:
introduction

it is a fact of life in modern canadian society that two adults will
meet and consent to having sexual relations within hours or minutes of
meeting.

the canadian law of communicated consent and honest but mistaken belief
in communicated consent has the breadth and depth to deal with relationships of
any duration -- from quick, chance encounters, such as is in play here, to
long-term relationships that are measured over the span of years or even
decades.

this case is the story of one quick, chance encounter and whether the
sexual touching that ultimately took place was consensual or not.

on july 24, 2024 four people met at a bar in deep river. st and her
friend cp went to hang out and have some fun. rp and his friend and co-worker cm
were in town for work. they, along with a couple of co-workers, also went to the
bar after work to socialize and have some fun.

soon after st and cp arrived at the bar, all four played some pool while
consuming one or two drinks. unfortunately, the bar was scheduled to close
early. rp had some marihuana at his hotel room which he agreed to share with
the others after the bar closed.

as the evening went on, the four people “paired up”. rp and st focused
on each other. cm and cp also focused on each other. they were together in
the sense that all four parties remained in each other’s presence for virtually
all evening. they were separate in the sense that each couple was not really
paying much attention to what the other couple was doing or what they were discussing.

after they consumed some marihuana outside rp and cm’s motel, the
parties returned to the room to continue to talk and get to know one another.

suddenly, rp pushed st down on his bed and pulled off her pants.

when cp realized what was happening, she discontinued her conversation
with cm, focused on st, assisted st in getting dressed, and the two women
departed the motel room.

police
were called. rp is now charged with sexual assault.

rp
says that st consented to the removal of her pants. st says that she did not.

the
crown proceeded summarily.

this
case turns on the assessment of the credibility and reliability of the
witnesses and the application of the legal principles established in the case
of
r. v. w.(d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 742.

date,
identity and jurisdiction were admitted.

for
the reasons that follow, i find the accused guilty as charged.
facts that are not (or not really or should not
really be) in dispute
background of the parties

despite
the length of time that this trial took, most of the facts with respect to what
happened leading up to the removal of st’s pants are not in dispute. there are
some minor differences on some details.

st
is twenty years old. she has a community college diploma as a behavioural
science technician. she is starting another program at another community
college in september.

when
the alleged incident took place, st had a boyfriend, who was not present.

cp
is 22 years of age, and she is attending a university program.

st
and cp met when they were in high school. they have been friends ever since. they
were both home in deep river.

rp
is 28 years old. he works for a contractor that installs cabling for
telecommunication companies. he is currently working on a long-term project in
deep river. they work in deep river for five days and then return home for
weekends. the date of the incident was their second day on the deep river
project.

cm
is 27 years of age. he has worked for the same company for about five years.

cm
and rp have worked together for two and a half to three years. they have a
close relationship and have been friends since they were young. cm helped rp
get his job with the company.

when
the incident happened, cm and rp were staying in the same motel room.
what happened before they
met at the bar

cp
came over to st’s house a couple of hours before they went to the bar. they
consumed some vodka and mike’s coolers. st estimated that they had four
drinks. st felt “a little bit tipsy” before they went to the bar. she
explained that a “little bit tipsy” meant that she was enjoying herself more
and feeling less stressed. she agreed that her speech was probably slower. 
she disagreed that her movement would have been impaired. “i am a drinker”,
she said. she admitted to consuming a mickey of alcohol every other day at this
point in her life. she stated that she actually consumed less on the night in
question than she normally does.

st
did not believe that she consumed any drugs before she went to the bar. she
acknowledged that she had a marihuana pen which she could have used. she
stated, however, that at that point in her life, she was drinking more and
using marihuana less.

st
recalled that cp drank about the same amount as she did. she did not notice
any signs that cp was intoxicated.

in
cross-examination, st denied that she and cp were “pre-gaming”.

cp’s
mom drove them to the bar. they arrived at about 10 pm.

cp
stated that she and st consumed three or four shots of liquor and a cooler
before going to the bar. they also shared a 10 mg thc drink.

cp
described herself as “a little tipsy but not drunk”. she did not notice any
changes to st’s speech or coordination, nor did she notice any changes to her
own. cp recalled consuming one cocktail at the bar – probably a
vodka/cranberry – that st purchased. she did not notice any changes in her
sobriety or st’s as a result of consuming the cocktail.

cm
stated that he went to the bar with rp, his foreman, rh, and another member of
their crew, bb. cp consumed a beer or two at dinner. when asked about rp’s
consumption, cm stated that he “probably” had one at dinner. when probed
about the drinking, he could not remember whether he had one at dinner or at a
barbeque back at their motel room.

cm
could not recall what time they arrived at the bar. he remembered that they
played pool and consumed another beer. he estimated that he had between five
and six alcoholic beverages between supper and the end of the night.

rp
stated that when they finished work, they returned to their motel. he waited
to see what the other guys on the crew were going to be doing. ultimately, he
grabbed a pizza and had dinner alone. he did not have anything to drink at
dinner.

rp
probably smoked some marihuana after work. he smokes every day.
what happened at the bar

rp
met with the other guys, who he identified as bb, rh and cm, at the bar at
about 7:00 or 8:00. there he had a couple of drinks and played pool. he
stated that he had four drinks in total while he was at the bar. two were beer
and two others were sweet liquor drinks.

rp
remembered seeing st and cp arrive at the bar, probably after 10:00 pm. the
foreman, rh, went up to meet st and cp and he introduced st and cp to the
others. rp bought a shot for st and one for himself. cm bought a shot for cp
and one for himself.

they started to socialize and play pool.

rh
and bb ultimately left early. rh got “cut off” by the bartender because he
went outside with a beer. rp estimated that this happened about 45 minutes to
an hour after st and cp arrived.

the
bar was small. it was not busy. there might have been a band playing. it was
scheduled to close at 11 pm.

as
the evening unfolded, rp and st chatted about school and work. they exchanged
information about their ages. one of his friends was cm.

at
one point, they left the bar for a smoke (vape) break. 
rp and his friends said that they were staying at a nearby motel and rp, st, cm
and cp made plans to go back there when the bar closed. the motel was only a
two-minute walk from the bar. rp had some marihuana at the bar that they could
share. after the smoke break, they returned to the bar. rh and bb left after bb
was told to leave because he took some alcohol outside the bar.
the parties head to the
motel

at
the end of the night, the four went to rp and cm’s motel.

st
and rp walked together. cp and cm walked together about three feet behind st
and rp. st recalled that she and rp engaged in conversation, but she could not
recall what the conversation was about. she also recalled telling rp, “don’t
do anything weird”. she recalled that he asked her why she would say that, and
he was “stunned”. she told him that it was a joke. she said, “i just met
you”. when asked in court why she said that, she stated that she “just felt
that i needed to say it.”

as
they walked, rp had his arm around st’s waist. “i allowed that”, she said. 
she recalled that the “don’t do anything weird” comment was made after he had
his arm around her. he did not remove his arm after she made the comment.

st
did not tell him that she had a boyfriend.

cp
recalled thinking that it was “fine” to go to the motel room with st, rp and
cm. she thought, “what can happen in deep river?” she opined that deep river
is a safe town and “nothing normally happens here”.

st
agreed that it was drizzling on the night in question. she disagreed that her
pants were wet from sitting outside in that weather. cp said it was not raining. 
cm said it was wet, but he could not recall whether it was raining.

when
they arrived at the motel, they went directly to room 101 which was the room
that rp was sharing with cm.

the
room was a typical motel room with two double beds. there was liquor and
marihuana on the table. next to rp’s bed, was the bathroom. unlike typical
motel rooms where the bathroom opens into a hallway, in this case, the bathroom
opened adjacent to one of the beds.

once
there, st had a little bit of liquor which she mixed with pepsi. 
she made the drink herself. rp had a drink of the same concoction. st
probably had a piece of rp’s left-over pizza. cp did not consume any of the
pizza because she is a vegetarian. she ate some chips instead.

cp
recalled consuming a drink which was a mixture of gatorade and liquor. the
drink was mixed by either rp or cm.

cm
recalled mixing a rum and coke each for himself and cp. he stated that st took
his drink so he switched to drinking beer.

all
four parties were in the room. st recalled that she and rp were standing or
sitting on the corner of rp’s bed. cp and cm were standing next to the
window. each couple was involved in their own conversation.

cp
recalled that, although the parties were essentially paired up, she was able to
converse with everyone and hear their conversations. that said, she was not
really listening to st and rp’s conversation because she was focused on her
conversation with cm.

after
about five or ten minutes, all four went outside to smoke a joint. st and rp recalled
that it was st’s idea to consume the marihuana. cm recalled that rp rolled the
joint before they left. st recalled consuming “two puffs”. they sat on a
ledge or raised flower bed next to the sign for the motel.

rp
testified that the ledge was wet and his pants got wet from sitting on it.

with
respect to her general level of intoxication at that point, st stated that she
was “feeling good” and “definitely intoxicated”. she did not, however, notice whether
she had lost any coordination or problems with her memory. she described her
situation as “mellow” and “cross”.

rp
did not believe anyone was intoxicated.

cm
stated that he had a buzz but was still in his “right state of mind”. he did
not perceive anyone else to be intoxicated. the marihuana made him feel
relaxed.

as
they sat outside, st’s and rp’s legs were touching. he also continued his
earlier practice of putting his arm around st’s waist. she recalled that his
hand was moving in a rubbing motion after about two minutes. as she
indicated before, she did not care that his arm was around her waist and she
“let it happen”. at one point, however, st removed his arm. she stated that
he did not say anything when she removed it.

cp
and cm did not observe rp and st touching. cp recalled thinking, however, that
it was “weird” that st and rp were “almost touching” because they didn’t know
them, and st had a boyfriend. she kept this thought to herself. cp testified
that she felt “more relaxed” after consuming the joint. she was not sure if
there was any change to st’s demeanour. rp said that he was ready to go to
bed. cp could not remember whether anything was said in response to this
announcement.

after
about five minutes, the four individuals went inside.

rp
and st arrived at the motel room first with cp and cm bringing up the rear.

st
testified that when they returned to the motel room, rp went to use the
bathroom. st stated that she had to use the bathroom very badly and she went
in. she was not aware that rp was in the bathroom before she went in. when
she went in, she observed rp standing up, presumably urinating. she waited
for him to finish and then she used the bathroom. st closed the door after he
left. nothing else occurred while they were in the bathroom. no words
were exchanged.

rp
essentially gave the same evidence with respect to the encounter in the
bathroom.

cp
recalled that while st was using the bathroom, rp went to his bed and got in. 
he did not remove any clothing.

after
using the bathroom, st sat on the edge of rp’s bed. she noticed that cp and cm
were still talking and things between them appeared to be “going well”. from
st’s perspective, she was waiting to leave. she recalled saying, “we’ll leave
soon”. cp told her, “ok”.

cp
recalled seeing st go into the bathroom while rp was using it. she believed
that st was “really embarrassed but she really needed to pee.” cp recalled
that once rp left the washroom, the door was closed while st used it.

cm
stated that by the time he got back to the motel room with cp, st was using the
washroom. rp was rolling a joint. he did not see st go into the washroom
while rp was in there.

in
cross-examination, defence counsel showed cm his statement to the police where
he indicated that he remembered st going into the washroom at the same time as
rp. he agreed that this was accurate but stated that they were not in the
washroom at the same time for very long.

he
resumed chatting with cp. they sat on the bed with their backs against the
headboard. he then stated that, “we were facing each other, i would imagine.” 
he then corrected himself and said, “…i would say.”

in
re-examination, cp agreed that what he said in his statement and what he said
in court about observing st and rp in the washroom at the same time was
inconsistent. he stated that he thought he was sure when he testified in-chief
but he realized that he had forgotten what he said in his statement.

rp
recalled that when he exited the bathroom (and st went in), cp and cm were
coming in from outside.
rp’s evidence about his sense of how he and st were
getting along

rp
recalled that as they went back to the motel room, he thought he and st were
“hitting it off pretty good.”

he
further recalled that when they were outside sharing the joint, the “vibe” was
good. he remembered that his legs and st’s legs were touching. he described
st as “pretty friendly” and stated that “she didn’t seem to be disinterested.” 
he believed that she had plenty of opportunities to leave if she was uncomfortable. 
he thought that st was interested in him.
evidence with respect to the removal of st’s pants

while
st was sitting on the edge of rp’s bed, rp started to take his shirt off. she
asked him why he was taking his shirt off and rp told her that he was getting
ready for bed. st told him not to remove his pants when she noticed that he
was about to do so.

in
cross-examination, st agreed that she did not tell the police in her statement
that she told rp not to remove his pants.

cp
did not hear this conversation.

cm
stated then when rp came out of the bathroom, he announced that he intended to
take his pants off because they were wet. at this point cm turned and
completely faced cp for privacy. he agreed with defence counsel that cm
thought rp and st were “about to hook up”. cm then got a bit closer to cp.

cm
testified that he could not remember whether he saw rp remove his shirt. he
was given an opportunity to refresh his memory with his statement and he stated
that he did not recall rp’s shirt coming off.

when
asked if he removed his shirt, rp stated, “i don’t think so”. he testified
that he told st that his pants were wet from outside, and he was going to take
them off. he asked her if it was okay for him to do so. she said, “yes”.

at
this point, st saw rp come from his position near the head of the bed to where
she was sitting on the edge. she described his new position as in front of
her. rp then pushed her down on the bed with both hands and started to remove
her pants.

cp
testified that she observed essentially the same thing.

in
cross-examination, st agreed that, owing to her intoxication, she was wobbly so
it was easier for rp to push her down.

she
stated that when he pulled her pants down, he removed her pants and underwear
at the same time. she recalled that her butt was on the edge of the bed and
her head was on his pillow. her feet were hanging off the bed.

st
stated that at no time before this did rp say anything to her.

nor
did she say anything to him.

st
described her pants as cargo style. they were fastened with a zipper, a button
and a tie. rp did not attempt to undo them as he “yanked” them off. she
recalled that it took “hard pressure” for him to pull them off. he was
successful in pulling her pants (and her underwear) down. she was not wearing
any shoes.

in
cross-examination, st agreed that she told the police that rp untied her pants
before removing them.

st
recalled not being aware of what was happening. she did not tense up and she
just lay there. she said that it happened “really fast”.

st
stated that she felt his hands near her “cooter”

and he was “like feeling me up” by going up and down her legs and feeling her
waist area. she stated that he was “hovering”. she could not remember whether
he was using one hand or two. she said his head was close to her body.

in
cross-examination, st stated that she did not tell the police that rp’s hand
was near her vagina.

rp
stated that after st said it was ok to remove his pants, he started to remove
hers. rp stated that he asked st if he could remove her pants because “we were
having a good connection.” and he “figured it was the next step”. when
defence counsel suggested, “some people might say kissing is the next step?”,
rp replied, “i can see that argument”.

when
asked what it was about the interaction with st that made him believe that they
were having a good connection, he stated that st did not do anything specific. 
it was just the way they were acting or talking. he repeated that they were
“hitting it off pretty well” and added, “if i was being a creep she didn’t have
to be in the room.” he said that st was “kind of smiling” when he asked her to
remove her pants.

when
st was asked if she was “smiling” when rp removed her pants, st stated, “i
don’t know. i wasn’t looking at his face.”

rp
denied that st’s pants were particularly difficult to remove. he described
them as “jogger” type pants. there was nothing to unbutton, untie or unzip. 
he recalled seeing her pink lace underwear.

rp
also stated that st lay on her back voluntarily. he did not push her.

at
this point, cp screamed at rp to get off. cp assisted st to get up and she assisted
st with putting her pants back on. st recalled that cp was “furious” and she yelled
at rp, “what are you doing to her?” st stated that her body was “shaky” and
she was “scared. i was just freaking out kind of.”

cp
did not recall seeing rp push st down. cp recalled observing what was going on
and getting up and saying, “what the fuck are you doing?” rp did not reply. she
described st as “kind of just frozen”. she looked at st and asked, “what is
going on?” she recalled saying to st, “you said you want to go. let’s go.”

cp recalled that
her reaction was immediate. she did not expect to see anyone engage in a “sex
act”.

cm recalled seeing
st on her back with rp removing her pants. he did not see how that came about
because he was focused on conversing with cp. he corrected himself and said
that he did not actually see rp removing her pants, but he did see that st’s
pants were down. rp was, however, “right there”.

cm recalled that
cp pushed him out of the way. he recalled that st was wearing pink underwear. 
in re-examination, he did not remember anything else about st’s outfit.

cm recalled
looking at st and she “looked shocked, like she did something wrong.” despite
giving this opinion, he could not give any detailed observations about the
expression on st’s face.

cm added that he
recalled that rp was standing up because cp got mad and said something. he
could not recall what she said. he recalled that cp pushed him out of the
way.

cm stated that
he saw st’s pants on the floor. he then corrected his evidence to indicate
that st’s pants were just past her knee. he denied seeing st’s vagina. when
asked, he stated that st’s underwear were “still up”.

cm stated that
he did not hear rp say anything to st. he repeated that he was focused on cp. 
when asked what he meant by being focused on cp, he stated that he was chatting
with her. when asked if he had intentions to do anything with cp, he stated,
“maybe at some point. i wanted to get to know her.” when asked if he was
hoping for an “intimate reaction”, he said, “no”. in cross-examination, he
stated that he did not hear rp say he was going to remove st’s pants or whether
st made any comment in response. in re-examination, despite his evidence that
he was very focused on the conversation with cp, he insisted that he heard rp
announce that he was removing his pants.

despite this,
later in his evidence, cm stated that when he saw st’s pants down, he thought,
“what’s going on?” the two girls came back to the hotel room. i thought that
there was going to be some intimacy. he denied thinking that all four of them
would be intimate. when asked if he was willing to watch the others get
intimate, he stated, “i guess.” he added, “my feeling now is not to be there.”

rp stated that
cm and cp were laying on the bed and cm’s back was to him. he could not hear
what they were talking about.

rp recalled that
when cp yelled at him and interrupted him in the removal of st’s pants, st’s
pants were down to her thighs. he stated that cp appeared to be “furious”. he
asked st if it was okay and st had no reaction. he said that st appeared
“shocked”. he described her as “almost like a deer in the headlights.” he
denied that she was crying.

st stated that
rp looked scared. he went to bed and put the covers over his face and made a
“squinty grossed-out look” with his face. cp recalled that rp went to
bed and closed his eyes. cm could not remember what rp did.

in
cross-examination, st agreed that rp told her he was “sorry” but she did not
tell the police this in her statement. she also agreed that rp told cp that
“she wanted it.”

when asked about
rp saying “sorry” in re-examination, st stated that she distinctly remembered
it and it came up, after, when rp and cp were “bickering” about what happened. 
she believed that rp was directing the apology at everyone because he did not
look at her when he said it.

rp stated that
when he was removing st’s pants, cp stated “stop, stop, stop. what are you
doing?” rp then put his hands up. he said he “felt pretty small”. he then
said, “sorry, sorry, sorry.”

it took a
few minutes to get st’s pants back on. she was “tipsy”, “stumbling” and she
was crying too. immediately after they got st’s pants back on, they left. in
cross-examination, st agreed that she told the police that she pulled her pants
up herself. although, after looking at her statement, she agreed that this is
what she said, she did not remember actually telling the police this.

in court, cp
could not recall whether she helped st pull up her pants. when her memory was
refreshed with her statement by defence counsel, she agreed that she told the
police that she helped st with her pants and this was accurate.

cp told rp,
“you’re fucked”. cm said, “what the fuck?”

cm testified
that “within seconds” cp and st left. rp said that they left “immediately”.

in
cross-examination, st testified that she told the police that she should not
have let rp touch her. she agreed that she did not voice any objection to what
was going on. she agreed that she would not have said anything if cp was not
there. “i was scared”, she said. when asked if she was “embarrassed”, st
stated that she was “humiliated.” she agreed that she later apologized to cp.

st also agreed
that she thought she had provoked what happened and felt ashamed. she
disagreed that she felt ashamed because she had a boyfriend. she said that she
felt ashamed because “my ass and my vagina was in front of two people i didn’t
know.”
st’s and cp’s actions after the incident

as st and cp
left the motel, st was crying. they tried to call their parents. they also
tried to call cp’s brother. then they walked home.

st recalled wondering,
“did i say something?” and “did i do something?” cp consoled her and did “what
friends do.”

in
cross-examination, st agreed that she later told the police, “i don’t know what
i did for him to do that to me. i didn’t say anything to make him do that.” defence
counsel then suggested that st told the police that she could have said
something to rp. st replied, “i know for a fact that i didn’t”.

cp recalled that
st was extremely embarrassed, hyperventilating and crying. cp was worried
about her. she told st not to be embarrassed and she was there for her. cp
recalled that st was embarrassed because she thought that cp saw her vagina. 
she told her not to be embarrassed. st seemed to feel better after this.

in
cross-examination, cp recalled that st apologized to her. st also told her
that she did not think that what happened was a sexual assault. cp told st
that, in her opinion, it was.

during the walk
home, st called her boyfriend and told him what happened. she wanted to make
sure that he heard about it from her first. in cross-examination, st stated
that she told her boyfriend because she wanted his support.

cp recalled that
they did not go directly to st’s house. they stopped at her house where cp
grabbed a pillow. they then went to st’s house. cp encouraged st to talk to
her mother.

cp recalled that
when they arrived home, they spoke with st’s mother. initially, st did not
want to speak to her mom because she felt ashamed. cp insisted that she do so. 
cp told her that what happened “wasn’t ok” and that someone else needs to
know. cp was also “pretty upset” about it and wanted another support person
for st.

as soon as they
told st’s mother, her mother stated that they were going to the police
station.

earlier, st and
cp discussed going to the police. cp wanted her to go. st did not want to
because she felt that she had provoked what happened.

cp did not
endorse this evidence when she testified. she stated that they did not discuss
calling the police until after st spoke with her mother. cp recalled that when
st’s mother told them they were going to the police she thought it was the
right choice.

when they got to
the police station, the police did not take statements right away. they told st
and cp to come back the next morning when they were “a bit more sober”. although
st felt that she would have had no difficulty accurately telling the police
what happened, she agreed and went back the next day to give her statement.

in
cross-examination, st stated that she was still feeling the effects of
intoxication when she gave her statement to the police. she had a headache and
felt overwhelmed. she did not know whether her state of sobriety could have
compromised what she said to the police.

st stated that
she has not discussed the case with cp. they only discussed how they were each
feeling as a result of what happened. st was aware that cp had spoken with cm
on
snapchat.


st stated that
at no time prior to speaking with the police did she feel she had to change or
modify her version of what took place out of fear that her boyfriend would be
upset with her.

in
cross-examination, she disagreed with the suggestion that she went forward with
the complaint to “save face” with her boyfriend and cp. she also disagreed
with the suggestion that she consented to rp removing her pants but she could
not tell her boyfriend or cp that. “that didn’t happen”, she said.

she did not know
if she would have gone to the police if her mother had not insisted.

she disagreed
that she told cp that she was sorry because she felt responsible for what rp
did. she stated that she “felt bad that it happened because we were supposed
to have a good night.”

she agreed that
she was worried that she provoked rp and that it was somehow her fault.

she agreed that
when she spoke to the police, she told the officer that rp was “scary, weird
and gross”, and that he “looked pervy and had diseases.” when asked if rp was
too gross to go to a motel room with, st stated, “i don’t know.” when asked if
he was too gross to sit on his bed, st stated, “i can sit on someone’s bed!” 
she also agreed that he was not too gross to share a joint with or eat some of
his pizza.

st disagreed
that she saw the encounter as “something of a date.”

st agreed that
she referred to rp as “my guy” when she gave her statement to the police. she
disagreed with the suggestion that she was trying to paint a picture that was
worse than it actually was, either to the police or to the court.

defence counsel
asked cp if she was “on guard” on the night in question. cp said “no.”. 
defence counsel then asked her about her statement to the police where she said
“i was always on my guard”. cp stated that she shouldn’t have used the word
“always”. she stated that she was partially on her guard. she agreed that she
made judgments and jumped to conclusions about some of the men at the bar,
including an “older guy”

who was there.

when asked if
she jumped to any conclusions about rp, cp stated, “yes, i thought he was
nice”. she related that he told her that he was also from a small town. she
described him as a “friendly person.”

cp disagreed
that her loyalty to st has affected how she remembered what she saw. she also
testified that she felt guilty for limiting her association with st and
supporting her out of fear that these efforts would be misconstrued and
interfere with the outcome of the case.
cm’s and rp’s actions after the incident

cm stated that
after st and cp left, he and rp talked and wondered “what the hell is that?”. he
did not remember if they went outside for a cigarette. he denied calling
anyone.

rp stated that
he and cm talked, and they were trying to figure out what happened. rp
remembered staying up with cm and watching
cops
on television. at least
at one point, they went outside and had some cigarettes. the police came at
about 3:00 am.

cm stated that
he did not think anyone was “overly drunk”. despite this, he agreed that he
told the police that they could not take his statement because he was
intoxicated. he stated that it was his belief that it was illegal for the
police to take a person’s statement when they are intoxicated. he agreed that
he did not want to give a statement until he was completely sober.
issues raised during the cross-examination and
re-examination of rp

cross-examination
was not rp’s finest hour.

rp stated that
nothing stood out about his conversation with st that evening. he agreed that
he would have remembered it if she said she liked him, asked for his number or
if they discussed things to do at other times. he agreed that all he could
remember was that she was nice to him.

he agreed with
crown counsel that because st was being friendly and nice to him, he thought
that st was “into” him. he stated, “i figured at least a little. if i was
off-putting in some way, she would have left”.

he agreed that
as the night unfolded, he was interested in what “might happen”. he agreed
that he was shocked when st and cp left because what he thought was going to be
an “awesome night turned out to be not so awesome”.

he agreed that
prior to st’s pants being removed, she “never once” told him that she actually
wanted that to happen. he stated, “i’ve been in very similar situations in the
past where we didn’t have a talk about hooking up but it eventually led to
that.” he agreed that this scenario involved someone other than st.

rp agreed that
he was not contesting that he pulled down st’s pants. he agreed that the pants
could have had a button or a zipper or a tie and he just didn’t remember. nor
could he remember whether her pants were a tight fit. he stated that he could
see st’s underwear after her pants were down.

when asked how
it was that he remembered the details of st’s underwear, rp stated, “that was
the worst night of my life” and st’s underwear, which were pink, were “seared
into” his mind.

with respect to
what he hoped would happen, rp stated, “i was hoping we would start kissing maybe
and then get under the sheets.” he wanted a little bit of privacy.

he did not agree,
however, that removing st’s pants required privacy or that it was too revealing
to pull st’s pants down with cp and cm present. “i figured cp and cm were on
the same page. i figured they were going to go down a similar path”, he
stated.

he agreed that
he did not have a conversation with cp and cm about whether they were “okay”
with him proceeding in this fashion. he agreed that it did not occur to him
that they might not be comfortable with what he was doing.

the crown suggested
that he was so focused on getting st into his bed that he had no regard for how
cp or cm might feel about it. the following exchange took place:
rp: i’m just
comfortable with my own body; i don’t mind getting a little less clothes on. 
that doesn’t bother me.
crown: but you can
understand it might bother someone else?
rp: i guess.
crown: you guess? 
you think that everyone in the world wants to see you naked?
rp: i didn’t
say that.
crown: well, what are
you saying?
rp: some people
might.
crown: some people
might not, though?
rp: yeah.

he agreed that
he was hoping to be intimate with st. crown counsel suggested that he was
going to do “everything in your power to make that happen.” he replied, “until
it made her uncomfortable. she had no issue with it. she didn’t tell me that
i couldn’t do this. i didn’t see any signs.”. he agreed that he made these
assumptions because she was being friendly, and she came back to the motel
room.

rp agreed that
it did not cross his mind that she went to the motel room because she wanted to
share the joint.

with
respect to st’s level of intoxication, rp stated that if he had heard her
slurring her words or had seen her stumbling, he would have asked her if she
was sure about what she was doing.

with respect to
his marihuana consumption, rp stated that he consumes 1.5 grams a day.

the crown asked
him questions about his memory of the incident. to this, rp stated:
it is hard to remember all
these details with something that happened in such a short span. i wouldn't
call it trauma but pretty close to trauma for – hard to remember everything
that happened on such a terrible night. i am trying to forget the worst night
of my life. i think i just put my foot in my mouth. i am not entirely sure
what i meant by that.

rp agreed that
he could not remember if st’s pants were still down when she got up. nor could
he remember if she put her shoes on. he agreed that he did not follow her and
ask if she was okay. “i had already offended her enough”, he stated.

when asked why
it crossed his mind that he had offended her, rp stated, “because cp got up and
called me the lowest”. he stated that st did not say anything that made him
believe that he had done anything wrong. “it was all [cp]”, he stated.

the crown
suggested to rp that he did not care what st thought. he stated, ‘i did care
but there was nothing i could do to remedy that situation. she was not in the
mood to converse. if she wanted to talk, why didn’t she say something right
then and there?”

when the
crown continued to pursue this line of questioning, rp stated that he was
confusing st’s reaction with cp’s. he could not explain how he was confusing
them.

rp agreed
with the proposition that when looked at it from “the other side”, he might
have misjudged the situation. he also agreed with the proposition that just
because st was being nice to him, it did not mean that she wanted to have sex
with him.

he explained, “if
i thought that if there was an issue with it, she would have stopped me. she
would have said something.”

crown counsel
asked rp what his intention was after he pulled st’s pants down. he stated,
“hoping that it would have gotten somewhere further sexually maybe.” crown
counsel asked, “whatever the next thing was you were going to go ahead with
it?” he agreed.

crown counsel
then said, “as long as she didn’t say “stop”, you were going to rely on her
silence?” he then disagreed.

when asked why
he asked st if he could pull her pants down if he was not going to ask her to
do anything else, he replied, “human decency.” crown counsel then asked,
“you weren’t going to show human decency to do the next step?” rp replied,
“unless she said “no”, “stop”, in my mind, she was okay with what was going
on.”

he disagreed
with the crown’s suggestion that as long as st did not say “no” or fight him
off, he would proceed. “i was hoping it would have led to some kind of
relations”, he said. crown counsel suggested, “you were just going to try to
see?” rp replied, “yes.”
re-examination

in
re-examination rp essentially stated that st consented to him removing her
pants.

defence counsel
asked rp what st did to make him think that she was “interested.” rp replied
that when they were walking back from the bar, they were “paired off”, that st
was right beside him being “chummy and friendly”. he stated, “i figured that’s
got to mean something.”

with
respect to where he was when he asked st to take her pants off, rp stated that
he was standing in the middle of the room when he said it.

he stated
he would not have proceeded further if st had said that she did not want to, or
if she had recoiled from him touching her. he agreed that he was going to keep
going if she did not fight him. he stopped short of agreeing that he was going
to keep going if she remained completely still and silent, or if he tried to kiss
her and she did not kiss back.
submissions and analysis

defence counsel
argued that the crown had not proven the absence of consent.

she maintained
that rp was honest and straightforward and was unshaken in cross-examination. 
he ensured that he had st’s oral consent before proceeding. when there was the
first sign of objection, he stopped. for reasons set out below, i reject these
submissions.

defence
counsel further argued that there were serious reliability issues in relation
to st, cp and cm, including:
a)
the evidence
with respect to the ingestion of alcohol and marihuana. st and cp were
drinking heavily. they drank before they went to the bar and after they were
at the bar.
i accept that over the course
of the night, st and cp had approximately eight alcoholic beverages. st also consumed
one marihuana drink. st and cp also shared a joint with rp and cm. i find
that rp had four or five alcoholic drinks, and some marihuana which he ingested
before going to the bar. i find that cm had between five and seven alcoholic
drinks.
i find that st and cp were, to
use their word, “tipsy” and rp and cm were also intoxicated. the police did
not want to take st’s and cp’s statement until they were sober. cm did not
want to give a statement until he was sober.
despite the fact that all of
the parties were intoxicated, they gave largely congruent evidence on
everything but the issue of whether st told rp not to remove his pants and
whether rp asked st if he could remove hers. this is not a case where, owing
the consumption of alcohol or marihuana, there is vast disagreement as to what
happened and when.
b)
cp was acting to
protect st.
there was nothing about cp’s
actions which were inappropriate. she was protecting her friend, who she
(correctly) surmised was frozen in the moment when rp removed her pants. cp probably
prevented a grave interference with st’s sexual integrity.
there was nothing in the
evidence that suggested to me that cp and st had prepared a script for court or
that cp was attempting to mislead the court. if anything, both st and cp were
upset that their relationship was curtailed out of fear that they would be
accused of colluding.
cp was a good witness. she
thought carefully about her answers before answering them. she was precise. 
any inconsistencies in her statement were minor.
c)
cp and st’s
mother interfered and insisted st contact the police. defence counsel stated
that this case was before the court solely because of cp’s immediate and extreme
reaction to what happened.
i agree with the
characterization that cp had an immediate and extreme reaction to what she
saw. but what she saw – her friend being sexually assaulted right under her
nose – was deserving of an immediate and extreme reaction.
i agree that st’s mother
insisted that st contact the police. i find that cp supported that decision. 
cp also made it clear that to st that, in her opinion, what rp did was a sexual
assault.
neither were wrong. st was
frozen and incredulous with respect to what happened to her. the reaction of
cp and st’s mother was not extreme. rp did something that he was not entitled
to do. whether st, in that moment, or in the moments and hours immediately
after the incident did not understand that what happened was criminal is
immaterial. cp, and st’s mother, were not wrong.
d)
st had to make
good on her story to save face with cp, her mother and her boyfriend.
i disagree. st was an honest
witness who did her best to tell the truth. to be sure, the fact that st had a
boyfriend, put her in an awkward position. she might have been afraid as to
how things looked, but in the final analysis, she did nothing wrong.
her “crime” was being nice to
rp, sharing a couple of hours of conversation with him, allowing him to put his
arm around her, allowing their legs to touch while they shared a joint, sharing
a joint with him and sitting on his bed in his motel room, all in the presence
of her friend and rp’s friend, all while she had a boyfriend. none of this
requires her to “save face”. st testified that she wanted her friend cp to
have some fun. things with cp and cm seemed to be “going well”. just before
the incident, she was getting impatient and she made it clear to cp that they
would go soon.
she wanted to call her
boyfriend right away because she wanted his support.
i reject any suggestion that
she made everything up or blew it out of proportion in order to save face with
her boyfriend.
e)
st testified
that she did not know if she had said something to make rp do that.
i agree with the crown’s
submissions on this point, which i have discussed below.
the unequivocal evidence is
that st was completely shocked and surprised by what happened. she froze. she
was unable to process it. when she started to process it, she was
incredulous. her evidence that she did not know if she had said or done
something to make rp take off her pants was rhetorical and expressed out of
utter disbelief with what had happened.
she knew she did nothing wrong.
when she wondered if she had said something or done something to make rp
sexually assault her, she was trying to figure out what would have made him do it
because it did not make sense to her.
i find that there is nothing
about this statement that reflects consent or leaves me in doubt as to whether
st consented.
f)
st
testified that her police statement was affected by her hangover.
i have already commented on the
level of intoxication of the parties. i am not surprised that st was hungover
when she spoke to the police. except for the issue about rp touching near her
vagina, the inconsistencies and omissions between her statement and her
evidence in court were minor and inconsequential.
g)
st could not
recall rp’s or cm’s names.
identity was admitted.
that said i am not at all
surprised by the fact that st did not remember rp’s and cm’s names. i find that
this is also why she referred to rp in her statement as “my guy”. she met them
once and they spent -- at most -- two hours together.
if anything, the fact that st
does not remember their names reinforces how new the relationship was and how
incumbent it was on rp to be extremely careful to ensure that st was
consenting.
h)
st was not sure
if rp’s pants were off.
this was an honest answer. she
did not have to be sure. her evidence was that she was frozen and surprised
with respect to what happened to her.
i)
in court,
st said that she asked him not to remove his pants. there is nothing to that
effect in her statement.
i agree that this is an
inconsistency. however, i find that either on its own, or in concert with the
other inconsistencies, this is not sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt as to
the veracity of st’s evidence.
j)
st did not
remember the taking of a photo as the four walked from the bar to the motel.
this is a minor omission. 
nothing turns on it.
k)
st stated that
she poured the drinks at the motel room. everyone else stated that rp or cm
made the drinks.
this is a minor disagreement in
the evidence. nothing turns on it.
l)
no one
indicated that they saw st “naked”.
cp testified that she did not
see st’s vagina because she did not look. cm recalled seeing st’s pants down,
but he was inconsistent about whether he saw them off or around her thighs. cm
saw her underwear. rp recalled seeing her underwear.
st testified that she needed
cp’s help to get her pants back up.
none of this helps me decide
whether rp removed st’s pants with her communicated consent or with an honest
but mistaken belief in her communicated consent.
the issue of whether anyone else
saw st “naked” does not help me assess her credibility and reliability one way or
another.
m)
st stated that rp touched near
her vagina. she did not mention that in her police statement.
i agree that this is a major
inconsistency about a core allegation.
i accept the crown’s submission
that st was naïve. it may also be that this gap in her statement to the police
is explained by the fact that she was hungover when she gave her statement.
while i have no doubt that rp
removed st’s pants without her consent, based on this inconsistency, i do have
a doubt that he went further and touched her near her vagina.
my finding of guilt relates
only to the fact that he removed her pants without her consent.
n)
st displayed
animus when she told the police that rp was “weird, gross, pervy” and “had
diseases”. the evidence suggests that she did not find him repulsive.
i find that this does not
affect her credibility and reliability. it is clear that she did not find him
repulsive as the night unfolded. however, it is not unusual for her to have
expressed that opinion to police once what happened to her started to sink in.
victims often express some
animus towards those who abuse them. it is not unusual. the animus expressed
here was relatively tame and it reflects st’s level of maturity and naiveté
more than it reflects true animus against rp.
it does not leave me in doubt.
o)
st had a motive
to fabricate. she called her boyfriend right away after the incident because
she wanted to control the narrative.
see my comments above with
respect to st’s decision to call her boyfriend. this does not leave me in
doubt.
p)
cp’s evidence is
influenced by loyalty to st.
see my comments above with
respect to cp’s loyalty to st. this does not leave me in doubt.

defence
counsel suggested that st regrets what happened, arguing that regret is not
proof; nor is uncertainty; nor is embarrassment.

i disagree. st
does not regret anything. nor should she.

i asked the
crown to make submissions on only two points raised by defence:
a)
the
inconsistency in st’s evidence about the touching of the vagina; and
b)
st’s evidence
that she wondered if there was something that she said that made rp behave that
way.

with
respect to the first point, the crown submitted that:
a)
there was an
inconsistency between st’s evidence in court and what she said in her police
statement.
b)
st’s evidence
about the vaginal touching came up the first time in her direct evidence. her
evidence on this point was that after pulling her pants down, rp started to
“feel her up” and touch near her vagina.
c)
rp was starting
to do “something” when cp intervened.
d)
the vaginal
touching would have been the “next step”, having regard to the fact that rp
pulled down st’s pants and underwear. rp’s evidence was clear that he intended
to continue with a sexual encounter. in this way, st’s evidence is actually
consistent with what rp said.
e)
st was not
sophisticated enough to lie about this. as an example, the crown reminded me
that st had difficulty calling her vagina by its proper name.
f)
all the
witnesses described the situation as unfolding very quickly.
g)
this
inconsistency is insufficient to reject st’s evidence on the issue of consent.
i have commented on this issue
above. this issue does not leave me in doubt about the issue of consent to the
removal of her pants.
i am, however, in doubt, on the
issue of whether he touched her vaginal area and started to feel her up.

with
respect to the second point, the crown submitted that:
a)
st’s question as
to whether she said something to make him do that was consistent with what she
said in evidence.
b)
st was adamant
in-chief and in cross that she did not want rp to undress her. she did not
want to be undressed in front of her friend and a guy that her friend had just
met. she was clear that she did not consent. she was confused and ashamed about
what she could have done to make him believe that this was ok.
c)
crown counsel
repeated her submissions about st’s sophistication. she also argued that st was
19 and “a bit naive and immature.”
d)
st’s shame and
embarrassment about the situation was further evidenced by the fact that she
apologized to cp after, even though she had not done anything wrong.
e)
crown counsel
maintained that when she said this, st was not suggesting that she was
consenting to what happened. she was confused and trying to figure out why rp
would do this to her.
f)
the
pulling down of st’s pants was very invasive. it is clear that nothing else
happened between them before that would have led to this.
i have commented on this issue
above. there is nothing about st trying to understand how rp could have
possibly thought that she agreed to him removing her pants that leaves me in
doubt.
the legal
framework against which the evidence in this case is applied

as an accused person, rp is always presumed innocent until the state
proves his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

only when the crown proves that rp committed the elements of the
offence charged beyond a reasonable doubt is the presumption of innocence
overcome.

a reasonable doubt
is not an imaginary, far-fetched or frivolous doubt. it is not a doubt based
on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone. it is a doubt that is based on
reason and common sense. it is a doubt that logically arises from the evidence
or the absence of evidence.

to be satisfied of rp’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, i have to
be sure. if i am not sure, i must find rp not guilty.

if i don’t know who to believe, i must find rp not guilty. even if
i believe that rp probably committed the offence, that is not a sufficient
basis on which to find him guilty. probable guilt is not proof of guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt.

the appellate authorities set out the path i must follow in
considering whether the crown has established guilt beyond a reasonable doubt:
a)
first, where the accused testifies and i believe him, i must find
him not guilty.
b)
second, where the accused testifies and even though i do not believe
him, i am left with a reasonable doubt by his evidence, i must find him not
guilty.
c)
third, even if i do not believe the accused or am not left in doubt
by his evidence, if i am left with a reasonable doubt on the basis of the
other evidence i do accept, i must also find the accused not guilty.
only if, at
the end of this exercise, i am satisfied as to the guilt of the accused beyond
a reasonable doubt, must i find him guilty.

i cannot compare the accounts and decide guilt on the basis of which
account i like better.

in following this path, i rely on my experience, reason and common
sense. i must not, however, engage in stereotypical or mythological reasoning
which masquerades as “common sense”.

the evidence that is led before me is assessed by me on the basis of
whether it is credible and reliable.

a witness who is credible, is not necessarily reliable. a witness
may be sincere and credible, but their evidence may also demonstrate that their
recollections are not reliable.

one way of determining whether a witness is credible and reliable is
to gauge their evidence in court against what they said on previous occasions,
such as when they gave a statement to the police.

not every inconsistency, however, gives rise to the conclusion that
a witness is unreliable. some inconsistencies are important; others less so. 
where an inconsistency involves something material about which an honest
witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a
carelessness with the truth which is a cause for concern.

the same issue can arise where a witness “fills in the blanks” with
respect to what took place. a witness may honestly and sincerely believe that
a certain aspect of their evidence is true; analysis on the basis of logic,
reason and common sense might suggest however, that what the witness says – as
honest, sincere and credible as the witness may seem – is not reliable.

memories fade. they can also be faulty and frail. sincere, honest
and credible witnesses can simply be wrong or make assumptions about things
because of the passage of time.
the law
with respect to sexual assault

in order to find rp guilty of sexual assault, i must be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that:
a)
rp intentionally applied force to st.
b)
st did not consent to the force that rp applied.
c)
rp knew that st did not consent to the force that he applied.
d)
the force that rp applied took place in circumstances of a sexual
nature.

appellate courts have given trial judges the following instructions
in assessing the presence or absence of consent:
a)
if the complainant expresses lack of agreement, there is no
consent: section 273.1(d) and (e).
b)
if the case involves a different interpretation of essentially the
same events, trial judges should consider whether the complainant, in her mind,
wanted the sexual touching to occur. once she has asserted that she did not
consent, the question is one of credibility. if the trial judge is satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that she did not consent, the inquiry shifts to the
accused’s state of mind:
r. v. ewanchuk,
(1999)
1999 canlii 711 (scc), 131 ccc (3d) 481 (scc)
at paragraph
61;
r. v. g.f.,
2021 scc 20
at paragraph
29.
c)
the subjective consent of the complainant can, however, be vitiated
by certain conduct against the complainant which causes the complainant to
submit or not resist. this conduct is set out in
sections 265(3)
and
273.1(2)
(c)
of the
criminal code:
i) the
application of force against the complainant or another person (265(3)(a));
ii) threats
or fear of the application of force against the complainant or another person
(265(3)(b));
iii) fraud
(265(3)(c));
iv) the
exercise of authority (265(3)(d)); or
v) the
accused induces the complainant to engage in the activity by abusing a position
of trust, power or authority (273.1(2)(c)).
if one of
these factors exist, any consent that the complainant gave is said to be
“vitiated”. “vitiated” means “of no force and effect.”:
r. v. g.f., supra,
at paragraphs
34-36.
d)
the accused may then establish that on the basis of her words and
conduct, the complainant was consenting:
r. v. ewanchuk, supra,
paragraph
63.
e)
the accused’s belief that the complainant was consenting cannot be
reckless or willfully blind:
r. v. ewanchuk, supra,
at paragraph
65.
f)
silence, passivity or ambiguous conduct is not
consent:
r. v. ewanchuk, supra,
at paragraph
51.
g)
while it is open for a complainant to change her mind, the accused
must make certain that she has truly changed her mind before proceeding with
further intimacies. the accused cannot rely on the mere lapse of time or the
complainant’s silence or equivocal conduct to indicate that there is a change
of heart, nor can he engage in further sexual touching to “test the waters”. 
continuing sexual contact after someone has said “no” is, at a minimum,
reckless conduct which is not excusable:
r. v. ewanchuk, supra,
at
paragraph
52.
h)
the complainant must agree to the specific sex act. agreement to
one form of penetration is not agreement to all forms of penetration. 
agreement to sexual touching on one part of the body is not agreement to all
sexual touching:
r. v. hutchinson,
(2014)
2014 scc 19 (canlii), 308 ccc (3d) 413 (scc) at
paragraph
54. consent must be specifically renewed and communicated for each
sexual act. it is not possible to give “broad advance consent”:
r. v.
barton,
 scc 33 at paragraph 118.
i)
section 273.1
of the
criminal code
requires that the accused must take reasonable steps, in circumstances known to
him at the time, to ascertain that the complainant was consenting. the
reasonable steps requirement rejects the outmoded idea that women can be taken
to be consenting unless they say “no”. there is no catalogue of steps that
constitute “reasonable steps”. silence, passivity or ambiguous conduct is not
a reasonable step. the more invasive the sexual activity and/or the greater
the risk posed to the health and safety of those involved, the greater care is
necessary in ascertaining consent. greater care is also necessary where the
parties are unfamiliar with one another and there is the risk of
miscommunication, misunderstanding and mistake:
r. v. barton, supra,
at
paragraphs 105 to 108.
j)
not only does no mean no, but only yes means
yes. nothing less than positive affirmation is required to establish consent:
r. v. goldfinch,
 scc 38 at paragraph 44.
k)
when assessing the credibility of the complainant the court must be
careful to not rely on impermissible myths and stereotypes under the guise of
common sense and logic:
r. v. arjd,
(2017), abca 237, aff’d (2018), scc
8;
r. v. steele,
(2021) onca 186.
do i
believe the accused?

no.

i do not believe rp’s evidence that he asked st to remove her pants
before proceeding to do so. i do not believe him when he said that st verbally
consented.

i find that rp mistook the fact that st was friendly with him, spent
an hour or two talking with him, allowed him to put his arm around her, allowed
his leg to casually touch hers as they sat outside and shared a joint, and
agreed to come back to his motel room as equivalent to her consent for him to
proceed further.

his evidence in cross-examination, where he essentially endorsed
these beliefs, (and others) is sufficient for me to find that his complete misapprehension
of the situation, not st’s direct verbal consent, caused him to sexually
assault st by removing her pants.

none of those actions are tantamount to communicated consent on the
part of st, nor can they constitute an honest, but mistaken belief in
communicated consent on rp’s part. they are a distortion of what was actually
going on.
am i left
in doubt by the evidence of the accused?

no.

as i set out, rp’s evidence was steeped in myth and stereotype about
the meaning of consent. against this backdrop, i simply cannot accept the
proposition that his evidence that st verbally consented to the removal of her
pants might be reasonably true.

rp’s evidence is, essentially, that because st did not say “no” or
did not leave, or did not recoil, he had a licence to experiment with her
sexual integrity. if during one of those experiments, she said “no”, then he
understood that he had to stop. unless she said “no”, she was fair game to his
experimentation. this ignores the admonishment from the supreme court of
canada that “not only does “no” mean “no”, but only “yes” means “yes.””

there was nothing about st’s conduct on the evening in question that
communicated to rp that she wanted him to remove her pants:
a)
a smile, being friendly, or seeming like she is “into him” is not
consent to pull down her pants.
b)
a couple of hours of conversation is not consent to pull down her
pants.
c)
allowing him to put his arm around her as they walked back to the
motel room is not consent to pull down her pants.
d)
sharing a joint, some drinks, or a piece of pizza is not consent to
pull down her pants.
e)
allowing his leg to touch hers as they sat outside smoking a joint
is not consent to pull down her pants.
f)
going back to his motel room (with two other
people, one of whom she also just met), is not consent to pull down her pants.
g)
sitting on the edge of his bed is not consent to pull down her
pants.
h)
the combination of any or all of these factors is not consent to
pull down her pants.

these parties barely knew one another. rp had the duty to be very careful. 
he had to
make sure
that st expressed her consent to pulling down her
pants. this is not a situation where there is prior conduct or a prior
long-standing relationship that helps inform the issue of what was consensual
on the night in question.

consent can be expressed by words or actions. none of the actions
attributed to st, alone or together is sufficient to find that she communicated
consent or that rp had an honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent.

if rp wanted to remove st’s pants, it was incumbent on rp to make
sure that she consented to do so. anything less than that was reckless
“testing of the waters”.

based on his experience with another woman, which turned out to go
as he hoped, rp thought that what he was doing was perfectly acceptable. it
was not. it was a precipitous guess that st would behave in the same manner. rp
assumed that all women were open to sexual touching and only if they objected
or left, was he required to stop.

he assumed wrongly.
on the
basis of the evidence i do accept, am i satisfied as to the guilt of the
accused?

yes.

for reasons i have expressed, except where i have indicated, i
accept the evidence of st and cp.

i accept st’s evidence that she did not consent to rp pulling down
her pants.

i also accept her evidence that she told rp on their walk not to do
“anything weird” and they discussed what she meant by that conversation. i
accept her evidence that she told him, “i just met you.” this was
unchallenged.

i do not believe the evidence of cm’s account on key aspects of what
transpired for the following reasons:
a)
he was inconsistent in his evidence on whether he saw st go to the
bathroom while rp was using it.
b)
he was imprecise in his evidence about how he was positioned with cp
when the touching began. he said, “we were facing each other,
i would
imagine
”. then he corrected himself by saying, “
i should say.
”
c)
he was inconsistent in his memory with respect to the removal of
rp’s shirt.
d)
he was inconsistent on the issue of whether he saw rp removing st’s
pants.
e)
he was inconsistent on whether he saw st’s pants on the floor or
just past her knee.
f)
he was inconsistent about whether he intended to
be intimate with cp.
g)
he expressed the opinion that he believed that some intimacy was
going to take place, without any detail as to why he had that opinion. he
seems to have made the same error.
h)
he expressed a willingness to watch rp and st be intimate on the
evening in question, even though he now realised that would not have been
appropriate.
i)
he did not think he, or anyone else, was “overly
drunk” but he refused to give a statement to police because he was intoxicated.

i found cm inconsistent, imprecise, glib and quick to give an answer
before thinking. i cannot rely on much of what he said about the key aspects
of the evidence.
summary of findings

i do not believe rp and i am not left in doubt by his evidence.

i believe st and cp. except where i have indicated, i find their
evidence was credible and reliable.

i do not believe cm, nor do i find his evidence reliable.

i find that rp sexually assaulted st by removing her pants without
her communicated consent.

i find that rp did not have an honest but mistaken belief in st’s
communicated consent.

i have a doubt as to whether rp touched st’s vaginal area after he
removed her pants.

he will be found guilty as charged.
released: august
13, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson

i was advised that “pre-gaming” is slang for individuals who drink at
home before going to licensed establishments. this is done, apparently, in
order to consume more alcohol and “have a bigger buzz” and save money.

a lot of time was consumed at trial discussing who bought drinks for
whom and how many drinks were purchased. nothing really turns on this. i
ultimately find that the parties were mildly intoxicated as a result of the
consumption of alcohol and/or marihuana which occurred before they attended the
bar, while at the bar, at the motel room and during a break to smoke a joint at
the motel room. in st and cp’s case, they consumed approximately eight
alcoholic drinks over the course of the evening.

throughout her evidence st referred to cm by “cody” which his not his
actual first name. i am satisfied that when she was referring to cody, she was
referring to cm. in cross-examination, st agreed that she did not remember either
rp’s or cm’s names.

on cp’s evidence, there may have been more than one smoke break. it
does not matter. all of the parties were in agreement that they smoked or
vaped tobacco. up to this point, no marihuana was involved.

from st’s evidence in court and her statement to the police, there is
disagreement as to whether she poured “whiskey and pepsi” or “rum and coke.” 
nothing turns on this. it is a distinction without a difference.

i was advised that “cross” is slang used to describe the increased
sense of euphoria that comes from mixing two different drugs, in this case
alcohol and marihuana.

st stated that “cooter” was slang for “vagina”.

during st’s evidence in-chief, the parties asked me if an application
pursuant to
section 278
of the
criminal code
was needed in order to
introduce the
snapchat
conversations. i was advised that cp had consented
to the records being used, but cm had not. after reviewing the text of the
conversations over a break, i stated that, firstly, since neither party
intended to introduce the conversations in-chief or in cross of st, st’s
evidence should be completed. secondly, in light of the fact that the
snapchat
conversations contained some private discussions between cm and cp, i
advised that in absence of consent from cm, we would have to proceed with a
mid-trial
section 278
application if the parties wished to introduce the
conversations in evidence. at this point counsel opted not to proceed
further. i advised them that the ruling was without prejudice to their right
to revisit it, should they wish to do so in light of the evidence called or as
part of an application under sections 9(1) or 9(2) of the
canada evidence
act. the application was never renewed.

there was some evidence that an older man, who is a well-known
resident of deep river, was at the bar that night. nothing turns on this.