source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj390/2025oncj390.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. alsendi, 2025 oncj 390
date: 
2025 07 21
court
file no.: 23 48119803
toronto
region
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
suhail alsendi
before
justice cidalia c.g. faria
heard
on january 22, may 27, and july 21, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on july 21, 2025
abrahim ahmed.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
sarah cressatti................................................ counsel
for the accused suhail alsendi
faria j.:

suhail alsendi pled guilty on january 22, 2025,
to having trafficked cocaine on october 12, 2023, in toronto contrary to s.5(1)
of the
controlled drugs and substances
act. a pre-sentence report
(psr) was ordered, submissions were heard, and the parties requested a second
opportunity to make submissions as a result of further developments. i granted
the request and heard further submissions.

these are my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts

the parties filed an agreed statement of facts.

on october 12, 2023, an
undercover officer of the toronto drug squad called suhail alsendi. during
their telephone conversation, mr. alsendi agreed to sell the officer a quantity
of cocaine for $900.

the officer met mr. alsendi at 1570 wilson avenue.
mr. alsendi got into the officer’s car and sold him 12.87 grams of cocaine for
$900. police arrested mr. alsendi after the deal.

upon arrest, mr. alsendi dropped 6.49 g of
cocaine, and 13.5 pills of oxycodone on the front passenger floor mat of the
undercover officer’s car. he had a prescription for the oxycodone. the search
incident to arrest led to the seizure of bear spray and $380.00 from mr.
alsendi’s backpack.

additional aggravating facts agreed to are:
i.
on september 30, 2023, using the same number as
that of october 12, a different toronto drug squad undercover officer called
mr. alsendi who agreed to sell that officer cocaine for $220.00. mr. alsendi
met that officer at the same wilson address, got into that officer’s car, and
the two drove to 200 exbury rd. mr. alsendi went into the building and returned
shortly after with 3.57 g of cocaine for $220. mr. alsendi was not arrested,
and the investigation continued.
ii.
on october 6, 2023, a different officer called mr.
alsendi using the same telephone number. mr. alsendi agreed to sell that
officer a quantity of cocaine for $80. the two met at a tim horton’s restaurant
on keele st. mr. alsendi got into that officer’s car. the officer was told to
drive to 200 exbury rd. mr. alsendi got out of the car, went into the building
and came back to the car. he then sold that officer 1.11g of cocaine for
$80.00. mr. alsendi was not arrested, and the investigation continued. this
officer called mr. alsendi on october 12, 2023, as well.
iii.
on october 12, 2023, toronto police executed a
search warrant at mr. alsendi’s home at #406 – 200 exbury rd. inside mr.
alsendi’s bedroom, police located empty drug packaging, a replica firearm, and
a crossbow.
ii.
suhail alsendi

mr. alsendi is now 33 years old. he was 32 at
the time of the offences. he has no criminal record.

pursuant to his psr, mr. alsendi grew up in a
loving home in baghdad, iraq where his father worked, and his mother cared for
the children. he completed high school and attended one year of university. he
was exposed to the violent conflict that led to the iraqi war during which his
father was injured. he immigrated to canada as a sponsored refugee with his
family. his father is on disability because of injuries sustained during the
war. in 2012, mr. alsendi became a permanent resident at the age of 21, and
never applied for citizenship.

mr. alsendi still lives with both his parents
who are in their 60’s, his brother who is a barber, and his sister who works in
insurance. his father was recently diagnosed with cancer and needs treatment.
counsel submitted mr. alsendi will be his primary care giver during this time. they
are a close family and he attends church with them weekly.

he has a limited employment history, though he did
work as manual labour, in a bakery, in construction, and with a manufacturing
company at different times. he has not worked since 2017 when he was injured in
a motor vehicle accident and injured again in a motorcycle accident in 2020. he
is on social assistance.

mr. alsendi reports he has no addictions but
uses marijuana throughout the day to manage his pain and consumes a “couple of
shots” of alcohol one or two evenings a week. he is proud he did not misuse his
prescribed medication after his two accidents. he reported having “lots of
friends” with whom he plays pool and soccer. he goes fishing and he likes to
swim.

mr. alsendi reported to the psr author that he
offended because he needed money for personal expenses, pay his bills, in particular,
to purchase medication, and “live a life.” he stated he “did not approach
people to sell drugs”, people called him. he believes he has limited legal work
opportunities.
iii.
legal principles

the fundamental purpose of sentencing is set out
in
s. 718
of the
criminal code. the objectives of sentencing, also set
out in
s. 718, are supportive of that purpose. proportionality, as the
fundamental principle of sentencing, serves to give effect to the purpose and
objectives of sentencing. the secondary principles set out in ss. 718.2 assist
to giving effect to proportionality.

secondary principles include considering
aggravating and mitigating factors (s.718.2(a)), parity (s. 718.2(b)), and
restraint (s. 718.2(e))

the sanction that the court imposes should have one or more of
the following objectives:
to denounce unlawful conduct
to deter the offender and other
 persons from committing offences
to separate offenders from
 society, where necessary
to assist in rehabilitating
 offenders
to provide reparations for harm
 done to victims or to the community
to promote a sense of
 responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims
 and to the community.
iv.
position of the parties

both parties agree that a custodial disposition
is warranted. the dispute is whether it should be served in custody or in the
community.

the crown submits the range is 6 months to 2
years for this level of drug trafficking and given the nature of the drug, the
number of times he trafficked and the lack of insight, mr. alsendi’s sentence
should be a carceral one.

the defence did not dispute the range but
submitted that as this is mr. alsendi’s first offence, he suffers from a physical
disability and will be caring for his father, a conditional sentence meets the
principles of sentencing.

the crown added that since submissions were made
on may 27, 2025, mr. alsendi has been charged with serious provincial offences
allegedly committed while mr. alsendi was on bail for this offence, and he is
now in custody. he submits this fact should be considered when determining if a
conditional sentence is appropriate.

the defence submits that at the time she made
the submission that mr. alsendi had no outstanding charges and was having no
difficulty following his bail conditions, she was correct. however, the
situation has changed.
v.
analysis

it is now noted that mr. alsendi has been
charged while on bail. however, mr. alsendi is presumed innocent of those
charges, he is still considered a first-time offender before me, and so the new
charges, though noted, are ultimately of little weight.

the main aggravating factors in this case are:
i.
although mr. alsendi pled to trafficking cocaine
on october 12, 2023, he also trafficked on 2 other occasions.
ii.
cocaine is a hard drug.
iii.
the quantum of cocaine mr. alsendi trafficked was
not insignificant.
iv.
he had a replica handgun in his bedroom and empty
drug packaging. this is an item of concern for a drug dealer to possess.
v.
mr. alsendi was pursuing economic advantage via
drug trafficking. he has no addiction according to him, he is housed with his
family, and he receives social assistance.
vi.
he has no insight as the harm his offending
causes the community and vulnerable addicted people. he communicated a sense of
entitlement given he feels he has limited employment choices, people come to
him to purchase the drugs, and he somehow feels victimized by police.

the mitigating factors are:
i.
mr. alsendi has no criminal record which requires
consideration as a first-time offender.
ii.
he pled guilty which demonstrates
accountability.
iii.
his guilty plea saves resources in the criminal
justice system in this jurisdiction.
iv.
his plea obviates police witnesses from having
to attend court, and are thus available to continue with their professional duties.
v.
his family appears to be pro-social and able to
emotionally support him should he choose to rehabilitate himself.

a conditional sentence is available in this
circumstance as trafficking is not an excluded offence per
s. 742
of the
criminal
code, there is no minimum sentence, and neither probation nor a
penitentiary sentence is warranted. three of the five criteria are thus met.

however, i must determine whether the last two
criteria are met: first that mr. alsendi will not be a danger to the community;
and second, whether a conditional sentence would meet the fundamental
principles of sentencing in this case.

given that mr. alsendi has no criminal record,
and this offence is not violent, strict terms would likely be able to manage the
risk of danger to the community. however, as the ontario court of appeal noted
in
walker,
a lack of understanding the seriousness of the offence is a concern that weakens
the appropriateness of a conditional sentence. mr. alsendi has little insight,
if any, to the extensive damage drug dealing causes individuals and the
community.

however, it is on the fifth criteria that i find
a conditional sentence order is definitively inappropriate in this case.

i am mindful that a conditional sentence can
reflect the principles of denunciation and deterrence as stated in
proulx. however,
it would not do so sufficiently in this case. a conditional sentence would not
adequately reflect the gravity of the offence and blameworthiness of mr.
alsendi.

although the sentence for mr. alsendi as a first
offender must be a restrained one, and in keeping with others similarly
situated, the primary applicable principles are denunciation and deterrence
given the number of times mr. alsendi was selling drugs, the quantum, and his
lack of insight.

he wanted to make more money than he received
from social assistance so as to live a better life. there are large numbers of
people in our community with equally challenging physical ailments without mr.
alsendi’s education, employment skills, housing, friends, and supportive family
who make ends meet without turning to criminality to improve their finances.

moreover, not only does mr. alsendi claim no
substance use issues, but he also confidently asserted he “separates himself
from bad influences.” as a result, mr. alsendi’s offending was definitive,
well-planned, purposive criminality.

in this circumstance, a conditional sentence is
insufficient to reflect the applicable sentencing principles of denunciation
and deterrence, and mr. alsendi’s high blameworthiness.

counsel submitted that as a permanent resident,
a carceral sanction over 6 months may have serious negative collateral
consequences on mr. alsendi’s status in canada.

that may be accurate. however, collateral
immigration consequences cannot so affect a sentence as to distort it and make
it disproportionate,
which in this case, would be the effect of a conditional sentence.
vi.
sentence

mr. alsendi, you are sentenced to a 12-month
jail term, in addition to the pre-sentence custody you have served enhanced by
1.5.


you will also be on probation with terms to assist
you with improving your life skills and encourage you to find employment you
can manage.

finally, i also make the following ancillary
orders:
(1)
a dna order pursuant to s.487.04(b).
(2)
a forfeiture order for all the items seized.
(3)
a s.109 weapons prohibition order for 10 years.
released: july 21, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria

exhibit 1: agreed statement of facts, january 22, 2025

exhibit 2: pre-sentence report, suhail alsendi, april 11, 2025

r. v. walker,
2021 onca 863
at para.
4.

r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5 (canlii), 2000 s.c.c. 5 at para.
22.

r. v. pham,
2013 scc 15 (canlii), 2013 s.c.c. 15 at para.
14-6.

439 days minus 49 days enhanced to 74 days, for 365 days to serve.