source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj520/2025oncj520.html

citation:
r. v. samuel, 2025
oncj 520
date: october 6, 2025
ontario
 court of justice
toronto
between:
his
 majesty the king
— 
 and —
brandon samuel
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
 the crown
l.
 will
for
 the defendant
g.
 tomlinson
heard: july 21-23 and 25,
 2025
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction

on april 6, 2024, police stopped a vehicle
with two occupants. mr. samuel was behind the wheel and ms. maxine howell-lang
was the passenger. the two of them were involved in a professional relationship
where he paid her for her intimate companionship. ms. howell-lang had a restricted
handgun with a defaced serial number tucked into the waistband of her pants.
she told the police that it belonged to the defendant who had assaulted and
confined her in the car.

as a result, the defendant was charged with assault,
assault with a weapon (a bottle), kidnapping, forcible confinement, pointing a
firearm, as well as a host of other firearm possession offences. ms. howell-lang
was charged with various offences as well.

the defendant elected to be tried by a judge
of the provincial court and pleaded not guilty before me to all charges.
b.
the
evidence
(a)
introduction

maxine howell-lang testified for the crown
as did p.c. h. masoul, p.c. i. nicoara, and p.c. g. civichino.

mr. samuel testified for the defence.

several audio/visual exhibits and an agreed
statement of fact were filed as exhibits.

i shall not set out the evidence in detail. a
transcript of the evidence is readily available. rather, i shall summarize the
witnesses’ versions of events with emphasis on the salient aspects of their
testimony.
(b)
ms. howell-lang’s version of events

according to ms. howell-lang, she and the
defendant met that day so that they could have a drink and he could give her a
present. it was her birthday that day.

he arrived in his cadillac and came into the
lobby of the apartment building she had directed him to. she met him there and
they went to his car which was parked across the street.

once in the car they began to argue over money
he said she owed him. she denied owing the defendant any money. she tried to
get out of the car, but he grabbed her by the hair and would not let her out of
the car.

he then drove off. she screamed and tried to
crash the car by grabbing the steering wheel. he struck her with a bottle of
liquor and pointed a gun at her.

he then turned left into a street off st.
clair avenue. he got out of the car as a police car pulled in behind them. as
he left the car, he told her “if you say anything you already know”. she thinks
he left the gun on the driver’s seat when he got out. she put the gun in the rear
waist band of her pants and emerged from the car to speak to the police. they
arrested her for assault, and she told them about the gun in her pants.
(c)
ms. howell-lang’s cross-examination

cross-examination of ms. howell-lang
revealed that her testimony was rife with contradictions and questionable
failures of recollection. she falsely complained to the police of bleeding from
her face. she falsely told the police that she had gone to law school for six
years. she at first denied there was a weapon in the car then told the police
that there was a gun or perhaps a knife behind her back and that the defendant
had put it there, quite contrary to her trial evidence. she testified that she
told the police about the gun before being arrested which is clearly not
correct. she had consumed cocaine and alcohol and perhaps other psychotropic
drugs shortly before the incident.
(d)
the police testimony

p.c. masoul dealt principally with ms. howell-lang
after the cadillac was stopped. ms. howell-lang was crying hysterically. he
asked her if there were any weapons in the car and she said there were not. she
then told him that the defendant had put either a knife or a gun in her
waistband. he did not see any injuries on her.

p.c. nicoara observed the driving of the
cadillac for a considerable period before police pulled it over and did not
note any erratic or unlawful driving. she first dealt with the defendant after
he emerged from the car. she then engaged with ms. howell-lang.

ms. howell-lang told her that the defendant
had put something in her waistband. p.c. nicoara searched ms. howell-lang and
found a handgun tucked into her rear waistband under a jacket and a sweater
that was tied around her waist.

p.c. civichino also witnessed the driving
which did not strike him as unusual. he then dealt with the defendant after the
defendant emerged from his car. the defendant told him that he had had an
argument with ms. howell-lang and that she had struck him in the face.

in-car camera video shows the defendant
being visibly upset when he hears a reference to the firearm on the police
radio as he sat in the back of a police car.
(e)
the agreed facts

mr. samuel admits that the firearm in
question is a firearm by definition and that it is both prohibited and restricted.
he also admits that its serial number had been effaced. he further admits that
he was not licensed to possess it.

the parties also agree that pc tan removed a
curly black hair from the seized firearm. the hair was located when pc tan
removed round #7 from the magazine. the defendant admits that the hair is his.
(f)
the testimony of mr. samuel

the defendant was 40 years old when he
testified and had no criminal record.

according to the defendant, he had no
knowledge of the firearm that the police found in ms. howell-lang’s possession.
he agreed to meet her that day to have a drink in celebration of her birthday
and to retrieve the $200 she owed him.

he met her in the lobby of the apartment
building she directed him to. they went to his cadillac, and both drank from a
bottle of brandy that he had in the car. she then asked to be driven to a
nearby walmart after which she would pay him.

before departing for the walmart, they began
to argue. he asked her to get out and she refused. he then decided that he would
take her to the walmart in hopes of eventually getting his $200. she began
hitting him and continued to yell at him. he then reconsidered the trip to
walmart and decided to turn around and take her back to the apartment where he
had met her, which he believed was her home.

as he turned around on a side street near
warden and st. clair the police arrived. he got out of the car and told the
officers that ms. howell-lang had assaulted him.

in his testimony, the defendant denied any
knowledge of the gun and denied ever assaulting ms. howell-lang and denied
confining or kidnapping her.

when asked about the police having found his
hair on the gun, he had no explanation for its presence on the gun.
c.
analysis
(a)
introduction

this case turns principally on the
credibility of mr. samuel and ms. howell-lang, and i must thus apply the rule in
r. v. w.d.,
1991 canlii 93 (scc), s.c.j. no. 26, which can be summarized as follows: if
i believe the testimony of mr. samuel, i must of course find him not guilty.
even if i am not convinced by his testimony, it may nonetheless, when examined
in the context of all the evidence, raise a reasonable doubt. if it does, i
must also find him not guilty. if it does not raise a reasonable doubt, i must
examine the evidence that i do accept to see if it proves the criminal allegations
against the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. if it does not, the defendant
must be acquitted. if it does, he must be found guilty.
(b)
the credibility of the witnesses and their accounts

as i set out above, ms. howell-lang’s
testimony was rife with contradictions and questionable failures of
recollection. her account is manifestly unreliable, and her credibility is
wanting.

the police did not see any erratic driving
which one would expect if she had indeed behaved in the car the way she
testified that she had.

ms. howell-lang’s demeanour as depicted on
the in-car camera on the way to the booking station does not inspire confidence
in the reliability of her account.

on the other hand, the defendant’s testimony
was delivered in a calm and straightforward fashion. nothing in his
cross-examination undermined the cogency of his evidence. as referred to above,
ms. howell-lang’s testimony is so inconsistent and unreliable that it does not
successfully rebut his account.

there are only two items of evidence that
might call the defendant’s account into question: the dna evidence, and his
reaction as he sat in the back of the police car after his arrest.

as concerns the dna evidence, it proves that
one of the defendant’s hairs was located and removed from the gun while a
police officer was handling the magazine. the agreed statement of fact does not
specify where on the gun the hair was located. and, regardless of where it was
located, no evidence was led as to when the hair was deposited on the gun nor
was any evidence led to support the proposition that the hair landed on or in
the gun by primary transfer while the defendant was handling the gun (as
proposed by the crown), as opposed to by secondary transfer as ms. howell-lang
handled the gun. given the intimate nature of their relationship, there was
ample opportunity for transfer of one of the defendant’s hairs to an article of
ms. howell-lang’s clothing or to her body. such a hair might easily have been
transferred to the gun by ms. howell-lang thereafter, without the defendant
ever coming into contact with the weapon.

the defendant’s reaction in the police car
(summarized above) is equivocal. the defendant was clearly upset and angry when
he repeatedly swore as he heard voices on the police radio referring to the gun
that they had discovered. but his mood also coincided with his arrest and
sudden loss of liberty. it is impossible to conclude that these utterances
(“fuck…fuck..”) are evidence of consciousness of guilt regarding the gun and
not anger and frustration at his situation more generally.
d.
conclusion

i am thus left with a reasonable doubt as to
what occurred on april 6, 2024. i also have a reasonable doubt that the
defendant ever possessed the handgun found in ms. howell-lang’s pants.

the crown has failed to prove any of the
criminal allegations against the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.

the charges are dismissed.
released on october 6,
2025
justice
russell silverstein