source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj544/2025oncj544.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. bajwa, 2025 oncj 544
date:
october 17, 2025
information
no.: 121102200942
central
west region - burlington
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jugrag bajwa
before
justice brian g. puddington
reasons
for judgment released on october 17, 2025
h. somal............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
s. hutton...................................................................................... counsel
for jugrag bajwa
table of contents
overview...
1
legal principles..
2
i)
the presumption of innocence.
2
facts..
2
analysis..
3
puddington j.:
overview

mr. bajwa is charged with a number of counts. the crown proceeded
on counts 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 16 and 17. during the trial, the crown invited me to
dismiss count 16. after a directed verdict motion, i found mr. bajwa not
guilty of count 2 (possession of a stolen vehicle). at the end of the trial, i
am left to determine if mr. bajwa stole some mail, damaged a canada post box,
possessed tools for a break and enter, possessed someone else’s driver’s
license and assaulted a police officer while they tried to arrest him.

this trial was somehow scheduled for 4 days. one of the reasons for
this, presumably, was because the accused required a punjabi interpreter. regardless,
the trial did not take the 4 full days, but still involved 6 witnesses for the
crown – two civilians and 4 police officers.

the defence did not call any evidence.

for the reasons that follow, i find that the crown has not proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. bajwa committed any of the offences.
legal principles
i)
the presumption of innocence.

it is important to remember at the outset and
throughout that mr. bajwa is innocent until proven guilty.
the presumption of innocence, and along with it the
standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, are important safeguards to ensure
that no innocent person is convicted of an offence and deprived of his or her
liberty. without these protections, there would be a serious risk of
wrongful convictions – an outcome that cannot be accepted in a free and
democratic society.
facts

i will not spend too much time reviewing the
facts in this case. the record is clear and discloses what happened. in
summary, on march 24, 2022 in georgetown, ontario, the two civilian witnesses
were woken up in the middle of the night to the sound of someone trying to pry
open a community mailbox. they looked out the window and saw two men at the
mailbox, and could see one had a crowbar. the police were called and they
watched from their window as the police effected the arrest nearby. they were
not able to identify mr. bajwa as either of the two people at the mailbox.

the police arrived. the first officer, cst.
wentzell, arrived at the area but did not have the mailbox in sight. instead,
he rolled down his window while he awaited backup and heard the sound of metal
hitting metal, confirming in his mind that someone was breaking into a
mailbox. eventually, backup arrived and a pursuit of a blue gmc terrain
ensued. the gmc fled from police but went down a dead end and was trapped by
the police cars. it tried to escape but hit a concrete lamp post. the
occupants then fled. cst. wentzell did not see mr. bajwa that night. he dealt
with the driver of the car.

officer lowery was involved in the search of the
gmc. he gave very detailed evidence of what was in the car, including tools
that appeared to be for breaking and entering purposes, and various pieces of
id and mail, but never saw mr. bajwa that night.

officer pinkney was part of the swat team. he
chased someone. he does not know where that someone came from, but they
eventually fell and resisted arrest. when asked if he saw that person he
arrested that night in court, he pointed at mr. bajwa, not only the only male
of east indian descent in the courtroom, but the only other person in the
courtroom other than the court staff and lawyers. mr. bajwa was also sitting
next to his lawyer. after taking this male he said was mr. bajwa back to the
cruiser, he had no further contact with him. he also did not testify as to who
he handed this male over to.

officer lean testified as well and described the
damage to the mailbox. photos of that damage were filed as exhibits. he also
described how he was tasked to attend the hospital to deal with a mr. bajwa, though
he could not say (other than through hearsay evidence) how he knew the name “jugrag
bajwa”. he was not there when the arrest took place. he also identified mr.
bajwa by pointing to him in court.

i never heard from any officer who identified
mr. bajwa that night, cautioned him or gave him his rights to counsel. i do
not know how mr. bajwa got to the hospital. i do not know when he was booked. 
i do not know how the name “jugrag bajwa” was obtained and if he spoke to a
lawyer. essentially, mr. bajwa was sitting in my courtroom as an accused
person with very little evidence as to how it was he got there. the only
identification evidence in this trial is as described above.
analysis

it is very dangerous to convict somebody, beyond
a reasonable doubt, based solely on the accused being pointed at in court. 
this is particularly the case when the last time the officers saw the accused
was in the middle of the night, 3 ½ years ago.

almost 3 decades ago in
r. v. myers,
1997
o.j. 4185, our court of appeal warned about the significant frailties of
identifying the accused in the courtroom. our supreme court of canada,
adopting the dissenting reasons of the british columbia court of appeal, also
warned against these frailties in
r. v. reitsma,
1998 canlii 825 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 769.

evidence of mr. bajwa’s presence at the scene of
the mailbox that night can be summarized as follows. officer pinkney arrested
and was assaulted by someone in the middle of the night. he never described
what that person looked like, what they were wearing or how tall they were. he
placed them in a police cruiser and never saw him again. in court, 3 ½ years
later, he pointed at the only other person in the courtroom, mr. bajwa, and
said that was him. officer pinkney was the only officer to identify mr. bajwa
as being at the scene that night. while officer lean spent more time with mr.
bajwa at the hospital, i have no connection or continuity before me as to how
it was mr. bajwa ended up at the hospital, nor what happened after he was
released.

i am not criticizing the police in this matter. 
i am pointing out that the crown has not met their onus. it may very well be
that a plethora of other identification evidence exists. i would assume there
was, as somehow mr. bajwa was arrested and brought to court. i doubt that was
done arbitrarily. but i am left with an evidentiary record that provides we
with nothing as to who formally arrested mr. bajwa, why he was allegedly taken
to a hospital, what happened after the hospital, and how he came to be identified
as “jugrag bajwa”. to convict this presumed innocent individual on that basis
would not only be dangerous, it would be contrary to the principles of
fundamental justice.

being unable to identify mr. bajwa beyond a
reasonable doubt as one of the men at the scene that night, he is found not
guilty on all counts.
released: october
17, 2025
justice
b.g. puddington