source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj22/2025oncj22.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. vanderhyden-steaman, 2025 oncj 22
date: 
2025·01·14
court file no.: 
22-50003958
toronto region
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jameel
vanderhyden-steaman
before justice
 cidalia c.g. faria
heard on july 26, 2023
 and december 13, 2024
reasons for sentence
 released on january 14, 2025
daniel desantis................................................................................. counsel
 for the crown
robert chartier........... counsel for the accused jameel
 vanderhyden-steaman
faria, j.:

jameel vanderhyden-steaman pled guilty on
july 26, 2023, before me, to having been in possession of an unloaded
prohibited firearm with readily accessible ammunition on september 2, 2022,
contrary to
s. 95(1)
of the
criminal code.

sentencing was adjourned for an impact of
race and culture report (ircr), also known as a
morris

report to be prepared. though there was a delay in applying for the report, by
february 2023 there was still no author assigned to the task.

as a result, an enhanced pre-sentence report
(an epsr) was ordered instead, that addressed the role of race in the
offender’s life written by a probation officer. this report was received in
april 2024. as a result of scheduling difficulties, submissions were not heard
until december 13, 2024, on which date i reserved my decision.

these are my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts

on the 2nd day of september 2022, police
constable caringi and police constable chimiski of the toronto opp were
conducting general patrol northbound on weston road at finch avenue in the city
of toronto.

pc caringi observed a blue honda civic at
the weston road and finch avenue intersection. he ran a cpic query of the
honda and learned that one of the two registered owners had an outstanding
warrant.

the officer followed the honda civic and saw
it go through a red-light at finch avenue
and
arrow
road and then merge onto
highway 400.
he
a licence
plate check to confirm the
cpic return and then stopped the honda on
highway 400 northbound to investigate.

mr. vanderhyden-steaman identified himself
with his driver’s licence and the officers arrested him as the wanted male at
3:37 a.m.

at this time, mr. vanderhyden-steaman told
the officers he had a firearm in the back of the vehicle. the officers saw a
black bag the on the floor behind the front passenger seat. inside the bag was
a clear plastic bag with 7 red coloured 12-gauge shotgun ammunition, and a
cooey, sawed-off shotgun. mr. vanderhyden-steaman was then arrested for
possession of a prohibited firearm.
ii.
circumstances of mr. vanderhyden-steaman

mr. vanderhyden-steaman who was 24 years old
at the time of the offence is now a 26-year-old man who works as a forklift
associate and lives with his mother, his grandmother, and his older brother in
alliston ontario. he has a long-term girlfriend of over 7 years.

pursuant to his pre-sentence report (psr), mr.
vanderhyden-steaman did not complete high school. he was diagnosed as a child
with mild attention deficit/hyperactive disorder (adhd) and prescribed
medication according to his mother, though he does not recall taking
medication. he did not receive any supports to enable him to succeed
academically, failed most of his grade 9 classes and was unable to catch up. 
he eventually left school in grade 11. he recalls being suspended for fighting
about 5 times. he witnessed racism but stated he did not personally feel he
experienced it while in school.

he is good with his hands; his mother
described him as handy with a good work ethic and has always worked, even at
jobs he did not like. he has done warehouse jobs, road maintenance, general
labour, and mechanics apprenticeships. he has been working as a forklift
driver for a major automotive manufacturer for over 3 years.

he feels he
has not experienced racism in his work life.

he has no medical issues, nor difficulty
with alcohol, though he smokes cannabis 3 times a day which he finds assists
with his adhd.

he has always lived with his mother. he is
close to her, close to his grandmother and his older brother.

his father was involved in the criminal
justice system, and erratically involved in his life until he was 6 years old. 
his father was then deported to his country of origin. though he has spoken to
his father since, he has no relationship with him. unfortunately, this left
mr. vanderhyden-steaman with no male role models, other than basketball players
and musicians, as he explained to the author of the epsr. this left him
vulnerable to the pull of peers who demanded loyalty as the cultural
expectation of the neighbourhood. this placed him in precarious positions.

it was in this environment that mr.
vanderhyden-steaman disclosed to the epsr author that he experienced racism. 
from the age of 6 to 19, he lived at dufferin and eglington which he named as a
“red flag” community with a high crime rate. there, he witnessed violence and
a consistent police presence “along with stereotyping and discrimination”. he
recalled being stopped by police between the ages of 14 and 17 while on his way
home from school and felt interrogated. he believes he was racially targeted. 
he recalls being followed by police and found it frightening. he was around
firearms incidents and recalls running for cover which made him feel “paranoid
in public and crowded places.”

it was this “paranoia” and fear of gun
violence which, ironically, he explains is the reason he possessed the very
weapon that caused his fear.

fortunately, mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s
grandmother moved to alliston and the family moved with her. he finds this
suburban environment to be a more positive one for him.
iii.
positions of the parties

the crown submits the appropriate sentence
is one of 3 years in the penitentiary minus psc which in this case is 14 days
enhanced to 21 days as
summers

credit. he recommends several
ancillary orders and the forfeiture of the seized firearm and ammunition.

the crown submits the guiding principles are
denunciation and deterrence. he emphasizes the aggravating factors and the
evils associated with the possession of firearms in toronto which courts have
repeatedly decided warrant significant penal sanctions. in his submission, his
position already accounts for consideration of the epsr
morris
factors
and the strict conditions of his release pursuant to
downes.

the defence submits this is an appropriate
sentence for a conditional sentence. he argues the principles of denunciation
and deterrence are reduced by virtue of mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s personal
circumstances, the circumstances of his arrest, his rehabilitation efforts. he
emphasizes the more numerous mitigating factors and that the impact of a conditional
sentence on mr. vanderhyden-steaman would be denunciatory and specifically
deter him. he takes no issue with the ancillary orders recommended by the
crown.
iv.
legal principles

sentencing is meant to reflect and reinforce
the basic values of our society. accordingly, the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a
just, peaceful, and safe society by imposing just sanctions.

the sanction that the court imposes should
have one or more of the following objectives (s. 718):
to denounce unlawful conduct
to deter the offender and other
 persons from committing offences
to separate offenders from society,
 where necessary
to assist in rehabilitating
 offenders
to provide reparations for harm
 done to victims or to the community
to promote a sense of
 responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims
 and to the community.

the sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (s.
718.1).

in addition, the codified principles of
parity (s. 718.2(b)), that an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if
less restrictive sanctions are appropriate in the circumstances (s. 718.2(d)),
and all applicable aggravating and mitigating factors must be considered (s.
718.2(a)).
v.
aggravating and mitigating factors
i.
aggravating

i must consider two serious aggravating
factors:
i.
mr. vanderhyden-steaman was in possession of the
firearm and the ammunition in a motor vehicle while on a public roadway in toronto.
ii.
mr. vanderhyden-steaman was wanted by the
police. he had not surrendered to police in regard to that other matter.
ii.
mitigating

there are many more mitigating factors to
consider, and they are as follows:
i.
mr. vanderhyden-steaman pled guilty. his plea
demonstrates remorse and accountability. his intention to plead was made clear
to the court early via a judicial pre-trial and preparation for trial was never
commenced. he was particularly transparent about taking responsibility at his
allocution. he apologized, referenced his mother and grandmother, the way he
was raised, and his intention to teach the children he hopes to have to follow
the law. his plea also saved resources at a time they are limited, and
obviated witnesses from having to come to court to testify and be taken from
their other public service duties protecting the public.
ii.
he forewent triable issues, particularly a s. 9
charter
challenge as to whether racial profiling was at play in his detention.
iii.
he was 24 at the time of the offence, and 26
years old now. he is still a youthful offender.
iv.
he has no criminal record. this is significant
given he grew up in an area where temptation to becoming involved in criminal
conduct was likely frequent.
v.
he has a solid employment history and is
currently well employed. he is committed to productivity, even when the work
was unpleasant as his mother noted. he has been able to use his skills and
jobs, rather than lament his limited education with laziness. his work ethic
is commendable.
vi.
he has significant family support. his mother,
his grandmother, and his girlfriend were present in court, and they provide him
with positive role models and an environment conducive to success.

these factors all bode well for mr.
vanderhyden-steaman’s rehabilitative potential.
iii.
downes consideration

mr. vanderhyden-steaman has been on release
since september 15, 2022, a period of 2 years and 4 months. he filed an
affidavit

describing his life while he was on house arrest for 10 months from september
15, 2022 to july 26, 2023.

the only exceptions to his house arrest were
to attend his employment and while he was in the direct presence of his surety.
 his shift work which changed every two weeks was either from 6:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. or from 4:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. he was offered over-time on many
occasions, either to come early, or to stay late. however, as he needed his
surety to take him to work, and they were not prepared to leave at 4:00 or 5:00
a.m., nor pick him up at 2:00 or 3:00 a.m. he experienced financial loss.

prior to the house arrest, mr.
vanderhyden-steaman deposed he worked out regularly at a gym and played
recreational basketball. he was not permitted to do either during his house
arrest which negatively affected his physical health, and his mental well-being.

his long-term girlfriend lives in toronto
and does not drive. he deposed seeing her was dependant on her ability to get
a ride to alliston which was not often. when he did see her, he could not go
out with her. this strained their relationship.

mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s bail conditions
were varied to a 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. curfew except for employment in july
2023. he was honest that this curfew was difficult but paled in comparison to
his house arrest.

the impact of the 10 months mr.
vanderhyden-steaman spent on house arrest had a significant and pervasive
impact on him financially, physically, mentally, and on his personal
relationship therefore warrants reduction of sentence consideration.
iv.
morris consideration

i must also consider the fact mr.
vanderhyden-steaman is a young black man who grew up in toronto.

it is concerning mr. vanderhyden-steaman was
unable to obtain an impact of race and culture assessment (irca) report by the
sentencing and parole project (spp), the experts in this field. the wait time
for the report was just too long.

though the epsr author, vermont gilkes, did
a commendable job in his attempt to explore, identify and document mr.
vanderhyden-steaman’s experience of racism and its role in his offending, he
did not have access to the research and expertise required to relate mr.
vanderhyden-steaman’s experience to the reality and impact of anti-black racism
on him. research and expertise spp has.

the absence of the specialized training and
knowledge, research, and expertise of an irca report, in this case, left the
court with gaps. for instance, although mr. vanderhyden-steaman spoke of being
diagnosed with adhd, he did not seem to have an independent education plan
(iep) that would have assisted him at school. there is research that provides
context to systemic educational limitations experienced by black students which
would provide context to his academic record, context the spp would likely have
provided.

although mr. vanderhyden-steaman said he was
expelled numerous times from school and did not think race was an issue, there
were no statistics provided which document the systemic differing discipline
sanctions between black students and other students in educational institutions
in toronto for similar conduct. again, context the spp would likely have
provided.

the point is that irca reports are a
critically important tool to courts in the determination of a fit sentence of
black individuals in toronto for whom anti-black racism may have played a role
in their offending. i take judicial notice of anti-black racism in toronto,
but that is not quite sufficient when an irca report would have provided more
substantial context to mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s personal experience. long
wait times and lack of spp funding, what appear to be the impediments to the
obtaining of an irca report in this case is a worrisome circumstance.

turning to what is known, mr.
vanderhyden-steaman disclosed having been questioned by police when walking
home from school as an adolescent because he is black and lived in a
neighbourhood with considerable police focus. his mother confirmed his
perception that there were “racist undertones” to the manner he was stopped and
questioned, making him fearful of getting off the school bus.

the violence in his community, and his
experience as a “target” for racial reasons contributed to his perception of
vulnerability. in addition, there is a well-documented history of racial
profiling by the toronto police service.

mr. vanderhyden-steaman chose not to pursue
the issue of racial profiling via a s. 9
charter
challenge. he could
have challenged whether the officers involved in this case make vehicular
inquiries of every vehicle stopped at an intersection, or just blue hondas, at
every intersection, or just those in some neighbourhoods. notably weston road
and finch is a well-known location of both police focus and a large, racialized
community.

although seriously misguided, mr.
vanderhyden-steaman’s decision to possess a firearm was impacted by the
anti-black racism in the community he grew up in and played a role in his offending
conduct.

this does not diminish the gravity of the
offence, but it is a mitigating factor and somewhat attenuates his moral
culpability.
vi.
analysis

“the determination of a just and appropriate
sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely
mathematical calculation. it involves a variety of factors that are difficult
to define with precision” stated the supreme court of canada in
lacasse.

such is the
case in very sentencing, and it is no different here.

firearms are a social evil. they are
manufactured for one purpose: to kill. in an urban setting, on a public
roadway, while driving a vehicle, the possession of a firearm is a decision to
be part of gun violence and gun culture that causes carnage and devastation to
countless families and undermines the core of our communal sense of safety.

the supreme court of canada, and every level
of court has repeatedly stated that denunciation and deterrence are the primary
guiding principles in cases of possessing firearms with ammunition. “gun-related
crime poses grave danger to canadians”,
r. v. nur,
2015 scc 15
at para
1.

justice doherty specifically stated at para.
206:
“[i]ndividuals
who
have
loaded
restricted
or
prohibited
firearms
that
they
have
no
business
possessing
anywhere
or
at
any
time,
and
who
are
engaged
in
criminal
conduct
or
conduct
that
poses
a
danger
to
others
should
continue
to
receive
exemplary
sentences
that
will
emphasize
deterrence
and
denunciation.”
and mclachlin
c.j.
underscored,
at
para.
120 that:
“[i]t
remains
appropriate
for
judges
to continue to impose weighty
sentences" in appropriate circumstances.”

usually,
anything
less
than
a
penitentiary
sentence
fails to
meet
the
sentencing principles
of
general
deterrence
and
denunciation.

the crown relies on
r. v. kabanga-muanza,
2019 onsc 1161,
r. v. kawal,
2018 onsc 7531,
r. v. mohiadin,
2021
onca 122,
r. v. st. clair,
2018 onsc 7028,
r. v. thavakularatnam,
2018 onsc 2380
and
r. v. mahamet
-zene,
2018 onsc 1050
to support his
position that mr. vanderhydren-steaman must be sentenced to a penitentiary
sentence, and that it be for 3 years as he recommends.

granted each of these offenders was also
young (but for mr. st. clair), racialized, and from compromised backgrounds,
they also possessed a loaded firearm in far different circumstances than those
before me.

mr. kabanga-muanza, mr. kawal, mr. st.
clair, and mr. mahamet-zene all went to trial. all but for mr. thavakaluratnam
and mr. mahamet-zene had criminal records. all these offenders were involved
in altercations, or the firearm was discharged, the firearm was on their person
or close by and loaded, ready to fire.

the distinguishing features between these
offenders and mr. vanderhyden-steaman are the actual circumstances of the
offence. for instance:
i.
the firearm was not on mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s
person, nor in a satchel on his body.
ii.
though it was in the vehicle in public, it was
not easily accessible to him in the driver’s seat as it was behind him, in a
bag, on the floor.
iii.
though the ammunition was in a clear bag with
the firearm, the firearm was not actually loaded.
iv.
there were no other circumstances of criminality
associated with the possession of the firearm such as brandishing it, pointing
it, discharging it, drugs, or drug paraphernalia.
v.
there was no altercation with anyone, and no one
was in the vicinity at the time of its seizure from the back seat of the
vehicle.
vi.
the actual firearm itself was a sawed off-shot
gun not a semi-automatic or automatic handgun.

finally, it is noteworthy, that upon arrest
for something unrelated, mr. vanderhyden-steaman was co-operative and made an
immediate inculpatory statement. he voluntarily informed the police that he
was in possession of the rifle and informed them of where it was. this
frankness is unusual in these circumstances.

these features, in their totality merit
consideration that mr. vanderhyden-steaman is not at the “true crime” end of
the gun possession spectrum requiring an exemplary sentence.

possession of a firearm with ammunition is a
grave offence no matter the circumstances, but not all circumstances are the same.
 denunciation and deterrence are the guiding principles but are not the
only
applicable principles.

mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s specific
circumstances and those of the offence merit consideration of the defence
position that a conditional sentence may be appropriate in this case.

the defence provided 19 cases, decided by
the ontario court of appeal, or the superior court of justice in ontario, or
the ontario court of justice, after the supreme court of canada’s
nur

decision, that either sentenced an offender to a conditional sentence for a
s.95 offence or stated that such a sentence is available for a gun possession
offence.

the ontario court of appeal made clear in
desmond
-
robinson

that conditional sentences “may well be appropriate” in gun offence cases. it
went on to find a conditional sentence of 2 years less a day for a first time,
young offender with strong demonstrated rehabilitation prosects to be a fit
sentence.

i reviewed all the defence cases but will
not refer to them all. in numerous cases, similar offenders who committed a
similar offence in a similar circumstance received a conditional sentence, even
after trial.

of note, is that several offenders whose
circumstances were more aggravating than those in the case at bar were still
sentenced to a conditional sentence. to name a few:
•
mr. beharry

was convicted after trial of possessing a loaded handgun in his fanny pack in
the back seat of the car. he was 32 years old.
•
mr. lewis

was also in possession of cocaine at the time he was in possession of his
firearm.
•
mr. collins

was also in contravention of a prohibition order, possessed the proceeds of
crime, and trafficked drugs but had made great steps towards rehabilitation
when he was sentenced to a conditional sentence for his possession of a loaded
firearm.
•
mr. gill

flushed cocaine down the kitchen sink when police entered the premises before a
loaded glock that he jointly possessed with a co-accused was located.
•
mr. burke-whittaker

fired a shot in the general
direction of an unknown vehicle that had opened fire outside a funeral.
•
mr. stewart

was in possession of an over-capacity magazine.

in each case, the jurist found there were
circumstances about the offender that enabled a conditional sentence to reflect
the gravity of the offence and the moral blameworthiness of the offender.

section
742.1
of
the
criminal
code
provides
for
a
conditional
senten
ce if
5
prerequisites are met:
i.
there is no minimum term of imprisonment.
ii.
the offence is not one of the enumerated excluded offences.
iii.
the court is satisfied the service of the sentence in
the community would not endanger the safety of the community.
iv.
the court imposes a sentence of less than two years.
v.
the conditional sentence is consistent with the
fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
ss. 718
to
718.2
of
the
criminal code.

as noted earlier, a conditional sentence is
available for a
s.95(1)
offence as there is no minimum term of imprisonment,
and it is not an excluded offence.

as mr. vanderhyden-steaman has no criminal
record, abided by his strict house arrest conditions, and his curfew during the
entirety of his release with no issues, has long term employment, a supportive
family, and the epsr provided no history of violence, or risk of dangerousness,
i am satisfied that if mr. vanderhyden-steaman were to serve a sentence in the
community he would not endanger that community.

the issue is whether in this case, a
sentence of less than 2 years is appropriate, and if it is, whether a
conditional sentence is consistent with the fundamental purpose of sentencing
and appropriate pursuant to the two-stage analysis in
proulx.


first, i exclude a probationary term as an
obviously inappropriate sanction in this case. second, given the specific
circumstances of both the offence and the numerous mitigating factors,
particularly mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s youthfulness, lack of a criminal record,
downes
experience during the house arrest portion of his release, and
the
morris
factors of in his environment, and his rehabilitation efforts,
i find a penitentiary sentence is not required in this case.

turning to whether a conditional sentence is
consistent to the fundamental principles of sentencing, although i recognize
the crown’s concern that the dilution of sanctions for firearms offences could
contribute to the further proliferation of these gun possession offences, i
also agree with counsel that there is a spectrum to everything, even the
possession of a firearm with ammunition in a vehicle in toronto.

for this reason, it is trite to repeat that
sentencing is an art and not a formulaic calculation. it is one of the more
demanding tasks of a jurist, and one that attempts to ultimately balance
principles, factors, and the reality of the unique human being before the
court.

in this case, this sentence must reflect the
guiding principles of denunciation and deterrence, but also the principles of
parity and restraint.

i have listed the aggravating and mitigating
factors, and on balance, in this case, mr. vanderhyden-steaman’s
industriousness, family support, growing maturity, and the fact he moved away
from the environment that contributed to his perceptions and paranoia
demonstrate strong rehabilitation efforts and potential. his offence was
committed in isolation rather than in conjunction with other criminality. i
therefore find that a conditional sentence is consistent with all the
principles of sentencing in
ss. 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code.
sentence

mr. vanderhyden-steaman, i sentence you to 2
years less a day, minus 14 days enhanced to 21 days psc to be served in the
community as a conditional sentence under house arrest, for which the terms,
after submissions, will be appended to these reasons after submissions.

i also order that you be on probation order
for a period of 2 years. the terms, after submissions, will also be appended to
my reasons.

you will also:
(1)
provide a sample of your dna today pursuant to s.487.04(a)
(2)
be prohibited from possessing weapons for life pursuant to s. 109.
(3)
pay the $200 victim fine surcharge within 6 months.
(4)
forfeit the seized items pursuant to s.490(1).

i thank both counsel for their helpful
submissions.
released: january 14, 2025
signed: justice cidalia
c. g. faria
appendix a: jameel vanderhyden-steaman
conditional sentence order terms
you are sentenced to a 2 year less a day minus
21 days conditional sentence order.
the terms are that you will:
i.
report within 24 hours of this order in person
or by telephone to a conditional sentence supervisor (css) and thereafter as
directed by your css.
ii.
you will co-operate with your css and sign all
releases to permit your css to monitor your compliance with all terms of this
cso.
iii.
you will reside at with your mother at her
residence in alliston ontario.
iv.
you will remain in ontario during the period of
your cso.
v.
you will remain on the property of your
residence during the duration of your cso except:
a.
from 12 noon to 5 pm on saturday and sunday
for the necessaries of life.
b.
when travelling directly to, from and while
you:
i.
are
at your place of employment. (employment confirmed by css)
ii.
are
at pre-scheduled medical, counselling, dental, legal, court, and religious commitments.
iii.
are
at a gym, or recreational centre for physical activity purposes.
iv.
are
in the direct presence of your mother natalie vanderhyden, your grandmother beverley
steaman, or your girlfriend lache beard.
v.
have
the prior written approval of your css on your person.
vi.
you will possess no weapons as defined by the
criminal
code.
probation order terms
you will serve a 2 year probation order. in
addition to the statutory terms, you will;
i.
report within 48 hours of the completion of
your conditional sentence order to your probation order and thereafter as
required by your probation officer.
ii.
possess no weapons as defined by the
criminal
code.

r. v.
morris,
2021 onca 680

exhibit 1:
pre-sentence report, jameel vanderhyden-steaman, april 9, 2024.

exhibit 3:
letter dated may 28, 2024, simcoe parts service inc.

r. v.
summers,
2014 scc 26

r. v.
downes,
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca)

exhibit 2:
affidavit jameel vanderhyden-steaman, november 24, 2024

r. v.
lacasse,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58.

r. v.
desmund-robinson,
2022 onca 369,
r. v. morris
202 onca
680,
r. v. gill,
2024 onsc 3194,
r.
v. burke – whittaker,
2024 onsc 2906,
r. v. stewart,
2024 onsc 281,
r. v. osman,

o. j. no. 735,
r. v. marier,
2023 onsc 5194,
r. v. yogo,
2023
onsc 4144,
r. v. edwards,
2023 oncj 53,
r. v. roberts,
2023 oncj
226,
r. v. gurley, 2023 scj,
r. v. stewart,
2022 onsc 6997,
r.
v. lewis,
2022 onsc 1260,
r. v. beharry,
2022 onsc 4370,
r. v.
jeffery,
2022 onsc 3628,
r. v. moses,
2022 onsc 332,
r. v.
roberts,
2023 oncj 226,
r. v. mclarty-mathieu,
2022 oncj 498,
r.
v. goodridge,
2022 oncj 139.

r. v.
nur,
2015 scc 15

r. v.
desmund-robinson,
2022 onca 369
at para.13.

r. v.
beharry,
2022 onsc 4370.

r. v.
lewis,
2022 onsc 1260.

r. v.
collins,
2023 onsc 5768.

r. v.
gill,
2024 onsc 3194.

r. v.
burke-whittaker,
2024 onsc 2906.

r. v.
stewart,
2022 onsc 6997.

r. v.
proulx,
2000 scc 5 (canlii),
2000, scc5

365 days x 2 = 730 days
– 1 day = 729 days. 729 days – (14d x 1.5 = 21days) = 708 days to serve