source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj575/2025oncj575.html

citation:
r. v. garlow, 2025 oncj 575
date: november 4, 2025
ontario court of
justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jesse garlow
before justice b. green
sentencing on november 4
th, 2025
ms. a. kok........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
mr. s. yeghoyan.................................................... 
counsel for the defendant mr. garlow
green j.:
a.
introduction

on june 7
th,
2024, mr. garlow was driving a vehicle when he was pulled over by the police to
conduct a
highway traffic act
investigation. mr. guthrie was his
passenger. the investigation led to mr. garlow’s arrest for several charges following
the search of his vehicle.

the police located a
very frightening looking firearm with a magazine inserted in it, in a bag in the
backseat. a flame thrower, crow bars and other items were in the trunk of the vehicle.
mr. garlow had close to $5000 in cash in his wallet along with a small scale.

mr. garlow has been
detained in custody since the date of his arrest. the matter was scheduled to
proceed to trial. mr. garlow’s counsel filed
charter
materials in
anticipation of a trial. nevertheless, mr. garlow instructed his counsel to
enter resolution discussions on his behalf.

on the first day of the
trial, april 8
th, 2025, mr. garlow entered pleas of guilty to two counts.
he admitted that he was in possession of a loaded prohibited, modified, firearm
and that his possession of this firearm was in contravention of court orders that
prohibited him from possessing such items.

mr. garlow did not
admit that he was in possession of the firearm in furtherance of a criminal
enterprise or as a tool of the trade of drug trafficking. these are inferences that
the crown seeks the court to draw from the items in his possession, in a car,
and his history of committing criminal offences including trafficking in drugs.

mr. garlow’s acceptance
of responsibility resulted in the staying of the charges against the co-accused,
mr. guthrie. it saved trial time that was devoted to this matter in a stacked
court so that other matters could proceed on that day. he has consistently
expressed remorse for possessing the firearm and breaching a court order.

the sentencing hearing
has been adjourned three times through no fault of mr. garlow’s. it took time
to prepare a fulsome
gladue
report as he is an indigenous person. in
addition, his counsel had scheduling issues. at each appearance, he appeared in
considerable distress that his matter did not proceed to sentencing.

to ensure the matter
was not adjourned again, the litigants provided written submissions yesterday
and today advocating for their respective positions.

the crown provided
impressive and detailed written submissions. she focussed primarily on the
nature of the offences. she submitted that, considering the seriousness of these
crimes and the deadly nature of this loaded weapon, the only appropriate
sentence that will address the predominant principles of sentencing is a
penitentiary sentence of 3.5 years

less credit for pretrial custody. the crown also sought a section 109 weapons prohibition
for 10 years, a dna order and forfeiture of all items seized by the police
including the money that was in mr. garlow’s wallet.

the crown emphasized that mr. garlow was
carrying a loaded firearm in a vehicle in public in suspicious circumstances
along with a flame thrower and crow bars. this firearm was designed for one
purpose, as a killing machine. its possession is antithetical to the norms and
values of canadians. a strong message must be sent to deter like-minded
individuals from carrying a loaded firearm by meting out a significant
punishment. in addition, the punishment for having this weapon in contravention
of a prohibition order must be consecutive.

counsel asked for a
gladue
report to
be prepared to aid with his submissions and this court’s consideration of his client’s
indigenous background. i received a report that was prepared in 2015 and an
updated report.

to describe mr. garlow’s background as
tragic would be an understatement. there is an undeniable link between his
criminal record and his experiences as an indigenous person. in addition, the
conditions of his detention at central east correctional centre have been
horrendous. he expressed understandable upset during previous appearances about
the suffering he has endured while on remand.

counsel provided brief written submissions.
he urged me to consider the mitigation of mr. garlow’s guilty plea, his
expressed remorse, and his potential for rehabilitation especially with the
support of resources for indigenous people.

mr. garlow has achieved periods of
stability in the past. he can be a positively contributing member of society
once he is released from custody. counsel advocated for a sentence of time
served to be coupled with a comprehensive probation order and the ancillary
orders requested by the crown.

this is a highly unusual case. the crown’s cogent
submissions accentuated the potential for death and destruction posed by the weapon
that was in mr. garlow’s possession. she urged the court to find that this gun
was possessed for the purpose of committing crimes and was in contravention of
an order intended to protect the public.

in contrast, counsel highlighted that mr.
garlow’s personal history is heartbreaking, and how that attenuates his moral
responsibility for these crimes.

there is a clear, causal nexus between his
father’s brutalization in residential schools and the trail of damage and
devastation that slammed like a wrecking ball through the next generation. i
cannot imagine a case with a more shocking example of the detrimental impact of
colonialism, intergenerational trauma and the attempted cultural genocide by
seizing children from their communities only to be placed in horribly abusive
environments.

it is important to carefully review the aggravating
circumstances of the offence and any mitigating circumstances of this offender,
the applicable sentencing principles including the unique experiences of
aboriginal people, and any similar precedents with respect to the applicable range
of sentencing to arrive at a fair and balanced sentence.
b.
facts:
i.
the offences:

on june 7
th
of 2024, officers were on
general patrol in peterborough. they saw a vehicle weaving within its lane, so
they conducted a traffic stop. mr. garlow was in the driver’s seat. he had a crack
pipe in his lap. he was instructed to shut off the vehicle. he followed the
officers’ directions.

during their initial interactions, the police noticed
that mr. garlow had large amount of money in his wallet, almost $5000, along
with a small weigh scale. mr. garlow immediately explained to the police that
all the money that was recovered from his wallet was the proceeds of gambling.

the police demanded that mr. garlow provide a sample
of his breath into a roadside screening device. he blew a zero which
demonstrated that he was not impaired by alcohol. the police checked out the
backgrounds of mr. garlow and his passenger, mr. guthrie. they both had
criminal convictions which caused some alarm. backup officers were called to
the scene even though mr. garlow was being compliant with all directions.

the police began looking inside the vehicle. it was disputed
what, if anything, the officers saw in plain view. in any event, the
investigation escalated to a search of the vehicle’s interior. the police located
a modified rifle with a loaded magazine in a bag in the back seat of the
vehicle. both men were immediately arrested at the scene. during a further
search at the station, police found the butt stock of gun, a newer looking safe,
crow bars and a flame thrower in the trunk.

it is difficult to describe the frightening
appearance of this particular firearm without reviewing the picture that was
made an exhibit. this gun is obviously not intended for hunting anything other
than human beings. it is designed to maim and/or kill in a spray of bullets.
simply brandishing it would cause sheer terror.

experienced criminal justice professionals
are not naïve. an available inference from the items in that car and the
collective backgrounds of both occupants was that this firearm was possessed
for a nefarious purposes. both men were subject to prohibition orders at the
time. it is not, however, the only available inference from the facts. during
interviews with mr. garlow for the
gladue
report, he denied that he was
trafficking in narcotics. he also vehemently denied that he intended to use the
gun to commit a crime.

while there are several aggravating
factors, i must consider mr. garlow’s individual circumstances with a special
emphasis on his experiences as an indigenous person, his potential for
rehabilitation and the unusually mitigating factors.
ii.
the
circumstances of the offender:

mr. jesse garlow’s background was
thoroughly reviewed in two
gladue
reports. the first one was prepared in
2015. it was updated for the purposes of these proceedings in 2025. mr.
garlow’s familial and personal history is undeniably tragic.

the discrimination against and mistreatment
of our first nations people is a national shame. the devastating intergenerational
impact of colonialism and residential schools is unfortunately exemplified by
mr. garlow’s shocking life experiences. it has washed through his family history
like a tidal wave of destruction and caused alienation from his roots.

mr. garlow is a
status aboriginal person
as defined by
section 35
of the
constitution act, 1982.
he is
mohawk and a member of six nations of the grand river first nation. his indigenous
ancestry is traced through his father, gary garlow. mr. garlow’s grandparents
escaped before they were apprehended and placed in residential schools. his
father was not as fortunate.

when gary garlow was a boy, his father was
beaten to death.
his mother was too young
and poor to care for her children. gary was taken away from his mother, his
family and his community. he was raised in an extremely abusive environment.

torn from his family and culture, gary garlow learned
only pain, apathy and survival by any means in a residential school. after
enduring years of torment, he did not function well in society or interact well
with other people. he committed a multitude of offences. he was either on the
run from the law or he was incarcerated in a facility. ultimately, he killed
someone. he was incarcerated for a substantial period.

while gary garlow was in prison, he met jesse garlow’s
mother. she was visiting her brother who was also serving time. they married
after gary was released from the penitentiary.

jesse garlow was born in 1984. gary often worked away
from home, but his son initially had stability with his maternal family as a
young boy. he enjoyed a middle-class lifestyle while he was with them. the
couple had another child, jesse’s younger sister. gary garlow was injured while
at work, so he stayed at home with jesse’s sister. jesse garlow felt envious of
that connection.

as noted, jesse’s paternal grandfather met a violent
death. thereafter, jesse garlow’s personal losses continued throughout his
life. his maternal grandmother died when he was five years old. tragedy struck
again when his mother became ill with cancer. he remembers visiting her in the
hospital and fighting at school when someone made fun of his mother for being
bald. jesse’s mother died when he was nine or ten years old. his father could
not cope with her loss. he was drinking heavily and briefly returned to a life
of crime. there was significant family tension over custody of the children.
jesse was shuffled around between homes until he ended up with his father again.

gary garlow disclosed that the only person he really
loved was his first wife. while he had love for his children, he was not able
to show it to them. in the 2015 report gary expressed that he believes that his
capacity to express any affection was beaten out of him. he feels responsible
for the way his children have turned out especially jesse. unlike his father,
gary described jesse as a person with a “kind heart” and “smart like his
mother”. he did not want his son to follow in his footsteps.

before the death of his mother, jesse led a
relatively “sheltered life”. everything changed for him afterwards. his father
became involved in a relationship with an indigenous woman who had two children
of her own. his father was often away at work, so jesse was left to fend for
himself and take care of his little sister. not surprisingly, this living
arrangement did not work out. his sister was sent to live with other family members.
jesse provided a description of his experiences while in his father’s care:
he was never
properly loved, right? my dad was an aboriginal survivor, having the native
beat out of him. sometimes i felt like we were the stereotypical natives in
peterborough. you know, the drunk native that beat his kids. i’d go to school
with bruises on me, shit like that. it sucked.

jesse maintained a strong bond with his
maternal grandfather, but once again tragedy struck. mr. garlow’s grandfather
was murdered by his wife. by the age of eleven, both of his grandfathers had
been murdered and his grandmother and mother were dead. the devastating impact
this would have on a boy is incomprehensible. in addition to these losses, his relationship
with his father was very unstable.

mr. garlow was a bright student and a gifted
athlete. despite his talents, it is hardly surprising that jesse’s grades began
to slip, and he became quite rebellious. he got into fights with other
students. students made fun of his father’s complexion. he started skipping
classes and abusing various drugs. gary garlow encouraged jesse to drink at
home to be with adults. his family home became the party place where he would
drink and abuse drugs with his dad. tensions built up until father and son eventually
had a physical fight.

when jesse garlow was 17 years old, he was
expelled from school. he went away on a trip with friend. when he returned, he
discovered that his father had abandoned him. his father moved away with his
sister without any notice or warning to jesse. he lost all his belongings and
had to reside with his maternal uncle. mr. garlow disclosed to his counsel that
his uncle was abusive with him. he did not see his father again for a few
years.

mr. garlow’s life spiralled out of control
after he was abandoned by his dad. his criminal record commenced in 2003 when
he was 19 years old. he supported himself by selling drugs. he was in unstable
relationships. he began more heavily abusing various drugs.

eventually, he decided to leave a toxic
relationship. he tried to get back on the right path. he was able to obtain a
high school diploma, applied to college and moved in with his sister for a
period but she had various life challenges. he reconnected with his father. he
did well for the first year, but he wasn’t able to maintain that lifestyle.

mr. garlow was startlingly candid with the
authors of the
gladue
report. he began drinking again and spent more
time with the “wrong crowd” of people. he discovered that he could make a lot
of money quickly by robbing illegal grow operations. he lived with various
people while maintaining legitimate work, but his drug abuse escalated out of
control. he became involved in different relationships. in time, he stopped
abusing crack and stabilized again for a little while.

mr. garlow was caught in a repetitive cycle
of drug abuse and crime interspersed with periods of stability. he has a
multitude of convictions between 2003 until 2011 for various property offences,
breaches of court orders and possession of unlawful substances. in 2011, he was
convicted of more serious offences of break and enter. he was in an out of
custody for short periods like a revolving door.

shortly before he was incarcerated in 2011,
out of the blue, jesse garlow received a phone call from child and family
services. he discovered that he had a child with an indigenous woman who lived out
west. they had a brief encounter, so he was quite surprised to find out about
this child.

after his release from custody, mr. garlow
was able to maintain a more significant period of stability and sobriety. he
earned custody of his son who is half cree and half mohawk. mr. garlow has a
relationship with a supportive partner who was and still is helping him with
raising his son. she has been in his life through all the ups and downs since
2011.

jesse garlow did well for a time, which
coincides with the gap in his convictions between 2011 and 2015. sadly, he
became overwhelmed with accumulating expenses despite working diligently. he
turned to gambling to address his growing debt. eventually, in 2015, he got
caught in the same cycle of substance abuse and committing crime. he was arrested
for a robbery and other property offences.

the
gladue
report that was prepared
in 2015 made various recommendations to assist with preventing jesse garlow’s
recurring issues. his son was 5 years old, and he was still with the same
partner. he received a sentence of 14 months in addition to pretrial custody. while
he was incarcerated, a path was offered for him to follow to assist with his
success. he participated in programs proposed by the native horizons treatment
centre. he established a positive connection with his ancestry.

after he was released from jail, jesse
garlow felt some hope for a different future. he got a decent job. he was
promised that he would be made full time, but he suffered more misfortune. the
company found a less expensive means to meet their needs. jesse lost his job,
and he lost his budding hope for a bright future. he was desperate to pay off
his looming expenses. he returned to the life that he knew would provide his
family with the funds that he desperately needed to support them and his drug
habit.

before he was arrested again in 2018, he returned
to a life of trafficking in and abusing narcotics. mr. garlow’s apathy towards
the impact of trafficking in drugs on other users must be understood in
reference to his background which is fulsomely detailed in the 2025
gladue
report. he learned how to survive from his father who was a broken man.

mr. garlow began heavily abusing fentanyl.
he sent his son to live with his partner’s mother to protect him from being
exposed to their life choices. he was estranged from his father, but he maintained
a relationship with his sister robyn and her son gage. robyn was also addicted
to drugs. she struggled with various mental health issues.

in 2017, jesse garlow was the victim of a
home invasion during which he was pistol whipped and the gun was fired. within
days, the police raided his home and located a considerable quantity of drugs.
this time, his lawyer did not ask for an updated report. mr. garlow was convicted
and sentenced as follows:
october 18,
2018, jesse was sentenced to 978 days for possession of a schedule i substance
for purpose of trafficking (x2) and possessing the proceeds of property
obtained by crime over $5,000, as a result of being found with an ounce of
cocaine, 3.5 grams of fentanyl and $19,000 cash.

two
days after mr. garlow was sentenced to his first penitentiary sentence, his
sister robyn was shot and killed by the police during a mental health crisis. a
coroner’s inquest investigated the circumstances of her death.

before his sister was shot, their father called the
police for help because he was concerned that she was going to hurt herself.
instead, she was killed by the responding officers in his presence. the amount
of guilt that his father must have felt over her death is unfathomable.

gary garlow disappeared shortly after this terrible
loss. other than one sighting and a phone call, jesse garlow has not heard from
his father for years. jesse was incarcerated so he was not able to attend his
sister’s funeral. he lost his sister and his dad while he was in jail.

while in custody, he completed more programming for
indigenous offenders:
called the
indigenous integrated correctional program model. this program is an indigenous
variation of the mainstream program offered in federal prisons; it helps
participants understand the problems in their life and incorporates traditional
healing, teachings and guidance from an elder.

he excelled in the program. he also learned
trade skills in the institution. following his release from custody, he went to
back to school and secured a good job. he explained that he:
recognizes
the pattern in his record, that he tries to earn an honest living but becomes
frustrated with financial obligations and struggles with addictions, and often
reverts back to drug trafficking.

once again, jesse garlow was able to stay
out of trouble for years. eventually, he became overwhelmed with mounting
financial obligations and the stress of working so much but not getting ahead. by
2024, jesse felt a “crushing feeling of loneliness” because most of his family is
either dead or missing.

he started gambling to make up the
difference in their household expenses and abusing drugs to cope with his deteriorating
mental health. he was on medical leave from his employment. he sunk into a deep
depression and experienced anxiety. the author of the
gladue
report
explained that:
a person
with a combination of co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders
has what is termed a concurrent disorder. aboriginal people have been
identified as a population that requires priority attention when planning
concurrent disorder services due to concern over the prevalence of mental
health, suicide and physical disorders among the aboriginal population.
having a
mental health problem increases the risk of having a substance use problem, and
having a substance use problem increases the risk of having a mental health
problem. the difficulty separating the two to obtain a diagnosis is compounded
because of the overlap of symptoms between mental health and substance use
disorders.

despite all these challenges, for the first
time in his adult life, jesse garlow reported that he did not resort to
trafficking to support himself. he was struggling to improve his mental health
when he was charged with these offences. he explained that he was invited by a
friend to a cabin to shoot for sport. he was carrying the weapon in his
vehicle. he emphasized that:
i admit, i
was in the wrong. i was in the possession of a firearm when i have a s.109, and
i shouldn’t have been. hands down – i was in the wrong.
i’d like her
(her honour) to know - i hate guns. i almost lost my life to a gun. my sister
lost her life to a gun. i’ve lost a good friend to a gun.
and that gun
was there because we had went up north and were just playing around. it was
brought as something to do for fun. if i knew it was being brought, i would
have rejected the whole idea. i didn’t even think about it. i just left it in
the car, thinking, ‘okay, tomorrow or the next day, i’ll drop it off.’

mr. garlow vehemently denies that he
possessed the gun for any nefarious purposes. this assertion is difficult to
reconcile with the other items recovered from his vehicle and the nature of this
firearm was not an amusing toy. it was modified to cause maximum harm. nevertheless,
the crown is required to prove any aggravating fact beyond a reasonable doubt:
section
724(1)
(e) of the
criminal code.

the crown did not request a
gardiner
hearing to dispute this issue even though the
gladue
report detailed mr.
garlow’s denials of trafficking in drugs and his explanation for his possession
of the gun. this report was available more than a month ago, before the last
appearance, in september. rather, the crown urged the court to consider these
are unsworn, self-serving and implausible claims that have been untested by
cross-examination. accordingly, she submitted that mr. garlow’s statements
should be given little, if any, weight.

i have considered the following facts:
1.
the interior of the vehicle was messy and
had other miscellaneous items.
2.
although he has convictions for assault
police and a robbery, mr. garlow has no prior convictions for any weapons
offences. considering the length of his sentence for the robbery, it is
inconceivable that it involved the use of a firearm. i am not aware of any
conviction that involved the use of or possession of a firearm.
3.
mr. garlow had a crack pipe in his lap
because he is an addict. the amount of crack was for personal use.
4.
i take judicial notice that it is not
unusual for addicts to have scales to ensure they are not being shorted by
their dealers. the scale was small enough to fit in his wallet. the police did
not recover any other drug paraphernalia, packaging materials or debt lists
from his car.
5.
in the
gladue
report, mr. garlow
emphatically and proudly proclaimed that he has not returned to drug
trafficking since his last sentence in 2018. hearsay is admissible evidence at
a sentencing:
subsection 723(5)
of the
criminal code. i appreciate that
the crown submitted the credibility of mr. garlow’s statements is highly questionable.
6.
mr. garlow explained his possession of the
gun. while i agree with the crown that his explanation was implausible, the
inference sought by the crown that he possessed that gun in furtherance of the
criminal enterprise of drug trafficking is not the only reasonable inference
available.
7.
mr. garlow provided a reason to the police
immediately upon his detention for the funds that he had on him. the money was
proceeds from gambling. he has a long history of gambling that was detailed in
the
gladue
reports.
8.
mr. garlow made a multitude of statements
against interest in the
gladue
reports about his previous poor choices,
but he vehemently denied any intention to use the gun to commit a crime.

ultimately, i cannot conclusively infer
beyond a reasonable doubt “why” mr. garlow had this gun. nevertheless, the possession
of this type of loaded gun along with the other items, in a car, while driving
in public and while bound by a prohibition order, is very aggravating even
without this added context.

after mr. garlow was arrested and detained
in custody, he suffered yet another unbelievable loss in 2024. his nephew gage,
his sister’s only child, died due to an overdose. history repeated itself. once
again, he could not attend the service for a lost, cherished family member.

mr. garlow has suffered other punitive
consequences for these offences. he owned the car that he was driving on the
date that he was arrested by the police. the car was seized and impounded at a
lot that charges compounding fees for storage. mr. garlow’s wife was unable to
pay the impound fees.

in addition to the loss of his car, counsel
joined the crown in the request for forfeiture of all items seized including
the money in mr. garlow’s wallet. the crown suggested that was an implicit
admission the money was ill-gotten gains. i do not agree.

through his counsel, mr. garlow has
consistently maintained that the money was from gambling. i do not know why the
concession for a forfeiture order was made and i am not prepared to draw any
inferences from settlement discussions that the court was not privy to. in the
end, mr. garlow suffered significant financial losses due to the commission of
these offences.

mr. garlow was employed at the time of his
arrest. he was on medical leave because of his depression. he is a tradesman
and a valued employee. he has been able to reach out to his former employer. he
is hopeful that he will be able to return to gainful employment following his
release from custody.

mr. garlow has been in custody since the
date of his arrest on june 7
th, 2025. he has been incarcerated for a
total of
516 days
which is the equivalent of 774 days with
summers
credit. mr. garlow’s stay at central east correctional centre has been tortuous
for him emotionally, psychologically and physically.
iii.
the conditions
of mr. garlow’s pretrial detention:

i have written extensively about the
shocking conditions at central east correctional centre. a few examples:
r.
v. spicher,
2020 oncj 340 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 3251;
r. v. mcpherson,
 o.j. no.
1628;
r. v. gold,
 o.j. no. 5988. my voice is but one among a
chorus of jurists denouncing the unrelenting oppression of inmates on remand.

despite a multitude of decisions, from every
level of court in ontario, decrying this abuse of vulnerable inmates,
absolutely nothing has been done to alleviate this unjustifiable treatment of
people at the mercy of the state. it is mind boggling that a country that
prides itself on its purported respect for human rights is turning a blind eye
to these documented, undeniable and inexcusable cruelties.

instead of addressing these concerns,
politicians demand more pretrial incarceration without taking any steps to
ameliorate the overcrowding, understaffing and inability to house the current
population let alone incarcerate more people. it bears repeating that these are
people, human beings not livestock.

there is an added dimension to the vulnerability
of the inmates who are denied pretrial release. i take judicial notice of
decades of research documenting that the prisoners remanded into custody
awaiting the outcome of their proceedings are disproportionately represented by
marginalized groups: the mentally ill, impoverished, substance abusers, people
of colour and first nations people. people who are historically disadvantaged and
in need of support, access to resources and recognition as opposed to indifference
and harshness.

there are numerous decisions discussing the
disproportionate number of indigenous people who are housed in custodial facilities.
authors b. ewing and l. kerr of the 2023 article “reconstructing gladue”

observed that:
twenty-seven
years ago, in recognition of the over-representation of indigenous people in
canadian prisons, parliament enacted
section 718.2
(e) of the
criminal code.1 it
stated, in pertinent part: ‘a court that imposes a sentence shall also take
into consideration the following principles: … (e) all available sanctions
other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the circumstances should be
considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of
aboriginal offenders.’2 three years later, in
r. v. gladue, the supreme
court of canada read this as a remedial provision aiming to limit sentencing
judges’ resort to custodial sanctions, in general, and for indigenous people,
specifically.

the overrepresentation of our first nations
people in custody has indisputable correlation to canada’s shameful history of
abuse and cultural genocide in residential schools. mr. garlow’s father was a
resident in one of those schools. he was in and out of custody, as his son has
been, throughout their adult lives.

counsel filed a detailed lock down report.
while awaiting the outcome of these proceedings, mr. garlow has been subjected
to triple bunking for months at a time and frequent lock downs. an updated
letter from cecc noted the following list of triple bunking:
jun. 20,
2024, to jul. 17, 2024 28 days
jul. 21,
2024, to aug. 04, 2024 15 days
aug. 14,
2024, to sept. 08, 2024 26 days
sept. 15,
2024, to oct. 11, 2024 27 days
oct. 17,
2024, to nov. 13, 2024 28 days
nov. 22,
2024, to jan. 24, 2025 64 days
jan. 26,
2025, to feb. 01, 2025 7 days
february 05,
2025 1 day
feb. 08,
2025, to mar. 04, 2025 25 days
mar. 14,
2025, to mar. 16, 2025 3 days
march 25,
2025 1 day
may 07,
2025, to may 08, 2025 2 days
may 14,
2025, to may 24, 2025 11 days
jul 02, 2025 1
day
jul. 05,
2025, to jul. 08, 2025 4 days
jul. 14,
2025, to jul. 24, 2025 11 days
aug. 16,
2025, to aug. 17, 2025 2 days
sept. 10,
2025, to present
56 days
total
triple bunking 312 days


in addition to overcrowding and unsanitary
conditions, mr. garlow was locked down
459 times
for less than 6 hours and
67 times
for 6
hours or more. counsel added up all the hours which totalled
2038 hours of time spent on lock down. during those periods, mr. garlow reported
that he was unable to change his clothes for as long as ten days. he endured 40
days without access to clean sheets. understandably, there was considerable
tension on the ranges. he witnessed beatings and an inmate died.

to cram three grown men into a tiny cell,
with one man having to sleep on a dirty floor, while enduring multiple,
repetitive lock downs, is cruel and unusual treatment. the living conditions
are unsanitary and inhumane.

mr. garlow is separated from his son and
partner. he is alienated from them since he is unable to communicate with them often
because of the inability to regularly access the phones. he has no access to
appropriate services for an indigenous person. in addition, he suffered
extensively from the consequences of a scabies outbreak and untreated health
issues.

the authors of the
gladue
report included
mr. garlow’s account of his experiences:
this year he
and his cellmates were moved from their cell due to a scabies scare. as the
health unit was full, they were placed instead in the behavioural control unit
(bcu), which is normally reserved for inmates who are being disruptive and pose
a security risk. jesse said staff told him when they placed him there, that he
would continue to get access to things such as library books and a special
diet, but once placed on the bcu, he was essentially forgotten and neglected
for a week other than basic necessities. jesse said he heard staff talking
openly within earshot of other inmates, joking about jesse and his cellmates
being on the unit because of scabies: “i was put in the bcu, put in a
disgusting cell, made fun of by guards. it was the worst week of my life. i’ve
never been treated so inhumanely my whole life.”
jesse said
he has suffered a variety of medical problems such as throat infections and
athlete’s foot, which he believes are due to overcrowding and unsanitary
conditions. in the month of july, they were on lockdown almost every day, due
to construction.
he was moved
to a maximum pod earlier this summer and was not allowed to have his cell
effects moved with him:
they left my
stuff behind. i lost everything. i left it all back on four pod. all my tax
returns. so now there’s people that have all my private information, my sin,
all my phone numbers, some of them to family members. now i can’t call them. i
had papers for court and stuff, that i can’t get back. i asked them to go back
and get it, and they said, ‘consider it gone.’ then, they never came back for
me, so i just stayed down here.
jesse said
he and other inmates are deterred from reporting medical concerns to health
care staff out of fear of being moved from their cells and losing all their
effects and access to services.

there are no legitimate excuses, whatsoever,
for this province’s consistent failure to provide appropriate living conditions
for inmates, adequate staff and/or acceptable medical care.

the mitigation of mr. garlow’s sentence is
not a “break” for him. he did not want to be or choose to be treated inhumanely
by the authorities who are ostensibly responsible to provide adequate care for
inmates. a sentence reduction is not a reflection of a judge being “soft on
crime”. it is our obligation as the gatekeepers of justice to address, redress
and hopefully ameliorate institutionalized abuse.

mitigation of mr. garlow’s sentence is the
only means to express condemnation of human rights violations and this utterly
shameful mistreatment of presumptively innocent inmates awaiting the outcome of
their proceedings. for an indigenous person like mr. garlow, this is reminiscent
of the historical governmental and societal apathy towards the devastating and
destructive institutional abuse of our first nations people.

mr. garlow’s sentence must be mitigated to
reflect the unnecessary suffering that was caused by agents of the state and
the denials of his basic human dignities for over a year. of course, i am aware
of the appellate authority that prohibits reducing a sentence to such an extent
that it is no longer a proportionate disposition.

despite the terrible conditions of his
detention, mr. garlow has taken advantage of any program that he was able to
access. he has shown his commitment to rehabilitation by completing the
following self-directed programs or booklets:
anger
management – 19/12/2024.
anger
management – 04/28/2025
substance
use – 04/09/2025.
managing
stress – 05/13/2025.
changing
habits – 05/26/2025.
goal setting
– 06/03/2025.
thoughts to
action – 07/10/2025.

mr. garlow hopes to walk a different path
from this point forward. he is willing to engage in the programs outlined in
the most recent
gladue
report. he wants to connect with and rely on
services for indigenous people. it is not just for himself. he wants to be a
better father to his son than his father was to him.
c.
legal analysis:
i.
guiding
principles of sentencing:

the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:

to denounce unlawful conduct
and the harm done to victims or to the community that
is caused by unlawful conduct;

to deter the offender and other persons
from committing offences;

to separate offenders from society, where
necessary;

to assist in rehabilitating offenders;

to provide reparations for harm done to
victims or to the community; and

to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.

section 718.1
of the
criminal code
provides that any sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender. as a result, d
epending on the circumstances of the offence and the
circumstances of the offender, a court may focus on specific principles of
sentencing as the most important factors to guide the court’s decision.

undoubtedly, in cases involving possession of a loaded
firearm, especially in suspicious circumstances while in public, general
deterrence and denunciation are the predominant sentencing principles.

in
r. v. beharry,
2022 onsc 4370
at paras.19 and 20, justice schreck observed:
the gravity of the
offences committed by mr. beharry is significant. like all handguns, the
firearm possessed by mr. beharry is manufactured for the sole purpose of
killing or seriously injuring human beings. it is not incidentally dangerous.
rather, its dangerousness is its very purpose. it is an instrument of death. as
explained in
morris, at para. 68:
gun crimes
involving the possession of loaded, concealed firearms in public places pose a
real and immediate danger to the public, especially anyone who interacts with
the gun holder. when the person with the gun is confronted by the police, who
are engaged in the lawful execution of their duties, the risk increases
dramatically.... a person who carries a concealed, loaded handgun in public
undermines the community's sense of safety and security. carrying a concealed,
loaded handgun in a public place in canada is antithetical to the canadian concept
of a free and ordered society.

one of the leading decisions with respect
the range of sentences for firearms cases is
the decision of
r. v. nur,
2015 scc 15. the supreme court upheld the court of appeal’s
decision in
r.
v. nur,
2013 onca 677
citing favourably justice doherty’s remarks at para.
206:
nor do my
reasons have any significant impact on the determination of the appropriate
sentence for those s. 95 offences at what i have described as the true crime
end of the s. 95 spectrum. individuals who have loaded restricted or prohibited
firearms that they have no business possessing anywhere or at any time, and who
are engaged in criminal conduct or conduct that poses a danger to others should
continue to receive exemplary sentences that will emphasize deterrence and
denunciation. thus, as outlined earlier, and regardless of the three-year
minimum penalty, this appellant, despite the mitigating factors, could well
have received a sentence of three years.

sentence ranges are not static. they evolve
and must be responsive to various factors including growing social awareness.
since the
nur
decision, there have been many subsequent decisions that
acknowledge the seriousness of gun crimes and the need for exemplary sentences,
while balancing some uniquely mitigating circumstances, including social
context evidence, that may mitigate the culpability of the offender.

there are numerous decisions that have been
released since 2020 in which offenders who have been convicted of gun related
crimes have received sentences of less than two years incarceration and even
conditional sentences:
r. v. mclarty-mathieu,
2022 oncj 498 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 4925
(ont.c.j.);
r. v. allegro,
 o.j. no. 1780 (ont.s.c.j.);
r. v.
lewis,
 o.j. no. 318 (ont.c.j.);
r. v. moses,
2022 onsc 332;
r. v. morfo,
2020 onsc 5663 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 4158 (ont.s.c.j.).

in
r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
at
para
131, the court of appeal reviewed the range of sentences for these
offences and explained that:
as
indicated
in
r. v.
smickle,
2013
onca 678,
304
c.c.c. (3d) 371, at para.
30, additional reasons,
2014
onca 49,
306
c.c.c. (3d) 351,
sentences at or just below the two-year
mark may be appropriate for some s. 95 offences.
when the sentencing judge determines that
an appropriate sentence is in that range, counsel and the sentencing judge must
fully explore various options which could eliminate or reduce the offender's
period of actual incarceration while still giving effect to the proportionality
principle. [emphasis mine]

in
r. v. beharry,
supra,
justice schreck sentenced an offender who possessed a loaded prohibited gun in
a vehicle to a conditional sentence. the offender was convicted after trial. he
was 32 years old, and he had no criminal record.

after summarizing the facts, the court
engaged in an extensive review of various precedents with respect to the
sentence ranges for gun offences:
the
well-established
three-to-five year range
that is often mentioned in s.
95 sentencing cases applies in situations where “the use and possession of the
gun is associated with criminal activity, such as drug trafficking”:
r. v. graham,
2018
onsc 6817, at para.
38;
r.
v. marshall,
2014
onca 692, at paras.
47-48;
nur
(s.c.c.), at para. 82.
lower sentences in the upper
reformatory or lower penitentiary range can and have been imposed in cases in
the “middle of the spectrum,” that is, where the firearm is not possessed in
connection with other criminal activity:
r. v. smickle,
2013 onca 678 (canlii),
2014 onca
678,
304
c.c.c. (3d) 371, at para.
30
(additional
reasons at
2014
onca 49,
306
c.c.c. (3d) 351
);
r. v. johnson,
2022
onsc 2688, at para.
38;
r. v.
shomonov,
2016
onsc 4015, at para.
12;
r. v.
downey,
2017
onca 789, at paras.
9-12;
r. v.
dalton,
2018
onsc 544, at para.
56;
r. v.
filian-jiminez,
2014
onca 601, at para.
2;
kongolo,
at para. 74;
boussoulas
(s.c.j.), at para. 22.
[emphasis mine]

the crown acknowledged that there are variations
in the range of sentences depending on the unique circumstances of each case.
she provided an impressive selection of multiple decisions to support her
position of the appropriate penalty, including a comprehensive sentencing chart.
this type of preparation for a sentencing hearing is commendable.

the crown relied on the aggravating fact
that mr. garlow’s possession was in furtherance of criminal activity. as noted
earlier, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that mr. garlow was in
possession of this firearm in relation to drug trafficking. it is of course
aggravating that he possessed the firearm while in possession of mind-altering
substances that could have negatively influenced his choices.

i do not intend to summarize each of the
decisions thoroughly reviewed and thoughtfully provided by the crown. i will, however,
address one submission. i do not agree with the crown’s statement that
sentences below the 3 years “starting point” “involve exceptional and sympathetic
circumstances and may be justified; others seem to amount to an error in
principle”. such dismissive statements about persuasive, well-reasoned, factually
unique judgements because they are not consonant with the crown’s opinion was
not warranted or appropriate.

ultimately, sentencing precedents are
intended to provide guidance as opposed to dominating the sentencing process.
in
r. v. rawn,
2012 onca 487
at paras.
29 and 30, the ontario court of
appeal emphasized that:
it goes
without saying that a fit sentence must be ascertained on an individual basis.
it is therefore inappropriate to allow the
parity principle, a principle that, by definition considers another sentence
imposed on another offender, to dominate the determination of a fit sentence.
in
r. v.
issa (t.)
(1992),
57 o.a.c. 253, this court expressed the role of the
parity principle as follows, at para. 9:
so long as
sentencing remains an individual process there may be sentences meted out to
offenders for participation in the same offence which are justifiably disparate.
[we] think that clayton ruby's statement in
sentencing
is correct, that
the rule against unreasonable disparity in sentencing "
does not require equal sentences, but only
understandable sentences when examined together." [emphasis mine]

despite mr. garlow’s history of drug trafficking
and the other items in that vehicle, i cannot conclusively infer that he was in
possession of this firearm in furtherance of other criminal activities. nevertheless,
as noted, mr. garlow’s possession of this gun in public, while in possession of
mind-altering drugs, and while in contravention of a court order are substantially
aggravating facts.

mr. garlow knew that he was prohibited
from possessing firearms for any reason. the possession of a particularly
deadly gun in public, despite a court order intended to protect innocent
members of the community, must attract a consecutive sentence. that is the only
means to express condemnation for breaching the court order.

while these are serious crimes, a sentence
must be proportionate and responsive to the aggravating circumstances of the
offence
and
the mitigating circumstances of the offender as opposed to
unduly focusing on one or the other. as the supreme court explained
in
r. v.
ipeelee,
2012 scc 13 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 13
at para.
37:
the
fundamental principle of sentencing (i.e., proportionality) is intimately tied
to the fundamental purpose of sentencing -- the maintenance of a just, peaceful
and safe society through the imposition of just sanctions. whatever weight a
judge may wish to accord to the various objectives and other principles listed
in the
code, the resulting sentence must respect the fundamental
principle of proportionality. proportionality is the
sine qua non
of a
just sanction. first, the principle ensures that a sentence reflects the
gravity of the offence. this is closely tied to the objective of denunciation.
it promotes justice for victims and ensures public confidence in the justice
system....
second, the
principle of proportionality ensures that a sentence does not exceed what is
appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender. in this sense,
the principle serves a limiting or restraining function and ensures justice for
the offender. in the canadian criminal justice system, a just sanction is one
that reflects both perspectives on proportionality and does not elevate one at
the expense of the other.

sentencing requires a careful balancing of
competing considerations to achieve a just and proportionate disposition. the
supreme court of canada
reiterated in
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no.
64
at para
12
(s.c.c.)
that:
the more serious the
crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender's degree of
responsibility, the heavier the sentence will be. in other words, the severity
of a sentence depends not only on the seriousness of the crime's consequences,
but also on the moral blameworthiness of the offender. determining a proportionate
sentence is a delicate task. as i mentioned above, both sentences that are too
lenient and sentences that are too harsh can undermine public confidence in the
administration of justice.

i must balance the aggravating features of
the offences and mr. garlow’s moral blameworthiness for his choices as well as
his potential for rehabilitation. considerations unique to each individual case
may tip the scales one way or the other when deciding the appropriate sentence.
mr. garlow’s heritage and history are important considerations.
ii.
the principle of restraint:

this will not be mr. garlow’s first penitentiary
sentence. nevertheless, i am mindful of the principle of restraint that is
codified in
section 718.2
of the
criminal code:
(d)
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders,
with
particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders. [emphasis mine]

mr. garlow is morally culpable for his
choices. the sole purpose of that kind of gun is to kill people and,
considering it was modified and had a loaded magazine, to enable the holder to
kill many people. it is not intended for entertainment while shooting at a
cabin, neither is a flame thrower.

despite the lack of a related record for
gun offences, i agree with the crown that the least restrictive sanction that
is appropriate in the circumstances is a significant sentence of incarceration to
reflect the severity of his crimes. the risk he posed to innocent member of the
community and the police by having that gun in his vehicle cannot be
understated.

mr. garlow is not a young man, but that
does not mean i should not exercise restraint. i have cautioned myself that this
sentence should not be so crushing that he is left with no hope for
rehabilitation, a successful reintegration into society and reuniting with his
son.

i believe that there is quite a bit of hope
for him, especially when considering the resources that are being offered to
him as an aboriginal person.

he must learn to prioritize his teenage son.
a teenager who lost his mother and who is dependent on his father. his son is
just like he was when his own mother died. he is lost without a stable
connection to his father and his culture. jesse garlow can choose to step away
from the path his father followed, if he accepts the support and services
offered by professionals within the indigenous community.
iii.
the sentencing
of an indigenous person:

i do not intend to extensively recite the guiding
considerations when sentencing an aboriginal person that have been repeated for
decades since the supreme court of canada’s seminal
decisions in
r. v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc),

s.c.j. no. 19, and
r. v. ipeelee,
2012
scc 13.
in
r. v.
hills,
2023 scc 2
at para
55, the supreme court of canada provided this
succinct summary:
at para 55: in addition,
s. 718.2
(e) of the
criminal code
provides a mandatory direction to consider the unique situation of aboriginal
offenders for all offences (
gladue, at para.
93;
r. v. ipeelee,
2012
scc 13,

1 s.c.r. 433, at paras.
84-85
).
sentencing judges must consider the systemic or background factors which may
have played a part in bringing the particular aboriginal offender before the
court and the types of sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be
appropriate in the circumstances for that offender. sanctions other than
imprisonment are to be considered.
at para 87:
section 718.2
(e) of the
criminal code
is mandatory and was enacted to address the overincarceration of indigenous
people and their disproportionate representation in canada's criminal justice
system. the unfortunate truth is that indigeneity is an offender characteristic
that is more than "theoretically possible". indigenous offenders are
not only reasonably foreseeable in the sense contemplated by
nur, the
statistics over the years demonstrate that indigenous people are vastly
overrepresented before the courts. the same is true for black and other
racialized offenders who are overrepresented in the criminal justice system and
whose experiences of historic and systemic disadvantage may reduce their moral
blameworthiness

i found additional guidance from the
ontario court of appeal’s
decision in
r. v. mercier,
2023 onca 98
at
para
18
that:
gladue
and
ipeelee
require trial judges
to make two separate inquires when sentencing indigenous offenders. first,
whether systemic and background factors have affected the degree of
responsibility of the offender, and second, whether different or alternate
sanctions are appropriate to fulfil the principles of sentencing.

the
gladue
report that was prepared
in anticipation of these proceedings was enlightening and very helpful. it fulsomely
explained how mr. garlow’s “
experiences
of historic and systemic disadvantage” attenuate his moral blameworthiness for
many of his life choices and these offences.

i wish to thank the authors of the report
for taking so much time to provide the court with a sensitive and thoughtfully prepared
recitation of mr. garlow’s familial and personal life history. the authors
provided explanations for the connections between mr. garlow’s substance abuse,
mental health issues, criminogenic tendencies and canada’s legacy of colonialism
and mistreatment of our first nations people.

there is an obvious connection between the
systemic and background factors as an aboriginal
person and the adverse impact on every aspect of mr. garlow’s life, including his
history of substance abuse and
criminal convictions. his moral responsibility for the incomprehensible choice
that he made to possess a lethal weapon, while subject to a prohibition order,
is attenuated by his consumption of mind-altering substances and a long-standing
history of the inability to see the bigger picture of the potential consequences
of his misdeeds to other people because of his own suffering, trauma and abuse.

in summary, the two positive role models in
jesse’s life, his mother and grandmother, died when he was a boy. both his
grandfathers were murdered. his father suffered cultural alienation in the
residential school system. jesse was separated from a supportive and welcoming
community as a direct result. his father was often absent, emotionally unavailable,
abusive and encouraged poor choices. his sister was killed by police while she
was suffering a mental health crisis. his nephew died of an overdose. his
father is missing.

jesse garlow’s choices are informed and
influenced by his upbringing, numerous tragedies, and his disconnection to his
roots. fortunately, his community is waiting to embrace him and offer him a different
path to follow with some guidance.

i appreciate the crown’s very able and
forceful submissions highlighting the aggravating facts and the potential
devastation of possessing a killing machine. fortunately, those legitimate
concerns were not realized. these dangerous weapons have been seized and will
be destroyed pursuant to a forfeiture order.

in addition to financial losses, mr. garlow
has been severely punished by the length of his stay and his suffering as an
inmate at central east correctional center. these consequences serve as ample denunciation
and deterrence, both specific and general for possessing a loaded firearm in
contravention of a court order.

it is essential that every sentence is
proportionate and responsive to the unique circumstances of each individual
case. the supreme court eloquently directed in
r. v. hill, supra
at para
112 that:
proportionality is based in fairness and
justice for the offender and does not permit unjust punishment for the
"sake of the common good" (
priest, at p. 547;
see
ipeelee,
at para.
37
). while society can be understood to be deeply concerned with the
criminal behaviour which gave rise to the conviction, people are also committed
to fair and just punishments which are not cruel, unusual or grossly
disproportionate to the sanction which was deserved.

i have determined that systemic and
background factors have affected the degree of responsibility of this offender.
mr. garlow is the personification of
intergenerational trauma. i cannot imagine more sympathetic circumstances or
mitigating factors that cry out for some compassion. punishing him with a further
period of incarceration for the sake of the common good would be unjust.

secondly, i have also decided that there
are “
different or alternate
sanctions” in addition to his period of pretrial incarceration that are
“appropriate to fulfil the principles of sentencing”.
the focus going forward will be on rehabilitation and restorative
justice by ensuring mr. garlow’s successful reintegration into his community
with the support of aboriginal services to restart his journey towards healing
and fulfilling his true potential.

this approach to the sentencing of this
offender, in these circumstances, is far more likely to protect the public than
an additional period of incarceration. as the supreme court observed in
r.
v. j.w.,
2025 scc 16
at para
56:
rehabilitation of
the offender and the protection of society are linked. the opening words of s.
718 state "[t]he fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society".
one of the objectives in pursuance of this is "rehabilitating
offenders" (s. 718(d)). rehabilitation is "one of the fundamental
moral values that distinguish canadian society from the societies of many other
nations in the world, and it helps the courts impose sentences that are just
and appropriate".

the remainder of mr. garlow’s sentence will
be focussed on rehabilitation through a structured and demanding period of
community supervision for the next three years. he will have the opportunity to
connect with and draw support from various services for indigenous peoples that
are devoted to healing trauma as opposed to being defined by it. these
organizations are prepared to provide him with the skills to be successful.

aboriginal legal services set out a
detailed list of various programs, including two residential placements, that
are available to assist mr. garlow with his ongoing rehabilitation, life
skills, credit counseling and making better choices. each of these
recommendations will be included in the probation order.
d.
conclusion

mr. garlow is standing on a precipice. he
can choose to take the helping hand that is being extended to him by native
horizons or he can repeat this horrible cycle and spend the balance of his life
in and out of custody. he owes his son more than a life without a father and a
life without a beneficial connection to his ancestry. i hope that mr. garlow 
will choose to believe in himself enough to fully embrace this opportunity to
start anew.

mr. garlow has been in custody from june 7
th,
2024, until november 4
th, 2025. he has served a total of
516 days of pretrial custody
which is the equivalent of 774 days with
summers credit or 25 months and 24 days. his sentence will be mitigated further
to reflect the conditions that he endured while he was in pretrial custody. the
total period of pretrial custody that will be credited will be
1032 days (2 years, 10 months and 2 days).

the time will be attributed as follows:
possession
of the load firearm there will be
450 actual days of time served
= 675 days with summers + 225 days of duncan mitigation
for a total of
900 days
time served
or 30 months
or 2 ½ years of the pretrial custody will be attributed to possession of the
loaded prohibited weapon.
possession
in contravention of a prohibition order there will be
66 actual days
= 99 with summers + 33 days mitigation for a total of
132 days of time served
consecutive
or 4 months
and 12 days be consecutive and attributed to breaching the prohibition order

mr. garlow will receive a suspended sentence
with a period of probation of three years with the terms and conditions
attached in schedule a. the probation order will be transferred to
peterborough.

he will be subject to a section 109 order
for life. he is ordered to supply a sample of his dna. the victim fine
surcharges are waived as an undue hardship. all items seized from him, except
for the cell phone, will be forfeited.
schedule a
suspended sentence with three years of probation
statutory
conditions:
•
keep the peace
and be of good behavior;
•
appear before the
court when required to do so;
•
notify the court
or probation officer in advance of any change of name or address and promptly
notify the court or probation officer of any change in employment or occupation
reporting:
•
report in person
to a probation officer:
o
within 2 working days;
o
and
thereafter at all times and places
as directed by the probation officer or any person authorized by a probation
officer to assist in your supervision
•
you must
cooperate with your probation officer. you must sign any releases necessary to
permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance and you must provide
proof of compliance with any condition of this order to your probation officer
upon request
residence
•
you must not
reside in a place where firearms, imitation firearms, ammunition, restricted weapons,
prohibited weapons or explosive substances are kept or stored;
•
you must not be
in any vehicle where you know that firearms, imitation firearms, ammunition,
restricted weapons, prohibited weapons or explosive substances are kept or
stored;
no contact and
not attend
•
do not contact or
communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, by any physical or electronic
or other means with jonathon guthrie
•
do not be within 50
meters of any place where you know him to live, work, go to school or any place
that you know the person to be
except
o
while attending at required court
appearances
weapons and
permits
o
do not possess any weapons as defined
by the criminal code.
counselling and
treatment
•
attend and actively
participate in all assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as
directed by your probation officer in consultation with
dianne hamilton or her
designate, gladue caseworker at aboriginal legal services, who can help him
follow up on recommendations and access programs (ms. hamilton can be contacted
at 705-395-0204)
and
complete them to the satisfaction of your probation officer including but not
limited to:
o
native horizons treatment
centre in hagersville, ontario, for a residential program for addiction
recovery and all follow up programs or an alternative substance abuse program
for an indigenous person if they do not have sufficient resources;
o
native horizons for a
residential program for
finding balance: healing grief & loss
program
and all follow up programs or an alternative grief program for an indigenous
person if they do not have sufficient resources;
o
the
apatisiwin program
through
the nogojiwanong friendship centre (884 ford st. location, peterborough) for
credit counseling and to receive help applying for training and
apprenticeships, or funding for self-employment and business start-up
opportunities.
o
parenting classes for
indigenous people.
•
you shall sign
any release of information forms as will enable your probation officer to
monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.
•
you shall provide
proof of your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.

the crown’s initial position was 4 years but that changed in
the written submissions presumably in response to the contents of the gladue
report.

utlj © university of toronto press e20230017

this does not include the initial period of detention while he
was in admitting.