source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj296/2025oncj296.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. kroll, 2025 oncj 296
date: 
2025 05 30
court
file no.: oshawa 21-28101370
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
julian kroll
before
justice joseph hanna
reasons
for judgment released on may 30, 2025
c. enright............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
r. levin…
…………………………………………………………counsel
for the defendant
hanna j.:
introduction

julian kroll is charged with impaired operation
of a conveyance contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
and
possession of a schedule i substance, namely methamphetamine, contrary to s. 4(1)
of the
controlled drugs and substances act. while the impaired count is
not particularized, the crown’s position is that mr. kroll’s ability to operate
a conveyance was impaired by drug.

mr. kroll began his trial self-represented. on
the first day of trial two police witnesses were called. the matter was adjourned,
and mr. kroll retained counsel. counsel was then given the opportunity to
cross-examine the witnesses who had already testified. the last witness to
testify was a toxicologist.

the crown did not seek to introduce any
statements made by mr. kroll to the police. these statements are therefore not admissible,
and i have not relied upon them. i will only mention these statements as necessary
to explain the unfolding of the events and to clarify the limitations of the
drug-recognition evaluator’s opinion. similarly, i have placed no weight on the
inadmissible hearsay contained in the 911 call which triggered the
investigation in this case.

no
charter
complaints were made. the
issue i need to decide is whether the crown has proven mr. kroll’s guilt of the
offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt.
the evidence
of the arresting officer

on september 23, 2021, at 8:05 a.m., police
constable mariah trousdale attended the food basics in whitby in response to a
911 call. she observed mr. kroll seated in the driver’s seat of a vehicle that
was parked diagonally in a handicapped spot. he was the sole occupant of the
vehicle.

p.c. trousdale requested that mr. kroll provide
his driving related documents. she observed he had extremely dilated pupils. in
cross-examination she stated that she was not aware what impact, if any,
colored contact lenses would have on the pupils’ appearance. she also observed
mr. kroll to be hyperactive, constantly moving around restlessly. she testified
that mr. kroll’s speech was very quick and that his responses were very short. she
asked mr. kroll to exit his vehicle. when he did, she noticed he was unsteady
on his feet.

p.c. trousdale made an approved screening device
demand and administered the test. mr. kroll passed. in response to the
officer’s inquiry regarding where he was going, mr. kroll looked frantically
for his phone, which apparently contained the address. p.c. trousdale testified
she observed mr. kroll rummage throughout the vehicle searching for his phone
despite it being in plain view on the passenger seat. she then observed mr.
kroll attempt several times to gain access to his phone. i emphasize here that
i do not rely on mr. kroll’s utterances surrounding this event but only the
officer’s description of what she saw. p.c. trousdale also observed mr. kroll
fumble his phone. he eventually gained access to his phone.

mr. kroll was then arrested for impaired
operation. p.c. trousdale searched the vehicle incident to arrest. she located
what she described as a “crackpipe” in the front passenger seat area, though
she could not recall exactly where, and she indicated she did not believe it
had been in plain view.

p.c. trousdale testified that while transporting
mr. kroll to the police station she observed his feet in the air and that she
constantly had to remind him to stay seated in an upright position. she elaborated
that she had been driving calmly and obeying the traffic laws while this was occurring.

while at the police division, p.c. trousdale
located a bag in mr. kroll’s jacket pocket which contained what appeared to her
to be methamphetamine. she testified that she processed this item and sent it
off for analysis, though she could not recall the specific government agency it
was sent to.

p.c. trousdale’s badge number is 3957.
evidence of the drug recognition evaluator

police constable jonathon stinson is a drug recognition
evaluator (dre). he conducted a 12-step evaluation of mr. kroll at the police
division. this evaluation was recorded on the officer’s body worn camera.

the evaluation included a horizontal gaze test, a
nystagmus test, and an eye conversion test. neither of these tests revealed anything
unusual.

during the modified romberg test, mr. kroll estimated
30 seconds had passed when it had been 22 seconds. this was outside the 5
second discrepancy range for the test. during the test, p.c. stinson observed
that mr. kroll swayed from front to back and side to side. furthermore, mr.
kroll did not keep his head tilted back as instructed. instead, his head rolled
around.

mr. kroll then performed the walk and turn test.
p.c. stinson observed mr. kroll lose his balance twice during the instructional
phase. in the walking stage, mr. kroll missed touching
his heel to toe four times during the first nine steps. he also took 13 steps
rather than the nine he had been instructed to take. while turning, mr. kroll
did not take several small steps to turn himself around as he had been instructed.
instead, he pivoted around on both feet to take the second set of nine steps
back. during his second walk, he took 13 steps rather than the nine he had been
directed to take. he also failed to touch his heel to toe six times and extended
his arms to balance himself.

next, was the one leg test. while raising his
right leg, mr. kroll swayed once for balance. he also used his arms to balance
throughout and came away from his normal position of rest. when raising his
left leg, he swayed once and again used his arms for balance. p.c. stinson
observed him touch his foot down four times.

on the finger and nose test, mr. kroll twice touched
the right side of his nose, rather than the tip of his nose.

p.c. stinson advised that mr. kroll’s body
temperature was 35.9 celsius, which was slightly below the normal range of 36.5
– 37.5 celsius. his blood pressure and pulse were normal.

p.c. stinson measured mr. kroll’s pupil sizes in
three different settings. in room light, the pupils measured in the normal
range. in total darkness, his pupils measured 4 millimetres, which was below
the normal range of 5 – 8.5 mm. in direct light, mr. kroll’s pupils were within
the normal range.

p.c. stinson acknowledged that he could not say
within what timeframe mr. kroll consumed drugs. he also acknowledged that results
on the individual tests involved in his evaluation which fell outside of the expected
ranges could possibly be caused by sources other than impairment.

p.c. stinson testified that mr. kroll’s
behaviour, such as his fidgetiness and shakiness was in his opinion
inconsistent with the suggestion that mr. kroll was tired or fatigued.

p.c. stinson testified that it was his opinion,
based on the totality of everything he had observed during his evaluation, that
mr. kroll’s ability to operate a conveyance was impaired by a combination of a central
nervous system stimulant and a narcotic analgesic.

he testified that in reaching his conclusion, he
compared his observations to the matrix.

p.c. stinson testified that mr. kroll had advised
him that he had slept well the night before and that he had consumed crystal
meth 24 hours earlier. i ruled that these statements were inadmissible to prove
either count given that the crown did not prove them voluntary. see:
r. v.
vitellaro,
2025 oncj 200, at para.
40. the officer testified these
statements were taken into consideration in forming his opinion, though he
could not quantify how much weight he placed on them. he testified that if he excluded
these statements from his consideration his opinion in this case would not
change.

p.c. stinson obtained a urine sample from mr.
kroll pursuant to a demand made under
s. 320.28(4)
of the
criminal code
and
submitted it to the centre of forensic sciences for analysis.
the toxicology evidence

the crown called dr. marina chiaravalloti, a
toxicologist, who works at the centre of forensic sciences. her report was also
filed as an exhibit.

her evidence was that mr. kroll’s urine sample
contained methamphetamine, amphetamine, and ghb. she explained that methamphetamine
is a central nervous system stimulant and that ghb is a central nervous system
depressant. she indicated that amphetamine could either arise as a metabolite
of methamphetamine or be administered as its own drug. she was unable to tell
in this case which had occurred.

dr. chiaravalloti was careful to emphasize that urine
results could not be used to determine dose, route of administration, when
drugs were administered, or whether a person was impaired. she also emphasized
that the presence of a drug metabolite in urine does not reveal whether that
drug was present in the person’s blood at the time the sample was taken. her
evidence was that generally speaking methamphetamine could cause increased
talkativeness, pupil dilation, increased blood pressure, and increased risk-taking
behaviour. it could be followed by a crash phase of extreme fatigue. again,
generally, this drug could cause erratic driving and impair an individual’s
ability to operate a motor vehicle.

she explained after a single dose,
methamphetamine can be detected in urine for 1 to 4 days. with multiple uses,
and with chronic use, the period of detection could generally extend to a week but
could possibly extend beyond that.

the evidence list report included in dr.
chiaravalloti’s report lists durham regional police service as the agency which
submitted mr. kroll’s urine sample and indicates a case number of 2021-223835.
the health canada certificate of
analyst

the crown tendered a certificate of analyst from
health canada. it indicates that a sample was delivered from the durham
regional police service on september 28, 2021. the sample was sealed within a
package with identification markings including:
on0181658
trousdale 3957
2021-223835.

the certificate states that the sample was analysed
and found to contain methamphetamine.
the burden of proof

mr. kroll is presumed innocent. it is the
crown’s onus to prove his guilt of the offences charged beyond a reasonable
doubt.

where the crown's case depends on circumstantial
evidence, the question becomes whether the court can be satisfied that the
accused's guilt is the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of
the evidence:
r. v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33 (canlii), 1 s.c.r. 1000 at paragraphs
28
and 55.
credibility and reliability of the
witnesses

i found each of the witnesses who testified to
be credible and reliable. each testified in a straightforward manner. neither
witness was evasive in cross-examination. i did not find either one of them to
be shaken in cross-examination. nor did i find any significant internal or
external inconsistencies in either of their evidence. furthermore, each of the
three witnesses made reasonable concessions when suggestions were made to them.

one piece of evidence i found unreliable is
whether mr. kroll’s pupils were dilated. p.c. trousdale testified they were
dilated, however p.c. stinson testified they were normal during two measurements
and constricted during one. i have no reason to doubt p.c. stinson’s measurements.
he was conducting a test he routinely administers. i do not find that this
discrepancy undermines p.c. trousdale’s general credibility or reliability. it
may be that mr. kroll’s eyes were initially dilated then later were not.
additionally, mr. kroll was wearing coloured contact lenses when p.c. trousdale
interacted with him, but he had removed them at the time p.c. stinson measured
his pupils. i do not know how those lenses could have affected the appearance
of his pupils. ultimately, i am unwilling to find that mr. kroll’s pupils were
actually dilated when he was interacting with p.c. trousdale. i accept,
however, that the officer was being honest in her testimony about believing
that they were.
assessment of the drug possession
count

section 2(1) of the
cdsa
incorporates the
definition of possession found in
s. 4(3)
of the
criminal code:
r. v.
bains,
2015 onca 677, at para.
154.
r. v. hudson,
2021 onca 772, at
paras.
88 – 89.

possession under
s. 4(3)
of the
criminal code
includes personal possession, constructive possession and joint possession.
knowledge and control are essential elements of both personal and constructive
possession:
r. v. morelli,
2010 scc 8, 1 s.c.r. 253, at para.
15;
hudson, at para.
89.

knowledge may be inferred based on
circumstantial evidence, “such as, for example, the finding of the drug on the
accused's person”:
r. v. aiello, o.j. no. 373,
1978 canlii 62
(onca), at para.
8; (aff'd)
1979 canlii 31 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 15. while the crown need not prove
knowledge of the specific drug alleged in the information, it must prove the
accused had knowledge the drug was a controlled substance:
r. v. williams,
2009 onca 342, at para.
19;
aiello, at para. 8.

i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that p.c.
trousdale seized a bag from mr. kroll’s jacket pocket and that this bag
contained methamphetamine. the officer’s evidence on this point was credible
and reliable. this evidence was neither undermined in cross-examination nor contradicted.
p.c. trousdale testified that she submitted a sample of the substance found in
the bag for analysis. the certificate of analyst filed states that the sample
analysed by health canada contained methamphetamine. though p.c. trousdale could
not recall the specific agency where the sample was sent, i am satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that continuity of the sample has been proven. the
certificate of analyst filed refers to a sample delivered by durham regional
police service five days after mr. kroll’s arrest. the certificate also
indicates that the sample was in a sealed package containing markings including
p.c. trousdale’s name and badge number, as well as a number which matched the
case number listed on the toxicology report associated to mr. kroll’s urine
sample.

i am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that mr. kroll had both knowledge and control regarding the methamphetamine
seized by police. it was found on his person and there is nothing to suggest it
was placed there without his knowledge. obviously, he had control over the item.
the natural and compelling inference which i draw is that he was aware of the substance
that was in his pocket and of its nature. in my view, any inference to the
contrary would be speculative.
assessment of the impaired operation
count

p.c. trousdale observed mr. kroll seated in the driver’s
seat of a motor vehicle. i accept this unchallenged evidence. mr. kroll is
therefore presumed to have been operating this vehicle unless he establishes on
a balance of probabilities that he did not occupy the driver’s seat for the
purpose of setting the vehicle in motion:
criminal code, s. 320.35;
r.
v. boudreault,
2012 scc 56 (canlii), 3 s.c.r. 157 at paras.
36-38. there was no evidence
in this case capable of rebutting this presumption.

it is the crown’s burden to prove impairment to
any degree beyond a reasonable doubt:
r. v. stellato
(1993),
1993 canlii 3375 (on ca), 78 c.c.c.
(3d) 380 (ont. c.a.), at p. 384, aff'd
1994 canlii 94 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 478;
r. v. stennett,
2021 onca 258, para.
111.

the following combination of factors and
circumstances lead me to conclude that the crown has met its onus:
-
mr. kroll was parked diagonally in a handicap spot.
see similarly:
r. v. turner,
2014 onsc 6820, at para.
23.
-
mr. kroll was hyperactive while interacting with
p.c. trousdale.
-
p.c. trousdale observed him to be speaking
quickly and with short sentences.
-
mr. kroll was unsteady on his feet when he
exited his vehicle.
-
he frantically looked for his phone despite it being
plainly visible on the passenger seat.
-
mr. kroll struggled to gain access to his phone
and fumbled it.
-
while being transported to the police station he
raised his legs in the air despite the officer driving normally.
-
during the drug recognition evaluation, mr.
kroll had difficulties with the romberg test, the walk and turn test, and the
finger and nose test. having watched the video of his evaluation and considered
p.c. stinson’s testimony, i find that mr. kroll’s fine motor skills and balance
appeared impaired.
-
mr. kroll displayed fidgetiness and shakiness while
with p.c. stinson.
-
mr. kroll’s overall behaviour while interacting
with the police was inconsistent with the suggestion that he was fatigued.
-
there was no evidence that mr. kroll was
suffering from any mental or physical illness or disability which might explain
his behaviour.
-
there is no evidence that mr. kroll smelled of
alcohol.
-
i am mindful that p.c. stinson considered mr.
kroll’s inadmissible statements while forming his opinion. having said that, i
still find that his opinion that mr. kroll’s ability to operate a conveyance
was impaired due to a combination of drugs to have significant weight. i have
considered this opinion with its noted limitations in the context of all the
evidence.
-
mr. kroll was in possession of methamphetamine,
which is a central nervous stimulant. this is one of the types of drug p.c.
stinson opined contributed to his impairment.
-
the toxicology evidence, despite its above-mentioned
limitations, supports that mr. kroll had methamphetamine in his urine. the
absence of a test result identifying drugs in mr. kroll’s blood does not
preclude a conviction. test results are just one piece of evidence for the
trial judge to consider:
r. v. henry,
 o.j. no. 3989 (c.a., in
chambers);
r. v. jackson,
2018 onca 460, at para.
25.
-
the expert evidence was that methamphetamine can
impair a person’s ability to operate a motor vehicle.

having reviewed the evidence in its entirety,
including the gaps in the evidence, i conclude that the only reasonable
inference is that mr. kroll’s ability to operate a conveyance was impaired by drug
to at least a slight degree.
the
presumption in
320.31(6) of the
criminal code

for the reasons stated, i have concluded that
the crown has proven the impaired operation count independent of the
presumption found in
s. 320.31(6)
of the
criminal code.

that provision states:
(6) if the analysis of a sample provided under
subsection 320.28(4)
demonstrates that the person has a drug in their body that is of a type that
the evaluating officer has identified as impairing the person’s ability to
operate a conveyance, that drug — or, if the person has also consumed alcohol,
the combination of alcohol and that drug — is presumed, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, to be the drug, or the combination of alcohol and
that drug, that was present in the person’s body at the time when the person
operated the conveyance and, on proof of the person’s impairment, to have been
the cause of that impairment.

this not a presumption of guilt. it is a “presumption
of accuracy of the dre's call when it is corroborated by a toxicological analysis”:
r. v. amarelo-gemus,
2019 onsc 2675, at para.
58.

the fact that there was also ghb in the mr.
kroll’s urine does not undermine the conclusion that the dre's opinion was
corroborated by the toxicological analysis which found a central nervous system
stimulant in his system:
r. v. lee,
2020 oncj 342, at paras.
79 – 82.

similarly, i do not find that the presumption is
inapplicable because only one of the types of drugs included in the dre’s
opinion was found in mr. kroll’s urine. the provision uses the indefinite
article, stating that the presumption applies when the sample reveals the
presence of “
a
drug in their body that is of
a
type that the
evaluating officer has identified as impairing the person’s ability to operate
a conveyance”. the french version of the provision similarly uses the
indefinite article.

the plain meaning of the provision in both official languages is that the
presumption applies, subject to other requirements being met, when the sample seized
demonstrates the presence of one of the types of drugs included in the dre’s
opinion:
r. v. downes,
2023 scc 6, at para.
41;
oliveira v. ontario
(director, disability support program),
2008 onca 123, at para.
19;
r.
v. stipo,
2019 onca 3, at para.
180.

there are other prerequisites that must be met before
the presumption can be relied upon by the crown. the presumption only applies
when there is an absence of evidence to the contrary and the crown has proven
the accused’s impairment beyond a reasonable doubt:
r. v. muliuolis,
2022 oncj 563, at para.
74;
r. v. danyliuk,
 o.j. no. 844, at
para. 162.

for the reasons already given, i have found
proof of impairment. i do not find that there is any evidence to the contrary
which would make the presumption inapplicable. accordingly, i also find that
the crown has proven mr. kroll’s guilt on the impaired operation count by means
of the presumption found in
s. 320.31(6)
of the
criminal code
conclusion

the crown has proved both charges beyond a
reasonable doubt. mr. kroll is found is found guilty of impaired operation of a
conveyance, and possession of a scheduled i controlled substance.
released: may 30, 2025
signed:
justice joseph hanna

(6) si l’analyse d’un échantillon fourni au titre du
paragraphe 320.28(4)
révèle la présence dans l’organisme de la personne
d’une drogue d’un type
dont l’agent évaluateur a conclu qu’il avait affaibli la capacité de conduire
de cette personne, cette drogue — ou, si la personne a aussi consommé de
l’alcool, la combinaison de l’alcool et de cette drogue — est présumée, sauf
preuve contraire, être celle qui était présente dans l’organisme de la personne
au moment où elle a conduit le moyen de transport et, sur preuve de
l’affaiblissement de sa capacité de conduire, être la cause de cet
affaiblissement.