source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj489/2025oncj489.html

citation:
r.
v. thongdara, 2025 oncj 489
date: 2025·07·21
court
file no.: 4814 998 22 4000 2363
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
thaviphanh thongdara
before
 justice david porter
heard
 on february 10, 11, 12, march 31 and june 13, 2025
ruling
 on dangerous offender application released on july 21, 2025
d. desantis ……….…………………………………………………………………………
 for the crown
s. pennypacker ………………………………………………………………………… 
 for the defendant
porter j:
overview

mr. thongdara is a 50 year old man who was born in vientiane,
laos. on september 25, 2023, mr. thongdara plead guilty to the robbery of a
convenience store on april 19, 2022, pursuant to
s. 344
of the
criminal code. 
the crown has, pursuant to
s.753 (1)
of the
criminal code, applied for a
determination that mr. thongdara is a dangerous offender. the robbery which
occurred on april 19, 2022 is the index offence in the crown’s application. 
the crown and defence agree that the robbery was a serious personal injury
offence.
the crown relies on
s.753 (1)
(a) (i) and/or
s.753 (1)
(a)
(ii) in support of this designation. the defence opposes this designation and
submits that,
in light of the substantial pre-sentence custody already
served,
a conditional sentence is appropriate.

at the hearing of june 13, 2025, it was agreed with counsel
that the court would first render its decision on the dangerous offender
application, on july 21, 2025, and then hear further submissions on the
sentence, in light of the court’s ruling on the dangerous offender application.
the index offence – the convenience store robbery
at axness convenience store april 19, 2022

on tuesday, april 19, 2022 at approximately 6:50 a.m., mr.
thongdara entered the convenience store, wearing a mask and gloves to conceal
his identity. he entered the store posing as a customer. he selected a can of
pop from the fridge and approached the counter and requested a pack of
cigarettes. he then suddenly walked around the counter and attacked the store
clerk. he punched the clerk, knocked him to the floor and kicked him numerous
times as the clerk lay on the floor behind the counter. a security camera
video was filed in evidence showing the brutal nature of the attack involving
punching, and kicking of the clerk while he was on the floor.

as the clerk lay on the floor behind the counter, mr.
thongdara stole cash from the cash register in the store and fled. the clerk
had tried to escape by climbing across the counter, shortly before mr.
thongdara fled from the store. a quantity of cash was stolen from the store. 
the clerk suffered a swollen forehead, scratches and bruising to his cheek
area, a left swollen left eye and the bridge of his nose was scraped and sore.

mr. thongdara entered a plea of guilty to robbery, which is
the index offence in relation to the crown’s application to have mr. thongdara
declared a dangerous offender.
mr. thongdara’s criminal record

mr. thongdara’s criminal record is the following:
date
of conviction (yy/mm/dd)
location
of court
offence[s]
sentence
1994-09-20
1. assault (1) 1 day (1½ months presentence
custody)
1995-04-20
– newmarket, on 1-2 robbery x2 (cpic
incorrect)
3.
obstruct peace officer
(1-2)
6 months on each on count 1
and
2, consecutive (1 year presentence
custody)
probation
18 months on each
charge
firearms
prohibition for 10
years
(3)
15 days consecutive and
probation
18 months
1995-04-21
– toronto, on 1. assault (1) 45 days consecutive to
sentence
serving
1996-01-19
– newmarket, on 1. attempt obstruct justice (1) 6 weeks consecutive to
sentence
serving
1998-11-09
– toronto, on 1. escape lawful custody (1) 6 months
1999-04-14
– toronto, on 1. attempted murder
2.
forcible confinement (6
charges)
3.
robbery (2 charges)
4.
assault with a weapon
5.
extortion
6.
use of a firearm during
commission
of an
offence
(1)
14 years
(2-3)
4 years on each charge
concurrent
(4) 2
years concurrent
(5) 3
years consecutive
(6) 1
years consecutive
s.109
order for life
2019-10-03
– brampton, on 1. possession of a schedule i substance
1)
$100
fine
2024-02-09
– toronto, on 1. assault (2 charges)
2.
fail to comply release
order
(1-2)
6 months on each concurrent
(3)
30 days concurrent
probation
12 months
dna
s.109
order for life
dan
gerous offender
regime
purpose

the overriding purpose of the dangerous offender legislation
pursuant to part xxiv of the
criminal code of canada
(“criminal code”)
is
to protect society from habitual offenders who pose a risk of repeat violent
behaviour:
r. v. jones,
1994 canlii 85 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 229,
per
gonthier j., at para. 124.

a dangerous offender application proceeds in two stages: the
designation stage and the penalty stage.
the designation stage is
governed by
s. 753 (1)
(a) of the
criminal code
which provides the 2
alternative bases for a finding that an accused is a dangerous offender on
which the crown relies in this case. they state:
“753
(1) on application made
under this part after an assessment report is filed under subsection 752.1(2),
the court shall find the offender to be a dangerous offender if it is satisfied
(a) that the offence for
which the offender has been convicted is a serious personal injury offence
described in paragraph (a) of the definition of that expression in section 752
and the offender constitutes a threat to the life, safety or physical or mental
well-being of other persons on the basis of evidence establishing
(i) a pattern of repetitive
behaviour by the offender, of which the offence for which he or she has been
convicted forms a part, showing a failure to restrain his or her behaviour and
a likelihood of causing death or injury to other persons, or inflicting severe
psychological damage on other persons, through failure in the future to
restrain his or her behaviour,
(ii) a pattern of
persistent aggressive behaviour by the offender, of which the offence for which
he or she has been convicted forms a part, showing a substantial degree of
indifference on the part of the offender respecting the reasonably foreseeable
consequences to other persons of his or her behaviour,...”

the onus rests with the crown to prove that an offender meets
the elements under
s.753 (1)
beyond a reasonable doubt. in
r. v.
boutilier,
2017 scc 64 (canlii), 2 s.c.r. 936,
at para.
26-27, the supreme court explained
the criteria that the crown must prove before a court will designate the
offender to be a dangerous offender:
“26 in
lyons,
1987 canlii 25 (scc), 2 scr 309,
justice la forest read the objective element
of the designation -- the requirement
that the predicate offence be a ‘serious personal injury offence’ --
together with the subjective element -- the ‘threat’
assessment -- and concluded that four criteria were ‘explicit’
from the language of s. 753(1): (1) the offender has been
convicted of, and has to be sentenced for, a ‘serious personal injury offence’;
(2) this predicate offence is part of a broader pattern of violence;
(3) there is a high likelihood of harmful recidivism; and (4)
the
violent
conduct
is
intractable
(p. 338).
the
last three criteria are part of
the
assessment of
the
‘threat’
posed by
the
offender.
the
last two of these are future-oriented, and
justice la forest explained them as follows:
thirdly, it must be
established that
the
pattern
of
conduct
is
very likely to continue
and to
result in
the
kind of suffering
against which
the
section seeks to
protect, namely,
conduct
endangering
the
life, safety or physical well-being of
others or, in
the
case of sexual
offences,
conduct
causing injury,
pain or other evil to other persons. also
explicit
in one
form or another in each subparagraph of s. [688, now 753]
is
the
requirement
that
the
court must be satisfied that
the
pattern of conduct is
substantially
or pathologically
intractable. [emphasis added; p. 338.]”

the requirement of intractability is an essential requirement
of a finding that the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused is a dangerous offender. as the court of appeal recently noted in
r.
v. j.c.,
2025 onca 331, at para.14:
“
boutilier
establishes that before designating a
dangerous offender, a sentencing judge must be satisfied that the offender
poses a high likelihood of harmful recidivism and that his or her conduct is
“intractable”. the court defined intractable conduct as “behaviour that the
offender is unable to surmount”:
boutilier, at para.
27. this requires the sentencing judge to
conduct a prospective assessment of dangerousness, so that only offenders who
pose a future risk are designated as dangerous and face the possibility of
being sentenced to indeterminate detention.”
the law on intractability at the designation
stage

in
r. v. boutilier, supra, at paras.
35-36, cot
é
j. for the majority in the supreme court
describes the prospective inquiry at the designation stage of a dangerous
offender application as follows:
“determining whether or not
a high risk of recidivism and the intractability are present necessarily involves
a prospective inquiry into whether an offender will continue to be, in justice
dickson’s words (as he then was),” a real and present danger to life or limb”:
hatchwell
v. the queen,
1974 canlii 203 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 39, at p.43. for the court in
lyons,
this prospective inquiry was critical to the constitutionality of the scheme.
an entirely retrospective assessment could not ensure that indeterminate
sentences were rationally connected to the objective of public safety going
forward. nor could it avoid catching offenders who had proved violent in the
past but who presented no future threat.
the jurisprudence of this court subsequent to lyons
has consistently considered a prospective assessment of risk to be a component
of dangerous offender applications…”

and at para. 37, cot
é
j.,
stated this inquiry involves the assessment of,
“a past pattern of violence
is considered in the global assessment of an offender’s future behaviour,
which, in turn, is considered by the court in determining whether the offender
constitutes a “threat”.

at para. 43, cot
é
j.
described this assessment at the designation stage as follows:
“as the assessment of
prospective risk described above is concerned with whether an offender will
continue to be a “real and present danger”, being unable to surmount his or her
violent conduct, the sentencing judge must consider all retrospective and
prospective evidence relating to the continuing nature of this risk, including
future treatment prospects.”

in
r. v. broadfoot,
2018 oncj 215, justice greene
noted at para.77:

 “
the supreme court of canada in
r. v. boutilier,
did
not expressly state the difference between the intractability assessment at the
designation stage as opposed to the intractability assessment at the sentencing
stage of the proceedings. a review of the final
analysis in
boutilier
leads
me to the following conclusion: at the designation stage, intractability
relates to whether or not the conduct can be treated. at the sentencing stage,
the court has found that the conduct cannot be treated so the question becomes
can the conduct be managed.”

justice greene’s conclusion on the meanings of
“intractability” at the designation stage and the penalty stage has been
adopted by justice rutherford in
r. v. b.h.,
2018 oncj 497, at para.
97,
justice kelly in
r. v. windebank,
2023 onsc 4809
at para.
124, and by
justice corrick in
r. v. inacio,
2018 onsc 6617, at para.172. i agree
with this interpretation of the meaning of intractability at the designation
stage.
the
sentencing of dangerous offenders

following this determination, the “penalty stage” requires a
court to determine the appropriate sentence and is governed by sections 753 (4)
and (4.1). section 753 (4) gives a
sentencing judge
three options:
(a)
impose a sentence of detention in a penitentiary for an
indeterminate period;
(b)
impose a sentence for the offence for which the offender
has been convicted – which must be a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a
term of two years – and order that the offender be subject to long-term
supervision for a period that does not exceed 10 years; or of detention in a
penitentiary for an indeterminate period;
(c)
impose a sentence for the offence for which the offender
has been convicted.

pursuant to s. 753 (4.1), if a
judge finds that a person is a dangerous offender, the
judge shall
impose an indeterminate sentence unless the judge is satisfied that there is a
reasonable expectation that a lesser sentence (under s.753(4)(b) or (c) ) will
adequately protect the public against the commission of murder or a serious
personal injury offence by the offender.

in
r. v. boutilier, supra
at para.
70, cot
é
j. for the majority articulates the proper
analytical approach in determining the sentence of an offender designated as a
dangerous offender under s.753(4.1):
“ 
the framework a sentencing judge should adopt in exercising his or her
discretion under s. 753(4.1) has been aptly explained by justice
tuck-jackson of the ontario court of justice:
r. v. crowe, no. 10-10013990,
march 22, 2017. first, if the court is satisfied that a conventional sentence,
which may include a period of probation, if available in law, will adequately
protect the public against the commission of murder or a serious personal
injury offence, then that sentence must be imposed. if the court is not
satisfied that this is the case, then it must proceed to a second assessment
and determine whether it is satisfied that a conventional sentence of a minimum
of 2 years of imprisonment, followed by a long-term supervision order for a
period that does not exceed 10 years, will adequately protect the public
against the commission by the offender of murder or a serious personal injury
offence. if the answer is “yes”, then that sentence must be imposed. if the
answer is “no”, then the court must proceed to the third step and impose a
detention in a penitentiary for an indeterminate period of time. section
753(4.1) reflects the fact that, just as nothing less than a sentence reducing
the risk to an acceptable level is required for a dangerous offender, so too is
nothing more required.”
the long-term offender regime

section 753(5)
(a) of the
criminal code
allows a court,
where it does not find the offender to be a dangerous offender, to treat the
application as an application to designate the offender a long-term
offender.

unlike the dangerous offender designation, there is no
requirement that the court find that the accused’s conduct is intractable
before making a long-term offender designation:
r. v. broadfoot,
2018
oncj 215, at para.
94;
r. v. j.c., supra, at paras.
24 and 39
(ont. c.a.)

the criteria for a long-term offender designation is set out
in s. 753.1(1):
“753.1 (1) the court
may, on application made under this part following the filing of an assessment
report under subsection 752.1(2), find an offender to be a long-term
offender if it is satisfied that
(a) it would be
appropriate to impose a sentence of imprisonment of two years or more for the
offence for which the offender has been convicted;
(b) there is a
substantial risk that the offender will reoffend; and
(c) there is a
reasonable possibility of eventual control of the risk in the community.”
a comparison of the dangerous offender &
long-term offender provisions

as outlined by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. sipos,
2014 scc 47,at para 19, the dangerous offender and long-term offender
provisions are preventive sanctions that impose special measures on an offender
to address their elevated risk of future offending. in
r. v. boutilier,
supra, at para.75, the supreme court characterized the
dangerous offender designation criteria as “more onerous” than those under the
long-term offender criteria.
“in particular, under
s.
753(1), the sentencing judge must be satisfied that “the offender constitutes a
threat to the life, safety or physical or mental well-being of other persons”,
whereas under s. 753.1, the sentencing judge must merely be satisfied that
“there is a substantial risk that the offender will reoffend”. as
explained above, when read properly,
s. 753(1)
limits the availability of an
indeterminate detention under s. 753(4) and (4.1) to a narrow group of
offenders that are dangerous
per se. it therefore cannot be said
that both regimes target the same offenders.”

as outlined in
r. v. sipos,
supra, at para.
19:
“a dangerous offender may
be sentenced to an indeterminate sentence of imprisonment; this is preventive
detention in its clearest and most extreme form. a long-term offender may be
sentenced for the underlying offence and, in addition, to a long-term
supervision order not to exceed 10 years. this is a preventive sanction
that is finite in length and built on supervision in the community.”

to make a long-term offender designation, the court must be
satisfied that it would be appropriate to impose a sentence of imprisonment of
at least two years for the offence for which the offender has been convicted,
that there is a substantial risk that the offender will reoffend, and that
there is a reasonable possibility of eventual control of the risk in the
community: s. 753.1(1).

section 753.1(3) establishes a minimum sentence of 2 years
for a long-term offender, from which pre-sentence custody can be deducted:
r.
v. hall (m.g.),
2004 canlii 14199
(ont. c.a.)

in
r. v. hall, supra, the court of appeal stated at
paras. 61-62 with respect to the requirement of a minimum 2 year sentence for a
long term offender:
“
61
] the respondent was in custody
for almost 30 months prior to sentencing. following the usual practice, the
trial judge gave the respondent two for one credit for his pre-sentence
custody. on this basis, the respondent had served the equivalent of four years
and ten months. the trial judge concluded that no additional period of
incarceration was necessary.
 i accept that given the long period
of pre-sentence custody, it would not have been appropriate to impose a further
period of incarceration in excess of two years. this does not, however, mean
that a long-term offender designation could not
have been made. pre-trial incarceration may be taken
into account where a statute imposes a minimum penalty:
r. v. wust,
2000 scc 18 (canlii),
 1 s.c.r. 455,
143 c.c.c. (3d) 129;
r. v. mcdonald
(1998),
1998 canlii 13327 (on ca),
127 c.c.c. (3d) 57,
40 o.r. (3d) 641
(c.a.). the same reasoning applies to the requirement in the long-term offender
provisions that the court impose a sentence of at least two years. having
regard to pre-sentence incarceration in calculating the length of the sentence
imposed for the purposes of the long-term offender provisions upholds
parliament's intention that the long-term offender status should be available
only for persons who commit offences that warrant sentences of two years or
more, and at the same time preserves the court's discretion under
s. 719(3)
of the
criminal code
to take into account pre-sentence
incarceration:
r. v. wust, supra, at pp. 462-63 s.c.r., p. 136 c.c.c. if
the sentence imposed by a trial judge, having regard to the credit that the
trial judge gives for pre-sentence incarceration, is the equivalent of a
sentence of two years or more, the first pre- condition to the finding that an
offender
is a long-term offender is met.”

at the sentencing stage, where the court finds an offender to
be a long-term offender, as is the case with dangerous offenders, the paramount
principle in sentencing a long-term offender is the protection of the public:
r.
v. boutilier, supra, at paras.
54 and 56. public protection is the general
purpose of part xxiv of the
criminal code, in which the long term
offender provisions are found:
r. v. boutilier, supra, at para.56.
crown position

the crown has, pursuant to
s.753 (1)
of the
criminal code,
applied for a determination that mr. thongdara is a dangerous offender. the
crown submits that mr. thongdara meets the criteria for a dangerous offender
designation pursuant to s.753 (1) (a) (i) and/or s.753 (1) (a) (ii). under either
of these sections, the crown submits that this court should be satisfied that
mr. thongdara constitutes a threat to the life, safety or physical or mental
well-being of others. the crown also submits that mr. thongdara presents a
substantial risk of future harmful recidivism through the sustained
intractability of his conduct. as a result, the crown submits that mr.
thongdara should be declared a dangerous offender and sentenced to an
indeterminate sentence, pursuant to s.753 (4) (a).
defence position

defence counsel opposes the application and submits that the
crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. thongdara is a
dangerous offender. the defence submits that the evidence does not establish
that mr. thongdara “constitutes a threat to the life safety or physical or
mental well-being of other persons” required under both 753(1)(a) (i) or (ii)
for a finding that mr. thongdara is a dangerous offender. the defence submits
that the evidence does not support a finding under either
s.753(1)
(a)(i) or
s.753(1)
(a)(ii).

the defence submits that while mr. thongdara may have a
history of violence, there is no pattern of repetitive behaviour as required
for a finding under
s.753(1)
(a)(i).

the defence submits that the evidence does not establish to
the requisite standard that there is a likelihood of causing death or injury to
other persons through a failure to restrain his behaviour in the future as
required under s.753(1)(a)(i).

furthermore, the defence submits that the evidence does not
demonstrate that mr. thongdara has shown “a pattern of persistent aggressive
behaviour” that demonstrates “a substantial degree of indifference” in regards
to “consequences to other persons” as required for a finding that mr. thongdara
is a dangerous offender under
s.753(1)
(a)(ii).

as mr. thongdara has served 986 real days of pre-sentence
custody and 986 x 1.5 = 1,478 days of enhanced credit to july 21, 2025, the
defence submits that a carefully crafted conditional sentence of 2 years less a
day is appropriate.
the law: s 753.1 (a)(i)

section 753 (1) (a) (i) reads as follows:
753 (1) … the court shall
find the offender to be a dangerous offender if it is satisfied
(a) that the offence for which the offender has been
convicted is a serious personal injury offence described in paragraph (a) of
the definition of that expression in section 752 and the offender constitutes a
threat to the life, safety or physical or mental well-being of other persons on
the basis of evidence establishing
(i) a pattern of repetitive behaviour by the offender, of
which the offence for which he or she has been convicted forms a part, showing
a failure to restrain his or her behaviour and a likelihood of causing death or
injury to other persons, or inflicting severe psychological damage on other
persons, through failure in the future to restrain his or her behaviour,

in
r. v. wong,
2023 onca 118, the court of appeal has
recently reviewed the requirement in s.753(1)(a)(i) of a “pattern of repetitive
behaviour”.

the court stated at paras. 36 and 37:
“for
the purposes of
s. 753(1)
(a)(i), a pattern of repetitive behaviour is a pattern
that contains “enough of the same elements of unrestrained dangerous
conduct to be able to predict that the offender will likely offend in the same
way in the future. … however, the offences need not be the same in every
detail; that would unduly restrain the application of the section”:
r.
v. hogg,
2011 onca 840, 287 o.a.c. 82, at
para.
40;
r. v. szostak,
2014 onca 15, 118 o.r. (3d) 401, at para.
56. “differences in the details of the
offences will not be relevant if the predicate and past offences represent [as
s. 753(1)
(a)(i) requires] ‘a pattern of repetitive behaviour by the offender …
showing a failure to restrain his or her behaviour and a likelihood of causing
death or injury to other persons, or inflicting severe psychological damage on
other persons, through failure in the future to restrain his or her
behaviour’”:
r. v. brissard,
2017 onca 891, 356 c.c.c. (3d) 494, at
para.
57.
in
r. v. gibson,
2021 onca 530, 157 o.r. (3d) 597, at
para.
228, this court emphasized that the
requirement for a pattern refers to a pattern
of
behaviour and not a pattern of offences:
the statutory
requirements demand proof of a pattern of behaviour, not a pattern of offences
or convictions. in its ordinary, everyday sense, a pattern refers
to an arrangement or order discernible in, among other things, objects, actions
or ideas. as used in
s. 753(1), a pattern refers to actions, not thoughts. the
required pattern is based not solely on the number of offences, but also on the
elements of similarity in the offender’s behaviour. [emphasis added.]”

the court noted further at para. 45:
“in
r. v. neve,
1999 abca 206, 71 alta. l.r. (3d) 92, which
is often cited for its comprehensive review of the requirements for designation
of a dangerous offender, and which the sentencing judge relied on in this case,
the court of appeal for alberta explained the types of behaviour that could
form part of a pattern having regard to the definition of “serious personal
injury offence”:
“does all criminal behaviour form part of the pattern? in our view,
it does not. we read s.753(a) as requiring that the court be satisfied on two
points: (a) that the predicate offence is part of a pattern of behaviour which
has involved violent, aggressive or brutal conduct; and (b) that it is likely
that this pattern of conduct will continue and will lead to conduct endangering
the life, safety or physical well-being of others: see
lyons,
supra.
since a predicate offence under s.753(a) must be a “serious personal injury
offence” (meaning that it itself must meet either a violence or endangerment
requirement under
s.752
(a)),
it follows logically that the past behaviour must also have involved some
degree of violence or attempted violence or
endangerment or likely
endangerment
(whether more or less serious than the
predicate offence). otherwise, the predicate offence would not be part of that
pattern. [emphasis added.]”

in determining whether a pattern of repetitive behaviour has
been established, the entire circumstances of the behaviour must be
considered. the number of incidents is not determinative. as watt j.a. stated
in
r. v. gibson,
2021 onca 530
at paras.
223-224:
“ it
is uncontroversial that two incidents may constitute a pattern, provided they
disclose a sufficient degree of similarity:
r. v. hogg,
2011 onca 840, 287 o.a.c. 82, at
paras.
40, 43;
r. v. byers,
2017 onca 639, at paras.
20-23.
 the
pattern requirement in ss. 753(1)(a)(i) and (b) is not based exclusively on the
number of offences. it is also rooted in the elements of similarity in the
offender’s behaviour:
r. v. langevin
(1984),
1984 canlii 1914 (on ca), 11 c.c.c. (3d)
336 (ont. c.a.), at pp. 348-49. see also
r. v. knife,
2015 skca 82, 460 sask. r. 287, at
para.
67, leave to appeal refused, 
s.c.c.a. no. 382.”
the law:
s. 753(1)
(a)(ii)-alternative basis for
designation as a dangerous offender

section 753 (1) states the court shall find the offender to
be a dangerous offender if it is satisfied
“(a) that the offence for
which the offender has been convicted is a serious personal injury offence
described in paragraph (a) of the definition of that expression in section 752
and the offender constitutes a threat to the life, safety or physical or mental
well-being of other persons on the basis of evidence establishing.....
(ii) a pattern of
persistent aggressive behaviour by the offender, of which the offence for which
he or she has been convicted forms a part, showing a substantial degree of
indifference on the part of the offender respecting the reasonably foreseeable
consequences to other persons of his or her behaviour.”

in
r. v. smith,
2023 onca 575, the court considered
the meaning of “persistent aggressive behaviour” in
s. 753(1)
(a)(ii) and stated
at para. 28:
“ 
authors gary botting, vincent larochelle and alison yule in
dangerous offender law
(toronto:
lexisnexis canada, 2021), at p. 27, describe “persistence” as “subsistence
through a long period of time, a concept quite different from the notion of
repetition. while a repetitive pattern of harmful conduct is the main
predictive element of
paragraph
753(1)
(a)(i), the main predictive element of paragraph (ii) is
the offender’s indifference to future harm to others arising from their
conduct.”

the test under s. 753 (1)(a)(ii) “does not depend on the
similarities among the predicate offences”:
r. v. c.w.,
2019 onca 976,
at para.28.

the court in
r. v. smith, supra, summarized the
requirements of
s.753(1)
(a)(ii) as follows at para. 37:
“ 
 as the above cases demonstrate, the fact that there is a gap
between offences is not determinative provided: (i) there is a pattern of
behaviour (ii) involving persistent acts of aggression causing serious harm and
demonstrating a substantial degree of indifference to the consequences of the
offender’s actions that (iii) creates a serious risk of ongoing harm to the
public: see
williams (onsc), at para. 287;
brown, at
para.
55; and
robinson, at
para.
122. see also
r. v. c.w.,
2019 onca 976, at para.
28;
neve, at para.
108;
r. v. tynes,
2022 onca 866, 165 o.r. (3d) 321, at
para.
70.”

in the requirements of
s.753 (1)
(a)(ii) “substantial degree
of indifference” means a “disregard, lack of sympathy or empathy, callousness
and coldness, and lack of concern or sensitivity”:
r. v. williams,
2018
onsc 2030, per
hill j. at para. 252.

the proper approach to determining if the criteria required
by s.753 (1)(a)(ii) have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt is summarized by
mcwatt j.in
r. v. wong,
2016 onsc 6362
at para.
224, (affirmed at
2023
onca 118
at para.
53
):
“ in
examining whether mr. wong’s conduct demonstrates indifference, his attitude
must be examined more generally. a demonstration of indifference which is
limited to the time at which the offence was committed is not sufficient. 
a broader examination of the offender’s personality is required in order to
determine if the offender lacks compassion towards others. the crown must
demonstrate that the offender has a conscious, but uncaring awareness of
causing harm to others and that this has occurred over a long period, involving
frequent acts with significant consequences. expert evidence can be drawn
upon in deciding whether the previous acts of aggressive conduct demonstrate
the requisite indifference (
r. v. george
(1998),
1998 canlii 5691 (bc ca), 126 c.c.c. (3d)
384 (b.c.c.a.) at para.
23;
r. v. robinson, supra at para.
123;
r. v. vanderwal,
2010 onsc 265 (canlii), o.j. no. 246
(ont. s.c.).”

as previously noted, a pre-condition to a finding that an
accused is a dangerous offender under either of the definitions in s. 753 is
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s offending conduct is
intractable.
the evidence of expert witness dr. alina iosif

dr. alina iosif,
a forensic psychiatrist at camh, was
called as one of the crown’s witnesses at the hearing. dr. iosif prepared a
psychiatric assessment under
section 752.1
of the
criminal code
to
assist the court to determine whether mr. thongdara is a dangerous offender. 
to do so, dr. iosif interviewed mr. thongdara for a total interview time of 7
hours.

she reviewed extensive materials concerning mr. thongdara’s
background and history, summarized in a comprehensive 40-page report admitted
in evidence.

the following is a summary of her findings:
•
mr. thongdara meets the criteria for personality
disorder not otherwise specified, gambling disorder and polysubstance use
disorder (opiates and alcohol, in partial remission in a controlled setting)
•
mr. thongdara demonstrates a high risk of
violent recidivism.

dr. iosif concludes at p. 37 of her report:
“mr. thongdara has incurred convictions for violent and non-violent offences. 
according to the risk assessment above, mr. thongdara’s likelihood for future
violent recidivism falls in the high risk category, in other words he evidences
a substantial likelihood of re-offense.
mr. thongdara has led a criminal
lifestyle since adolescence. his lack of remorse and empathy for victims have
been commented upon repeatedly in his file information. his accelerating
substance use habits over time have also impacted his history of violence. in
the four years between living in a halfway house after a lengthy federal
sentence and his re-incarceration in 2022, mr. thongdara accumulated three sets
of charges, two of which (including the index offence) were violent in nature. 
his employer, mr. khan offered him a work position away from the city to avoid
temptation, but mr. thongdara left in 2021 under false pretext and resumed drug
use. while fully aware and accepting of the negative impact of substances on
his behaviour, mr. thongdara used drugs copiously; he was again violent, and he
was re-incarcerated. after he was arrested for the index offences, and
released on bail, mr. thongdara incurred further charges of assault, also while
intoxicated, in july 2022. in such circumstances, mr. thongdara clearly showed
indifference to the foreseeable consequences of his behaviour.”

in summary, dr. iosif’s opinion supports a finding that the
requirements of
s.753(1)
(a)(ii) are met by the record in this case (dr. iosif
testimony, february 11, 2025, at p.115).

at p. 38 of her report, dr. iosif makes the following
recommendation concerning mr. thongdara’s risk management:
“given mr. thongdara’s high
risk of violent offending, he needs a high level of intervention and
significant resources to decrease that risk. his needs should be directed
towards assisting with abstinence from substances, and therapies which focus on
antisocial traits. he should also have a high level of consistent support and
external supervision, and assistance in engagement in meaningful activities
including employment. it is recommended that mr. thongdara complete the
indicated programming in a federal institution prior to being released in the
community.”
mr. thongdara – background:

mr. thongdara is a 50-year-old man who was born in vientiane,
laos on april 10, 1975. he emigrated to canada when he was 16 years old in
1991 and is currently a permanent resident.
childhood

mr. thongdara had a difficult childhood. his father was
incarcerated for approximately six years and his family suffered financially. 
due to his father’s incarceration and financial hardships, mr. thongdara was
unable to attend school in laos and was forced to work at a young age. 
following his father’s release from prison, mr. thongdara and his family moved
to a thailand refugee camp where they experienced violence. at the age of 16,
mr. thongdara immigrated to canada. despite his limited schooling and english
language skills, he was enrolled in grade 9 and pursued six subjects. mr.
thongdara was subsequently expelled in grade 10 and recalled skipping class and
being involved in fights. mr. thongdara characterized himself as a “bad boy”
who had “a lot of problems” growing up. following his first incarceration in
1994, he moved out of his parent’s home at the age of 18. while incarcerated,
mr. thongdara successfully completed his high school education and was a good
student.
adult life

before his arrest for the index offence, mr. thongdara was
living in toronto with his wife, lily khampath chaytha whom he married in
2021. mr. thongdara hopes to continue their relationship following his release
and considers her to be a source of support. however, dr. iosif stated that ms.
chaytha does not share this same desire and does not wish to maintain a
romantic relationship with mr. thongdara.

apart from ms. chaytha, mr. thongdara has limited familial
supports as his father is deceased and his mother and brother currently reside
in a nursing home. ms. chaytha’s unwillingness to maintain a relationship with
mr. thongdara, alongside his family history, led dr. iosif to conclude that he
has few protective factors.

as part of her report, dr. iosif interviewed michael khan,
who employed mr. thongdara on his farm for approximately one year in 2022. he
indicated that so long as mr. thongdara stayed away from fentanyl he did well.
after working for mr. khan on his farm mr. thongdara returned to toronto to
help his mother, and when mr. khan saw mr. thongdara in toronto he noticed his
intoxication, likely from opiates, rendered him incoherent and not functional.
(dr. iosif, report, p.17).

dr. iosif testified that mr. thongdara suffered from a long
history of substance abuse starting with cannabis at age 20, and heroin and
crack cocaine, both prior to 1998 and then at the age of 25 while incarcerated,
(dr. iosif, testimony, february 10, 2025 pp. 22-25). mr. thongdara
acknowledged in may 1994 that he had used crack cocaine (dr. iosif, testimony, february
10, 2025 p. 59) (tedc medical records, vol. 3, tab 10, p. 465). after his
release from the lengthy prison sentence in 2017, he continued to use crack
cocaine, and in 2022 committed an assault at the woodbine casino while high on
fentanyl.
employment history

dr. iosif testified that mr. thongdara has consistently
demonstrated a “fair interest in work” and has been positively described by his
employers, a “protective” factor moving forward. while incarcerated, mr. thongdara
worked as a cook and in a workshop. following his release, mr. thongdara was
employed on a farm by michael khan who spoke highly of mr. thongdara and
emphasized that he was sober for a year and doing well during this period. he
described him as a man of good character, whose addictions had taken over his
life and resulted in his criminal behaviour. dr. iosif indicated that mr. khan
was a kind, positive and instrumental support who helped promote his sobriety
and curb his gambling addiction. they maintained a relationship while he was
incarcerated, and mr. khan is willing to support mr. thongdara upon his
release.
criminal record

mr. thongdara’s criminal record is as follows:
•
1994-09-20 – toronto – assault
•
1995-04-20 – newmarket:
robbery x2, obstruct peace officer
•
1995-04-21 – toronto:
assault
•
1996-01-19 – newmarket:
attempt obstruct justice
•
1998-11-09 – toronto:
escape lawful custody
•
1999-04-14 – toronto: attempted murder, forcible
confinement x6, robbery (2 charges), assault with a weapon, extortion, use of a
firearm during commission of an offence
•
2019-10-03 – brampton:
possession of a schedule i substance
•
2024-02-09 – toronto
assault (2 charges)
chronological
review of mr. thongdara’s
criminal convictions, psychological assessments and institutional
history from 1994-2024.
1994-09-20 – toronto – assault
(application
record, vol. 1, tab 2)

on february 19, 1994, the complainants made disparaging
comments about mr. thongdara’s girlfriend at a community centre. this lead to
an altercation in which mr. thongdara was beaten up by a group of people.

the next day he went to the residence of one of the persons
responsible for beating him up the night before, accompanied by friends to
ensure he was not outnumbered as he had been the night before when he was
beaten up. mr. thongdara approached the victim, took out a plastic imitation
handgun and struck the victim behind the ear, causing a gash. mr. thongdara and
his friends fled the scene.

dr. iosif noted the significance of mr. thongdara seeking
revenge in committing this assault, as consistent with anti-social behaviour,
and not just an impulsive reaction. (dr. iosif, transcript, february 10, p. 46)
1995-04-20 – newmarket: robbery x2, obstruct
peace officer, application record, vol 1, tabs 3 and 4)

mr. thongdara was convicted of robbing 2 convenience stores
in newmarket while armed with a knife.

on sunday, may 1, 1994, at 12:30 a.m., mr. thongdara attended
a convenience store, bought milk and walked out without paying. a little
later, when the store clerk was alone, mr. thongdara re-entered the store,
pulled out a small brown-handled knife and proceeded to rob the store.

the same night, about 5½ hours earlier, mr. thongdara robbed
another convenience store in newmarket by jumping over the counter and telling
the female store clerk to get money while holding a small folding knife in his
hand. she opened the till and gave him money and he left. mr. thongdara was
arrested the next day in possession of a sum of money. when he was arrested,
he falsely identified himself to the police. justice taliano noted in his
sentencing reasons that mr. thongdara “was not so inebriated, or under the
influence of drugs, to suggest that his judgement was distorted and it
propelled him into uncharacteristic behaviour”: application record, vol. 1, sentencing
reasons, april 20, 1995, tab 4, at p. 4

the nature of these violent offences is very similar to the
index offence committed april 19, 2022.

dr. iosif noted in her testimony on february 10 at p. 46:
“this has been a bit of a
theme in mr. thongdara’s history, that he needs money, whether it is because
he’s not employed or because he has debts from gambling or he wants it to
support his drug habit, and that he robs convenience stores because they are,
well, convenient and that leads to criminal offences. he is very matter of
fact about it…..”

in the pre-sentence report dated april 20, 1995 in relation
to the convictions for robbery, and possession of a dangerous weapon, in
newmarket, it is noted that mr. thongdara’s mother reported that she and her
children were victims of physical abuse perpetrated by mr. thongdara’s father. 
before coming to canada from thailand, mr. thongdara lived in a refugee camp
where “in order to survive he had to resort to violence”.

the author notes that this violence and his exposure to physical
abuse in his childhood may have resulted in violence having become a “learned
behaviour” for him.

in 1993, mr. thongdara’s girlfriend became pregnant, and as a
result of his incarceration for the robbery offences, she left him. he has
never met the child.

the presentence report author noted that mr. thongdara had
been held in custody since may 2, 1994. the author notes that while he was
incarcerated he was involved in a number of violent fights with other inmates
and at least one incident involved the attack on a correctional officer. he
was usually identified as the aggressor and he was noted to be “violent and
aggressive towards inmates and staff” by a security captain at the toronto
jail.

the health care co-ordinator at the toronto jail reported
that mr. thongdara had been diagnosed with an “anti-social disorder with
borderline structure” (pre-sentence report, april 20, 1995, application record,
vol. 2, tab 2.)

in his reasons for sentence dated april 4, 1995, taliano j.
concluded that mr. thongdara had lied to the police, lied under oath at a
preliminary inquiry of an accomplice, and lied to the probation officer
(application record, vol. 1, tab 4, p. 6). he noted that the robberies were
committed after mr. thongdara cased out each store and occurred when the
victims were most vulnerable.
1995-04-21 – toronto: assault (application
record, vol. 1, tab 5, transcript of guilty plea, april 21, 1995)

this assault arises from an event at the toronto east
detention centre on december 24, 1994 where mr. thondgara and the co- accused
were inmates. they refused to hand out their dishes from their cell to
correctional workers as a protest for the fact that they had been denied access
to the telephone.

the correctional officers entered mr. thongdara’s cell to
collect the dishes. mr. thongdara punched one of the correctional officers and
yelled at him. the second correctional officer left to get assistance, and mr.
thongdara then proceeded to lunge at the correctional officer he had punched,
kicking him in the face and body resulting in injuries. the officer had
scrapes and bruises and missed work for 2 weeks due to his injuries.

in dr. iosif’s report she noted that mr. thongdara stated
that he got involved in defending his cell mate who was being assaulted by
correctional officers. dr. iosif stated that “i think that mr. thongdara tends
to minimize many aspects of his criminal history and i think that his feeling
of self-righteousness and potentially dominance comes into play when he engages
in violent behaviour.” (iosif, transcript, february 10, at pp. 46-47).

mr. thongdara was sentenced to 45 days in jail consecutive to
the newmarket robberies for which he had been sentenced the day before. (app.
record, vol. 1, transcript, tab 5, p. 5)
1996-01-19 – newmarket: attempt obstruct justice
(application record vol. 1, tab 6, transcript dated january 19, 1996
)

on january 27, 1995, mr. thongdara was sworn to give evidence
as a crown witness in a preliminary inquiry against an accomplice in robberies
for which he had been charged in january and may of 1994. mr. thongdara denied
any knowledge of the robberies and stated that he had never been in the area. 
mr. thongdara subsequently admitted that this testimony at the preliminary
inquiry was false. on january 19, 1996, he plead guilty to willfully
attempting to obstruct justice in a judicial proceedings by making false
statements under oath, contrary to
s.131(2)
criminal code.

dr. iosif noted at p.47 of her testimony on february 10 that
mr. thongdara said in the assessment that he doesn’t “rat people out”. she
noted that “it speaks to the degree to which mr. thongdara would rather protect
his reputation than cooperate with authorities.”

at his sentencing hearing, it was acknowledged by the crown
that mr. thongdara later testified truthfully against his accomplice at the
accomplice’s trial for the robberies. (application record, vol. 1, tab 6, transcript
at p.10).
report of social worker john sampson to the
ontario parole board dated august 9, 1995, (application record, vol. 2, tab 2)

in this report to the ontario parole board on august 9, 1995,
social worker john sampson notes that mr. thongdara had attended the human
relations program at maplehurst since the end of may 1995, and that he found it
helpful. his school reports document that mr. thongdara was studying
mathematics and mechanics and getting good grades. mr. thongdara acknowledged
to the author that he has difficulty controlling his anger when he is upset. 
the author recommended anger management counselling which had been unavailable
to mr. thongdara at maplehurst, otherwise he is at risk of re-offence. he
noted that mr. thongdara accepted responsibility for his robbery offences and
expressed “some empathy” for the victims. (report, at p.4).
report from dr robert linden to probation and
parole september 11,1996(application record, vol 2, tab 3)

a september 11, 1996 letter from roberta linden, a
psychologist, to probation and parole reported on an assessment/counselling
session with mr. thongdara done on august 14, 1996.

dr. linden indicated that mr. thongdara lived with his
mother, sister and brother, but not with his father. his brother and father
both had criminal records. dr. linden opined that mr. tongdara “expressed no
remorse for violent behaviour and showed little empathy for the victims”. dr.
linden writes “mr. thongdara can be charming, manipulative, and very
dangerous... i fear that this young man is at great risk of reoffending and is
a danger to the community.”
report of dr. percy wright sept 17, 1998
(application record, vol. 1, tab 4)

a september 17, 1998 psychological report of dr. percy
wright, conducted over 3 days in september 1998, was prepared in relation to a
possible prior dangerous offender application in relation to mr. thongdara
after his conviction for attempted murder, forcible confinement, extortion and
robbery.

it is noted that mr. thongdara is involved in martial arts
and learned to fight, especially in thailand. he expressed a belief that he
was protected by a spirit and would not die as long as he could scratch himself
with a match and not bleed.

his account of the index offences was severely at odds with
the reports of other witnesses. dr wright found mr. thongdara to be a “less
than credible historian”. he was described as having a tendency to exploit
others and to have poor behavioural controls.

he concluded that mr. thongdara presents with a “willingness
to resort to violence, a lack of commitment to any vocational track, a reliance
on very primitive deception in relating to others, limited depth and empathy
within his relationships combined with a lack of desire to change.” he found
that mr. thongdara’s presentation was in keeping with antisocial personality
disorder “but this requires a history of conduct disorder which cannot be
proven.” he concluded that mr. thongdara’s magical thinking regarding being
protected by a spirit was likely a culturally accepted belief which contributed
to his poor judgement and a sense of omnipotence.
1998-11-09 – toronto: escape lawful custody (application
record, vol. 1, tab 13)

on friday, june 26, 1998, mr. thongdara appeared in court for
a bail hearing and was required to wear leg irons due to his security risk. he
was led back to the cell area after being ordered to be kept in custody. at
that time, the court officers removed his leg irons in the process of putting
him back in the cell and mr. thongdara escaped by running back to the bail
court. he jumped over the prisoner’s dock in an attempt to run out of court to
free himself. the court officers gave chase and were able to grab onto his
feet as he was hopping over the prisoner’s dock. mr. thongdara lost his
balance and fell on top the court officer.

mr. thongdara indicated to dr. iosif that when he committed
this offence he was young, addicted to heroin, suffering from withdrawal and
that he wanted to go to toronto to see his girlfriend. (iosif transcript, feb
10, p. 47). dr. iosif noted in this offence the element of drugs, being
impulsive, and disrespectful of authority. (transcript, february 10, pp.
47-48).
1999-04-14 – attempted murder, forcible
confinement x6, robbery (2 charges), assault with a weapon, extortion, use of
firearm during commission of an offence (application record, vol 1, tab 15)

the most serious offences occurred in 1996 which resulted in
his 18-year incarceration. mr. thongdara was convicted of attempted murder;
six counts of forcible confinement; two counts of robbery; extortion;
aggravated assault; assault with a weapon; assault causing bodily harm; use of
a prohibited weapon; and pointing a firearm.

the trial judge, jennings j. found that on august 29, 1996,
mr. thongdara led a gang of 10-15 youths into a karaoke bar. shortly after,
the doors of the premises were locked, while customers and staff were ordered
out of the establishment, and two were robbed. the owner of the karaoke bar
was threatened that the bar would be burned down, and that he would be killed,
if he did not provide money. one of the gang members was dispatched to get
gasoline to assist in the threatened burning. the owner’s son was beaten. 
jennings j. found that mr. thongdara was the leader of the group and directed
its operations in the restaurant.

a friend of the owner’s son went into the bar and witnessed
his friend being attacked. shortly after, mr. thongdara broke open a sawed-off
shotgun, extracted cartridges, loaded the chamber, closed the breach, raised
the gun, and deliberately fired a barrel into the owner’s neck and shoulder. 
this was done in a calm and collected manner while the individual posed no
threat to mr. thongdara.

jennings j. noted from the medical evidence that the victim
was very fortunate to have survived the shooting. dr. iosif’s report notes
that mr. thongdara indicated that this event “turned my life upside down”. dr.
iosif noted that mr. thongdara continues to deny his responsibility and at the
time of sentencing, justice jennings stated that “he has shown absolutely no
remorse.”

with respect to this offence, dr. iosif notes that mr. thongdara
was asserting his dominance. she states at p. 48 in her evidence on february
10:
“he says within his circle
he has access to firearms, illegal access to firearms. he is interested in
antisocial behaviours, specifically he wants to rob people who are alleged to
engage in illegal gambling and have a lot of cash on the premises, so these are
all elements that speak to a lifestyle that is consistent with somebody who is
inclined to criminal behaviour and antisocial personality.”

dr. peter klassen did a psychiatric assessment in a report
dated sept 18, 1998 for possible use in a dangerous offender application before
jennings j. in relation to the attempted murder conviction. jennings j. had
dr. klassen’s report, and a report from dr. gojer, in the sentencing hearing. 
in the assessment by dr klassen, mr. thongdara denied that he was the person
who fired the gun at the victim which resulted in his conviction for attempted
murder. he had been found by justice jennings as providing testimony which was
described as evasive and incredible.

in that assessment, mr. thongdara indicated that he had
previously engaged in robberies resulting from cocaine use and gambling, and
that he was addicted to horseracing.

dr. klassen concluded that mr. thongdara likely suffered from
antisocial personality disorder and possibly from substance use disorder. he
noted that no treatment has been shown to be effective for antisocial
personality disorder or psychopathy except external control. he concluded that
mr. thongdara was unable to restrain his behaviour in the future and had shown
a substantial degree of indifference regarding foreseeable consequences.
(application record, vol 2, tab 5, at p.22).

dr. iosif noted that in her assessment she came to
conclusions similar to those of dr. klassen and dr. wright, but noted that she
did not find mr. thongdara as duplicitous during her assessment as dr. klassen
did. (dr. iosif, transcript, february 10, p. 43).

a psychiatric assessment by dr. gojer dated february 14, 1999
indicated that mr. thongdara showed some remorse and he was diagnosed with
adult anti-social behaviour and cannabis abuse. he noted that mr. thongdara’s
assaultive behaviors were in the context of feeling wronged or in self
defence. he noted repetitive aggressive behaviours in different settings but
was not convinced that he had an antisocial personality disorder or that he was
a psychopath. (application record, vol 2, tab 7)

in sentencing mr. thongdara to a total sentence of 18 years,
and an order pursuant to s.743.6 (1) that he serve half of the sentence before
being released on parole, jennings j. stated at p. 5 of his reasons for
sentence dated april 14, 1999:
“i am unable to find that
mr. thongdara is likely to be rehabilitated, which is a factor in my decision under
this section. i have found that the complete disregard for the welfare of
others exhibited in mr. thongdara’s conduct is particularly repugnant.”
institutional records

dr. iosif’s report refers to 35 misconducts committed by mr.
thongdara between 1994 and 2023 while incarcerated. the crown argues that mr.
thongdara’s history of misconduct while incarcerated illustrates mr.
thongdara’s history of impulsivity and inability to change his behaviour. the
misconducts in questions vary in severity, ranging from assault, possession of
contraband, disobeying orders, to using foul language towards staff.

dr. iosif summarizes mr. thongdara’s institutional history at
pp. 22-23 of her report.

the following are the institutional offences involving
aggression or overt violence.

july 15, 1994: an altercation misconduct with another inmate
was found (dr. iosif report, p. 22. application record, vol. 3, jail records,
p. 87)

between august 2022 and may 2023, mr. thongdara was found
guilty of 4 misconducts involving assaults. (dr. iosif report, p. 23). the
circumstances appear varied. for example, in the misconduct finding dated
august 9, 2022 the record states “inmate admits to fighting, claims other
inmate hit him first”. (jail records, vol. 3, p. 582).

in an incident of november 25, 2022, mr. thongdara was
observed on cctv striking another inmate with closed fists. (jail records,
vol. 3, p. 668).

in an incident of november 28, 2022, it appears that mr.
thongdara admitted to punching another inmate (jail records, vol. 3, p.
660-662).

on 3 occasions, mr. thongdara was found to have engaged in
misconduct by disobeying an order or engaging in insulting behaviour with a
guard on november 3, 1994, march 2, 1997, january 31, 1998, (dr. iosif report,
pp. 22-23).

correctional service of canada records from joyceville
institution report generally satisfactory behaviour from october 2002 to
february 2005. he followed his correctional plan, and worked in the kitchen,
and subsequently attended school and completed grade 10.
anger & emotional regulation treatment

in 2003, mr. thongdara was identified as needing a medium
level of intervention based on his static factors and a high level of
intervention based on his dynamic factors. he demonstrated need in the areas
of impulsivity, aggression, poor conflict resolution and low frustration
tolerance. he completed the prerequisite program for anger & emotions
management program and the cognitive skills program at joyceville institution. 
(application record, vol. 4, p. 383).

mr. thongdara was enrolled in the anger & emotions
management program at joyceville institution in 2003 but was suspended from the
program due to sporadic attendance. records reveal that he was attentive
during some periods of the program and demonstrated an understanding of the
concepts but neglected to remain engaged throughout all sessions. (application
record, vol. 4, pp. 384-386)

in 2005, mr. thongdara completed the anger & emotions
management program at joyceville institution. his attendance and engagement
improved, and he was reported to be “cooperative and inquisitive” during
sessions, while also well-liked by those in the program. he demonstrated a
reduced disposition towards irritation, impulsive aggressive responses, and an
improved ability to interpret and manage anger provoking situations.
(application record, vol. 3, p. 524-529).

following his completion of the anger & emotions
management program and reasoning and rehabilitation at joyceville institution,
upon his transfer to bath institution, he completed the majority of his
correctional plan. (application record, vol. 4, p. 731) mr. thongdara also
completed the preventive maintenance for violence program in january 2015. (application
record, vol. 4, p. 1551)
2008 progress report (bath institution),
application record, vol. 4, pp.729-735

mr. thongdara’s 2008 progress assessment revealed that he
made improvements from his intake in the areas of: level of intervention based
on dynamic factors, social interaction, personal/emotional orientation, and
attitude. progress was not made in the areas of: reintegration potential,
level of intervention based on static factors, substance abuse and marital
family, motivation level, security classification. the report also noted:
•
following his transfer to bath institution from
joyceville institution in september 2006, he secured employment in the kitchen
but was later suspended due to aggression towards staff members.
•
he was suspended from school due to absence but
was subsequently re-assigned. he remained focused on addressing his language
barriers by participating in academic studies.
•
he had difficulty adjusting to bath institution
and was convicted of four minor institutional offences since he had arrived. 
concerns remained regarding his ability to control his emotions and impulsivity
despite his completion of anger and behavioral management programs.
•
he accepted responsibility for his presence at
the restaurant on the evening of the attempt murder and other offences but
continued to deny shooting the victim. (vol. 4, p. 731) he indicated that his
decisions, negative associations, and the need to stand up for himself were all
elements that contributed to his offending behaviour. (vol. 4, p. 731)

on june 14, 2010 at the bath institution, a report on
“institutional adjustment/offender attitude” noted good improvement in school
and no infractions were noted. (iosif report, p. 25)

in a may 13, 2010 report from the warden to the national
parole board, the warden indicated that mr. thongdara has demonstrated a
pattern of persistent violent behaviour. there are no supervision programs
that would offer adequate protection to the public from the risk he might
otherwise present. (iosif report, p. 25)

in a june 7, 2010 correctional plan note, it was stated that
mr. thongdara continued to deny shooting the victim in his attempted murder
conviction. it was noted that in october 2008 he was placed in segregation
after it was alleged that he assaulted another offender. an updated
psychological risk assessment was requested. (iosif report, p.26)

the june 11, 2010 assessment notes mr. thongdara has
accumulated 15 misconducts over the course of his federal incarceration. he
completed the cognitive skills course in 2003, and anger and emotion management
in 2005. he had been suspended from an earlier anger management program in
2003. it was unclear to the assessor whether he had grasped the core tenets of
the anger management program. he had been working full-time in the cabinet
shop since september 2009. the psychologist noted elements of positive
impression management. (iosif report, p. 26) the psychologist assessed mr.
thongdara to be in the high moderate range for general recidivism and the
moderate to high moderate range for violent recidivism. (iosif report, p.26)

on june 14, 2010 at the bath institution, a report on
“institutional adjustment/offender attitude noted good improvement in school
and no infractions were noted. (iosif report, p. 25) (csc records, volume 4, p.
1704)
parole board detention reviews 2011 and 2014

the march 23, 2011 national parole board decision ordered his
continued detention on the basis that mr. thongdara was likely to commit an
offence if released before the expiration of his sentence. it was noted that
at his hearing of november 30, 2010 he admitted being the shooter in the attempt
murder offence. he was noted to have difficulties controlling violent
impulses. enhanced supervision or residency in a community correctional centre
was considered not sufficient to manage his risk. (csc record, vol. 4
p.1085-1089).

in a january 8, 2014, detention review at joyceville
institution, it was noted that mr. thongdara had completed the violent offender
maintenance program. concern was noted on the extent to which mr. thongdara
had internalized the lessons from this program and shown that he could put them
into practice. he retracted his previous admission of being the shooter in the
attempt murder offence. a psychological risk assessment from december 2013
indicated that he remained in the high moderate range for general recidivism and
the moderate to high moderate range for violent recidivism. his detention was
confirmed. (dr. iosif report, p. 28) (csc records, vol. 4, p.1247-1251).
statutory release by the parole board: april 10, 2015

in the april 10, 2015 parole board of canada decision, it was
noted that mr. thongdara had recently completed the violent offender
maintenance program for a second time. the facilitator of the program stated
that he had demonstrated good motivation and had participated actively. it was
noted that he required a significant amount of structure and supervision.

in the april 10, 2015 parole board decision, the detention
order was lifted and he was approved for “one chance statutory release” with
structure and close supervision. the conditions included conditions for
residency, avoiding the victim and their family, not consuming alcohol or
illegal drugs, avoiding criminal peers, and avoiding drinking establishments,
(dr. iosif report, p.29).

in an assessment report recommending conditions for the
statutory release granted by the parole board dated april 17, 2015 (vol. 4. p.
1344), it was noted that mr. thongdara had completed numerous correctional
programs including reasoning and rehabilitation in 2002, anger and emotions
management (2005) and the violent offender maintenance program (2013 and 2015),
along with obtaining his high school diploma. the report stated at p. 1346 “he
has completed the requirements in his correctional plan and appears to be
amenable to participating in interventions required of him.” it notes that in
more recent years he had been better able to manage his emotions and apply the
skills learned in his correctional programs.

the report noted that “offender thongdara does not appear to
have serious addiction to illicit substances or alcohol”, but as he admitted to
being under the influence of these when committing his offences, he should be
prohibited from consuming illegal substances or alcohol in any statutory
release. (p. 1348)
mr. thongdara’s parole from april 10, 2015 to
warrant expiry april 13, 2017

the national parole board records for mr. thongdara’s period
of release on parole, for more than two years prior to the end of his 18 year
sentence, demonstrate that when living on parole, in a structured and
controlled environment, mr. thongdara was able to live a relatively prosocial
life, and remain fully employed, without committing violent offences.

the periodic reports to the parole board in the period
february 2015 to april 2017 are very favourable to mr. thongdara’s prospect of
successful rehabilitation, while receiving the support and controls of a strict
regime. in its initial decision to lift the previous detention orders, the
board decided to grant him a “one chance statutory release with structure and
close supervision”. the statutory release included numerous conditions
including not to consume alcohol or drugs, avoiding association with persons
involved in criminal activity, avoiding drinking establishments, residing at a
community correctional centre or a community residential facility approved by
correctional service of canada and to report to the toronto police monthly.
(parole board decision, april 10, 2015) (vol. 4, p. 1354)

on september 8, 2015, mr. thongdara’s statutory release was
suspended briefly as a result of his admission of smoking marijuana on one
occasion. however, his otherwise general good conduct while on statutory
release caused that suspension to be lifted by a decision dated september 29,
2015. (parole decision dated september 29, 2015, vol. 4, p.1432). the board
noted at p. 1437:
“though, by all
indications, thongdara was doing very well, on 2015-09-07 he disclosed to his
crf caseworker that he had violated his special condition to abstain drugs by
smoking marijuana.
while thongdara’s use of
marijuana is concerning, given that he accepted full responsibility for his
actions and it was believed that risk to the community would remain manageable
with close supervision and limited access to the community, his statutory release
suspension was locally cancelled on 2015-09-14 and he reported to the crf as
directed. there have been no issues with his attitude, behaviour, or
compliance, since his return to the community.
the case management team
believes that with close supervision, the structure, support, and monitoring
afforded by crf residency, limited access to the community, and participation
in treatment intervention, the risk that thongdara presents to the community
will remain manageable.”

in a subsequent decision dated january 22, 2016 the board
determined that it was appropriate to maintain the residency condition on mr.
thongdara’s release in order to minimize the risk of further offences. the
report of that date is strong evidence of mr. thongdara’s ability to remain
free of further offences in the structured and controlled environment provided
by his parole conditions.

the board stated in its decision at p. 1469:
“during his incarceration,
thongdara successfully completed the reasoning and rehabilitation and anger
emotions management programs, as well as the violent offender maintenance program.
as previously noted, thongdara is currently participating in the integrated
correctional program model maintenance program as a follow-up to said treatment
programming. collateral contact with correctional program officer george
asiamah has been positive thus far, and it is anticipated that thongdara will
successfully complete the program in february 2016.....
thongdara ‘s existing
release plan remains appropriate and valid. he is currently residing at st.
leonard’s house peel crf in brampton, ontario, and he appears to be deriving a
great deal of benefit from the structure, support, and monitoring afforded by
crf residency. he is fully compliant with the rules, regulations, and
expectations of crf residency, maintains positive working relationships with
the writer and crf staff, and readily asks for guidance, feedback, and
assistance as needed. he is also maintaining full-time employment with m &
k metal fabricating in mississauga ontario”.

it is noteworthy that csc had never identified substance
abuse to be a significant contributing cause of mr. thongdara’s criminal
behaviour, and had therefore never offered to mr. thongdara the treatment for
substance abuse which dr. iosif concludes he now needs.

a toronto west parole office report dated august 21, 2015 at
p.1413 notes that csc does not offer low intensity substance abuse programming,
and states that thongdara’s rating on substance abuse was low based on his
moderate use of thc. the report states “while there are substance abuse
issues, they are not considered to be significant” (application record, vol. 4,
p.1413)

in the final parole report of his program supervisor dated
april 18, 2016, the author states at p.1489:
“mr. thongdara has managed
to avoid violence while on this release and he has been taking active steps to
keep himself away from negative influences and removing himself from
environments which may increase his risky thinking or promote violent behaviour. 
he said that feeling good and healthy keeps him motivated to continue to make
improvements in his life..... overall mr. thongdara has been making attempts
at applying his skills and he has demonstrated that he possesses the ability to
use these skills should he need to.”

based on this conclusion, no further maintenance strategies
were recommended.

mr. thongdara completed his sentence on his warrant expiry
date of april 13, 2017 after successfully completing 2 years of statutory
release. (vol 4, pp.1866-1868)

the criminal record shows that, after the completion of his
18-year sentence, mr. thongdara was offence-free until his conviction for
possession of fentanyl on october 3, 2019, and committed no offences of
violence for 5 years until the april 19, 2022 robbery of the convenience store
which is the index offence in relation to this dangerous offender application.
2019-10-03 – brampton: possession of a schedule i
substance october 3, 2019

mr. thongdara was caught with some fentanyl in his pocket and
paid a $100 fine.
2022-04-19 robbery

mr. thongdara pled guilty to the index offence of robbery
that occurred at the axess convenience store located in toronto on tuesday,
april 19, 2022 described previously.

when asked about this incident by dr. iosif, mr. thongdara
explained that he was both high on fentanyl and other substances that morning
and was gambling prior to the attack. he had lost all his money and indicated
that the “evil part” of him told him to rob the store worker when he exited the
bus that morning. he indicated that the robbery was not premediated and
expressed feelings of remorse.

with respect to this offence, dr. iosif stated in her
evidence on, february 10, at p. 53:
“the index offence is a
situation where mr. thongdara is intoxicated, he was gambling, he lost his
money and then he robs a convenience store. every one of these elements is
something that mr. thongdara had done previously… he was using fentanyl at the
time and he was in the community doing what he had done previously with similar
results.”
2024 – 02 -09 – toronto assault (application
record, vol. 1, tab 17)

this offence occurred while mr. thongdara was on a release
order in relation to his charge of robbery of the convenience store on april
19, 2022.

on saturday july 9, 2022, mr. thongdara was at woodbine
casino where he began to watch two strangers play the slot machines. the
parties were unknown to each other and had no prior interactions. at
approximately 11:45 a.m., without warning, mr. thongdara approached and kicked
the male victim in the back of his head. this caused the victim to fall
forward, and mr. thongdara pushed him off his chair. this caused the female
victim to rise out of her seat and reach toward the victim, her husband. at
this moment, mr. thongdara turned on the female victim and began to grapple
with her and push her head downwards with both of his arms on the back of her
neck. following the assault, mr. thongdara fled the casino and was arrested
shortly thereafter.

during his interview with dr. iosif, mr. thongdara indicated
that he was “very, very high” during this incident and committed the assault as
he believed the couple was “talking bad” about him. he also explained that he
had lost money at the casino the night before and was concerned he would be
unable to eat and pay rent; this assault was an attempt to “take [the victims]
money to go home”. he acknowledged that this was “bad thinking” and ran away
after his attack. both victims reported head pain following the attack.

it is very concerning that this offence occurred while mr.
thongdara was on a release order in relation to the april 19, 2022 convenience
store robbery.

mr. thongdara was sentenced to 6 months for this assault and
failure to comply, served concurrently to the six months for the assault
sentence.

concerning this offence, and the significance of substance
use in the commission of the offence, dr. iosif stated at p. 25 of her
testimony on february 10, 2024:
“well, the issue of
addiction is obviously very problematic. it’s problematic first of all because
it’s a force that can, tends to drive criminal behaviour. the individual needs
the substance, as mr. thongdara himself described, and therefore in order to
acquire that substance they may resort to criminal activity, or they may look
for ways to make money to support that habit. it’s problematic because being
intoxicated with substances will impair someone’s judgement. mr. thongdara
describes how he was intoxicated both at the time of the index offences and the
offences that happened in july 2022 subsequent to the index offence, and it’s
problematic because it poses challenges in terms of rehabilitating and finding
more constructive ways for someone to manage emotions going forward from a risk
management standpoint.”
dr. iosif’s psychiatric assessment and risk
assessment

dr. iosif testified that mr. thongdara’s addictions have
restricted his ability to maintain a law-abiding lifestyle.

she highlighted that his substance abuse and addiction have
impacted his history of violence. as noted, following his lengthy federal
sentence, mr. thongdara accumulated three additional sets of charges, two of
which were violent in nature. following this, he incurred further charges in
july 2022. all offences were committed while he was intoxicated and
illustrated an “indifference to the foreseeable consequences of his behaviour”.

in dr. iosif’s opinion, mr. thongdara meets the criteria for:
•
personality disorder
not otherwise specified (strong antisocial personality traits),
•
gambling disorder; and
•
polysubstance use disorder (opiates and alcohol)
in partial remission in a controlled setting.
anti social personality order

in dr. iosif’s opinion, although mr. thongdara does not
strictly meet the diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disorder, he
meets many of the criteria that are used to arrive at a diagnosis of
anti-social personality disorder. she explained that his impulsivity and
deceitfulness contributed to her assessment.

further, her report reveals that his childhood, notably his
exposure to child abuse and neglect, alongside his history of unstable,
erratic, and inconsistent parental discipline further strengthened her position
on his diagnosis. when asked about her diagnosis in cross examination, dr.
iosif indicated that mr. thongdara’s substantial time in prison plays a role in
his diagnosis. she noted that this diagnosis is not uncommon among offenders
who have spent extensive periods incarcerated. however, dr. iosif testified
that as an individual matures, anti-social personality characteristics and
effects are less evident with time. she testified that at the age of 65, these
characteristics diminish significantly, however her report notes that mr. thongdara’s
index offences demonstrate no objective changes despite his mature age.
polysubstance use disorder (opiates, cocaine)

mr. thongdara has struggled with substance abuse for most of
his life. dr. iosif testified that his addiction has often been the driving
force behind his criminal behaviour and poses severe challenges from a
rehabilitation and risk management perspective.

at the age of 25, mr. thongdara was introduced to and began
using heroin and crack cocaine while incarcerated. when asked about his drug
addiction by dr. iosif, mr. thongdara explained that his use of substances was
an outlet to release and cope with the significant stress in his life. between
2020 and 2022, mr. thongdara also battled an addiction to fentanyl and was on
methadone and suboxone while in prison. following his release from prison, he
continued using these substances and battled withdrawal, which he characterized
as being both debilitating and resulted in him feeling quite ill. during his
interview, he told dr. iosif that he requested to be weaned off methadone
during his present incarceration and has been clean for a year as he did not
wish to be released into the community with an addiction.
gambling disorder (dr. iosif report, page 10)

mr. thongdara meets the diagnostic criteria for gambling
disorder. he has self-reported his struggles with gambling and both of his
2022 offences occurred in the context of gambling. beginning in 2019, mr.
thongdara would go to the casino approximately twice a week with a friend and
would lose as much as a whole pay cheque. his addiction has brought upon
personal hardships, relationship challenges, and led to his criminal behaviour.
dr. iosif testified that his gambling addiction goes “hand in hand” with his
substance addiction, a need for money, and criminal offending. he incurs debts
from his gambling and substance use, which makes his gambling more reckless,
and leads to aggressive conduct.

dr. iosif emphasized the cumulative impact of mr.
thongdara’s substance abuse, gambling addiction and anti-social personality
disorder on his risk of re-offence. dr. iosif testified that the intersection
of these three factors are all features that contribute to mr. thongdara’s risk
level and likelihood of reoffence. dr. iosif testified that a sustained
effort to address the substance abuse and gambling addiction would be positive
for mr. thongdara and could impact his risk level and probability of recidivism.
dr iosif acknowledged that treating the substance abuse and gambling
addictions could possibly lower the risk of reoffence significantly.

significantly, dr. iosif acknowledged that mr. thongdara
has not yet received programming or treatment for his substance abuse and
addiction challenges.

dr. iosif appears to have placed little emphasis, or possibly
ignored, the 2-year period of statutory release under strict conditions from
2015-2017 which i consider to be an oversight in her analysis. in my opinion,
it represents a significant period of time in which mr. thongdara was offence
free, even though he had never received treatment for his gambling and
substance addictions.
actuarial risk assessment (report, p. 34)

in dr. iosif’s opinion, mr. thongdara’s likelihood for
future violent recidivism falls in the high-risk category, evidencing a
substantial likelihood of re-offense.

notably, mr. thongdara’s score on the pcl-r was 26, a high
moderate score that is predictive of future general and violent recidivism. 
further, this score indicates significant psychopathic characteristics,
consistent with mr. thongdara’s antisocial personality diagnosis. mr.
thongdara’s score on the vrag was 20, placing him in the seventh of nine
ascending risk categories and indicating a moderate-high probability of violent
recidivism.

dr. iosif reported that this assessment was not consistent
with his presentation and history of significant violence. she attributed this
discrepancy to the lack of collateral information on mr. thongdara’s early
childhood and the interviewers who seemed to have little information of his
history and potential for violence. as a result, dr. iosif believes a proper
classification of his risk level is “high”, meaning he evidences a substantial likelihood
of re-offense.
dynamic risk assessment (report, pp. 35-36)

dr. iosif also engaged in a dynamic risk assessment which
accounts for dynamic factors that are relevant in assessing risk management,
particularly providing information about when someone is likely to re-offend to
guide decision making. in doing so, she utilized the structured guide for the
assessment of violence risk (hcr-20 v3) and the structured assessment of
protective factors for violence risk (saprof). dr. iosif concluded that a
consideration of these dynamic factors did not lower his overall risk as his
risk for violent recidivism was estimated to be high.
hcr-20 v3 (report, p. 36)

dr. iosif reported concerns regarding mr. thongdara’s lack of
insight and instability. she concluded that mr. thongdara is likely to have
future problems with professional services and plans, supervision response and
coping if he is released into the community without completing a significant
period of treatment in custody.
structured assessment of protective risk factors
(report, p. 36)

dr. iosif reported that mr. thongdara’s protective factors
are few. she recalled that he has historically enjoyed working. although he
is quite attached to his wife, she noted that she had a lack of interest in maintaining
a romantic relationship with mr. thongdara. these factors led to the
conclusion that he would need to have external control once he enters the
community again.

on the totality of the evidence, i accept dr. iosif’s opinion
that, without extensive treatment, mr. thongdara’s risk of committing a further
violent offence is high.
risk management strategies

dr. iosif recommended the following risk management
strategies to reduce mr. thongdara’s risk of re-offending: (iosif, report,
p.39)

mr. thongdara should access and complete a variety of
programs designed to address antisocial traits both while incarcerated and
after release into the community. he should take psychological treatment
consisting of cognitive and social skills development, vocational training, and
learning self-regulation and self-management. she stated that the prognosis
for successful treatment of anti-social personality traits is “guarded”.

mr. thongdara should abstain from all substances and alcohol.

mr. thongdara should attend regular long-term treatment for
substance abuse.

he should pursue all recommended anger management and
self-regulation and self-management programs to develop skills in each of these
areas, dialectical behavioral therapy could assist.

mr. thongdara should pursue employment and additional
education to structure his life and reintegrate himself into the community by
fostering healthy self-esteem and providing prosocial influences and contacts.

mr. thongdara should be given trauma informed therapy to
address his childhood trauma.

mr. thongdara’s release into the community should be gradual
with extended periods of time in a residential correctional facility and
limited privileges should be earned through demonstrated compliance and
appropriate behaviour.

mr. thongdara should be prohibited from associating with
antisocial or substance abusing peers outside of the correctional facilities
(dr. iosif report, pp. 38-39)

dr. iosif did not set a particular time limit for the
completion of this regime during incarceration and after a release into the
community, or articulate an end-point at which time she understood these
interventions would no longer be needed.

she stated at p. 38 of her report:
“given mr. thongdara’s high
risk of violent offending, he needs a high level of intervention and
significant resources to decrease that risk. his needs should be directed
toward assisting with abstinence from substances, and therapies that focus on
antisocial traits. he should also have a high level of consistent support and
external supervision, and assistance in engagement in meaningful activities
including employment. it is recommended that mr. thongdara complete the
indicated programming in a federal institution prior to being released in the
community.”

with respect to release into the community dr. iosif stated
at p. 39:
“any release into the
community should take place only gradually and slowly, with extended periods of
time in a residential correctional facility, and limited privileges earned
through demonstrated compliance and appropriate behaviour. rapid intervention
should be undertaken in the event of a breach of release conditions. mr.
thongdara’s whereabouts should be regularly monitored by unannounced visits by
probation and parole officers, once mr. thongdara is living outside a
correctional facility. involvement in treatment programs should also be
monitored.”

dr. iosif acknowledged in her evidence that mr. thongdara had
never received treatment for his substance and gambling addictions. she
acknowledged that his risk of re-offence was to commit a violent offence, but
she could not predict the degree of violence involved.

she stated that the risk of re-offence was created by the
combination of mr. thongdara’s anti-social personality disorder, gambling
addiction, and the substance addiction. she accepted that treatment for the
gambling and substance addiction could significantly reduce the risk of
re-offence. she testified “i think that addressing the substance use and the
gambling disorder would be very positive for mr thongdara.” (transcript, feb.
11, 2025, p. 52)

dr. iosif testified in particular about proposed treatment
involving a determinate sentence followed by a long-term supervision order.

she testified that if there was a penitentiary sentence,
followed by a lengthy long-term supervision order, mr. thongdara would be
approaching the age of 65 such that antisocial traits would be significantly
reduced. she opined that if mr. thongdara were rehabilitated in terms of his
substance use disorder, monitored to stay away from gambling and from
antisocial peers, and with supervision of his interactions until 65 years of
age, then in her opinion the risk of violent re-offence would be manageable. 
(transcript, feb. 11, 2025, p. 8)

i accept dr iosif’s conclusion on mr. thongdara’s need for
treatment to reduce the risk of violent re-offending to an acceptable level. on
the totality of the evidence, i consider it to be a conservative, cautious
estimate, that emphasizes the statutory purpose of protecting the public. dr.
iosif expressed this opinion without expressly taking into account the 2-year
period of statutory release from 2015-2017, when, even without treatment for
substance abuse and his gambling addiction, mr. thongdara remained offence free
while living under strict controls and supervision, and the subsequent period
from 2017 to 2022 in which he was not alleged to have committed any violent
offences.

the testimony of joseph dixon, a parole officer supervisor,
with correctional services canada establishes that, as a person who had
committed three violent offences, upon being sentenced to a period of
incarceration of over two years, mr. thongdara would likely be referred for a
psychological assessment upon his entry into the federal penitentiary.

he would also receive an intake assessment at the joyceville
facility to determine what level of program intensity was appropriate for him.
if he was assessed as needing a high intensity program it consists of 86
sessions in the institution of 2 and half hours per session (joseph dixon, transcript,
february 4, 2025 at p.26.). the current programming in federal institutions
that would be applicable to an offender like mr. thongdara is a global relapse
prevention program that is a multi-target program called the integrated
correctional program model.

if an offender is subject to a long-term supervision order, the
order may involve a residential condition requiring the offender to live in a
community correctional centre or a community residential facility in the same
way in which this can be ordered by the parole board as a condition of parole. (dixon,
transcript, feb. 4, 2025 at p.52-54, 60)

on the totality of the evidence, i accept dr. iosif’s
evidence and recommendations on the in custody rehabilitative programming, and
subsequent controlled environment and substantial supervision that is needed to
reduce the risk of re-offence by mr. thongdara to an acceptable level such that
it is effectively controlled.
conclusion on the designation as a dangerous
offender

in
r. v. boutilier, supra, at para.
43, cot
é
j. described the assessment of prospective risk at
the designation stage as follows:
“as the assessment of
prospective risk described above is concerned with whether an offender will
continue to be a “real and present danger”, being unable to surmount his
violent conduct, the sentencing judge must consider all retrospective and
prospective evidence relating to the continuing nature of this risk, including
future treatment prospects.”

applying this analysis to the totality of the evidence, i
accept dr. iosif’s conclusion that, so long as he is compelled by a serious
addiction to fentanyl and cocaine, mr. thongdara will represent a substantial
risk to the community. however, i find that this risk is substantially reduced
when he is living within the restrictions and substantial controls in force
when he successfully avoided violence in the period february 2015 to april 2017
at the conclusion of his lengthy period of incarceration.
conclusion on intractability

in my opinion the crown has not proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that mr. thongdara’s conduct is intractable.

intractable behaviour refers to behaviour that an offender is
“unable to surmount”:
r. v. smj,
2023 onca 157, at para.
23;
r. v.
boutilier, supra, at para.
27.

the record demonstrates that mr. thongdara has not undergone
substantial assessment and treatment for his polysubstance abuse or for his
gambling addiction. dr. iosif acknowledges that it is these conditions, in
combination with his anti-social personality disorder, which form the basis of
his ongoing risk of serious personal injury offence if released without
treatment.

the fact that mr. thongdara has not had the benefit of
ongoing treatment for these conditions is a relevant factor in determining whether
the crown has proven intractability beyond a reasonable doubt:
r. v. simon,
2008 onca 578, per doherty j.a. at para. 93. indeed, dr. iosif acknowledged in
her evidence “i think addressing the substance use and the gambling disorder
would be very positive for mr. thongdara.” (transcript, feb. 11, p.52)

in
r. v. s.s.,
2019 onsc 3269, at para.120 (conviction
appeal allowed at
2022 onca 305, but conviction restored at
2023 scc 1
),
justice gray concluded that intractability had not been proven beyond a reasonable
doubt in circumstances where many techniques for treating the offender, such as
motivational interviewing and sex offender treatment, had simply never been
utilized.

in
r. v. j.c., supra, the court of appeal allowed an
appeal from a finding that the accused was a dangerous offender where the trial
judge had not considered intractability at the designation stage. the court
stated at para. 23:
“23
in his evidence,
dr. klassen described the appellant’s previous treatment programs as relatively
short-term and unlikely to have been effective. for this reason, dr. klassen
described the appellant as being, in practical terms, an “untreated offender”. had
this evidence been considered at the designation stage, it may well have led
the trial judge to conclude that the appellant was not intractable and that he
therefore ought not to be designated as a dangerous offender. the fact that
this was a realistic possibility is reflected in the trial judge’s finding
(albeit at the penalty stage rather than the designation stage) that “there is
a possibility of successful treatment and cure, [and] the prospects of risk
reduction and risk management and the reasonable possibility of eventual
control in the community are real.”

in
r. v. boutilier, the evidence showed that mr.
boutilier’s tendency to commit criminal offences flowed from his drug
addictions, and the expert forensic psychologist concluded that he was very
likely to continue committing criminal offences to fund his drug use in the
future. but this was premised upon the finding that mr. boutilier had had
little success with a wide variety of drug treatment programs he had been
through in his life, apart from one period of several months in a halfway house:
boutilier, supra, at para.80.

in summary, mr. boutilier’s offending was intractable because
he had tried drug treatment programs on several occasions, which were
unsuccessful, and he had consistently failed to adhere to conditions of his
release, making the finding of intractability a reasonable one:
boutilier, supra,
at para.
80, 83 and 87.

in contrast, mr. thongdara was never considered to have a
significant substance abuse problem while incarcerated, and subject to
statutory release, during his lengthy sentence for attempt for attempted murder
and subsequently. accordingly, he has never had the opportunity to pursue
substantial multi-substance abuse treatment, or treatment for his gambling
addiction.

while on statutory release from april 2015 to april 2017,
while living under strict controls and supervision, mr. thongdara committed no
violent offences and self-reported his single instance of using marijuana. 
even after controls were removed, and even without any treatment for his drug
and gambling addiction he was free of violent offence for 5 years until the
index robbery offence on april 19, 2022.

on the basis of the totality of the evidence, including dr.
iosif’s evidence, i conclude that it has not been proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that his criminal offending is intractable in the sense that it is
behaviour which he is unable to surmount with appropriate treatment. he has
not been offered the required treatment needed to address these issues.

in material in his csc file, it is clear that, in the last
few years of his 18-year sentence, and during 2 years of statutory release, he
was found by parole authorities to be willing to address factors contributing
to his criminal behaviour. he completed all programming made available, but
never was given substance abuse or gambling addiction treatment. even without
this treatment from 2015 until 2022 he committed no offences of violence, and
only began to re-offend with violence when the drug and gambling addictions
became significant causal factors in 2022.

even while ignoring this important evidence, dr. iosif
expressed the opinion that with a substantial penitentiary sentence, and
lengthy supervision order, with substantial controls, treatment, and supervision,
mr. thongdara’s risk of re-offence would be significantly reduced.

in light of this opinion, which i accept, and the evidence of
his substantial success while on statutory release (apart from admitting to
marijuana use once), and for several years after the end of his sentence, i
find that the crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that mr.
thongdara’s violent offending is intractable.

this is sufficient to conclude that the crown has not proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. thongdara should be designated as a
dangerous offender. had i been satisfied that intractability was proven, i
would have found mr. thongdara to be a dangerous offender under
s.753(1)
(a)(ii)
as i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that, on the totality of the
evidence, mr. thongdara engaged in persistent violent behaviour in the 3
convenience store robberies, the attempt murder, and the assault on the elderly
couple at the casino, reflecting a substantial degree of indifference to the
reasonably foreseeable consequences to other persons of his behaviour.

i accept dr. iosif’s evidence that, without substantial
treatment, mr. thongdara has a high risk of re-offence, and in particular a
high risk of committing a violent offence. i also find that a sentence of actual
incarceration of more than 2 years is required for the index offence of
robbery, but, based on all the evidence that there is a reasonable possibility
of eventual control of the risk of re-offence in the community.

i am therefore satisfied that mr. thongdara satisfies the
requirements to be found a long-term offender. based on the totality of the
evidence, i am satisfied that there is a substantial risk that mr. thongdara
will reoffend, that a sentence of more than 2 years is appropriate for the index
offence of robbery, and that there is a reasonable possibility of eventual
control of the risk of re-offence in the community based on the totality of the
evidence:
criminal code, s.753.1(1).

pursuant to s.753.1(3), mr. thongdara is therefore subject to
a minimum sentence of at least 2 years, from which pre-sentence custody may be
deducted, and a possible period of long-term supervision of up to 10 years.

as agreed with counsel at the hearing of june 13, 2025, having
determined that mr. thongdara be designated as a long-term offender in this
decision, i will hear further submissions from counsel on the appropriate sentence
to be imposed on a date to be scheduled.
date: july 21, 2025 
 ______________________________
justice david porter