source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj305/2025oncj305.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. pentland, 2025 oncj 305
date: 
2025 06 04
court
file no.: sudbury 4011-998-23-40102978-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
michael pentland
before
justice g. jenner
heard
on january 14, march 20, and april 24, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 4, 2025
adam lachance.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
mikael savitsky............................................................................... counsel
for the accused
jenner j.:
i.
introduction and issues

mr. pentland is charged with (i) impaired
operation of a conveyance and (ii) having a blood alcohol concentration (bac)
equal to or above 80 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood within two hours of
operating a conveyance (“80 plus”).

it is alleged that on august 21, 2023, mr.
pentland was driving too closely behind mr. maverik cuff’s vehicle when mr.
pentland’s vehicle left the roadway and collided with a driveway raised above
the ditch. mr. cuff stopped to assist. when police arrived, mr. pentland was in
the ambulance. cst. vachon made an approved screening device (“asd”) demand,
which mr. pentland failed. mr. pentland was arrested, brought to the police
detachment, and was required to provide breath samples. the lower of his two
readings was 230 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood.

on consent, the trial proceeded as a blended
voir
dire
addressing a
charter
application and the voluntariness of
certain alleged utterances.

the evidentiary issues to be determined are:
(1)
voluntariness:
were
mr. pentland’s utterances at the police detachment concerning his identity as
the driver of the crashed vehicle, the cause of the accident, and his level of
intoxication voluntary?
(2)
grounds for asd demand:
were mr. pentland’s rights under ss. 8 and 9 of the
charter
infringed because, when cst. vachon detained mr. pentland and made an asd
demand, he lacked the requisite reasonable suspicion that mr. pentland had
alcohol in his body?
(3)
timing of asd demand:
was mr. pentland’s right under s. 8 of the
charter
infringed
because cst. vachon’s asd demand was not made immediately upon his developing a
reasonable suspicion?
(4)
delay in right to counsel:
was mr. pentland’s s. 10(b)
charter
right breached because
cst. vachon failed to provide the informational component of the right without
delay?
(5)
counsel of choice:
was mr. pentland’s s. 10(b) right breached because cst. vachon did
not provide mr. pentland with a meaningful opportunity to contact counsel of
choice?
(6)
charter
remedy:
if any of the alleged
charter
breaches are made out, ought the evidence to be excluded?

the ultimate issues to be determined are:
(7)
identity and care and control:
was mr. pentland in care and control of the crashed motor vehicle at
the relevant time?
(8)
impairment:
was
mr. pentland’s ability to operate his vehicle impaired by alcohol?

the parties agree the additional issue of
whether mr. pentland had a bac ’80 plus’ turns entirely on the
charter
application.
that is, if the application fails to exclude the breath readings, then this
element of the 80 plus offence is proven. if the application succeeds in
excluding the breath readings, there must be an acquittal on that count.

the court heard from the following witnesses:
(i) mr. maverik cuff, a civilian motorist who partially observed the motor
vehicle accident and stopped to assist; (ii) opp cst. vachon, the first officer
to arrive on scene, and the arresting officer; (iii) cst. dokis, a second
officer who attended the accident scene; and (iv) cst. joyal, the breath
technician.
ii.
analysis
2.1 voluntariness

the crown failed to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that mr. pentland’s utterances to the breath technician, cst. joyal, were
voluntary. i must weigh the entire circumstances surrounding the statements,
but the determining factor in this case was the inducement contained in the
following exchange shown on the booking room video:
officer:
okay, so michael, if you don’t cooperate, you don’t cooperate.
mr. pentland:
i’ll cooperate.
officer:
you’ll be here all night if you don’t cooperate.

the crown points out this exchange occurred
after mr. pentland provided a fictional name as his legal counsel of choice.
the crown suggests the officer’s statement here is an unfortunately worded but
ultimately innocuous caution to curb mr. pentland’s insincere behaviour. that
may have been the officer’s intention, but i do not find the comment to be
innocuous. a reasonable interpretation of the officer’s retort is that
failure to cooperate would mean mr. pentland would be held in custody
overnight.

not every threat or inducement will render a
statement involuntary. in
r. v. spencer,
2007 scc 11, at para.
15,
deschamps j., writing for the majority, stated that “while a
quid pro quo
may
establish the existence of a threat or promise, it is the strength of the
alleged inducement that must be considered in the overall contextual inquiry
into voluntariness.”

the accuracy of a threat or inducement, while
not determinative, is relevant factor: see, for example,
r. v. othman,
2018 onca 1073
at para.
16;
r. v. backhouse,
2005 canlii 4937
(ont.
c.a.), at paras.
120-121. the officer’s statement here was inaccurate. while
lack of cooperation might have slowed the investigation and delayed mr.
pentland’s release, complete non-cooperation, including by refusal to comply
with breath tests, would more likely see mr. pentland charged with that
additional offence. that would not necessarily translate to an immediate
release, but it would not cause him to be held meaningfully longer than if he
was fully cooperative.

the prospect of spending a night in a detention
cell is no small matter. i am concerned that the officer’s statement may have
influenced mr. pentland to opt to answer questions he might not have otherwise.
the subsequent cautions given by cst. joyal were general in nature and not
specific enough to dispel the risk of the inducement. the crown’s onus is high.
it must establish voluntariness beyond a reasonable doubt. the crown has not
met that standard here. impaired driving investigations often require officers
to navigate vexing and obstructive detainee behaviour, but officers must be
cautious not to inaccurately convey to detainees that their liberty is
contingent on cooperation.
2.2 grounds
for asd demand

cst. vachon possessed the necessary grounds to
make the asd demand. he subjectively believed mr. pentland both operated a
motor vehicle in the previous three hours and had alcohol in his body. this
belief was objectively reasonable. cst. vachon testified that he was
dispatched to a motor vehicle collision. his first point of contact on scene
was an ambulance attendant who told him that the male involved in the accident
was being assessed medically, that they could smell alcohol on the male’s
breath, and that the male admitted he had consumed two beers the night before.
when he spoke to mr. pentland in the ambulance, cst. vachon could himself smell
alcohol on mr. pentland’s breath, and noted he had red and glossy eyes and
slurred speech. cst. vachon testified he had reasonable suspicion to believe
that mr. pentland had alcohol in his body.

the defendant urges me to reject cst. vachon’s
evidence because the civilian witness, mr. cuff, did not detect an odour of
alcohol on mr. pentland, and that the in-car video evidence of mr. pentland’s
transport from the scene does not demonstrate any slurred speech or indicia of impairment.
there is nothing inconsistent between cst. vachon detecting an odour of alcohol
in the enclosed space of the ambulance and mr. cuff’s not having detected such
an odour while interacting with mr. pentland outdoors. i do not find the video
evidence of mr. pentland at any stage of the investigation undermines cst.
vachon’s testimony as to his observations. in any event, the information
conveyed to cst. vachon by the ambulance attendants would, standing alone,
constitute grounds to suspect alcohol in mr. pentland’s body. cst. vachon’s
evidence on these points was uncontradicted, and i accept it. this ground of
the
charter
application fails.
2.3 timing
of asd demand

the defendant argues that cst. vachon’s asd
demand was unlawful because after forming his grounds cst. vachon delayed and
did not make the demand immediately.

section 320.27
of the
criminal code
says nothing about the period
between an officer forming the grounds for a demand and the making of the
demand. however, like its predecessor,
s. 254(2)
of the
criminal code,
the provision has been interpreted to have an ‘immediately’ or ‘forthwith’
requirement:
r. v. quansah,
2012
onca 123, at paras.
24-44;
r.
v. woods,
2005 scc 42, at para.
15;
r. v. breault,
2023 scc 9, at
para.
34.

cst. vachon’s evidence was that he arrived at
the scene at 2:56 pm. he parked on the opposite side of the highway from the
accident. he made observations of the scene and made his way to the ambulance.
outside the ambulance he spoke to one ambulance attendant. he then spoke to his
colleague, cst. dokis. they had a conversation about the male in the ambulance,
and about who would speak to witnesses at the scene. cst. vachon then entered
the ambulance where mr. pentland was being assessed. he identified mr. pentland
and made further observations: the odour of alcohol on breath, red and glossy
eyes, and slurred speech. at 3:13pm, he made the asd demand. the defence
challenged him as to whether description of events would realistically take the
17 minutes he said elapsed between his arrival and the demand. cst. vachon
agreed the various events were brief but was not able to provide any answer
beyond that. cst. vachon agreed that after speaking to the ambulance attendant
outside the ambulance, and before entering the ambulance, he was starting to
develop suspicion.

i accept that, subjectively, cst. vachon’s
grounds to make an asd demand crystalized when he was in the ambulance with mr.
pentland. it would, in my view, have been reasonably open to him to form such a
belief based on the information provided to him by the ambulance attendant
outside the ambulance. if, however, he did not in fact form a subjective
belief, an earlier objective basis is immaterial:
r. v. franco,
2024
onsc 2444, at para.
12.

but were i to reject cst. vachon’s evidence on
this point; were i to find he is being disingenuous about when his reasonable
suspicion crystalized, i would still not find an infringement of the
applicant’s
charter
rights, on the basis that any associated delay would
have occurred before mr. pentland was detained. the implicit immediacy
requirement in a case where the delay precedes a detention must be approached
differently. i cannot summarize the justification for this more effectively
than davies j. has recently in
r. v. franco,
2024 onsc 2444, at paras.
16-18:
there is, of course, jurisprudence that states that the
police are required to make a demand immediately if they intend to do so.
the
criminal code
does not explicitly require a police officer
to make the demand immediately after establishing reasonable grounds to suspect
the driver has alcohol in their body. however, canadian courts have repeatedly
held that, to be constitutional,
s. 320.27(1)
of the
criminal
code
(and its predecessor) must be interpreted to mean that the police
have an implicit obligation to make a demand as soon as they form the
reasonable suspicion that the driver has alcohol in their body:
r. v.
breault,
2023 scc
9
at para.
34,
r. v.
quansah,
2012 onca
123
at paras.
24 to 44,
r.
v. woods,
2005 scc
42
at para.
15,
r. v.
pierman
(1994),
1994 canlii 1139 (on ca),
19 o.r. (3d) 704
at para.
5. this is because
the police are allowed to detain the driver for the purpose of seizing a sample
of their breath without giving the driver an opportunity to speak to counsel
before the sample is taken. the statutory power to demand a breath sample
before the driver has an opportunity to speak to counsel has been found to be a
reasonable limit on the driver’s
charter
rights because of
“the extreme danger” posed by impaired drivers, but only if the police exercise
that power without delay:
quansah
at
para.
22.
the cases on the constitutionality of
s. 320.27(1)
of
the
criminal code
(and its predecessor) were decided in the
context that the driver had been detained by the police before the demand was
made. for example,
in
pierman
at
para.
5, arbour j.a. (as she then was) explained the rationale for
requiring the police to make the demand as soon as they have reasonable grounds
to suspect the driver has alcohol in their body as follows:
this is the only interpretation which is consistent
with the judicial acceptance of an infringement on the right to counsel
provided for in s. 10(b) of the
charter. if the
police had discretion to wait before making the demand, the suspect would be
detained and therefore entitled to consult a lawyer. the basis upon which the
courts have held that parliament may infringe on a suspect's right to counsel
is that there is no opportunity for the police to accommodate that right if the
breath sample must be taken "forthwith". it follows, in my view, that
for the section to maintain its constitutional integrity, we must assume it
also contemplates that there be no opportunity for the suspect to consult
counsel before the demand is made.
however,
in
r.
v. macm
illan,
2013 onca 109, the court of appeal for
ontario held that “greater flexibility” is permitted if the driver is not
detained between the time the officer forms the grounds to make a demand and
when the demand is made. the court made that finding because the rights
under ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
are not
engaged if the driver is not detained. in other words, if the driver is not
detained, any delay between the officer formulating grounds and making the
demand will not interfere with the driver’s
charter
rights and
the need for immediate action on the part of the police disappears.

i note further that the court in
macmillan,
applying a flexible approach, tolerated a 29-minute delay while the suspect was
not detained as reasonably necessary in the circumstances: para. 39.

adopting a flexible approach here, cst. vachon
was not conducting a standard vehicle stop. he was responding to a motor
vehicle collision. he made observations of the scene. he spoke to his
colleague, cst. dokis, to determine who would be responsible for speaking with
witnesses at the scene. he spoke to the ambulance attendant about the suspected
driver they were assisting. mr. pentland was being seen by another ambulance
attendant, a process cst. vachon was required to be sensitive to. cst. vachon’s
approach was reasonably necessary, and in the context of mr. pentland not being
detained by police, i do not find that cst. vachon breached any temporal
obligation with respect to the demand.
2.4 delay
in right to counsel

the defence complains of a four-minute delay
between the arrest and cst. vachon’s providing mr. pentland with the
informational component of the s. 10(b) right to counsel. this is argued as a
breach of the immediacy requirement upheld in
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33
at para.
42.

cst. vachon’s evidence is that the arrest
occurred at “approximately 3:14pm” and that he read mr. pentland the standard
right to counsel language at “approximately 3:17pm”. i note that the times
given are approximate—understandable given the dynamic reality of police
duties—and that it is not necessarily the case that a full four minutes elapsed
between these events. in any event, examining the evidence as to what occurred
in this short timeframe, i am not persuaded that cst. vachon failed to comply
with the immediacy component of the right to counsel.

cst. vachon testified that he advised mr.
pentland that he was going to be arrested. he showed him the result of the asd.
he attempted to explain that “he was involved in a motor vehicle collision,
that [the officer] could smell alcohol, and that he had registered a fail on
the approved screening device.” he was attempting, not succeeding, because as
cst. vachon was trying to explain that mr. pentland would be going back to the
station to provide proper samples of his breath, mr. pentland was talking over
him, trying to relay his own information. additionally, the ambulance
attendants were providing their own information, and advising that they were
clearing mr. pentland medically, indicating there were no injuries that would
require a hospital attendance. these things were all happening at once. cst.
vachon was trying to listen as well, and to be polite and respectful.

cst. vachon was unshaken on this point in
cross-examination, testifying that,
…before i could finish all this, which was
a time delay to get to my rights to counsel and caution, he kept talking and
making those comments. so, by the time i was able to finish explaining to your
client those steps that i want or those things that i wanted to tell him, with
the comments that he was telling me, that’s the time that i was able to provide
the rights to counsel, was at the time that i provided in my notes.

cst. vachon added that he tried several times to
ask mr. pentland to stop speaking so he could finish explaining what he needed
to. he was cross-examined as to why this was not reflected in his notes. i do
not find this to be the type of information that would make it into an
officer’s notebook. i do not find the omission to be of concern.

in
r. v. lee,
2023 oncj 251, at paras.
52-54, a brief two-minute delay in providing the informational component of s.
10(b) rights was justified where the officer was allowing for paramedics to see
to the accused. in this case, i am not persuaded of a breach following a delay
of mere minutes given (i) the officer was attempting to explain the reason for
the detention—itself a constitutional imperative pursuant to s. 10(a) of the
charter,
(ii) the detainee was interrupting and talking over the officer, and (iii)
paramedics were executing their own important duties. this ground of the
application is dismissed.
2.5 counsel
of choice

cst. vachon’ testified he read the accused the
standard right to counsel language, which includes a specific direction that
the detainee has “the right to telephone any lawyer [they] wish,” and
information about the availability of free advice from a legal aid lawyer. mr.
pentland responded at first by advising he did not understand. cst. vachon
explained the right to counsel a second time, using his own words. in response,
mr. pentland would not say whether he understood his rights to counsel but said
he was not drinking, before ultimately providing the name of a lawyer, “labr”,
of toronto. mr. pentland could not provide a full name or a phone number. cst.
vachon acknowledged this request and indicated mr. pentland would be provided
the opportunity to call the lawyer. mr. pentland was then cautioned, read the
breath demand, and transported to the police detachment.

cst. vachon testified that at the detachment
booking area he again explained to mr. pentland his rights to counsel. mr.
pentland advised that he had made up the name ‘labr’. he said he did not have a
lawyer. cst. vachon then asked mr. pentland if he would like duty counsel
called on his behalf, or if he wanted to pick a lawyer of his choice. mr.
pentland declined to call or lawyer or to speak with duty counsel.

the audio/video recording at the detachment
which was admitted into evidence on consent confirms this exchange and offers
greater detail:
station officer:
…so when i read you your right to counsel, you only gave me one
name for your, for lawyers.
mr. pentland:
i do not have a lawyer.
station officer:
okay, so what was the first name that you gave? what? i can’t hear
you.
mr. pentland:
i made it up.
…
mr. pentland:
i don’t need a lawyer.
cst. vachon:
would you like to, would you like to speak with one? would you like to, would
you like for us to call duty counsel for you, which is free legal advice for
your, because it’s your right? and this is my third time telling you this. i
told you twice in the ambulance with ems. i’m telling you again, you gave me a
bogus name in the ambulance… that didn’t make any sense at all.... but again,
we are here right now. it’s your right. if you want to speak to a specific
lawyer, you have one?
mr. pentland:
i do not have one.
cst. vachon:
or ok, if you do not have one that’s fine. you can, we can try to
find a lawyer for you. you can choose.
mr. pentland:
why do i need one?
cst. vachon:
well, because right now you’re under arrest for impaired driving by alcohol.
when someone gets under arrest, it’s their right to speak, if they want to talk
to a lawyer or a duty counsel. we can call duty counsel for you if you’d like.
mr. pentland:
i don’t know what that is.
cst. vachon:
a duty counsel is another. it, it’s a lawyer and they can be from wherever for
free legal advice. so it is like another lawyer, they could be from wherever.
so they’ll, we call, we request for a lawyer – duty counsel – and they’ll call
us back if there’s someone available right away and you get to speak with them.
mr. pentland:
what’s the other option?
cst. vachon:
what’s that?
mr. pentland:
i said what’s the other option?
cst. vachon:
so you, you, what we’re gonna do is i’m gonna call the lawyer for, and i’m
gonna let you talk to a lawyer. i read your right to counsel, i provided you
with a number on there and that’s the number that we call for duty counsel.
would you like us to call them? would you like us to call that number for you?
it’s regulated by the ontario government. it’s a group of lawyers that are
free. you don’t want that?

a short time later, cst. joyal, the breath
technician, takes over for cst. vachon, and tells mr. pentland the following:
cst. joyal:
alright. i just want to go through a couple things here before we start. did you
want to speak to counsel at all? i just gotta re-read you the, um, other rights
to counsel. okay? right to counsel is your right, is your right to speak to a
lawyer, okay? i’m gonna read it to you.. okay?

cst. joyal then re-read the standard right to counsel
language, which, again, stipulates that mr. pentland can contact “any lawyer
[he] wishes” and references the availability of duty counsel. the exchange
continues as follows:
cst. joyal:
do you understand?
mr. pentland:
yes.
cst. joyal:
yes.
mr. pentland:
what if i don’t?
cst. joyal:
uh, i can explain it to you further.
mr. pentland:
can i call one?
cst. joyal:
that’s your right. how about we call you, if you don’t have a lawyer, we’ll
call you duty counsel. and worst-case scenario, you speak to that lawyer. it is
free. it’s for people who can’t afford a lawyer. don’t have a lawyer. it’s a
service provided by the province.
mr.
pentland:
i can afford one.
cst.
joyal:
okay.
mr.
pentland:
but do i wanna call one that?
cst.
joyal:
that’s up to you. you’re an adult. you need to choose.
mr.
pentland:
i’d rather call, call my father.
cst. joyal:
you, you can call a lawyer.
mr. pentland:
my father’s a lawyer.
cst. joyal:
is your father a lawyer?
mr. pentland:
yeah.
cst. joyal:
who’s your father?
mr. pentland:
dave (inaudible)
cst. joyal:
sorry?
mr. pentland:
dave.
cst. joyal:
dave who?
mr. pentland:
(inaudible)
cst. joyal:
so if you, if, if, if you’re gonna, if you’re gonna continue lying-
mr. pentland:
-i’m not. it’s not a lie.
cst. joyal:
-you’re gonna be charged. well is he a lawyer or not?
mr. pentland:
it doesn’t matter. i’m not calling a lawyer.
cst. joyal:
you’re not calling a lawyer?
mr. pentland:
no.
cst. joyal:
okay. that’s fine. okay. so you don’t wish to speak to a lawyer then? okay.
mr. pentland:
at this time, no.
cst. joyal:
at this time, no. okay, alright.
(brief pause)
mr. pentland:
in the future, yes.
cst. joyal:
what’s
that? sorry?
mr. pentland:
i said in the future, yes.

these exchanges, considered in their entire
context, including the previous discussion in the ambulance, do not give the
impression that mr. pentland’s options were improperly limited. it may have
been beneficial for cst. vachon to respond to mr. pentland’s question about the
“other option” by reminding him again of the option to contact other counsel.
it would have been open to either officer to suggest methods of considering
other counsel, such as a local list, a phone book, or an internet search. but
the officers were not obligated to take such steps. an accused has a duty to be
reasonably diligent in attempting to contact counsel:
r. v. willier,
2010 scc 37, at para.
33. here, mr. pentland was advised multiple times that he
had the right to contact a lawyer of his choosing. he responded that he did not
have a lawyer. he was told the police could try and find a lawyer for him. mr.
pentland did not pursue that suggestion. he was clearly advised many times
about the availability of duty counsel, but he did not accept that offer. he
was reminded of the various options when cst. joyal re-read the standard right
to counsel language.

i further reject the notion that mr. pentland
sought to contact his father as a conduit to obtaining the name of a lawyer.
had mr. pentland communicated he wished to contact his father for this purpose,
this may have triggered a further obligation on the police: see
r. v.
pileggi,
2021 onca 4. but the evidence shows mr. pentland initially told
police his father was a lawyer. on being pressed, he obfuscated, before telling
police that it did not matter because he was “not calling a lawyer.” this
exchange placed no obligation on police to continue to make inquiries of mr.
pentland to implement his s. 10(b) right.

i am satisfied that mr. pentland understood his
proper options. he clearly knew he could choose a lawyer. he was not steered
inappropriately or given a false impression of his choices. he had given the
false name of one lawyer, and had offered up another, a family member, which he
retreated from when pressed on whether that person was a lawyer. he firmly
conveyed that he did not wish to call a lawyer at that time. i reject this
ground of mr. pentland’s
charter
application.
2.6
charter
remedy

having found no
charter
breach, there is
no need to consider remedy.
2.7 identity
and proof of care and control

as an essential element of both offences, the
crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. pentland was in care and
control of a motor vehicle. practically speaking, the crown must prove mr.
pentland was the driver of the crashed vehicle (the “mvc driver”). to meet this
onus the crown must rely on the cumulative effect of evidence that begins with
mr. cuff and continues through to the arresting and assisting officers.

once mr. cuff witnessed the accident, he drove
about 20 feet further, saw a turnaround point, turned his vehicle around, and
drove to the crash site as quickly as possible, where he pulled over, put his
four-way lights on, and ran over to the other vehicle. he estimated this all
took place within approximately 30-45 seconds of the accident. the crashed
vehicle was in a ditch past the driveway it had hit. it was upright on its
passenger side. the mvc driver was crawling out of the vehicle. the mvc driver
was the only person in the vehicle. mr. cuff’s physical descriptions of the mvc
driver were limited to him being a “shorter man, kind of bald up top.” neither
of these quite generic descriptors is particularly helpful to the crown, but
each is consistent with mr. pentland’s appearance.

a dog was present in the vehicle. mr. cuff
testified that the mvc driver seemed more concerned about his car and his dog
than himself. the individual proclaimed his connection to the vehicle when he
said “my car is fucked.” mr. cuff and the mvc driver had the dog on a leash,
petting him, making sure he was okay as well. mr. cuff did not notice any
injury, blood, or bruising on the mvc driver. he did not smell an odour of
alcohol. he did describe that the mvc driver was slurring his words a little
bit, though surmised that could have been from the shock.

mr. cuff was highly credible. he was quick to
say when he did not remember and was not sure. he was thoughtful. he made
concessions that could tend to benefit the defence, such as offering up an
alternate explanation for the mvc driver’s slurred speech. his description of
the scene of the accident was largely, with one exception to be addressed,
consistent with that of cst. vachon. i accept mr. cuff’s evidence as a
generally accurate, if incomplete account of the motor vehicle accident and
events at the roadside. i infer from that account that the individual mr. cuff
observed climbing out of the vehicle was the lone human occupant and was the
driver. there was no time for a second individual to exit the vehicle and
disappear from the scene before mr. cuff arrived. this hardly requires
corroboration but is nonetheless strengthened by the fact that the mvc driver
refers to the crashed vehicle as his car, and expresses only concern for the
canine occupant, rather than another person. there simply was no other person.

cst. vachon’s and cst dokis’s evidence confirms
that the man mr. cuff interacted with at the roadside was the very same man
they interacted with in the ambulance and police detachment, and ultimately the
very same mr. pentland in court.

when cst. vachon arrived on scene, he noted a
black acura suv on its side. his evidence was that the vehicle was standing
upright on the driver’s side as opposed to the passenger side. this is the
difference in evidence i alluded to previously. as cst. vachon never approached
the vehicle to examine it closely, i prefer and accept mr. cuff’s evidence on
this point, though ultimately, the specific positioning of the vehicle is not a
material fact. cst. vachon noted tire tracks on the gravel shoulder leading
into the ditch and driveway culvert. cst. vachon spoke to one ambulance
attendant, then entered an ambulance. inside was a second ambulance attendant,
and another person who was seated on a bench being medically assessed. cst.
vachon asked that other person for his identification and name. that person
identified himself as michael pentland. cst. vachon later confirmed the
information he received by conducting a ministry of transportation query at the
police detachment which included a photograph. cst. vachon went on to arrest
that same person, who also appears on the in-car video which was made a trial
exhibit. cst. vachon recognized that individual as the accused in court, mr.
pentland. i draw the same conclusion in comparing the two.

cst. dokis testified that he arrived on scene at
the same time as cst. vachon. he approached a civilian witness who was holding
a german shepherd. i cannot rely on the hearsay utterances made to cst. dokis
that the dog belonged to the driver, who was in the ambulance. based on the
admissible evidence, however, the only reasonable inference is that individual
in the ambulance was indeed the driver who had the dog. this was a single
vehicle motor collision. there was one human occupant of the vehicle, and one
canine occupant. no person at the scene claimed ownership of the dog. no other
person but the individual in the ambulance would have been rendered
unavailable. cst. dokis testified that the civilian he spoke with, who had
taken temporary responsibility for the dog, was a municipal worker. this
corresponds strongly with mr. cuff’s evidence that he was in a work truck with
a colleague traveling between two sites: an arena and a cemetery, and that he
assisted with the dog. cst. dokis ultimately had to take steps to contact a
third party come and collect the dog. the only reasonable explanation for these
events is that the dog’s guardian was otherwise occupied, in the ambulance.
2.8 
impairment

the element of impairment is made out where the
evidence establishes, beyond a reasonable doubt, any degree of impairment by
alcohol:
r. v. stellato,
1994 canlii 94 (scc), s.c.j. no. 51. the following evidence,
which i accept, bears on the issue:
•
mr. cuff described mr. pentland’s vehicle following
closely—maybe five or ten feet away—before hearing a loud bang, then seeing in
his rear-view mirror the car flying in the air. before the accident, both
vehicles were traveling about 100 km per hour. the speed limit was 80 km per
hour. mr. cuff reasonably deduced that the vehicle had hit a driveway and was
forced upward. the driveway was built across a ditch. mr. cuff also described a
curve in the road at that point and indicated that the mvc driver simply did
not turn. the weather was clear. the road was in good, dry condition. there
were no traffic signals or signs in the immediate vicinity of the accident. a
strong inference is available that mr. pentland did not notice the curvature of
the road or did not react to it.
•
according to mr. cuff, despite the car appearing
very badly damaged, while waiting for emergency services to arrive, the mvc
driver kept saying “let’s just flip the car over, i’m going to drive it out.”
any reasonable observer of sober mind would see the absurdity of such a suggestion,
given the damage to and resting position of the vehicle. that mr. pentland made
such a suggestion is evidence his thinking was impaired.
•
mr. pentland had an odour of alcohol on his
breath in the ambulance following the collision. the odour of alcohol was also
observed at the police station by cst. joyal. odour speaks to the consumption
of alcohol, though not directly to the level of impairment, if any.
•
mr. pentland had red, glossy eyes, and slurred
speech in the ambulance. cst. vachon’s observations of slurred speech are
corroborated by mr. cuff’s evidence.
•
mr. pentland had a bac of 230 mg of alcohol in
100 ml of blood. absent expert toxicological evidence, i can draw no direct
inference from that as to the level, if any, of impairment. but it remains
some evidence that, prior to the testing, mr. pentland consumed alcohol:
r.
v. dinelle,
 nsj no. 246 (c.a.);
r. v. tusiuk,
 o.j. no.
802 (s.c.), at para. 4. the evidence further permits no reasonable inference
that mr. pentland consumed alcohol after driving but before testing.

while i did hear evidence from cst. vachon with
respect to mr. pentland stumbling after he left the ambulance, cst. dokis, who
was also present, made no such observation. mr. pentland was also under the
physical control of police at that time. i place no weight on this particular
evidence.

there may be alternate inferences, unrelated to
alcohol impairment, available with respect to several of these indicia. for
example, mr. pentland’s vehicle missing the turn in the road is something that
might, in isolation, be explained by distraction. certain observations, such as
slurred speech, could perhaps be attributable, in isolation, to a head injury
during the accident and airbag deployment. but, as in any criminal trial, i am
not to assess the evidence in a piecemeal fashion. the criminal standard of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt applies to the evidence as a whole, and not to
individual items of evidence. examining the totality of the evidence in this
case, there is only one reasonable conclusion: mr. pentland consumed alcohol to
a degree which impaired his ability to operate a motor vehicle, and which
resulted in his failing to notice or failing to react to the curvature in the
road, leading to the accident.
iii.
conclusion

the crown has proven the essential elements of
both offences beyond a reasonable doubt. mr. pentland is found guilty on both
counts.
released: june 4, 2025
signed:
justice g. jenner

the argument was framed using the language of “as soon as practicable,” but i
will employ the appropriate terms.