source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj375/2025oncj375.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. baulk, 2025 oncj 375
date: 
2025 07 14
court
file no.: newmarket 4911 998 23 91108180
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
timothy baulk
before
justice e. prutschi
heard
on june 23, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on july 14, 2025
cameron peters.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
christopher lutes............................................ 
counsel for the accused timothy baulk
prutschi j.:

in september of 2023 officers from two police
services were engaged in an undercover operation on various social media
platforms. posing as a 14-year old girl, a conversation began between an
undercover officer and timothy baulk who was operating under the username
gymteacher1.

the communications were sexualized from the
outset and evolved over the course of nine days. the tone of the conversation
was overtly sexual throughout with mr. baulk asking the ‘girl’ about her
virginity, her masturbatory habits, and other highly inappropriate topics. he
counselled her on one occasion on how to digitally pleasure herself, requested
photos of the girl in her underwear, and sent sexualized photos of himself.

mr. baulk was charged with several offences
including luring contrary to
section 172.1(1)
of the
criminal code. though
matters proceeded slowly through no fault of mr. baulk, he made it clear at a
very early stage of his intention to plead guilty to this offence.

both parties acknowledge that luring is an
extraordinarily serious offence that calls for a jail sentence, even for an
otherwise pro-social first offender like mr. baulk. the crown proceeded by
indictment and urges me to impose a sentence of 30 months while mr. baulk
argues that a 12 month sentence is appropriate.
principles of sentencing

sentencing is a highly individualized process
that must balance overarching principles which are often in conflict with each
other. this includes the primacy of denunciation and deterrence in the case of
sexual offences against children. these principles however do not entirely erase
considerations of restraint and rehabilitation, particularly for a first
offender.

that having been said, the repeated weight of
recent appellate authority directs that sentences for sexual crimes against
children, including luring, must rise to properly reflect the gravity of such
offences.

the fundamental purpose of a fit sentence is to
contribute to public safety and respect for the law through the imposition of a
just penalty that balances all the principles of sentencing. this is best
accomplished by a careful review of both the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances of a given case.
aggravating factors

child luring offenders hide behind the shield of
anonymity to target the vulnerability of children. the crime is both a
preparatory offence, capable of laying the groundwork for even more serious
abuses, and a serious violation of a child’s personal autonomy, exposing young
victims to sexualized conversations and imagery.

it falls squarely within the family of child
sexual offences that the supreme court of canada spoke of in
r. v. friesen

when
urging sentencing courts to prioritize denunciation and deterrence through
higher sentences. three years later the supreme court in
bertrand marchand

forcefully
underscored this approach again while explicitly stating that sentences for
child luring must increase. the ontario court of appeal has repeated this
message again and again and again over the last three years with its decisions
in
r. v. m.m.,
r. v. aguilar,
r. v. ritchie

and
r. v. m.v.
sentencing courts at the trial level must take notice. the message from
appellate courts has been clear, consistent, and undiluted: sentences for child
luring offences have been too short for too long. this must change.

the lives of children today are increasingly
lived online in worlds where they are disturbingly easy targets for exploitation.
the explosive growth of this phenomenon is not simply anecdotal but
frighteningly quantified by the community victim impact statement presented by
monique st. germain, general counsel for the canadian centre for child
protection. the evolution of child luring, and the increasingly sophisticated methods
and resources needed to effectively combat it, were laid out in detail by the
report of detective staff sergeant todd martin.

mr. baulk engaged in highly sexualized
conversations over a prolonged period of time lasting 9 days. though the
‘child’ on the other end of the conversation was a police construct, this is
the reality in the majority of child luring cases and does little to mitigate
the disturbing and highly aggravating conduct.

this was not an ‘age swap’ case where the interaction
began with a purported adult only for the officer to disclose a younger age at
a later stage. mr. baulk thought, from the moment the conversation began, that
he was communicating with a 14-year-old child. this did not dissuade him from exploring
sexually explicit scenarios with the ‘child’ including sending provocative but
non-nude images of himself and trying to draw out similar images in return.

the age gap of over 30 years between mr. baulk
and the ‘child’ is a further aggravating factor. this was not a case of a young
adult seeking out a victim only a few years his junior.

mr. baulk was a teacher at the time of this
offence and his online profile (gymteacher1) played off his real-life
occupation. the crown urges me to see his status as a teacher as an aggravating
factor, arguing that mr. baulk clearly should have known better and leveraged
his status as a way to gain trust and weaken the barriers that might have otherwise
existed. counsel for mr. baulk argues almost in reverse, noting that mr. baulk,
through his pre-sentence report (psr), demonstrated deep insight into the harm
his actions could have caused – insight gained from his years working with, and
advocating for, students in his classes. i view mr. baulk’s past career as a
teacher as a neutral factor, neither aggravating nor mitigating the appropriate
sentence.
mitigating factors

despite the seriousness of mr. baulk’s offence,
there are a number of important mitigating factors that need to be considered.
first, mr. baulk expressed his intention to take responsibility and enter a
guilty plea at a very early stage in the proceedings. at his sentencing hearing
he offered a sincere and articulate apology in which he recognized not just the
individual harm of his actions but the impact on the broader community,
including the police officers who investigated him. i accept his expression of
remorse as meaningful and genuine. it gives reason for optimism regarding mr.
baulk’s eventual rehabilitation.

mr. baulk’s actions have had a catastrophic
impact on his own life. he was fired from his teaching position and stripped of
any opportunity to teach again in the future. though he has been successful in
securing new employment as a cook, this comes at a dramatically reduced salary
and even this position is likely to evaporate as he serves out his jail
sentence. despite this, he received a very positive character reference from
his employer who was fully aware of the charge mr. baulk had pled guilty to.

his arrest and charge have also driven a chasm
between him and many of the most important people in his life. his marriage has
failed, and he has become alienated from his two children. many of his closest
friends have distanced themselves from him, though one trusted contact has
stood by him in the face of all the turmoil and provided a very positive
character reference.

mr. baulk received a positive psr in which he
expressed his willingness to engage in any counselling that was required of
him. this would build on psychotherapy that mr. baulk began shortly after his
arrest completing 22 sessions prior to his sentencing hearing.

throughout the extended time of his communication
with the ‘girl’, mr. baulk made no efforts to arrange an in-person meeting.
this is not a case in which the offender was arrested while attending a
location for the purposes of following through on an even more heinous sexual
offence. while not a mitigating circumstance, it is important to situate mr.
baulk’s conduct properly along the spectrum of child luring offences. his
intent appears to have been to engage in a distorted and dangerous sexual
fantasy relationship online, but never to take that relationship to an even
more disturbing conclusion.
application to the defendant

as my review of the aggravating and mitigating
factors suggests, the circumstances of mr. baulk’s case place him at the lower
end of the appropriate range for luring offences. however, it is abundantly
clear that this range must increase in accordance with the weight of appellate
authority to properly reflect the level of abhorrence and potential for harm
associated with the offence of child luring.

while counsel for mr. baulk provided a sampling
of cases supportive of sentences in the one-year range, these cases either
pre-date the most recent directives from appellate courts or are blind to them.
while trial-level sentencing courts are not well-situated to fix broad
categorical ranges, it is clear from
mv
that the top end of the
sentencing range for luring has reached 5 years. in my view, taking into
account the clear direction plotted through
friesen,
aguilar, ritchie,
bertrand marchand
and
m.v., the lower end of that range hovers
around 18-months.

bearing in mind the age gap and the prolonged
highly sexualized nature of mr. baulk’s conversations with the fictional child,
i find that the appropriate sentence in this case is 22 months in jail. that
sentence would have been higher, quite possibly into the penitentiary range,
were it not for the importance of mr. baulk’s guilty plea, his obvious
remorseful shame, and the insight he demonstrated into his conduct as
illustrated within the psr.

the warrant of remand will be endorsed with my
recommendation that mr. baulk serve his sentence at the ontario correctional
institute (oci) where he can obtain specialized treatment for sexual offending
while in custody.

the determination that a reformatory sentence is
appropriate also allows for the imposition of a probation order. this
supervision will assist mr. baulk in his transition from custody to a safe and
productive return to society and maximize his chances for successful
rehabilitation.

the probation order will be for a period of 18
months with the following terms in addition to all the statutory conditions:
•
report to your probation officer within 3
business days of your release from custody and thereafter as required;
•
reside at an address approved of by your
probation officer and notify the officer of any change of address within 24
hours;
•
attend for counselling as directed by your
probation officer and sign any releases necessary to permit monitoring your
participation and completion of such programs.

the following ancillary orders also apply:
•
dna (primary designated offence);
•
soira registration for a period of twenty years
in accordance with section 490.012;
•
i have considered the various options available
to me under
section 161
of the
criminal code.
i am aware of courts adopting
very different approaches to how such prohibition orders are crafted.
i have
attempted to strike a balance between proactive protection of vulnerable young
persons while leaving open a path to rehabilitation and societal functioning
for mr. baulk upon his release from custody. there will therefore be a prohibition
order pursuant to section 161(1) for 5 years following the completion of his
jail sentence prohibiting mr. baulk from:
o
seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment, whether or not the
employment is remunerated, or becoming a volunteer in any capacity, that
involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the
age of 16 years;
o
having any contact – including communicating by any means – with a
person who is under the age of 16 years, unless done while under the
supervision of a competent adult aware of this order; and
o
accessing, unless under the direct supervision of a competent adult
aware of this order, any social media sites, social networks, internet
discussion forums or chatrooms including – but not limited to – facebook, x
(formerly known as twitter), snapchat, tinder, instagram, whisper, whatsapp or
their equivalents or similar services.

i have considered the crown’s request for a
section 109 order addressing the possession of certain enumerated weapons. section
109(1)(a) applies where “violence was used, threatened, or attempted”. while
friesen
opens the door to expanding the scope of “violence” to include child
luring, in my view such an interpretation stretches the definition to its
breaking point and i find that it has no application here.

mr. baulk is stepping into custody today which
will inevitably lead to the loss of his employment. it will be challenging for
him to get back on his feet when the custodial portion of his sentence is
completed. i therefore waive the victim fine surcharge.
released: july 14, 2025
signed:
justice e. prutschi

2020 scc 9.

2023 scc 26.

2022 onca 441.

2022 onca 353.

2023 onca 53.

2023 onca 724.