source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj542/2025oncj542.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. r.k.1,
2025 oncj
542
date: 2025 10 10
information no.: 998 24 12101077
central west region - burlington
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
r.k.1
before justice brian g. puddington
reasons for judgment on a directed verdict application
released on october 10, 2025
s. hamilton........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
g. henderson........................................................................ counsel
for the accused r.k.1
contents
facts..
1
analysis..
2
the directed verdict application..
2
section 162.1(1) –
publication,
etc., of an intimate image without consent
2
the surreptitious photo of r.k. in the bra.
3
the digitally altered photo.
5
conclusion..
6
puddington j.:
facts

r.k.1 is charged with one
count of publishing, distributing or transmitting an intimate image of a
person, to wit, his wife r.k., knowing that she did not give her consent to do
so, contrary to
section 162.1(1)
of the
criminal code.

r.k. and their daughter
p.k. were the only two witnesses for the crown at this trial. they testified
that they discovered that their father had opened a snapchat account and sent
various photos of r.k. to an unknown male.

while some of those
photos were of r.k. wearing clothes, there were two where she was in a state of
undress. in one, she was only wearing a bra. in another, it appeared that she
was completely naked with her breasts exposed. when testifying, r.k. stated
that the one of her in the bra was in fact her, while the photo with the
exposed breasts was fake, and was her head digitally manipulated to be on top
of a naked body that was not her own.
analysis
the
directed verdict application

at the close of the
crown’s case, mr. henderson brought a motion for a directed verdict (also known
as a “no-evidence” or “non-suit” motion). in making such a motion, the accused
asserts that the prosecution has failed to make out a
prima facie
case
to meet and he should therefore be acquitted without having to decide whether
or not to call evidence.

the test for a directed
verdict was articulated by the supreme court of canada in
united states of
america
v.
sheppard,
1976 canlii 8 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 1067 (s.c.c.),
where the
court held that a trial judge must decide “whether or not there is any evidence
upon which a reasonable jury properly instructed could return a verdict of
guilty”. the court elaborated on this
test in
r.
v.
monteleone,
1987 canlii 16 (scc),

2 s.c.r. 154 (s.c.c.)
as follows at paragraph 8:
where there is before the
court any admissible evidence, whether direct or circumstantial, which, if
believed by a properly charged jury acting reasonably, would justify a
conviction, the trial judge is not justified in directing a verdict of
acquittal. it is not the function of the trial judge to weigh the evidence, to
test its quality or reliability once a determination of its admissibility has
been made. it is not for the trial judge to draw inferences of fact from the
evidence before him. these functions are for the trier of fact, the jury.

the existence of some
evidence on every essential element will result in a dismissal of the directed
verdict motion. the assessment of the evidence will vary, however, depending
on whether the crown’s evidence is direct or circumstantial. where there is
direct evidence on each element of the offence, no weighing of the evidence
will be required by the trial judge. where the crown’s case involves
circumstantial evidence, the trial judge must engage in a limited weighing of
the evidence to determine whether the evidence can reasonably support an
inference of guilt.
section
162.1(1) –
publication, etc., of an intimate
image without consent

the
offence
in question in this case is contained in
section
162.1(1)
of the
criminal code:
162.1 (1)
everyone
who knowingly publishes, distributes, transmits, sells, makes available
or advertises an
intimate image
of a person knowing that the
person depicted in the image did not give their consent to that conduct, or
being reckless as to whether or not that person gave their consent to that
conduct, is guilty
(a)
of an indictable offence and liable
to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years; or
(b)
of an offence punishable on summary
conviction.

“intimate image”
is defined in section 162.1(2) as
a visual recording of a person made by any means
including a photographic, film or video recording,
(a)
in which
the person is nude, is exposing
his or her
genital organs
or anal region or
her breasts
or is engaged in explicit sexual activity;
(b)
in respect of which, at the time
of the recording, there were circumstances that gave rise to a reasonable
expectation of privacy; and
(c)
in respect of which the person
depicted retains a reasonable expectation of privacy at the time the offence is
committed.

it is therefore an
essential element of the offence charged in this case that the photo(s) in
question be, in fact, an “intimate image”. there is no issue on this
application for a directed verdict with respect to whether r.k. had a
reasonable expectation of privacy and retains a reasonable expectation of
privacy in the image of her in a bra. her evidence is that she was unaware of
that photo being taken and did not consent to it being distributed. obviously,
in these circumstances, a person would have a reasonable expectation of
privacy.

there are two issues,
therefore, for me to decide on this application.
1)
is the image of r.k. in
her bra, which was allegedly taken surreptitiously and distributed, a photo where
“the person is nude”, is exposing “his or her genital organs or anal region” or
“her breasts” or is engaged in explicit sexual activity; and
2)
is the digitally
manipulated image a photo where
the person
is nude or exposing
her
genital
organs or breasts, thereby meeting the definition of “intimate image”
the
surreptitious photo of r.k. in the bra.

exhibit 2 at the trial are
snapchat messages allegedly sent by mr. r.k.1 to the unknown male. p.k., mr.
r.k.1’s daughter, testified that she saw these images on her father’s phone in
what was apparently his snapchat account. for the purposes of the directed verdict
motion, the crown has called sufficient evidence that mr. r.k.1 “distributed”
or “transmitted” the images contained in those messages. the defence, on this
motion, does not appear to dispute that. this does not mean, of course, that
it has been demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt that he distributed them. it
only means that the crown has introduced enough evidence on this element of the
offence to get past the motion for a directed verdict. as mentioned, the
dispute arises as to whether those images are “intimate images”.

while several of the
photos are of r.k. in clothing, there is one, on pages 7 and 8 of exhibit 2,
where r.k. identified herself as being in a bra in their bathroom. in that
photo, her face has been concealed with scribbling over her face. her breasts
are fully covered in the photo, albeit, she clearly appears to be in a bra or
at least a top that shows a significant portion of her breasts.

section 162.1 is still
a relatively new provision, and few cases have dealt with the definition of
“intimate image”. mr. henderson, on behalf of mr. r.k.1, provided
the case of
r.
v. winsor,
2024 abcj 5. in that case, the accused was found not guilty
under this section, as the crown had not proven that the complainant was
“nude”. while the accused’s actions were deplorable, when he took photos of
her, she was able to cover her body with clothing as she was getting dressed.

interestingly,
the
alberta court of justice in
winsor
found at paragraph
44
of the decision
that “a photograph of someone in their underwear would not fall under the
provisions of section 162.1, regardless of how much or little the underwear concealed
or revealed.”

in
r. v. verner,
2017
oncj 415, an ontario decision, the image in question met the definition of
“intimate image”, as it depicted the complainant at a time when she was having
sex with the accused. she was also “nude” in the image, though you could not
see her genital organs, anus or breasts.
verner
is a helpful decision,
in that it finds (and i agree) that the definition of “intimate image” in
section 162.1(2)(a) is not conjunctive, but rather disjunctive. the court
finds at paragraph 43:
i read this section
disjunctively. in other words, the offence could be committed in one of
three ways; where the person is nude; where the person’s genital organ, anal
region or breasts are exposed; or where they have engaged in explicit sexual
activity.

more recently,
the
quebec court of appeal in
r. v. malogrosz,
2025 qcca 667
(a decision i
could only find in french), dealt with the definition of an intimate image. in
that case, the complainant took
a selfie
of herself posing in front of a mirror and showing her upper body, from the
bottom of her chin to the top of her thighs, completely undressed. her right
arm is positioned to hide her breasts, while her left hand holds the phone she
used to photograph herself. the lighting makes it impossible to discern her
genitals.

the quebec court of appeal found
that, whatever the applicable test, the court had no trouble concluding that it
has been met because, from the perspective of the potential violation of
intimacy, integrity, autonomy, and dignity of the person at issue, there is no
material difference between an image showing her completely bare and the image
in dispute showing her to be bare down to her upper thighs. the judge was therefore
right to find that the image at issue was an intimate image.

in
malogrosz,
the complainant was completely nude, but covering herself. it appears from
that decision, therefore, that the photograph met the definition of intimate image
because the complainant was “nude” in the photo.

r.k. is not nude in the
photo, nor is she engaged in explicit sexual activity. the question that
remains, then, is whether her breasts are “exposed” for the purpose of the
definition. i find that they are not.

in my view, while taking a photo
of someone, without their knowledge in their underwear and sending it to
another person is disgusting and disgraceful, it does not meet the clear
definition of “intimate image” as outlined in
section 162.1
of the
criminal
code. had parliament intended the definition to include photos or videos
of people in their underwear, it would not have been so specific in its definition
as to require the person to be nude or to have their genitals or breasts
exposed.

it is also clear from
the reading of the definition that the word “exposed” is meant to mean “without
clothing”. if the definition were interpreted too broadly, to include
situations where the breasts or genitals are partially clothed, then it becomes
difficult to understand where the criminal liability starts and where it ends. 
for example, a low-cut shirt or bikini may expose part of the breasts. would
these be considered intimate images, whereas a tight shirt or full piece
bathing suit would not? this level of ambiguity is not appropriate or
workable for an offence that attracts a potential criminal record or jail
time. it is for this reason that a strict reading of the section is required. 
“exposed”, therefore, should be read to mean that the body parts at issue are
bare and not covered by any clothing.

given that r.k. is not nude in the
photo, nor are her breasts exposed, the photo in this case does not meet the
specific definition of “intimate image” required by parliament.
the
digitally altered photo.

as noted, there was
also a photo in exhibit 2 where r.k.’s head was placed on a nude body that was
not hers.

this photo similarly does
not meet the definition of “intimate image”. the reason being, in short,
because it is not
her
nude body and, it is not
her
breasts – both
of which are necessary to meet that definition.

if this type of photo
were meant to be captured by this section, parliament would have specifically done
so.

an image of a person’s actual
exposed genitals or breasts or naked body carries with it a specific level of integrity
and privacy. this is not to say that a fake image does not cause harm and embarrassment,
but that harm is not captured by the current provisions under
section 162.1. 
again, it is clear from the definition of intimate image that parliament set
out to protect “the person” from having nude photos of themselves distributed, or
having “his or her” genital organs or anal region or “her”
breasts made
public without their consent.

parliament did not seek
to capture fake images in their definition of “intimate image”. if they had,
they would not have used the words “the person” or “his or her”.

given that the photo in
question is clearly not a photo of r.k.’s nude body, or
her
breasts, the
photo does not fall within the definition of intimate image.

none of this is to say
that creating and distributing these fake images is not morally reprehensible
and, frankly, obscene. it may be that parliament will turn its mind to
criminalizing this conduct in the future. i will note that in the first
reading of the proposed
online harms act,
an act that has not become
law, the drafters proposed defining “intimate content communicated without
consent” as:
(a)
a visual recording, such as a photographic, film or
video recording, in which a person is nude or is exposing their sexual organs
or anal region or is engaged in explicit sexual activity, if it is reasonable
to suspect that
(i)
the person had a reasonable expectation of privacy at
the time of the recording, and
(ii)
the person does not consent to the recording being
communicated; and
(b)
a visual recording, such as a photographic, film or
video recording,
that
falsely presents in a reasonably convincing manner a person as being nude or exposing
their sexual organs or anal region or engaged in explicit sexual activity,
including a deepfake that presents a person in that manner, if it is reasonable
to suspect that the person does not consent to the recording being
communicated.‍
(emphasis
added).

this proposed language
appears to be, at least in part, an acknowledgment by parliament that the
legislation as currently contained in section 162.1(2) does not address fake
images.

parliament may also
expand the offence of distributing intimate images to include the
non-consensual distribution of people in their underwear. but as i already
found, as the section currently stands, it specifically requires the person to
be nude or for the breasts to be “exposed”. for the reasons given, neither of these
apply to the photo of r.k. in her bra.
conclusion

on this motion for a directed verdict, i
find that the crown has not shown some evidence of an important element of the
offence – that the images in question were “intimate images” as defined in the section. 
it may be that the proper charge in this case, with respect to r.k. in her bra,
would have been a charge of voyeurism pursuant to
section 162
of the
criminal
code.
but mr. r.k.1 was not charged with that offence, and there is
nothing to suggest that voyeurism is a lesser and included offence of
distributing intimate images under section 162.1.

while there is some evidence that photos were
sent under disturbing circumstances, those photos are not captured by the
definition of “intimate image” as it currently stands in the
criminal code,
and therefore there was no evidence called by the crown in this case upon which
a reasonable jury properly instructed could return a verdict of guilty.

i will conclude by saying that nothing in
these reasons should be read as saying that r.k. did not experience an
embarrassing and humiliating event. while mr. r.k.1 remains innocent and it
has not been determined he had anything to do with the images in question, the
fact remains that the photos somehow exist, and r.k. had to endure viewing and
describing them in a courtroom full of people. those photos may have also made
their way into the public domain. she was emotional in court, and rightfully
so.

while i am sympathetic to her, that
sympathy cannot play any role in my judgment. i must apply the law dispassionately,
and not try to shoehorn images into a definition simply because i find the
photographs deplorable.

the application for a
directed verdict is granted and mr. r.k.1 is found not guilty.
released: october 10, 2025
justice b.g. puddington