source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj524/2025oncj524.html

citation:
r. v. duke, 2025 oncj 524
court
file no.: 998-23-61101719
date:
october 6, 2025
ontario
court of justice
central west region
at orangeville
between:
his
 majesty the king
—
 and —
david duke
heard
before mr. justice richard h.k.
schwarzl
on december
30, 2024; april 23, august 6, and september 5, 2025
reasons released on october 6, 2025
mr.
vikramjeet aujla.............................................................................................. 
for the crown
ms.
kathryn doyle........................................................................................... 
for the defendant
schwarzl,
j.:
reasons for judgment
1.0: introduction
[
1.]
the defendant, david duke,
faces trial for the alleged offences of dangerous driving and assault causing
bodily harm, contrary to
sections 320.13(1)
and
267
(b) of the
criminal code of
canada.
[
2.]
there is only one issue for
each charge. with respect to the dangerous driving, the defence submits that
the crown has not met its heavy burden of proof that the driving was
“dangerous.” as for the alleged assault, the sole issue is whether the
defendant acted in self defence.
[
3.]
both parties agree that the
resolution, if any, of these two issues relies upon my assessment of the
credibility and reliability of the evidence as a whole.
2.0:
the charge of dangerous driving
2.1: the facts
[
4.]
the following relevant facts
are not in dispute.
[
5.]
december 2, 2023 at around
6:00 p.m., the weather on westbound hwy 401 and northbound hwy 427 was dark and
raining. the traffic was moderate to heavy both west and north. mr. jason
tremblay was driving with his girlfriend, kelsi francis, were driving in a
honda civic. they were driving from etobicoke to bolton to have dinner with
friends. as they turned north onto hwy 427 from the 401, tremblay noticed a
dodge ram driven by mr. duke. like tremblay, duke was driving to bolton and he,
too, was entering hwy 427 from the 401.
[
6.]
both cars were parallel to
one another going north. while each driver has a different memory of the
particulars, both drivers believed the other was trying to jostle for position
in the northbound lanes. tremblay felt that duke was being aggressive while
duke believed that tremblay was trying to prevent him from merging safely into
tremblay’s lane. what ever the cause, both drivers were clearly peeved with
the other as they continued northbound side by side. mr. duke testified that
he was aggravated, agitated, and annoyed by tremblay’s behaviour.
[
7.]
during the jockeying, each
driver rolled down his window. words and gestures were exchanged as they sped
north on the highway. tremblay claimed that duke careened into his car and
sideswiped his honda, whereas duke said that while they were close enough to
yell at each other, tremblay reached out and broke the passenger side mirror of
his pickup truck. each denied the claim of the other. what is undisputed is that
for a short time on hwy 427 these two drivers were mutually engaged in an unfriendly
competition for lane space. mr. duke testified that he was verbally
aggressive, pissed off, and upset with tremblay but denied he was angry.
[
8.]
mr. tremblay moved ahead and
began to drive away from the defendant. he said that mr. duke was tailgating
him and flashing the high beams of his truck while pursuing him, matching his
lane changes as they drove past the other traffic until tremblay turned off hwy
427 onto major mackenzie drive, some 20 plus kilometres from where they first
encountered each other. duke agreed that after their confrontation on
entering hwy 427, tremblay sped away. he agreed that he followed tremblay, who
duke said “was definitely trying to avoid me” by going in and out of traffic. 
duke acknowledged staying two or so car lengths behind tremblay while flashing
his high beams at speeds faster than the other traffic. mr. duke said that he
wanted tremblay to pull over so that he could complain about the perceived
damage to his mirror, but tremblay refused. he agreed that he persistently
followed tremblay and flashing his high beams close behind him while “still
pissed” until they both exited onto major mackenzie drive. in summary, mr.
duke followed tremblay on a 400 series highway for many kilometres at high
speeds close to tremblay’s honda while flashing his high beams into tremblay’s
eyes while his upset with the purpose of confronting him for the earlier
encounter.
[
9.]
a short time later, the vehicles
met at the intersection of albion and queensgate in bolton where they stopped,
got out and confronted each other face to face. i will come back to what
happened at this intersection later in my reasons.
2.2:
positions of the parties
[
10.]
the defence argued that while
mr. duke’s driving was not ideal, it did not rise to the level of a “marked
departure” for someone in his circumstances. they submit that his driving may
have been careless, but it was not criminal.
[
11.]
the prosecution submitted
that when taking the facts as set out above, and even on taking mr. duke’s
testimony in isolation from the rest of the evidence, the crown has met its
burden of proof on the dangerous driving charge.
2.3:
applicable legal principles
[
12.]
with respect to the criminal
act (
actus reus
) of dangerous driving, it must be proven that the
driving itself, and not its consequences, when viewed objectively and in
context of the surrounding events, was dangerous to public safety. regard must
be given to all the circumstances including the nature, condition, and use of
the place at which the motor vehicle was operated, and the amount of traffic
that was, or might reasonably be expected, to be at that place:
r. v. roy,
2012 scc 26 (canlii),
 2 scr 60,
r. v. beatty,
2008 scc 5 (canlii),
 1 scr 49. speed, in and of itself, may, depending on all of the
circumstances, be proof of dangerous operation of a motor vehicle:
r. v.
marton,
 o.j. no. 3392 (s.c.j.);
r. v. laverdure,
 o.j.
no. 3595 (c.a.).
[
13.]
with respect to the mental
element (
mens rea
) to be proven, there must be evidence beyond a
reasonable doubt that the driving represented a marked departure from the
standard of care that a reasonable person would have observed in the
defendant’s circumstances. absent direct evidence of the driver’s state of
mind, two questions should be asked. the first question is whether, in light
of all circumstances, a reasonable person would have foreseen or been aware of
the risk to public safety and taken steps to avoid it. if the answer to the
first question is yes, then the second question is whether the driver’s failure
to see and take steps to avoid the risk to public safety was a marked departure
from the standard of care expected by a reasonable person in the driver’s
circumstances:
roy, supra;
beatty, supra. if the answer to both
questions is affirmative, then then the mental element is proven. if the
answer to either question is no, then the mental element has not been proven.
[
14.]
evidence showing dangerous operation of
the vehicle may be a factor in determining the "marked departure"
fault element, but that evidence may not be enough standing alone. the trier
of fact must go on and examine all of the circumstances relating to the
defendant’s state of mind at the relevant time:
r. v. richards,
2013 onca 433 (canlii),

o.j. no. 2933 (c.a.).
[
15.]
momentary lapses of attention
or civil carelessness by a reasonably prudent driver cannot prove the mental
element:
beatty, supra;
roy, supra. nevertheless, driving in a
manner which is a marked departure from the standard expected of a reasonable
person can occur within seconds when considering all of the circumstances:
r.
v. willock,
2006 canlii 20679 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 2451 (ont. c.a.).
[
16.]
in summary, when considering the mental
intent element, the trial judge must explain how and in what way the
driving went beyond negligence or carelessness and reached the level of a
marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would have
exhibited:
roy, supra;
laverdure, supra;
r. v.
reynolds, supra.
2.4:
principles applied to the facts of this case
[
17.]
in light of facts, based
mainly on mr. duke’s evidence, i find that his conduct—driving at high speeds
on a dark and wet highway, following very closely, in and out of traffic, and
repeatedly flashing his high beams into the car ahead for nearly 20 kilometres while
angry and intent on confrontation—constitutes the act of dangerous driving and represents
a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe
in the circumstances. such behaviour is the very definition of “road rage”
which created a substantial risk to the safety of mr. tremblay, his passenger,
and other road users. his long-distance chase of tremblay at high speed,
aggressive tailgating, and use of high beams to intimidate or harass another
driver on a busy highway, compounded by adverse weather conditions, is not
merely careless but dangerous.
[
18.]
therefore, i find that mr.
duke's actions meet the threshold for dangerous driving as defined by law. his
conduct went well beyond a momentary lapse or error in judgment; it
demonstrated a willful disregard for the safety of others. the evidence
supports a finding of guilt on the charge of dangerous driving.
[
19.]
consequently, there will be a
finding of guilt on the charge of dangerous driving.
3.0: 
the charge of assault causing bodily harm
3.1:
the facts
[
20.]
shortly after the chase on
hwy 427, both vehicles turned off the highway and proceeded towards bolton.
tremblay and francis were heading to friends for dinner; duke was going home.
[
21.]
while there is a dispute
about the specifics, upon assessing the whole of the evidence i find as a fact
that both cars found themselves at the intersection of albion and queensgate in
bolton. aware that mr. duke was behind them, tremblay pulled over to the
shoulder whereas duke stopped on the road. he agreed that he had no reason to
turn onto albion other than to confront tremblay and that he “was still pissed”
at tremblay but was emphatic that he was not looking for a fight.
[
22.]
the two men got of their
vehicles, but it is unclear who got out first. tremblay recalled that duke walked
towards him, and he punched duke in the face before any words were spoken
because he said he was afraid duke would attack him. duke testified that after
checking the side mirror tremblay came at him and sucker punched him in the
face. both men went to the ground and wrestled. other than tremblay’s punch
it is unclear if either punched or kicked the other after they fell together.
[
23.]
during the fracas, mr.
tremblay’s right tibia and fibula both broke just above the ankle, resulting in
the need for surgery to repair the injury and months to recover. mr. tremblay
was not sure how his leg was injured. a bystander separated duke and tremblay at
which point duke took off in his pickup truck.
3.2:
positions of the parties
[
24.]
the defence submitted that
given that tremblay threw the first and only punch there is a reasonable doubt
that the defendant was doing anything other than defending himself from
tremblay. they argued that while it is true that mr. duke wanted to confront
mr. tremblay, mr. duke’s intentions did not escalate from the verbal to the
physical. finally, they submit that the injury to mr. tremblay was accidental
and not caused by any deliberate act by mr. duke.
[
25.]
the crown argued that it is
beyond any doubt that mr. duke intended to pursue and confront mr. tremblay.
they point out that mr. duke admitted to being angry once he stopped and, they
say, he was spoiling for a fight as comeuppance to tremblay for what happened
on the highway.
3.3:
analysis
[
26.]
i find that mr. duke was
extremely perturbed by tremblay and was clearly the aggressor, which is
evidenced by his hot pursuit of him. i find that he confronted tremblay at the
roadside in bolton to seek satisfaction for the perceived slight on the
highway. i also find that mr. tremblay was angry with mr. duke and, despite
his better judgment and the advice of ms. francis, decided to get out of his
car. both men had enough of each other.
[
27.]
in the welter of conflicting
evidence about a matter that likely only took seconds to ignite and mere moments
to finally fizzle out, i am unsure whether the tumult that ensued was not a
consensual fist fight. on the criminal standard of proof, i am unable to find
the facts as suggested by the prosecution. in addition, i am unable to say
with confidence that the injury suffered by mr. tremblay was caused by any
felonious act or intent by the defendant.
[
28.]
as a result, i must render a
verdict of not guilty on the charge of assault causing bodily harm.
4.0:
conclusions
[
29.]
based on my reasons above, my
verdicts are as follows:
(a)
count 1,
dangerous driving: guilty; and
(b)
count 2, assault causing bodily harm:
not guilty. that charge is dismissed.
[
30.]
the parties are invited to
make submissions as to sentencing on the driving offence.
_______________________________
richard
h.k. schwarzl,
justice
of the ontario court of justice