source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj505/2025oncj505.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. woltz, 2025 oncj 505
date: 
2025 09 19
court
file no.: windsor 23-80200525
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
brian woltz
before
justice a. campbell
heard
on june 4, 5, 6, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 19, 2025
jayme lesperance............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
jessica grbevski..................................................... counsel
for the accused brian woltz
campbell j.:
introduction

brian woltz, (hereinafter “the defendant”), is charged with one
offence. he is alleged to have committed a sexual assault against the
complainant k.l. on or about the 25
th
day of november 2023.

the defendant entered a plea of not guilty and the trial proceeded on
june 4, 5, & 6, 2025.

the events that culminated in the charge against the defendant began on
friday november 24
th, 2023, when common law partners z.h. and k.l.
were at their home, and plans were made to attend the home of z.h.’s employer j.g. 
the defendant was invited to attend at the behest of his very close friend z.h. 
z.h. was determined to make efforts to secure additional employment for the
defendant. they attended j.g.’s address and alcohol was consumed by all
parties. the evening was largely uneventful, with everyone imbibing and
socializing. z.h., k.l., j.g. and the defendant spent several hours in the hot
tub at j.g.’s residence. in the early morning hours of november 25, 2025, k.l.
began to feel tired. she decided to attend the spare bedroom on the second
floor to sleep as she had done on past occasions. z.h., j.g. and the defendant
continued socializing and drinking in the hot tub. after some time, the defendant
announced he had to go to the bathroom, and he left the hot tub and entered the
home. k.l. awoke to use the bathroom on the second floor. she attended the
bathroom and left the door ajar. when she was finished, she proceeded towards
the door and was pushed back by the defendant entering. she was then accosted
by the defendant, who grabbed her arms, forcibly turned her around and
proceeded to have sexual intercourse with her for a very brief period. while
this was occurring, k.l. struggled to break free, and she was successful. she
ran down the stairs naked and fell on her buttocks. she managed to get up and
continued down the stairs, out the patio doors and into the hot tub. both z.h.
and j.g. described k.l.’s demeanour at that time as hysterical and they both
observed her crying. k.l. said she was raped. j.g. immediately went inside to
confront the defendant and found him with his head in his hands. j.g. asked the
defendant what happened, and he said he didn’t do anything. at first, z.h. remained
in the hot tub to console k.l., but then he attended inside the home and made
his way to the front door. the defendant left the premises and police were
called. the police arrested the defendant nearby while he was walking away,
noticeably intoxicated. expert evidence from the centre of forensic sciences
(cfs) was tendered and it was determined that k.l.’s dna could not be excluded
as a contributor to the dna that was found on a penile swab taken from the defendant.

admissions were made at the outset and throughout the trial and it was
agreed that there was no issue with date, time, jurisdiction, identification,
continuity of the penile swab, and the dna samples. nor was there any issue
with the admission of the photos of j.g.’s home and items found there. photos
taken of injuries suffered by k.l. to her arm, buttocks and her back were
admitted. the expertise of joanne cox, cfs forensic biologist was admitted. further,
the sexual assault examination report was tendered on consent of the parties
for the purpose of demonstrating the continuity of samples for dna comparison.
position of the parties

the crown submits that the evidence demonstrates beyond a reasonable
doubt the guilt of the defendant. the crown relies upon the testimony of k.l.,
z.h., j.g., constable ronal hazael, constable justin keating and the evidence
of the cfs expert joanne cox. nine exhibits were tendered during the trial.

the defendant completely denies that the sexual assault occurred. the defence
submits that based on the analysis required under
w.d., that the defendant
should be believed and acquitted. that in the alternative, if the defendant is
not believed, that his evidence should leave the court with reasonable doubt. 
as well, the defence submits that the remainder of the evidence does not prove
the offence beyond a reasonable doubt. the main points the defence relied upon
include:
1 – the defendant’s evidence
should be believed because his version of events coincides with the events as
described by k.l. until he exits the hot tub in the early morning hours.
2 – that both z.h. and j.g.’s
evidence was inconsistent on several points, including how they attended at j.g.’s
home, who was present within the home and what k.l. was wearing in the hot
tub.
3 – that the intoxication of all
the parties diminishes their reliability.
4 – the physical impossibility
of the assault and sexual assault as described by k.l.
5 – that the dna evidence is
speculative and could be the result of transference.
the law

the offence charged is sexual assault, contrary to
section 271
of the
criminal
code. the elements of the offence are as follows:
sexual assault,
section 271
(1) 
date and time
(2) 
jurisdiction
(3) 
identity of accused
(4) 
assault (application of force — s. 265)
(5) 
violation of sexual integrity
(6) 
complainant did not consent

as per
ewanchuk, a conviction for sexual assault requires proof
bard of two basic elements – consisting of the
actus reus
and
mens
rea.

the
actus reus, or unwanted sexual touching, is established by
proof of three basic elements: (1) touching (2) the sexual nature of the
touching and (3) the absence of consent. the latter is a purely
subjective determination and determined having regard to the complainant’s
state of mind at the time of the touching. in this regard, credibility must be
assessed by the trier of fact in light of all of the evidence. it is open to
the accused to claim that the complainant’s actions or words, before and during
the incident, raise a reasonable doubt as to her assertion that she, in her
mind, did not want the touching to take place.

the
mens rea
requirement consists of two components (1) an intention to
touching, and (2) knowing of or being willfully blind to the lack of consent,
either by words or actions, from the person being touched. consent is also an
integral component of the
mens rea
requirement but considered from the
accused’s perspective. where the evidence demonstrates that he believed the
complainant communicated consent to engage in the sexual activity in question,
the
mens rea
requirement would not be met, assuming the belief is not
tainted by an awareness of any of the factors in 273.1(2)

this
case requires me to make determinations on the credibility and reliability of
the witnesses, and i must consider the analysis set out by the supreme court of
canada in
r. v. w.d., 1991 1 scr no 742. the
w.d.
framework is
used by triers of fact in assessing the impact of defence evidence on the
ultimate question as to whether the crown has proven the case against the
accused beyond a reasonable doubt. the test is generally articulated as
follows:
firstly, if i believe the
exculpatory evidence of the accused, he must be acquitted;
second, if i do not accept the
evidence of the accused but am left with a reasonable doubt by it, he must be
acquitted; and
third, even if i reject the
accused’s evidence and am not left with a reasonable doubt by it, i must still
go on to determine whether the crown has proven the accused’s guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt based on the evidence that i do accept.

i
note that when evaluating the two accounts of the events, i am not engaging in
a contest of credibility where i must choose one version over the other as
truth (
r. v. graham,
2023 onsc 4300
). if i am unable to decide which
account to believe, the accused must be acquitted (
r. v. jhs,
2008 scc 30 (canlii), 2008 2 scr
152).

based
on the analysis below, i reject the defendant’s evidence. i found much of his
evidence illogical, inconsistent and contrived. i am not left with a
reasonable doubt by the defendant’s evidence. on the remainder of the evidence
that i do accept, i find that the crown has proven the defendant’s guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt.
the evidence
k.l.

the
complainant k.l. testified. she lives with her common law partner z.h., and they
have two children together, and k.l. has three other children from a previous
relationship. the children were aged between 1 and 10 at the time of the
incident. the plan to attend j.g.’s home was made earlier in the day on friday,
november 24, 2023. j.g. extended the invitation the day before. k.l. arranged
for the children to be cared for by their respective grandparents.

k.l.
testified that z.h. came home around 6 p.m. and he brought home a little bottle
of vodka. she had two mixed drinks, and she believed that z.h. may have only had
one because he was driving.

z.h.’s
friend c.w. was at their home, and c.w. picked the defendant up and brought him
back. z.h. drove everyone to j.g.’s and picked up another friend named a on
the way. they stopped at the lcbo, and k.l. believes z.h. purchased a six-pack
of twisted teas for her. she was uncertain whether the others purchased
anything for themselves.

when
they arrived at j.g.’s home, they hung around the island in the kitchen,
enjoying drinks. the others were talking about an upcoming roofing job. she
recalled that part of the conversation involved z.h. asking j.g. if the
defendant could assist on the next job.

a
and c.w. had departed earlier. j.g. then suggested they all go in the hot
tub. j.g. provided bathing shorts to z.h. and the defendant. k.l. wore her
bra and a pair of shorts that j.g. had left over from a girlfriend that lived
there.

everyone
attended the hot tub around 10:30 p.m. and they drank, conversed and listened
to music. at around 12:30 a.m., k.l. began to feel drowsy which was due to a
combination of her alcohol consumption, the heat from the hot tub and because
she routinely awoke at 5:30 a.m. with her children. she asked j.g. if she
could sleep in the spare bedroom upstairs and he agreed. z.h. assisted her
upstairs and helped her take all her wet clothes off. z.h. then returned
downstairs, and k.l. fell asleep. she identified exhibit #1 as a photo of the
sparsely furnished guest bedroom with an air mattress where she went to sleep.

at
approximately 1:00 a.m., k.l. attended the second-floor bathroom, and she left
the door ajar. she finished and walked towards the door as the defendant came
in wearing only his swim shorts. the defendant pushed the door causing her to
stumble back. k.l. said she was groggy. the defendant appeared extremely
intoxicated, like he did not know what was going on or what he was doing. no
words were exchanged. quickly, he grabbed her arms when they were face to face
and he shoved her towards the sink. k.l. was now facing the sink, and the
defendant was behind her. he was grabbing her arms, and she was trying to pull
away. k.l. was telling him to stop and let her go. the defendant then
penetrated her vagina with his penis. the entire interaction went on for
approximately a minute and a half to two minutes. she managed to get away and she
ran down the stairs naked, but she fell and bruised her buttocks. k.l. identified
exhibit #2 as photos that were taken the next day. the photos showed some bruising
to k.l.’s arm and a large bruise on the left side of her buttocks.

k.l.
was able to get up and ran out to the hot tub via the sliding patio doors. she
jumped into the hot tub with z.h. and j.g. she did not say anything, but she
was hysterical and crying. she said she had post-traumatic stress syndrome
from a previous incident, and she did not know what to do. she was not sure
what she told z.h. and j.g., but it involved the defendant forcing himself upon
her. approximately 30 seconds later, she observed the defendant go towards the
front door. she said z.h. got out of the hot tub and chased him, and j.g. was
already calling 911. the police arrived approximately 15 minutes later.

k.l.
identified exhibit #3, which included the clothing that she was wearing and
photos of the second-floor bathroom.

she
was asked to physically describe herself and the defendant at the time of the
sexual assault. she said she was five feet five inches to five feet six inches
tall, weighing 120 to 125 pounds. she described the defendant as having a
larger stature, approximately six feet tall, and weighing approximately 180 to
200 pounds.

k.l.
 described her level of intoxication as having “a good buzz” but not
intoxicated. on a scale of 1 to 10, she placed her intoxication level at a 5
or 6. throughout the night, she drank 5 to 6 twisted teas, and she may have
had a shot or two if she was offered. she observed that z.h. was not drinking heavily,
and she said he had a couple throughout the evening. she recalled that j.g.
and the defendant were drinking quite a bit.
j.g.

j.g.
is z.h.’s employer, and he testified. he invited z.h. and his wife k.l. over
to his home in leamington to discuss some business on friday november 24,
2023. z.h. asked if he could bring his friend brian woltz over and j.g. agreed. 
z.h., k.l. and the defendant arrived between 8 p.m. and 9 p.m. j.g. did not
believe that any other people attended except a man named c.w. who dropped them
off and stayed briefly.

upon
their arrival, the group were socializing and drinking in the home. within the
hour, they attended the hot tub outside. he recalled that z.h. and k.l. would
typically keep a bathing suit at his home, but he was unsure whether they
brought one on this occasion. he did recall that k.l. had a bathing suit on
while she was in the hot tub. j.g. loaned the defendant a pair of swim shorts. 
they used the main floor bathroom to change.

while
in the hot tub they were talking about work, listening to music and drinking. about
one or two hours later, k.l. said she was tired and wanted to go to bed. z.h.,
k.l. and the defendant then exited the hot tub and entered the home. after a
short period of time, z.h. and the defendant returned, and they consumed
another two or three drinks within a half hour period. j.g. then observed the
defendant exit the hot tub again and enter the house. at the time, he did not
think much of it.

j.g.
described seeing k.l. come through the patio doors “butt naked”, jumping into
the hot tub and crying hysterically. j.g. asked where brian was. he described
what happened as “…very not normal.” j.g. exited the hot tub and went looking
for the defendant while z.h. stayed with k.l. j.g. found the defendant inside
his home near the front door on the end of the steps of the staircase with his hands
on his head and shaking his head. j.g. asked the defendant what happened and
at first, he was silent, but then the defendant said “i didn’t do anything”
twice. at that time, j.g. believed the defendant was wearing the shorts he had
on in the hot tub.

j.g.
recalled that the defendant was standing by the door when z.h. confronted him
and asked, “what the fuck happened?” and the defendant replied, “i didn’t do
anything”. j.g. obtained a towel for k.l. and when he returned, he observed z.h.
running out after the defendant. when z.h. returned, j.g. asked k.l. what she
wanted to do, and it was decided they would call police. j.g. could not recall
if he or z.h. called police. the police arrived approximately ten minutes
after the call was made.

j.g.
could not comment on anyone being impaired by alcohol. j.g. would normally
have six or seven beers, and he described himself as a big guy who is not
affected by that amount of alcohol. j.g. said z.h. would have had a little
less than him. he was unable to comment on k.l. or the defendant’s consumption
of alcohol and he was only able to say that everyone was drinking. he was
unable to recall if any shots were consumed.
z.h.

z.h.
testified. k.l. is his girlfriend and the mother of their two children. he
described the defendant like a stepfather who is always there for him. z.h. and
k.l.’s children call the defendant “grampa”.

z.h.
testified that on friday november 24, 2023, he had called his boss j.g. earlier
in the day asking if they could come over and play pool and go in the hot tub. j.g.
agreed. at the time, z.h. was at his home with k.l. and the defendant. he had
picked up the defendant on an e-bike. z.h. was uncertain if a or c.w. were at
his house. z.h. and the defendant took the 4-wheeler and k.l. rode the e-bike
to j.g.’s house. z.h. said they did not drink before they attended. he was
not certain if they brought alcohol that they had from before or if they
attended the lcbo that day. they arrived at j.g.’s house sometime between 7
p.m. and 9 p.m.

when
they arrived at j.g.’s, they hung out for about an hour and a half and
discussed securing some work for the defendant. they congregated in the open
concept kitchen and living area where kitchen island and pool table were
located. k.l. wanted to go in the hot tub and j.g. provided z.h. and the
defendant with swim shorts. k.l. had her bikini with her. except for j.g.,
they all attended the main floor bathroom to change. j.g. attended his bedroom
to change.

they
all attended the hot tub at around 9:30 p.m. and there was music playing. they
talked about work. at around 1:30 a.m., k.l. announced she was tired, and z.h.
described her as looking drained and ready for bed. he assisted her upstairs
to the guest bedroom and j.g. and the defendant remained in the hot tub. he
believes k.l. took her bathing suit off and he gave her a kiss and he returned
to the hot tub.

j.g.,
z.h. and the defendant continued to drink and socialize in the hot tub until about
3 a.m. the defendant said he had to go to the washroom, and he went in the
house. z.h. did not recall how long the defendant was gone. z.h. then
observed k.l. running downstairs with something resembling a blanket and she was
naked. she jumped into the hot tub. she put her head in the corner and did
not say anything. z.h. went to her, and she yelled at him not to touch her. she
began screaming that brian had just raped her. j.g. then exited the hot tub. 
z.h. then asked her if she wanted him to chase the defendant, beat him or if
she wanted to go through the police and send him to jail.

z.h.
exited the hot tub and entered the house towards the front door, and he
observed the defendant at the end of the driveway. z.h. believed the defendant
was wearing the clothing he arrived in and not the shorts he was wearing in the
hot tub. he observed the defendant walking or running away. he went back in
the house to comfort k.l. z. h. could not recall if it was him or j.g. that
called police.

z.h.
agreed that everyone was drinking and that the hot tub amplified the effects. they
began drinking in j.g.’s kitchen. he was uncertain if k.l. was drinking
twisted teas and believed she was drinking smirnoff vodka. he had purchased a 26-ounce
bottle of vodka which was mixed with orange juice and a six pack of smirnoff
ice. z.h. said the defendant was drinking the most as he was a heavy drinker
for many years. he described the defendant as definitely more impaired than both
him and j.g.
pc ronald hazael

ontario
provincial police constable ronald hazael testified. he was dispatched at 3:26
a.m. for a sexual assault. information received from dispatch was that the
suspect, brian woltz, had just left, and he was wearing a black leather coat,
dark clothing and had long black hair in a ponytail. he and pc chauvin
observed the defendant walking on the sidewalk and he matched the description. 
pc chauvin also noted he was wearing dark pants and shoes. the officers confirmed
his identity, and they arrested him on an unrelated warrant. constable hazael
is a breath technician, and he noted the defendant was intoxicated and he
described him as “really drunk”. the officer smelled alcohol on the
defendant’s breath, he was mumbling his words, his speech was slurred, and he
was unsteady on his feet. once the defendant was secured in the police vehicle
he was given his rights to counsel, caution and he was re-arrested for sexual
assault. the officers seized his clothing and transported him to the opp
detachment.
pc justin keating

ontario
provincial police constable justin keating testified. he was also dispatched
at 3:26 a.m. and he was the first on scene at j.g.’s home. upon his arrival,
he observed alcoholic beverages on the kitchen island and counter, and bottles
near the hot tub. k.l. was standing with a towel covering the top portion of
her body with no other clothes on. he noted she was crying. he spoke to both
z.h. and j.g. and took statements from both. he attended the upstairs bedroom
and then the upstairs bathroom. he observed unflushed cigarettes and urine in
the toilet, a pair of pink women’s undergarments beside the sink and a wet
towel on the floor. he noted visible water on the wall and floor. he took
photographs of both rooms and k.l.’s clothing, filed as exhibit #3. he described
j.g. as very low level intoxicated and in a sense of disbelief.
joanne cox

joanne
cox is a forensic biologist from the cfs. she testified at the trial. her
statement of qualifications was filed as exhibit #5. on consent, she was
properly qualified to provide expert opinion on the examination of items for
the presence of blood, semen, and saliva, the interpretation of body fluid
testing and dna typing results in autosomal and ystr systems. she was also
qualified to prepare and provide forensic reports, and expert testimony
regarding body fluid identification and dna analysis, including deposition,
transfer and persistence of bodily fluids or dna. she had previously provided expert
opinion evidence in the same areas 55 times in both the ontario court of
justice and the superior court of justice.

four
biology reports were filed as exhibits #6 through #9. an interior vaginal swab
was taken from k.l. and semen was detected from one male. that sample was
compared to the defendant and z.h. and the defendant’s dna was excluded as the
source. z.h. could not be excluded as the contributor.

a
penile swab was taken from the defendant. there was a mixture of dna found
from two contributors on the swab, and k.l. could not be excluded as a
contributor. z.h. was excluded as a potential contributor. ms. cox was not
able to determine if the deposition of k.l.’s dna was as a result vaginal
secretions or another source, but she did indicate that bodily fluids would be
a rich source of dna.
brian woltz

at
the closure of the crown’s case, the defence elected to call evidence, and the
defendant testified. the defendant has known z.h. since he was a child. on
november 24, 2023, he and z.h. worked on a roof along with c.w. and another
male he did not know. they ended the day at around 5 or 6 p.m. he was dropped
off at his home and z.h. called him and asked if he wanted to go to j.g.’s
house and discuss the possibility of further work. the defendant agreed and z.h.
picked him up on an e-bike and they returned to z.h.’s home.

k.l.
and c.w. were there when the defendant and z.h. arrived. k.l. was the only one
drinking at that time. they were smoking weed and the defendant did as well. they
got into c.w.’s white ford truck, picked up a and then they went to the lcbo. z.h.
purchased a 26-ounce bottle of wiser’s for the defendant and a 26-ounce bottle
of vodka and some twisted teas. from there, they attended j.g.’s home.

when
they arrived, they were drinking and playing pool for a couple of hours. he
recalled that j.g., c.w., z.h., k.l. and a and the other male that he worked
with that day were present.

k.l.
 and z.h. decided they wanted to go in the pool. j.g. gave the defendant a
pair of swimming shorts with a string to tie them up. z.h., k.l., j.g. and the
defendant went into the pool. at the time, c.w. and a were playing pool and
sitting at the bar inside the home. he believes c.w. left at some time after
dark.

he
recalled that it was cold out and there was ice on the ground. they were in
the pool, drinking and talking about work that the defendant has done in the
past. he recalled they were in the pool for approximately three to four hours
and that no one left except to go to the bathroom or to get a drink near the
pool.

he
recalled that k.l. was wearing a bathing suit and z.h. and j.g. were wearing
swim shorts. he believed that z.h. and k.l. went upstairs for a while,
although he did not observe them when they did. he then observed z.h. come
back alone. he was not aware of where k.l. went, and he recalled that c.w. and
“them” were still in the house.

at
some point, the defendant told j.g. and z.h. that he was going to the
bathroom. he attended the bathroom and changed his clothing because he was
freezing. he was now wearing grey and white under armor pants, adidas shoes, a
shirt, an anarchy sweater and a leather coat with red flames. when he exited
the bathroom, he observed k.l. standing at the patio door with a towel wrapped
around her. he went out the front door and sat on a step with a smoke in his
hand.

a
short time later, z.h. came out and threw him to the ground and said “go”. he
replied “what” and “i didn’t do anything”, and z.h. repeated “go”. z.h. then
grabbed him and threw him on the grass. the defendant then left, walking
away.

the
defendant and c.w. were drinking wiser’s mixed with dr. pepper. he described
his intoxication as “a little bit g(n)arly”, resulting from him smoking weed,
drinking and being in a hot tub for four hours.

k.l.
was drinking twisted teas and taking shots of vodka and any other shots that j.g.
had. he testified that k.l. liked drinking, and she drank too much. he said
that z.h. told him not to give her any alcohol on many occasions. he described
her as really drunk.

j.g.
was drinking mixed whisky drinks. z.h. was not a heavy drinker, and his
drinking was not heavy that evening. the defendant observed that j.g. had a
whole bunch of booze. he said, “we were all pretty drunk”.

in
cross-examination, the defendant agreed there were no issues or problems
between him, z.h. and k.l. he admitted that he had quit drinking a year prior and
that he used to be an alcoholic, but that he was drinking on the evening in
question and sharing a bottle of wiser’s with c.w.

he
denied that he sexually assaulted k.l., and he implied that it could have been
someone else. when he was confronted with the cfs evidence from his penile
swab, he suggested that he should not have worn someone’s else’s shorts.
analysis

w.d.
requires that i begin with my assessment of the defendant’s evidence.

the
defendant’s evidence was internally and externally inconsistent. further, i do
not find the defendant’s evidence credible or reliable. on the second branch
of
w.d.,
i find that the defendant’s evidence does not leave me with a
reasonable doubt.

the
defendant was cross-examined for some time on his alcohol consumption and his
issues with alcoholism. his answers were internally inconsistent, contradictory
and evasive. he admitted in cross-examination that he quit drinking a year
prior to the evening in question and that he used to be an alcoholic, but he
was pressed by the crown on the obvious contradiction in his evidence on this
point. in response, he said “yeah, have a couple of drinks, casual drinking
shit” and “i drank a couple of drinks once in a while, not all the time.” on
many occasions, he denied that he was impaired on the evening in question, but
then he would admit that he was combining his drinking with smoking marijuana
on two occasions, and that the extended time in the hot tub likely contributed to
his impaired state.

the
crown continued questioning the defendant on his impairment and his
observations of the others level of impairment on the evening in question. he
became evasive and his answers were contradictory. on at least two occasions, the
defendant lashed out. the first time he did so, he said “well, i don’t know. 
i don’t even fucking know what you want.” on the second occasion, he denied that
he was an alcoholic despite his previous admission that he had been an
alcoholic and quit drinking. in response to the crown’s continued questioning
on the topic, he said “well, that’s what you’re fucking assuming, and it’s
pissing me off.” the defence submits that defendant responded in this way
because it is a sensitive topic for him. i view his responses as a frustrated
attempt to thrust an illogical point of view on a straightforward series of
questions.

externally,
the defendant’s testimony regarding his impairment was inconsistent and it did
not align with the observations of almost every other witness. z.h. recalled
that the defendant was drinking the most on the evening in question. he
described the defendant as a heavy drinker for many years and that defendant
was more impaired than j.g. and him. k.l. also observed the defendant drinking
quite a bit. k.l. testified about encountering the defendant in the bathroom
and she said the defendant looked extremely intoxicated, like he didn’t know
what was going on or what he was doing. constable hazeal, a breath technician,
described the defendant as “really drunk” when he encountered him. the
confluence of this evidence completely contradicts the defendant’s poor
attempts to minimize his drinking and impairment on that evening.

the
defendant’s evidence demonstrated an illogical and mostly unprompted need to overemphasize
k.l.’s drinking and impairment. he testified that he, k.l., z.h., and c.w. smoked
a marijuana joint before attending j.g.’s home, and k.l. and z.h. denied this. 
at the beginning of the defendant’s cross-examination, the crown was confirming
that there were no issues between the defendant, k.l. and z.h., and that he was
considered part of the family. the defendant agreed. then, unprompted, the
defendant said, “she just liked drinking” and “she drank too much”. he followed
this by saying that z.h. told him on many occasions not to give k.l. alcohol. later
in cross-examination, the defendant was asked about k.l.’s level of
intoxication and he said she was really drunk and that she was drinking vodka, twisted
teas and shots. when the crown inquired if he could really tell how much she
had to drink he said, “why would i keep track?”. when the crown suggested he
did not know how much she drank, he replied “guess not”.

in
response to key questions regarding his knowledge of and potential attendance to
the bathroom upstairs where the sexual assault occurred, he was equivocal and
unable to answer directly. when asked how many bathrooms he was aware of in j.g.’s
home, he said, “one, as far as i know”. i note that he was asked twice in
examination in-chief if he had ever attended the upstairs bathroom. instead of
clearly answering in the negative, he said, “not that i recall, no” and “not
that i recall”. z.h. testified that he gave the defendant a tour of the
upstairs when they arrived. in cross-examination, the crown asked the
defendant if this occurred and he said, “not that i recall”. the defendant
then admitted to being shown the main floor. the crown asked the defendant if
he denied ever going upstairs, the defendant replied “i cannot – cannot tell
you that. i don’t remember. all i know is i was playing pool and all that,
down at the main floor.” the crown asked again if at any point he attended the
upstairs of the residence and he responded, “i didn’t go upstairs as far as i
know”. when the crown noted the uncertainty in the defendant’s responses and
the defendant said, “no, i didn’t go upstairs…if that’s what you want.” the
defendant’s answers to these questions denotes clear uncertainty.

the
defendant completely denied that the sexual assault occurred, and he confirmed
that there was no conflict between him, z.h. and k.l. the defendant agreed
that he and z.h. were very close and that he was part of z.h. and k.l.’s
family. he agreed that while he was at j.g.’s, z.h. was trying to help him obtain
more employment. however, the defendant testified that at the end of the
evening, he suffered an unprovoked attack by his extremely close friend and quasi-family
member, z.h. the defendant did not provide any context as to why z.h. would
confront him, grab him and throw him to the ground and tell him to go. this
defies logic. based on the evidence of the defendant, z.h. and j.g., i can
surmise that some form of confrontation occurred. the defendant’s illogical
evidence on this point leads me to conclude that there was conflict, and that the
defendant made no effort to explain it.

he
was unable to answer the difficult questions posed to him about other key areas. 
he showed evasiveness and a lack of preparedness to answer questions about the
dna evidence and k.l.’s detailed allegation of the sexual assault.

in
the face of compelling circumstantial evidence that k.l.’s dna could not be
excluded as a source of the dna which found on the penile swab of his penis,
his denials rung hollow. his explanation was that he should not have worn
someone else’s shorts, implying that the presence of k.l.’s dna on his penis
was the result of transference. he initially denied suggesting that k.l. wore
the shorts that he was loaned by j.g., but then he waivered on his answers and he
suggested it again. this is despite the lack of any evidence that this
possibly occurred. i will further address the transference argument later in
my reasons.

the
crown then suggested that he sexually assaulted k.l., and the defendant responded,
“it wasn’t me”. the crown then asked the defendant if he was suggesting that
someone else committed the sexual assault, and the defendant replied “could
be. wasn’t – i wasn’t – wasn’t upstairs in the bathroom.” the trial evidence
provides no basis to suggest a third party was responsible and no third-party
suspect application was advanced by the defence.

the
defence suggests that the defendant is worthy of belief because his evidence
leading up to the point where he leaves the hot tub conforms with k.l.’s
evidence. even if this was true, which i find it is not in many respects, it
does not detract from the lack of reliability and credibility demonstrated by
the defendant’s evidence on the key aspects of this event. the defendant and k.l.
both testified that c.w. and a were present at j.g.’s home. they both recalled
that k.l. was drinking before they left for j.g.’s. they both testified that
they all attended the lcbo and z.h. bought twisted teas. they both testified
that a was picked up on the way. further, they both testified that they all
attended in one vehicle. however, they differ on the issue of whether they
smoked any marijuana. they differed on who picked up the defendant and brought
him back to z.h. and k.l.’s home. they differed on who drove to j.g.’s, with
the defendant indicating that c.w. drove his white truck and k.l. saying it was
z.h. who drove. they differed on what k.l. was wearing while in the hot tub.

i
conclude that the defendant was likely too impaired on the evening in question
to reliably remember the events. i also find that he is simply not credible,
and he was being evasive throughout his testimony. his evidence leaves me with
no reasonable doubt.

having
rejected the defendant’s evidence on the first and second branch of
w.d.,
i will now address the remainder of the crown’s evidence to determine whether they
have proven the offence beyond a reasonable doubt.

i
agree that both z.h. and j.g.’s evidence was externally inconsistent on several
peripheral issues. however, i disagree that these inconsistencies should result
in a finding that they were unreliable or lacking in credibility regarding their
key observations, particularly the post-offence demeanour of k.l. and their
observations of the defendant departing the home quickly.

z.h.
testified that there was no plan to attend j.g.’s home from the day before
november 24, 2023, which differed from k.l.’s evidence. he said that k.l.
brought her bikini and that she was wearing it in the hot tub, which differed
again from k.l.’s evidence. he said that he drove the defendant on his four-wheeler
to j.g.’s home and that k.l. took the e-bike, which did not accord with k.l.’s
evidence. he recalled that he brought a 26-ounce bottle of vodka and a six
pack of smirnoff ice, which differed slightly from k.l.’s recollection that
they stopped at the lcbo, and he purchased twisted teas for her to drink. he
did not believe that k.l. drank at their home prior to leaving, again differing
from k.l.’s evidence. he was unsure if c.w. or a were at j.g.’s home, again differing
from k.l.’s evidence.

j.g.
testified that he invited z.h. to his home on november 24, 2023, but k.l. said
it was a plan from the day before. j.g. was unable to recall the presence of a,
but he believed c.w. was in attendance briefly. he recalled that k.l. had a
bathing suit on. he testified that there was no one living with him in 2023,
but k.l. said she borrowed shorts from j.g., who had them left over from a girl
who lived there. he recalled an exchange of words between z.h. and the
defendant after the incident, but z.h. doesn’t recall saying or doing anything
to the defendant.

despite
these peripheral external inconsistencies, i believe both z.h. and j.g.’s
observations of k.l. in the immediate aftermath of the sexual assault. i have
no doubt, based on their evidence, that she exited the home naked through the
patio doors in the early hours of november 25, 2023, hysterical, crying and
making a complaint of sexual assault. i also believe that j.g. observed the
defendant with his head in his hands and that the defendant was initially
silent when he was asked what happened and that he finally responded by saying,
“i didn’t do anything”. further, i believe that both j.g. and z.h. made
efforts to confront the defendant, and that the defendant quickly fled the home
fully clothed. i have very little concern that their alcohol consumption
affected their ability to recall these core events.

i
find that k.l.’s overall credibility and reliability was exceptional. she fairly
admitted her alcohol consumption and her level of intoxication, but her
evidence was logical and showed no reliability issues. she was not shaken in
cross-examination at any point. her evidence was internally and externally consistent.
her post-offence demeanour, observed by both z.h. and j.g., demonstrates that
she was escaping the sexual assault that occurred 30 seconds prior. that
evidence is highly probative and bolsters her credibility. the photos taken
showed that she had bruising on her arm consistent with a struggle with the
defendant. the photos also showed the bruising on her buttocks from falling on
the staircase. further, her evidence is bolstered by the observations of both z.h.
and j.g. in the immediate aftermath.

i
also reject any suggestion that the dna evidence was a result of any spurious
hypothetical transference from a towel or the shorts the defendant borrowed
from j.g. according to the evidence of forensic biologist joanne cox, the dna evidence
could not exclude k.l. as the source of the dna found on the penile swab of the
defendant. ms. cox fairly agreed that the deposition of that sample could
conceivably have been the result of some form of innocuous transfer. however,
coupled with the evidence that i do accept, this is not a logical conclusion
and is speculative. the logical conclusion that is borne of this
circumstantial evidence, based on the primary facts that i do accept, is that
the defendant’s penis penetrated k.l.’s vagina. coupled with the testimony of
the witnesses, the dna evidence is highly probative and reliable circumstantial
evidence of sexual contact between them.

i
also reject the defence submission that the initial assault and sexual assault
as described by k.l. were anatomically impossible. the defence attempts to
shake k.l. in cross-examination on this point were not fruitful. k.l.’s
description of the defendant grabbing her arms while they were face to face and
forcing her to turn were detailed and vivid. she went on to describe that he
grabbed her arms from behind her and she was trying to pull away and telling
him to stop. the size difference between the two was compelling and i have no
concerns about whether the defendant was able to overpower her and quickly expose
his penis by pulling his swim shorts down. there was nothing in her
description that would cause me to question whether the events were physically
possible.
conclusion

i
reject the defendant’s evidence. as well, the defendant’s evidence does not
leave me with a reasonable doubt. i find that the crown has proven all the
essential elements of the sexual assault beyond a reasonable doubt.

as
a result, i find the defendant guilty of sexually assaulting k.l.
released: september
19, 2025
signed:
justice a. campbell