source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj113/2025oncj113.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. brown, 2025 oncj 113
date: 
2025 02 27
court
file no.: belleville 23-13102362
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
jeremy brown
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on february 14, 2025
oral
reasons for judgment rendered on february 14, 2025
written
reasons for judgment released february 27, 2025
kim beauchamp................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
david barrison.................................................................................. 
counsel for mr. brown
richardson j.:
introduction

the issue in this case is the appropriate sentence for a 25-year-old
man, with no prior record, who has been found guilty after trial of possession
of a firearm with an altered serial number, carrying a concealed weapon,
careless storage and knowledge of unauthorized possession of a firearm.

this case is complicated by the fact that before the offences
before me were committed, the accused had committed a homicide in omemee,
ontario. he was not, however, charged with that homicide until
after
he
was charged with the offences before me.

he has since pleaded to manslaughter and sentenced to the equivalent
of an eleven-year sentence.

the accused used a firearm to commit the manslaughter.
facts of the offences before me

on may 9, 2021, quinte west opp responded to an intimate partner violence
complaint on telephone road. after interviewing the two protagonists,
paige and mr. brown, the police determined that no offence had taken
place.

one of the attending officers was asked by larry, another
individual present, who was paige’s step-father, to go outside to speak about
something. once outside, larry gestured at the officer’s firearm and told the
officer that the accused “had one”.

the officer went downstairs and detained mr. brown, who was
seated on the bed next to paige, holding the couple’s baby. in the course
of the detention, paige asked mr. brown to give her a satchel/purse, that was
around mr. brown’s shoulder. she referred to the satchel as her
“purse”. the police, who were detaining mr. brown, refused to let him
relinquish custody of the purse/satchel to paige.

mr. brown was then handcuffed, taken upstairs in the house and
taken outside. once outside, in order to conduct a pat-down search, the
officers removed his handcuffs so as to take the satchel and set it on the
ground. in the course of doing so, the officers observed a butt of a
firearm sticking out from the satchel.

mr. brown was charged with a number of offences
including:
a)
being in possession of a firearm with a
tampered serial number contrary to
section 108(1)
(b) of the
criminal code;
b)
carrying a concealed weapon contrary to
section 90
of the
criminal code;
c)
possession of a weapon dangerous to the
public contrary to
section 88
of the
criminal code;
d)
careless storage of a firearm contrary
to
section 86(1)
of the
criminal code;
e)
unauthorized possession of a firearm contrary
to
section 91(1)
of the
criminal code;
f)
possession of a firearm without a
registration certificate contrary to
section 92(1)
of the
criminal code.

defence brought an application for a finding that in detaining
mr. brown and searching the satchel/purse, mr. brown’s rights under sections 8,
9 10(a) and 10(b) of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
were
breached and the firearm should not be admitted into evidence in the face of
those breaches as admission would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute under
section
24(2).

the crown conceded the breach of section 10(a) but argued that
the other sections had not been breached. the crown also argued that
admission of the firearm into evidence would not bring the administration of
justice into disrepute.

the matter came on before me for trial on the
application on april 2, 2024. i orally dismissed the application on april 3,
2024. i released written reasons on july 16, 2024. those reasons are now
reported as
r. v. brown
2024 oncj 345.

once the
charter
application was
dismissed, counsel invited the court to make a finding of guilt. i found mr.
brown guilty of the following offences:
a)
possession of a firearm with an altered serial number;
b)
carrying a concealed weapon;
c)
careless storage of a firearm;
d)
knowledge of unauthorized possession of a firearm.

i stayed the charges of weapons dangerous and unauthorized
possession of a firearm pursuant to the principles enunciated in
r. v. kienapple
1974 canlii 14 (scc).

the sentencing in this matter was delayed
several months because mr. brown wished to resolve his homicide matter first.
the manslaughter conviction

on december 20, 2024, mr. brown entered a guilty
plea to manslaughter and was sentenced to the equivalent of an 11-year sentence
made up of the following components:
a)
the equivalent of 47 months of pretrial custody;
b)
seven years and one month in the penitentiary;
c)
a section 109 prohibition; and
d)
dna.

on february 18, 2020, alex tobin died as the
result of a single gunshot wound to the chest at his girlfriend’s residence
located at 36 king street east apartment 1, omemee.

mr. brown and an unidentified male went to the residence
to purchase marihuana from tobin. during the transaction, the unidentified
male took tobin’s marihuana without paying for it. this resulted in an
altercation.

mr. brown was armed with a firearm. he pulled
out his firearm during the altercation. he believed that mr. tobin was
reaching for the firearm and he pulled the trigger.

mr. tobin suffered a fatal gunshot wound to his
left chest.

at the time of the incident, mr. brown had a
license to lawfully possess firearms.

on february 18, 2020 – the same day as the
shooting – mr. brown and his father called police and reported a theft of
firearms from his residence. this report was fabricated. one of the firearms
reported stolen was the firearm used to kill mr. tobin.

in february 2021, police executed a search
warrant in oshawa in relation to an unrelated investigation. the firearm used
to kill mr. tobin (and reported stolen by mr. brown and his father) was
recovered.

mr. brown was arrested and charged in relation
to the homicide on may 12, 2022.

he has been detained ever since.
the criminal record

mr. brown’s criminal record consists of
convictions for manslaughter, as i have set out above, and failing to comply
with a release order. the convictions for these offences post-date the
commission of the offences before me. thus, he had no record at the time that
the offences before me were committed.

he received a suspended sentence and probation
for the fail to comply.
the accused’s background

i asked the parties for written submissions.

defence advised that mr. brown is 29 years of
age. he was 25 when the offences before me were committed.

he has a four-year old son.

he has a supportive family.

he has sickle cell disease and is on the waiting
list for a bone marrow transplant. it is known to this court that sickle cell disease
can be an extremely painful and debilitating disease.

today, in the course of hearing final oral
submissions, i was given a copy of a pre-sentence report that was prepared for
mr. brown’s sentencing on the manslaughter charge. it reveals the following:
a)
mr. brown is the younger of two children in his family.
b)
he was born in scarborough.
c)
he lived with his grandparents until 2005 when the family moved to
ajax.
d)
living conditions while he was at his grandparent’s address were not
great. it was very crowded. other residences that he lived in before the
family moved to ajax were infested with rodents. the areas that they lived in
were areas of high violent crime.
e)
despite the move to better living conditions, mr. brown’s parents’
relationship deteriorated, and they separated when mr. brown was in grade 10.
f)
there was a custody battle for the children
which lasted some three years. the family home had to be sold.
g)
mr. brown initially lived with his father, but in 2020, moved to
live with his mother and his brother.
h)
mr. brown had a significant relationship with an intimate partner which
lasted four years. mr. brown told the author of the pre-sentence report that
he ended the relationship because it was toxic. his former partner died of an
overdose in 2020. he is said to have been devastated by news of her death and
he has been dealing with depression ever since.
i)
mr. brown then started a relationship with the
person i infer to be paige. it has been in decline since he was arrested on
the manslaughter charges.
j)
his grandmother died in 2023 and it has been
difficult for him to deal with this as well.
k)
mr. brown was diagnosed with sickle cell disease when he was nine
months old. he is said to have spent his childhood in and out of hospital. he
is at a high risk of stroke because of his disease.
l)
he is awaiting a bone marrow transplant.
m)
he reported that he was sexually abused by a camp counsellor when he
was ten years old.
n)
mr. brown completed his elementary and secondary school education.
he was bullied when he was in elementary school because he is smaller.
o)
he enrolled in a university program for business administration but
withdrew from that because he decided it was not something he wanted to do.
p)
he then enrolled and completed two years of a three year program in
social work. he withdrew from that to pursue employment.
q)
he worked first as a security guard. after he was charged and
unable to get security clearance, he worked doing electrical work. his
long-term plan is to complete his education to become a licensed electrician.
r)
he does not endorse problems with alcohol or
drugs. he uses alcohol and marihuana socially. he has prescription medication
for codeine and morphine to manage pain caused by his sickle cell disease.
s)
he was said to be cooperative with the author of the report.
t)
he expressed remorse for killing mr. tobin. the
author of the presentence report noted, however, that mr. brown tends to
minimize responsibility for that offence, claiming that it occurred because of
events in his life that he had no control over.
u)
he has converted to islam while in custody.
v)
four of his friends have died or been maimed as a result of gun
violence. two are paralyzed as a result of being shot.
w)
he denied being affiliated with any gangs. the author of the
presentence report contacted an officer with the toronto guns and gangs unit
who reported that they are not aware of mr. brown having any gang affiliation.

there is no report concerning the social context
(commonly referred to as a
morris
report) pertaining to mr. brown, who
is a black man.

as justice green observed in
r. v. mclarty-mathieu
2022 oncj 498
at paragraphs
14 and 15:
as gatekeepers
of the criminal justice system, judges must be acutely aware that overreliance
on academic achievement or employment success as mitigating factors can be
unintentionally discriminatory. of course, stereotypical assumptions about a
black person’s background should never influence a sentencing decision.
in the
collaborative expert’s report filed as appendix a in the
morris
decision,
the court had the benefit of extensive statistical analysis about the
socio-economic impact of systemic racism on black canadians commencing as
children right through to adulthood. black children are far more likely to be
apprehended by child welfare agencies negatively impacting familial bonds.
black students are statistically less likely to succeed in school. young black
canadians are far less likely to secure stable employment and when they do,
they receive disproportionately lower pay. incarceration rates are
disproportionality higher among black offenders.
mr. brown’s statement in court

when i asked mr. brown if there was anything he
would like to tell me, he said that he was sorry for what he had done. he also
said he was sorry for the time that it took to complete this matter. he
thanked me for sentencing him today so that he can get on with serving his
sentence in the penitentiary. i note that he has been confined in the
reformatory since the sentencing on the manslaughter in december 2024. he is
eager to get on with serving his sentence. it is known to this court that
conditions in the penitentiary are generally better than they are in the
reformatory.
the position of the parties

the crown seeks a sentence of two years in
custody, to be served consecutive to the sentence that mr. brown received for
the manslaughter.

defence seeks a sentence of one year
consecutive.
aggravating facts

the crown points to the following aggravating
factors:
a)
the criminal record;
b)
the nature of the firearm seized – a handgun;
c)
the fact that the serial number had been altered;
d)
the fact that the handgun was concealed in mr. brown’s satchel;
e)
the fact that mr. brown was holding his child while he possessed the
handgun and therefore potentially dangerous to the child;
f)
the fact that he was in the vicinity of his
girlfriend and her parents while he possessed the handgun and therefore
potentially dangerous towards them;
g)
the fact that he was in the vicinity of the police, who were
initially unaware of the handgun when they were on scene and investigating a
domestic incident and therefore potentially dangerous towards them, the
girlfriend, the parents and the baby.
mitigating factors

defence counsel pointed to the following
factors:
a)
the accused’s age;
b)
the fact that he is now serving a significant sentence for
manslaughter (the sentencing principle of totality).

defence counsel acknowledged that mr. brown is
not entitled to any mitigation for an early guilty plea.
factual issues in dispute

the crown says that it is aggravating that the
firearm was loaded. defence states that the fact that the firearm was loaded
was never proven.

the crown says that mr. brown’s possession of
the firearm was “long-standing and deliberate as opposed to momentary
possession”. defence counsel says that there is no evidence as to the length
of the accused’s possession.

the crown says that mr. brown’s possession of
the firearm made him dangerous to anyone around him, in particular, his baby,
his girlfriend, his girlfriend’s parents and the police. defence says that in
light of the fact that it is not proven that the firearm was loaded, “it is
unclear how he was dangerous to anyone in his proximity.”
has the
crown proven that the firearm was loaded?

with respect to whether the firearm was loaded,
i note that one of the offences that mr. brown was originally charged with was
an offence contrary to section 95(1), that is possession of a prohibited
firearm with readily accessible ammunition.

at the outset of the trial, crown counsel
advised that she was not in a position to prove the charge and i dismissed it.

however, the crown filed – on consent –
documents to the effect that the firearm met the definition of a “firearm” and
ammunition seized met the definition of “ammunition”. the photographs that were
filed in evidence are inconclusive as to whether the firearm was loaded when it
was seized.

i went back and listened to the evidence of the
seizing officer, constable clark which revealed the following:
a)
constable clark arrived on scene at 4:13 pm. when he arrived, he
heard one of the officers say “gun”. he went to assist but was not needed.
b)
he stated that “after everything calmed down a little bit”, he retrieved
the bag that had been taken from the accused. he checked the gun to ensure
that it was not loaded. he then secured the bag with the gun in his cruiser.
c)
he transported the bag with the gun back to the detachment. upon
arrival he secured the bag with the gun in the vault at the quinte west
detachment. he then went and assisted with lodging mr. brown into custody.
d)
when he was finished with that, he went back and retrieved the bag
from the vault and started going through the contents of the bag to document
its contents.
e)
the firearm, which he described as a silver.357 magnum taurus
handgun, was located in the main pocket of the bag.
f)
a photo of the ammunition was filed but
constable clark simply referred to it as ammunition that he received “in the
course of the investigation”. nowhere in his detailed recitation of what he
located in the bag, does he indicate that he found the bullets in the firearm,
or for that matter, in the bag.

i therefore find that the crown has not proven
that the gun was loaded.
has the
crown proven that mr. brown’s possession was long-standing?

with respect to the issue of whether mr. brown’s
possession was “long-standing and deliberate” or “momentary”, i agree with
defence counsel’s submission that there is no evidence as to how long mr. brown
was in possession of the firearm.

it was found in a satchel that mr. brown was
wearing around his neck. he tried to pass the satchel off to his girlfriend
when he realised that the police were detaining him. he clearly knew that the
firearm was there and he had control over it.

a number of documents belonging to him were
found in the bag. there was nothing tying the bag to paige.

on the evidence before me, however, i cannot
find how long he had knowledge of and control over the firearm.
was mr.
brown’s possession dangerous to anyone in his proximity?

regardless of whether the firearm was loaded, i
find that mr. brown’s possession of it was dangerous to anyone in his
proximity.

i made those findings at trial with respect to
the issue of section 10(a) and 10(b). i noted at paragraph 144(e), (f) and (g)
of the judgment that the threat to public safety and officer safety was very
high. indeed, it was so great that it justified constable szijarto’s decision
not to give the accused his 10(a) and 10(b) rights.

a confrontation in a small room – with two
civilians present, one of whom was a defenceless child – between mr. brown and
a number of armed police officers could have resulted in devastating
consequences for everyone in the vicinity, even others occupying the house (the
girlfriend’s parents) and anyone who might have been nearby.

once the police had reasonable grounds to
believe that mr. brown was in possession of the firearm, they had to act with
dispatch to protect their safety and the safety of everyone else. this was not
a situation where the police can be expected to stop and ensure that the
firearm is unloaded.

the potential for a devastating -- if not deadly
-- result was very high.
analysis

section 718
of the
criminal code
states:
the fundamental purpose
of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime
prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives:
(a)
to
denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that
is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b)
to
deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
(c)
to
separate offenders from society, where necessary;
(d)
to
assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to
provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to
promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm
done to victims or to the community.

section 718.1 states:
a sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender.

section 718.2 sets out “other sentencing
principles”:
a court that imposes a sentence shall also take into
consideration the following principles:
(a)
…..
(b)
a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(c)
where
consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly
long or harsh;
(d)
an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.

in
r. v. lacasse
2015 scc 64, the supreme
court of canada determined that the “cardinal principle” of sentencing law is the
principle of proportionality enshrined in section 718.1. that is, the more
serious the crime and the greater the degree of the offender’s responsibility,
the more severe the sentence will be. this must be balanced against the moral
blameworthiness of the offender.

lacasse
also
describes sentencing as a “delicate task”. other cases have established the
principle that sentencing is a highly individualized process.

possession of a loaded handgun is, in and of
itself, usually deserving of a denunciatory and deterrent sentence.

in
r. v. smickle
2013 onca 678, the offender
was 27 years of age, had no record and was in possession of a loaded cocked
handgun when the police executed a search warrant. the trial judge found that
the accused was taking photos of himself with the handgun and trying to “look
cool”. with respect to the danger posed to the public, justice doherty stated
at paragraphs 28 and 30:
the
respondent was not off by himself in some isolated forest playing with a fully
loaded cocked handgun. he was in someone else’s apartment located in a
high-rise apartment building. it is fair to assume there were other
people in the adjoining apartments who could well have been at risk had the gun
accidentally discharged. furthermore, as subsequent events clearly
demonstrated, the respondent had no idea of, and no control over, what might
happen as he was playing with the fully loaded cocked handgun. the police who were engaged in an important and
dangerous public duty were clearly put at risk by the respondent’s
conduct. surely, it is a matter of good fortune that someone was not hurt
either by the accidental discharge of the respondent’s firearm or by the police
response to the apparent threat posed by the respondent.
(emphasis mine).
….
the respondent’s
conduct falls squarely at the “true crime” end of the s. 95 spectrum i
described in
nur. 
he had a loaded cocked gun in his hand. he was engaged in conduct that
posed a serious and immediate risk to others. he had no authority to
possess the gun at any place or in any circumstances. even having regard
to the personal circumstances of the offender, a sentence approaching or at the
maximum reformatory sentence (two years less a day) would have been appropriate
absent a mandatory minimum sentence.

see also,
r. v. smickle
2014 onca 49.

in
r. v. morris
2021 onca 680, the police
were called to the report of a home invasion robbery. the complainant
described the culprits as four black men. on police arrival, there were four
black men walking in a nearby parking lot. mr. morris ran from the police
after being told by them to stop. during the course of the pursuit, he ducked
into a stairwell. when he came out of the stairwell, the pursuing officer
noticed that he was not wearing a jacket. the officer ultimately was able to
take mr. morris into custody. he went back to the stairwell and recovered the
jacket. it contained a loaded 38 calibre prohibited firearm. mr. morris was
never charged with the robbery. he was convicted at trial by a jury.

he was 23 when he committed the offences and 26
when he was sentenced. he did not have a criminal record.

the court of appeal had this to say about the
nature of gun crime at paragraph 68:
gun
crimes involving the possession of loaded, concealed firearms in public places
pose a real and immediate danger to the public, especially anyone who interacts
with the gun holder. when the person with the gun is confronted by the police,
who are engaged in the lawful execution of their duties, the risk increases dramatically.
it increases yet again when the gun holder
flees, and still again when the gun holder discards the weapon in a public
place. a person who carries a concealed, loaded handgun in public undermines
the community’s sense of safety and security. carrying a concealed, loaded
handgun in a public place in canada is antithetical to the canadian concept of
a free and ordered society: see
nur
(onca), at paras. 82, 206;
r.
v. felawka,
1993 canlii 36 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 199, at pp. 214-15. [emphasis mine]

as i have noted, in the case before me, mr.
brown was not possessing a loaded firearm. he was not possessing a firearm in
a public place. nor did he flee. however, on the facts of this case, as i
have set out above, this is a distinction without much of a difference. as i
have said, the potential danger to police and to others who were in the vicinity
was incredibly high and that is the gravamen of this offence.

the court of appeal went on to find, citing
r.
v. nur
2015 scc 15
that a three year penitentiary sentence was appropriate
in the “vast majority of offences” in cases involving gun crimes where there is
unlawful possession of a loaded handgun in a public place.

in
morris, supra,
the court of appeal
found that the appropriate sentence, having regard to the offender’s challenges
with his mental and physical health, and the social context evidence, was two
years less a day for a section 95 offence.

in
r. v. fagan
2024 onsc 2718, the offender
was found guilty of a section 95 offence. the facts involved the offender discharging
a 40 calibre handgun at least five times on a residential street in brampton. 
the offender was young and black. he had no criminal record. he pleaded
guilty. he expressed remorse. he had been subject to anti-black racism that
limited his education opportunities, shaped his world view and narrowed his
peer group. he believed that arming himself was the only way he could remain
safe. after noting that the appropriate sentence would normally be between
three and three a half years in the penitentiary, justice stribopoulos found
that the mitigating factors mandated a sentence of two years less a day in the
reformatory, to be followed by two years probation.

in
r. v. bajraktari
2024 onsc 4536, the offender
was found guilty of a section 95 offence after he was found in possession of a
loaded 9 millimetre handgun in a satchel located at his feet. he was a rear
passenger in a vehicle that was detained by police pursuant to investigation
under the
liquor licence act
for open liquor. at the time of the
offence, the offender was 19 years old. he had a deprived upbringing. his
father was deported to albania. he was a first-time offender. he conceded the
crown’s case after he was unsuccessful in a
charter
application. the
sentencing judge specifically found that the offender was not a danger to the
public and not a violent offender. there were immigration consequences that
could potentially be mitigated if he was given a conditional sentence. justice
sugunasiri sentenced the offender to two years less a day conditional.

there are a number of other cases where
conditional sentences have been imposed in cases of young black men who are
first time offenders and who possessed loaded handguns, or handguns with
readily accessible ammunition: see most recently for example,
r. v.
vanderhyden-steaman
2025 oncj 22.

on the facts before me, however, it is clear
that mr. brown is not entitled to a conditional sentence. i reject a
conditional sentence on the basis that mr. brown has already been sentenced to
a significant term of custody in the penitentiary for manslaughter with a
firearm.

denunciation and deterrence demand, not only a
custodial sentence, but a significant consecutive custodial sentence.

at the time he committed the offences before me,
mr. brown had already killed mr. tobin with a firearm.

while i accept that he now expresses remorse and
regret for killing mr. tobin, between the commission of that offence in
february 2020 and his arrest for it in may of 2022, mr. brown no doubt was
hoping that he got away with it.

whether that is the case or not, i would have
thought that this experience would have been a life-changing event for mr.
brown, after which he would have refused to have anything to do with firearms.

but that was not the case. fifteen months after
that fateful day in omemee, mr. brown was in possession of a prohibited handgun
in quinte west. he was not authorized to possess it. his possession was
concealed. the firearm had an obliterated serial number.

i say this not to punish mr. brown for the
manslaughter offence twice. i say this to deter mr. brown and other
like-minded individuals from a life of possession of dangerous firearms and to
denounce this repugnant and dangerous crime.

i also say this to illustrate that despite the
experience of killing a man with a firearm, mr. brown’s actions did not deter
him.

it is further aggravating that the handgun that
he was in possession of, had its serial number altered.

the only reason to possess a handgun with an
obliterated serial number is to keep the authorities from learning what the
origin of that handgun is.

some may quarrel with the fact that the
sentencing authorities that i have referred to all involve possession of a
loaded firearm or a firearm where ammunition is readily accessible, which is
viewed to be a more serious crime than the unauthorized possession offence that
i have found mr. brown guilty of.

on the facts of this case, i find that it
matters little that the firearm was not loaded or that the ammunition was not
readily accessible. it matters little that the firearm was being possessed in
a dwelling house, as opposed to a public place.

it matters greatly that there were others nearby
who were in danger due to the possession of the firearm including mr. brown’s
little baby, his girlfriend, his girlfriend’s family and the police.

a significant consecutive custodial sentence
must be imposed in order to deter and denounce his conduct.
sentence imposed

the sentence that i impose is:
a)
for the offence of possessing a firearm with an altered serial
number, the sentence is six months.
b)
for the offence of carrying a concealed weapon, the sentence is six
months consecutive.
c)
for the offence of careless storage of a firearm, the sentence is
six months concurrent.
d)
for the offence of possession of a firearm knowing that its
possession is unauthorized, the sentence is nine months consecutive. i impose a
nine month sentence to reflect the sentencing principles of restraint and totality,
to take into account the fact that mr. brown suffers from sickle cell disease
and to recognize the social context in which mr. brown, a black man from
scarborough and durham region, has lived. otherwise i would have imposed a
twelve-month sentence for this offence.
e)
these sentences will be served consecutively to the sentence that
mr. brown is serving for the manslaughter conviction.
f)
additionally, i will impose a section 110
prohibition for ten years and an order for the taking of mr. brown’s dna.
released: february 27, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson