source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj598/2025oncj598.html

warning
the court hearing this matter
directs that the following notice be attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection
486.4(2.1
) of the
criminal code.
these subsections and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which
is concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection
486.4(2.1
), read as follows:
486.4 (2.1
) victim under 18 — other offences —
subject to subsection (2.2), in proceedings in respect of an offence other than
an offence referred to in subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18
years, the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any
information that could identify the victim shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way.
(2.2)
mandatory
order on application —
in proceedings in respect of an offence other than
an offence referred to in subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18
years, the presiding judge or justice shall
(a)
as soon as
feasible, inform the victim of their right to make an application for the order;
and
(b)
on application
of the victim or the prosecutor, make the order; and
(c)
if an order is made, as soon as feasible, inform the victim of the
existence of the order and of their right to apply to revoke or vary it....
486.6 offence
—
(1)
every
person who fails to comply with an order made under any of subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. b.c.,
2025 oncj 598
date: 
2025 11 10
court
file no.: toronto region 998-24-48105744
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
b.c.
before
justice m. sean gaudet
heard
on june 2, 3 and september 3, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on november 10, 2025
stuart rothman................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
lorant kiss........................................................................... counsel
for the defendant b.c.
gaudet j.:
introduction

the defendant, b.c., is charged with assaulting
his former spouse, f.g. and their eldest son, y.c. on february 6, 2024, contrary to
section 266
of the
criminal
code. it is alleged that the defendant pushed f.g. in the entranceway of her
apartment as she was attempting to prevent him from leaving with her personal
smartphone, and of pushing y.c. as he came to the aid of his mother.

the defendant admits that he applied force to his
ex-wife and to their son but claims that he was acting in self-defence.

the central issue at trial is therefore whether the crown
has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was not
acting in self-defence during the altercation where he is alleged to have
pushed the complainants away from him when trying to leave the apartment.

the defendant was also originally charged with a
count of theft, namely of stealing the smartphone belonging to f.g. the crown
withdrew this charge at the outset of the trial.
the
position of the crown and the defence

counsel for the defence argues that the
defendant acted in self-defence. the defendant and his ex-wife were arguing
heatedly in her apartment over f.g.’s alleged infidelity. as the situation was
escalating it became clear to the defendant that he had to leave the
apartment. he was afraid that f.g. might become physical, and it was his right
to leave the apartment.

however, as the defendant was trying to leave the
complainants grabbed him, which amounted to their applying force to his body to
prevent him from leaving. the amount of force he used to remove their hands
from his body was proportionate and reasonable in order to respond to the
situation where he was being physically prevented from leaving the apartment.

the crown argues that the principle of self-defence
does not apply in this case. the defendant’s purpose in pushing away f.g. and y.c.
was not to defend himself but to leave the apartment with f.g.’s smartphone in
order to take away evidence of her infidelity. nor were defendant’s actions
were not reasonable under the circumstances; he could have ended the situation
by simply returning the smartphone to the complainant. in terms of the
defendant’s role in the incident, he was the instigator, not the victim. the
force applied to push the complainants was disproportionate and unnecessary.
background
to the incident – the marital dynamic

the defendant and f.g. are originally from morocco,
where they were married in 2009. they came to canada in 2011, and took up
residence in toronto. they have two sons, who were aged 12 and 8 at the time
of the incident. the complainant y.c. is their eldest son.

at the time of the incident f.g. worked at a
bakery making cookies and cakes, while the defendant worked in the information
technology field.

f.g initially described their relationship as
being generally positive. she testified that approximately ten years before
the incident took place the defendant’s behaviour changed, and he began to
display controlling behaviour. she testified that he controlled every aspect
of her behaviour – her work, her finances, and her personal relationships,
including her interactions with their children. he even chose her friends, and
most of her friends were the wives of his friends. the defendant made her wear
a hijab during their relationship, which she removed after her separation from him.

the defendant testified. he devoted much of his
testimony to the nature of his relationship with f.g. prior to the february 6
th,
2024, incident, and her betrayal. he described their relationship in very
different terms from f.g. his evidence was that their relationship was
characterized by mutual trust and loyalty, despite having the typical ups and
downs experienced by every relationship. the relationship began to deteriorate
in the spring of 2022, when he began to notice changes in her attitude and
behavior, such as her sending photos of herself with parts of her body
uncovered.

when asked to respond to the suggestion that the
defendant was “controlling”, in particular in relation to financial matters,
the defendant testified that consistent with the way things are when he comes
from, the man is the provider and the wife stays home. according to him, both
he and f.g. were happy with this arrangement. he also noted that she had
access to the joint chequing account and credit cards.

in april 2023 the defendant discovered evidence
of his wife’s betrayal. the defendant had access to f.g.’s instagram and
facebook accounts for him to post advertisements for her home cooking business,
which is where he found intimate messages on her social media between her and a
male work colleague. he logged on to f.g’s phone when she had left it in the
bathroom, and found “love messages” with her colleague. he confronted f.g.
about it, and she asked for a divorce.

given the defendant’s conservative religious background,
this was not acceptable to him. he described the situation as having a traumatic
effect upon him, and described himself as being in a state of shock. he
testified that “this is not us, this is not how we were raised, this is
not the type of people we are.”

the defendant refused to accept f.g.’s wish for
a divorce. he wanted to preserve his family. he wanted a reconciliation.

during the course of his testimony the defendant
testified that f.g. became addicted to pills given to her by someone from her
workplace – originally to deal with headaches she was suffering from – and that
she asked the defendant for money ostensibly to purchase gifts for an upcoming
trip to morocco in the summer of 2023, that she in fact used to buy more pills. 
the defendant also described f.g. as being compromised by this work colleague,
who became her lover.

i noted during the examination in chief of the
defendant that this evidence was not put to the complainant by defence counsel during
her cross-examination, which gave rise to
brown v. dunne
fairness concerns. 
the parties addressed the impact of this omission in final submissions, which i
turn to later in this judgment.
the
incident of february 6, 2024

in february 2024 the defendant and the
complainants were living apart. f.g. was living in an apartment on the 9
th
floor of a high rise building with their two sons; the defendant was living in
a separate home.

the evidence of the complainants and that of the
defendant was at odds in material respects with respect to what happened on
february 6, 2024. i address each version of events in turn.
f.g.’s
evidence

f.g. testified that on the date of the incident,
she and the defendant had been separated for about 5 to 6 months. the
defendant did not accept their separation, and would come to f.g.’s apartment
on occasion.

on february 6, 2024, the defendant came to f.g.’s
workplace at around 2:00 p.m. – three hours before the scheduled end of her
shift. before he showed up at her place of work, he called her on her phone
and was screaming and yelling at her. she told him that she wanted a divorce, but
he insisted on creating a problem.

when the defendant showed up at her workplace he
was angry. when she saw him, she put on her hijab that she kept in her locker,
out of fear of him. he yelled at her to take her things and come back to the
apartment. f.g. was frightened and agreed to leave her work before the end of
her shift. she was afraid she was going to lose her job. her supervisor asked
her if she wanted to leave with the defendant, and she told her it was okay. she
would go with him.

at the parking lot of the apartment building he
yelled at her, asking her why put on her hijab since he knew she had taken it
off, and he grabbed it off of her hair.

in the elevator on the way up to the apartment
the defendant took f.g.’s smartphone out of the pocket of her coat.

this was the only phone f.g. had. the defendant
paid for the complainant’s phone and had access to her gmail and whatsapp
accounts.

upon entering the apartment, he started yelling
and screaming in front of the children. she did not want them to witness their
fighting and wanted them to go to their room, but he insisted that they stay so
that they could see what kind of mother they had.

f.g. told the defendant that he could not take
her phone. she tried to take it from him. it was in the right pocket of his
coat. she followed him down the stairs and tried to take it out of his coat
pocket. in the struggle for the phone she ripped his coat.

at the bottom of the stairs by the door the
defendant pushed f.g. to the ground with two hands. as she tried to get up he
pushed her down with his foot.

f.g. testified that she saw her son, y.c. try to
push his father away, and that the defendant pushed y.c. and his head hit the
wall. she testified that she then lost consciousness.

when she regained consciousness, neighbours from
the apartment across the hall came were in her apartment and took her upstairs.

f.g. stated that she suffered injuries: she
could not move her right hand and injured her face, she was semi-paralyzed
because of her stress. her neighbour called 911, and she was taken by
ambulance to the hospital. in cross-examination f.g. conceded that she was
released from the hospital without any injuries.

the incident at the doorway occurred only a few
minutes after f.g. and the defendant arrived at the apartment.
y.c.’s evidence of the incident

the parties eldest child, y.c. testified. he is
12 years old. he testified that on february 6, 2024, he and his brother had
come home from school around 3:45 p.m. his parents came home soon thereafter. 
they were arguing. his mother told them to go upstairs, but their father insisted that they stay. they continued arguing. he could not recall what
they were arguing about, but for his mother asking her father to give her phone
back, but his father kept ignoring her.

his father tried to leave the house by running
down the stairs. his mother was following behind him, pulling on him. his
mother was trying to grab her phone out of his pocket. at that point he saw the
defendant push his mother on to the stairs with two hands. he observed her
trying to get up but she could not. y.c. heard his mother cry out to him for
help.

y.c. went down the stairs to help his mother. he
tried pulling his father back, to keep him inside the apartment. his father
managed to remove y.c.’s hands and pushed his chest with one hand, which caused
him to fall back and his head to hit the wall.

then his father left the apartment, going in to
the hallway. he initially ran to his right, and then turned around and ran
back to his left, dropping personal items such as some cards and his glasses.

after his father left, the neighbours arrived. 
together they carried his mother up the stairs to the living room.
the
defendant’s evidence of the incident

the defendant’s testimony about the february 6
th
2024 incident began with his description of efforts he was making to effect a
reconciliation with f.g.. their wedding anniversary had been on january 30
th. 
he bought her gifts and invited her to dinner. he wrote her a poem.

on february 6
th
2024 at approximately
3:00 p.m. the defendant found out that f.g. was still in a relationship with
her colleague from work. he phoned her at work, but she did not answer the
phone. he drove to her workplace, spoke to her supervisor and told her that he
wanted to speak to his wife. when f.g. came out he told her to pack up her
things, and to come with him. she asked him what he wanted to talk about, and
he responded “just pack your stuff and let’s come out – let’s go talk”.

the defendant described his state of mind at
this time as being irritated and frustrated – the first time f.g. had cheated
on him he could forgive, but this was the second time. things were different. 
with possession of her phone, he had evidence of her betrayal. her reputation
was on the line, and this evidence of her betrayal of him would not be good
for her reputation either with her family, his family, or anyone else. it
would also be bad for her in terms of having custody of the children.

the defendant denied trying to touch f.g. in the
parking garage of her apartment and denied that he tried to grab her hijab.

they went up the elevator to the floor of her
apartment. in the elevator, the defendant realized that the evidence of her
betrayal was on her smartphone, he saw it in her pocket, so he reached into her
pocket and grabbed it, without any resistance from her.

once they entered the apartment, they both went
up the stairs to the living room. their children were at home. f.g. told the
children to go upstairs, but he insisted that they stay. he admitted that she asked
him to give her the phone back, and that he said no.

the defendant thought that the situation was
going to escalate so he turned to leave the apartment. after he opened the door,
she grabbed on to his jacket. he turned around and, as he described it, “let
go of her hands”. he did not push her. because of the force that she was
applying to him, after he let go of her hands she leaned against the wall. he
did not push on her with his foot. his son then grabbed on to him. he “let go
of his hand” as well which led to him “leaning against the wall” because of the
pressure y.c. was applying against him. in his evidence, he simply released his
son, rather than pushed him.
analysis
the
browne
v. dunne
concerns

when the defendant testified in chief, he
brought with him a notebook that contained key points that he wanted the court
to hear about incidents involving f.g. that led to the incident of february 6
th
2024, so that the court could appreciate that it was he who was the real victim
on this case, not the complainants. this included the defendant’s evidence
about f.g.’s alleged drug use, about how she got into a relationship with her
work colleague because he offered her drugs to deal with a headache, that she
was taking anti-depressant and anti-anxiety medication before the incident. 
the defendant testified to other sensitive personal matters well, in particular
an abortion the defendant stated she underwent in 2022. these matters were not
put to the complainant by the defence in her cross-examination.

the defendant did not seek permission from the
court to rely on this notebook prior to testifying, and once it became known that
he was relying on this material to assist his testimony he was instructed to
stop doing so.

the cross-examination of the defendant was
conducted some three months after his examination in chief. the crown asked
the defendant to produce the notebook that he had taken up with him to the
stand. he did not have it, and the crown did not seek an adjournment for him
to retrieve it.

in
r. v. quansah,
2015 onca 237, the
court of appeal dealt with the application of the rule in
brown v dunne,
which requires a party to put to a witness of an opposing party contradictory
evidence that the party intends to introduce through their own witness. the
rule is rooted in the principles of fairness to the witness whose credibility
is attacked (in this case the complainant f.g.), to the party whose witness is
impeached (in this case, the crown), and to the trier of fact.

in my view there were instances where the
defendant gave evidence that fell afoul of the rule in
brown v dunne. the
defence conceded that the evidence about these matters was not relevant –
evidence about the complainant’s pill use, the abortion, the complainant being
compromised by her co-worker over her alleged addiction, and her using funds
given to her to buy these drugs – and that it was not relying upon them.

in my view none of this evidence is relevant to
the central issue that i have to decide in this case, specifically whether or
not the crown has established beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant did
not act in self-defence. none of my credibility findings about f.g. are
impacted by this evidence. nor could they be, since she was given no
opportunity to respond to them.
credibility findings

credibility assessments are not winner take all
contests. i can choose to believe some, all or none of the defendant’s
testimony.

overall, i found the complainant f.g. to be a
credible and reliable witness. her evidence was overall consistent with the
evidence of her son. it was internally consistent.
she admitted that she initiated
the physical contact with the defendant when she tried to physically prevent
him from leaving her apartment.

generally f.g.’s evidence bore the hallmarks of honesty. there was one area where her evidence was inconsistent with her
previous statement to the police. f.g. testified that when the defendant
pushed her to the ground he
kicked her to prevent her from getting up. she failed to mention being kicked
to the police when she gave them her statement on february 7, 2024. portions
of the video recording of her statement was played for the witness in court,
and while she did state that the defendant pushed her again and again when she
was down, the video shows that she was gesticulating with her hands when using
the word “push”. additionally, her son’s evidence was not corroborative on
this point. the defence suggests that f.g.’s evidence about the kick is a
recent fabrication.

on this point, i believe the evidence of the
defendant that he did not kick the complainant after she had fallen to the
stairs. it may be this evidence is a recent fabrication intended to cast the
defendant in a more negative light and therefore impacts upon her credibility,
or it may be that her memory on this point is simply mistaken and impacts upon
her reliability on this point. ultimately, little turns on this, as it is
admitted that the defendant applied force to the complainant using his hands,
although whether he pushed her or simply let her go is in dispute.

i find that f.g. exaggerated somewhat the extent
of the injuries she claims to have suffered as a result of the incident. f.g.
testified that she suffered injuries to her face and right hand as a result of
the push to the ground, but admitted that she was released from the hospital
without any injuries. she described swelling to the face, but she gave
inconsistent evidence as to when this injury manifested itself – whether the
day of the incident or a week later. she said she was referred to a
neurologist, but it emerged that this referral was for a condition that existed
prior to the incident.

ultimately, i do not find that these aspects of
her testimony detract from her overall credibility on the ultimate issues in
this case.

y.c. was a child witness, and overall i found
him to be a credible witness. he provided a coherent and internally consistent
narrative of what happened in the apartment between his parents. he admitted
when he could not remember an aspect of the incident, for example he admitted
he could not recall what they were arguing about. on the key aspect of
whether the defendant pushed him with his hand, or simply let go of him which
caused him to hit the wall, i prefer the evidence of y.c. to that of the
defendant.

i did not find the defendant to be a credible
witness. rather, he presented as a witness who was trying to downplay or
minimize the seriousness of his actions and of his responsibility for causing
this situation to escalate to the physical encounter that occurred in the
apartment. he wanted the court to know that he was the true victim in this
case.

overall, i found the defendant’s evidence to be
self-serving. he cast himself as the wronged party, as the true victim. he
described himself as a person who was raised with proper values and to do the
right thing, in order to justify his actions. his undisputed actions
undermined these assertions of personal virtue, however.

the defendant admitted that he took the
complainant’s phone out of her pocket without her consent, yet emphasized that
she did not resist him from doing so. while admitting that he was raised not
to take what did not belong to him, he justified his taking her phone without
her permission as being “for the sake of his family and for the sake of
knowing the truth”.

he forced f.g. to leave her workplace before her work was done
for the day, to her embarrassment and with the risk of jeopardizing her
continued employment because “family came first.”

he disputed that that the smartphone that he
took from the complainant was her phone, and that really belonged to him
because he paid for it and was paying for the sim card. she was just the user
of the phone, as if this were some sort of a justification for his having taken
it from her and refusing to give it back, although his evidence then shifted, and
he denied that he was suggesting that it was either her or his phone.

the defendant claims he did not push his wife
or son, but just let them go, as if he was holding on to them and released
them, instead of them holding on to him and him pushing them away. i do not
believe that the incident happened the way the defendant describes it. i find
that the defendant pushed both complainants, which caused both of them to fall
– f.g. to fall to the stairs and y.c. to fall against the wall where he struck
his head.

the defendant conceded in cross-examination that
he should not have insisted on his children being present during the argument
with his ex-wife. if he could do it all over again, he would have had the
“conversation” about f.g.’s infidelity in the parking lot, not in the
apartment. this expression of regret appeared genuine, but did not serve to
rehabilitate the defendant’s overall credibility.
the crown has established beyond
a reasonable doubt that the defendant was not acting in self-defence

it is
not
disputed by the defence that the
defendant used force against the complainants without their consent, and with
the knowledge that they did not consent.

the court of appeal
in
r v reid,
2003 canlii 14779 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 2822
(onca)
at para.
72
instructed
trial judges to apply a modified
w.d.
test in cases where
self-defence is raised and a
w.d.
instruction is
warranted. this principle is directly applicable to this case. accordingly, the
first two steps in
w.d.
i must apply are as follows:
1)
if i accept the accused's evidence and on the basis of it i believe or
have a reasonable doubt that he was acting in lawful self-defence i must find
the accused not guilty.
2)
even i do not accept the accused's evidence, if, after considering it
alone or in conjunction with the other evidence, i believe or have a reasonable
doubt that he was acting in lawful self-defence i must find the accused not guilty.

to answer these
questions in the modified
w.d.
analysis, i must also consider
the relevant self-defence provisions in
section 34
of the
criminal
code,
which reads in material part as follows:
34
(1)
a
person is not guilty of an offence if
(a)
they believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used
against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against
them or another person;
(b)
the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose
of defending or protecting themselves or the other person from that use or
threat of force; and
(c)
the
act committed is reasonable in the circumstances.
(2)
in determining whether the
act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the
relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including,
but not limited to, the following factors:
(a)
the nature of the force or threat;
(b)
the extent to which
the
use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to
respond to the potential use of force;
(c)
the person’s role in the incident;
(d)
whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a
weapon;
(e)
the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to
the incident;
(f)
the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the
parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the
nature of that force or threat;
(f.1)
any history of interaction or communication between the parties
to the incident;
(g)
the nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the
use or threat of force; and
(h)
whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of
force that the person knew was lawful.

the three requirements in section 34(1) are conjunctive. in
other words, the crown bears the onus of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that
the answer to at least one of the requirements in
section 34(1) is “no”.

to satisfy the requirement in s. 34(1)(a) the
defendant must subjectively believe that force or a threat of force was
being used against him or another person. the crown concedes this requirement
in this case. the complainants were applying force against the defendant by
grabbing on to him to try to prevent him from leaving the apartment with f.g.’s
phone.

i find that the defendant has not satisfied the
second requirement. the defendant did not push away the complainants to defend
or protect himself from the use of force. his subjective purpose was to take
away f.g.’s phone, because it contained all the evidence of her renewed infidelity
during a period when he thought they were trying to reconcile.

i also find that the defendant’s acts in pushing
the complainants with sufficient force that f.g. fell on to the stairs and y.c.
fell against the wall were not reasonable in the circumstances, within the
meaning of section 34(1)(c). in making this determination i have considered
the relevant circumstances of the defendant, the complainants and his acts.

the amount of force being applied to the
defendant was minimal – they were holding on to him.

there were other means available to the
defendant to respond to the use of force applied by the complainants. he could have defused the entire situation just by giving the
complainant back her phone. he knew that she needed this phone to communicate
with her family, for her work, to communicate with anyone. this was
unimportant to the defendant. he refused to return the phone to her because it
contained the evidence that he needed of her alleged infidelity that he could
show to her family to show that she was the true guilty party. it had the
evidence of everything that she was doing. he needed to have hard evidence of
her betrayal.

the key factor here is the defendant’s role in
the incident – the criterion in section 34(2)(c). the defendant narrowly
focusses on the physical altercation at the door of the apartment, at the very
end of the incident. however, in assessing self-defence, i must
pay close attention to the entire factual context and the tableau of the
evidence and not limit my consideration to the evidence of what occurred at the
doorway (
r. v. cunha,
2016 onca
491
at para
24
).

when considering the entire factual context it
is clear that the defendant was the true instigator of this incident. while he
has clad himself in the mantle of victim, this is an ill-fitting garment. he is
responsible for starting the chain of events that led to the incident in the doorway
of f.g’s apartment.

when the defendant found out about the complainant’s
alleged affair he insisted that she leave her place of work before the end of
her shift to come home with him. he did not care about the possible negative impact
that her leaving her job in midst of a shift could have on her employment,
because “family comes first” and he needed to have resolution of the issue
immediately. he needed to have a conversation, that was what mattered to him
at that moment. in other words, his needs came first.

the defendant’s behaviour in the parking garage
also is relevant in terms of the overall evidentiary context. i believe the complainant’s
evidence that the defendant removed her hijab from her hair, and that he was yelling
at her in the parking garage.

there was no need for the defendant to go up to
f.g.’s apartment to have the confrontation he needed to have with her. he
insisted in cross-examination that even though he did not live there, it was
really his apartment since he paid the rent, and his name was on the lease. in
his words, he was “entitled” to the place. as previously stated, he
acknowledged in cross-examination that he should not have come up to the
apartment to continue the argument, where it escalated to physical violence.

the defendant is also larger and stronger than
both of the complainants. the amount of force he used was not proportional to
the amount of force being applied to him. i reject his evidence that he simply
let go of f.g. and y.c., and that they fell with enough force to hit the stairs
and strike the wall. i have no doubt that he pushed them both, and that the
degree of force he used to push them on to the stairs and into the wall was not
proportionate. this was not a case of two assailants attacking one person. 
y.c. came to his mother’s aid and grabbed on to the defendant after he had
pushed f.g. to the ground.

upon review of the totality of the evidence, i find beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant did not act in self-defence when he
pushed the complainants and find the defendant guilty on both counts of assault.
released: november 10, 2025
signed:
justice m. sean gaudet