source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj253/2025oncj253.html

warning
the court
hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to
subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that
any information that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be
published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in
proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155,
160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272,
273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or
347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read from time to
time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct
alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on
or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with in the same
proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on application
—
in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
)
or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness
under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right to make an
application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the prosecutor or
any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections
486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. pham, 2025 oncj
253
date: may 9, 2025
ontario
 court of justice
toronto
between:
his
 majesty the king
— 
 and —
trung pham
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
 the crown
a.
 nash
for
 the defendant
h. gonzalez
heard: august 8, 2024 and
 march 6, 2025
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction

mr. pham is accused of sexually assaulting j.n.
on or about february 25, 2022.

mr. pham owns and operates a hair salon. he
offers hairstyling services as well as body hair removal to his customers.

j.n., the sole witness for the crown,
alleges that on the day in question he went to have his hair cut by mr. pham,
as he had done several times over the preceding 6 -7 months. after the haircut
was complete, mr. pham offered to trim j.n.’s back hair. j.n. agreed to pay an
extra $5 for that service. according to j.n., during this latter service, mr.
pham took down j.n.’s pants and underwear, then shaved and fondled j.n.’s penis
without j.n.’s consent.

mr. pham testified and, even though he did
not recognize j.n. and could not say whether he had ever serviced him, he
denied the alleged sexual assault. he called no further evidence.
b.
the
evidence
(a)
introduction

what follows is a summary of the salient
aspects of the witnesses’ testimony. a transcript of the proceedings is
available.
(b)
j.n.’s testimony in chief

j.n. had been a customer of mr. pham’s hair
salon for approximately six or seven months, during which time he had had his
hair cut there once per month, usually by mr. pham. on “a couple of occasions”
mr. pham’s sister had cut his hair. although he and mr. pham did not usually
talk much, he found mr. pham to be friendly and referred to him as “terry”.
they would normally exchange pleasantries.

on the day in question, j.n. told mr. pham
that he wanted “the usual” and he also described what he was looking for. j.n.
told mr. pham that he had a date the next day and mr. pham gently squeezed
j.n.’s chest and offered to make him look good for the date. he then offered to
remove the hair on his back. j.n. accepted this offer understanding that it
would cost an extra $5.

mr. pham escorted j.n to a separate room
that looked like a hair removal studio and closed the door. mr. pham asked j.n.
to take off his shirt, which he did.

mr. pham proceeded to work on j.n.’s back
and after a short period of time mr. pham, without warning, and without asking
permission, pulled down j.n.’s pants and underwear in a single motion. mr. pham
continued to remove j.n.’s back hair.

a short time later mr. pham grabbed hold of
j.n.’s penis with a tissue and told him that there was a lot of hair down there
and that girls don’t like it when there is a lot of pubic hair. mr. pham then
started trimming j.n.’s pubic hair without having asked if j.n. wanted that
service.

shortly thereafter, mr. pham abandoned the
tissue and held j.n.’s penis in his bare hands as he continued to trim the area
above and around his testicles.

mr. pham then commented to the effect that
the skin of j.n.’s penis was dry and that it should be moisturized. j.n. said
he could do that at home, but mr. pham proceeded to apply lotion to j.n.’s
penis and applied it with his hands, as if giving j.n. a “hand job”. as a
result, j.n. achieved a partial erection. mr. pham said “hey, it looks bigger
now”.

j.n. was not happy about mr. pham’s touching
of his penis. he does not recall saying anything because he was in shock.

mr. pham then told j.n. to pull up his
pants, which he did. mr. pham then offered a hug to j.n. which he accepted. j.n.
then paid mr. pham’s sister at the cash and included a 20% tip.

j.n. felt violated as he biked home after
the incident. he chatted with his friends about it and called 911 the next day.
he eventually gave a statement to the police on march 2
nd.
(c)
j.n.’s cross-examination

j.n. was carefully questioned about his 911
call and his statement to police. j.n. admitted that he told the truth in those
interviews and that he now agrees with and adopts everything he said.

through reference to those statements, it
was established that:
•
when mr. pham pulled down j.n.’s pants it was in
order to complete the back trim and that j.n. thought it was “okay”.
•
mr. pham explicitly suggested the pubic hair
trim and j.n. may have said something in response, although he could not recall
what he said.
•
while mr. pham trimmed his pubic hair j.n. was
unclear as to how he felt about it, and it was only afterward that he came to
think that there was something “not okay” about it.
•
j.n. said nothing to the police about mr. pham
trimming his testicles. j.n. conceded that he didn’t really remember whether
this had in fact occurred.
•
what stood out in j.n.’s mind after the service
was that mr. pham had not done a good job in performing what he had promised on
the pubic hair trim.
•
j.n. thought that, as concerns the groping, this
was something mr. pham did and “it was fine”.

on
re-examination j.n. explained that by “groping” he meant the trimming of his
pubic hair, the touching of his penis and the application of moisturizer. he
re-iterated his in-chief position that he did not feel it was “fine” at the
time.
(d)
mr. pham’s testimony in chief

mr. pham testified that he did not recognize
j.n. he might well have performed services on j.n. prior to and on the day in
question but he had no recollection of doing so. on the day in question his
salon was very busy because he was about to go on vacation.

mr. pham knows, however, that even if he did
trim j.n.’s pubic hair and apply moisturizer, based on his training and
practice, he would have obtained his consent because he would never perform
such services on anyone without their explicit consent.

much of mr. pham’s testimony concerned the
details of the normal operation of his salon and the nature of his careful discussions
with clients before he performs his services, which include all manner of body
hair removal. he only does what the client requests, although he will sometimes
suggest certain services to maximize his revenue. he always wears gloves when
he performs body hair removal and if the clients need to take their clothes off,
they do so themselves.
(e)
mr. pham’s cross-examination

mr. pham would not have touched j.n.’s chest
before the haircut as j.n. described. he would only do that to a client who was
also a friend.

in the last 12 months mr. pham estimates
that he has performed pubic hair removal 30-40 times.
c.
issues
and analysis
(a)
introduction

this case turns almost entirely on the
credibility and reliability of the two witnesses: j.n. and mr. pham.

because mr. pham testified and denied
assaulting j.n., i must approach the evidence as follows: if i believe mr.
pham’s denial; i must of course find him not guilty. even if i am not convinced
by his testimony, it may nonetheless, when examined in the context of all the evidence,
raise a reasonable doubt. if it does, i must also find him not guilty. if it
does not raise a reasonable doubt, i must examine the evidence that i do accept
to see if it proves the criminal allegations beyond a reasonable doubt. if it
does not, mr. pham must be acquitted. if it does, he must be found guilty.
r.
v. w.d.,
1991 canlii 93 (scc), s.c.j. no. 26.
(b)
the essential elements of sexual assault

harris j. in
r. v. george-oomen,
2020
oncj 37
at paras.
29-37, succinctly and accurately summarizes the elements of
sexual assault:
sexual assault is an
assault that is committed "in circumstances of a sexual nature, such that
the sexual integrity of the victim is violated".
section 265
of the
criminal code
provides
that a person commits an assault when, without the consent of another person,
he applies force intentionally to that other person, directly or indirectly.
this section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault.
the test to be applied in
determining whether the impugned conduct has the requisite sexual nature is an
objective one.
the part of the body
touched, the nature of the contact, the situation in which it occurred, the
words and gestures accompanying the act, and all other circumstances
surrounding the conduct, including threats which may or may not be accompanied
by force, will be relevant.
the intent or purpose of
the person committing the act, to the extent that this may appear from the
evidence, may also be a factor in considering whether the conduct is sexual. if
the motive of the accused is sexual gratification, to the extent that this may
appear from the evidence, it may be a factor in determining whether the conduct
is sexual. it must be emphasized, however, the existence of such a motive is
simply one of many factors to be considered, the importance of which will vary
depending on the circumstances.
the
actus reus
of
sexual assault is established by the proof of:
o
(1) a touching,
o
(2) the sexual nature of the
touching, and
o
(3) the absence of consent.
the absence of consent is
subjective and determined by reference to the complainant's subjective internal
state of mind towards the touching, at the time it occurred.
the accused's perception
of the complainant's state of mind is not relevant. that perception only arises
when a defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent is raised in the
mens rea
stage
of the inquiry.
the offence requires
general intent only. the
mens rea
for the offence is the general intent to
touch the complainant.
see too
r. v. chase,
1987 canlii 23 (scc),
 s.c.j. no.
57;
r. v. ewanchuk,
1999 canlii 711 (scc),
 s.c.j. no. 10
(c)
the assessment of j.n.’s credibility and
reliability

in my view, j.n. was not trying to deceive
the court. i find he was faithfully recounting what he now honestly believes
occurred during his encounter with mr. pham.

i believe that on the day in question he did
indeed undergo the back hair and pubic hair removal that he described. i also
accept his testimony as to the frequency of his visits to the salon. he would
have no reason to lie or exaggerate about this.
(d)
the assessment of mr. pham’s credibility and
reliability

i do not believe mr. pham’s assertion that
he does not recognize j.n.

pubic hair removal is not such a frequent
service that j.n. would have been lost in the crowd, especially given that j.n.
had been a monthly customer over the preceding 6-7 months.

because i do not believe this central theme
of mr. pham’s testimony, i do not accept the exculpatory aspects of his
testimony nor does his testimony raise a reasonable doubt. i should add that i
found his answers to be evasive and formulaic during much of his
cross-examination.
(e)
discussion

in my view, this case falls to be decided on
the third branch of the test in
w.d.

i accept j.n.’s testimony as to what
occurred between him and mr. pham on the day in question.

as to whether j.n. consented to what
occurred is more difficult.

j.n.’s adoption of his statement to the
police that is set out above in paragraph 17 of this judgment, along with the
fact that he left mr. pham a generous tip, leave me with a reasonable doubt on
the issue of consent. not consenting to mr. pham’s “groping” is inconsistent
with thinking at the time that “it was fine”.

the crown has the burden of proving beyond a
reasonable doubt that when mr. pham touched j.n. in the manner complained of,
j.n. did not consent to that touching. i find that the crown has failed to meet
that burden. on the evidence presented, i am not sure that j.n. did not consent
to the touching that has been proved.
d.
conclusion

the charge is dismissed.
released on may 9, 2025
justice russell
silverstein