source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj276/2025oncj276.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. singh,
2025 oncj 276
date: 2025 04 24
court file no.: brampton 24-31100137
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
lovejit singh
before justice p.t. o’marra
heard on march 5 and 6, 2025
reasons for judgment released orally on april 24, 2025
r. keenan and s.
mehra................................................................... counsel
for the crown
d. lent............................................................................... 
 for the defendant lovejit singh
p.t. o’marra, j.:
introduction:

on november 3, 2023, mr. singh was charged with
impaired operation of a motor vehicle, operating a motor vehicle with a blood
alcohol concentration exceeding 80 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood, and
dangerous driving. the crown proceeded summarily. mr. singh pleaded not guilty.
the trial took place over two days. i adjourned the matter and reserved my
decision for today.

mr. singh brought a
charter
application
to exclude the breath test results, all evidence of the impairment and all
other evidence obtained after the alleged breaches of his rights under sections
7, 8, 9, and 10(b) of the
charter. the application proceeded as a
blended
voir dire. three witnesses testified for the crown: jennie
nguyen, who witnessed the single motor vehicle accident at the exit ramp from
highway 401 onto hurontario street in the city of mississauga; the arresting
opp officer, officer hickey; and the qualified breath technician, sergeant
nasr. documents regarding the operation of the approved instrument and a
certificate of qualified technician were provisionally introduced as exhibits,
subject to the
charter
application. portions of officer hickey’s in-car
camera footage and a still photograph of mr. singh’s heavily damaged car were
entered as exhibits. mr. singh testified during the
voir dire
with the
assistance of an interpreter only for sections 8 and 9 of the
charter.
factual background:

on november 3
rd, 2023, at
approximately 8:42 p.m., jennie nguyen observed the white suv strike the
dividing barrier between highway 401 westbound collectors and the off-ramp to
hurontario street in the city of mississauga. ms. nguyen was a passenger in a
car driven by her boyfriend. they pulled over to check on the driver, the
vehicle's lone occupant, and then called 911. ms. nguyen and her boyfriend stayed
on the scene until paramedics arrived.

officer hickey arrived on the scene at
approximately 8:55 p.m. he first located the vehicle and checked if anyone was
still inside; no one was. he then proceeded to the ambulance, where he found
mr. singh, whom the paramedics assessed.

officer hickey spoke with mr. singh to confirm
whether he was the driver and if there had been any other occupants. mr. singh
confirmed that he was the driver and that no other occupants were in the
vehicle. mr. singh then provided officer hickey with his driver’s licence. mr.
singh advised officer hickey that he was not injured, which the paramedics
confirmed.

officer hickey then asked mr. singh how the
accident happened. mr. singh stated that he did not know but believed something
crossed before him. officer hickey noticed that mr. singh’s eyes appeared
bloodshot and glossy. officer hickey then asked mr. singh if he had anything to
drink, to which he responded that he had “drank a few shots of tequila.”

when the paramedics released mr. singh, officer
hickey directed mr. singh to sit in the rear of his cruiser. after mr. singh
entered his cruiser at 9:06 p.m., officer hickey informed him that he would
leave the door open as it was extremely windy and cold, and that mr. singh was
not under arrest. mr. singh was also told that the cruiser's interior was audio
and video recorded.

at approximately 9:07 p.m., officer hickey read
the alcohol screening demand, which mr. singh indicated he understood. mr.
lovejit was removed from the rear of the cruiser to be tested.

at approximately 9:08 p.m., officer hickey
demonstrated how to use the asd to mr. singh. at approximately 9:10 p.m., mr.
singh performed the alcohol screening demand / test and registered a failure.

officer hickey then placed mr. singh under
arrest, performed a search incident to arrest, handcuffed and placed him back
into the cruiser.

at approximately 9:15 or 9:16 p.m., mr. singh
was read his rights to counsel, which he understood. mr. singh stated that he
did not have his own lawyer but would like to speak with duty counsel. officer
hickey then cautioned mr. singh and read him the formal breath demand.

at approximately 9:29 p.m., officer hickey began
transporting mr. singh to the opp station.

officer hickey arrived at the station with mr.
singh at approximately 9:43 p.m.

officer
hickey called duty counsel and left a voicemail message. mr. singh then asked
if he could speak with any lawyer, and officer hickey said he could.
consequently, mr. singh provided his preferred counsel's name and phone number.

at
approximately
9:54
p.m.,
officer hickey
called
counsel
of
choice,
and
mr.
singh spoke to his counsel privately.

mr.
singh finished his call at approximately 9:59 p.m. and said he was satisfied.

at
approximately 10:04 p.m., mr. singh entered the breath room, where officer hickey
turned him over to the qualified breath technician, sergeant nasr. sergeant
nasr issued a primary and secondary caution and demanded a breath sample.

mr.
singh subsequently
provided
two
breath
samples.

the
first test was at
10:18 p.m.
and
registered
201mg
of
alcohol
in
100 ml
of
blood.
the
second
test
took
place
at
10:41 p.m. and registered 185mg of alcohol
in 100 ml of blood.

mr.
singh was released on an undertaking at approximately 11:17 p.m.
the issues:

mr.
lent has raised the following issues:
1.
did the crown prove beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. singh was the
driver?
if the answer to that issue is ‘’yes,” then the
following issues are left to be determined:
a)
could officer hickey reasonably rely on the “fail” on the asd due to a
potential mouth alcohol issue?
b)
after forming a
reasonable suspicion that mr. singh may have alcohol present in his system, was
officer hickey's decision to place mr. singh in the rear of his cruiser with
the doors secured with the intent to administer the alcohol screening demand
considered arbitrary detention thereby constituting a breach of section 9 of
the
charter
?
c)
was officer hickey’s delay of 5 to 6 minutes in giving the rights to
counsel to mr. singh a violation of section 10(b) of the
charter
?
d)
did the crown prove beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. singh’s ability
to operate a vehicle was slightly impaired by alcohol, contrary to section
320.14(1)(a) of the
code
?
e)
did the crown
prove that mr. singh drove in a manner that, having regard to all the
circumstances, was dangerous to the public, contrary to section 320.17 of the
code
?

if
the
charter
arguments fail, the crown will have established the elements
of the offence of “80 plus”, contrary to section 320.14(1)(b) of the
code.
the standard of proof and onus:

every
person charged with a criminal offence in canada is presumed innocent until the
crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that that person committed the
offence with which that person is charged. the onus of proof, as regards
proving guilt, never switches from the crown to the accused. i must consider
all the evidence to decide whether the crown has proven its case to the
criminal standard. i may only convict if satisfied that the crown has
established mr. singh's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

in
r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7, the supreme court noted that the
"overarching principle of the presumption of innocence, enshrined in s.
11(d) of the
charter, and the correlative principle of the crown's
burden of proof must always govern the fact-finding process. the presumption of
innocence -- a 'hallowed principle lying at the very heart of criminal law' (
r.
v. oakes,
1986 canlii 46 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 103, at p. 119) -- requires the crown to bear the
onus of proving all essential elements of the offence charged, beyond a
reasonable doubt, before a conviction may be entered.” (see:
oakes
at
para.
59.)

in
r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320, the supreme court of canada
indicated that proof beyond a reasonable doubt "does not involve proof to
an absolute certainty, it is not proof beyond any doubt nor is it an imaginary
or frivolous doubt" (at para. 36). in
r. v. starr,
2000 scc 40 (canlii), 2 s.c.r.
144, however, the court pointed out that the burden of proof placed upon the
crown lies "much closer to absolute certainty than to a balance of
probabilities". (see:
starr
at para.
242.)
has the crown proved that mr. singh was the driver?
the evidence:
jennie nguyen’s testimony:

ms.
nguyen was the passenger in her boyfriend’s car travelling behind a westbound
white suv on highway 401, approaching the exit to hurontario street. as they
entered the exit lanes, she observed the white suv was “wavering” between
lanes. the exit lanes consisted of two lanes, and both vehicles were in the
left exit lane.

interestingly,
at the outset of her testimony, ms. nguyen stated they were following directly
behind “lovejit”. i will return to this characteristic of ms. nguyen’s
testimony later in my reasons.

ms.
nguyen witnessed the white suv drive directly into the divider that separated highway
401 and the exit lanes to hurontario street. the white suv went airborne and
came to rest on the left shoulder of the exit lanes.

after
they stopped on the shoulder of the exit lanes, ms. nguyen looked back and
observed “a man standing outside of his car.” they exited their car, approached
the male, and asked if he was hurt or if anyone else was inside the vehicle.
the male was uninjured and confirmed that he was alone. ms. nguyen did not see
anyone else in the vicinity. she called 911.

ms.
nguyen described the male as tall, approximately six feet, “well kept,” and
“looked clean cut.” he had a “tan skin colour.” his “facial hair” was “very
well kept,” and he “looked dressed proper.” the male never re-entered his
vehicle or left the area. they asked him to “step further away” from the car as
they were concerned about the male waiting beside the damaged vehicle.

ms.
nguyen testified that the paramedics were the first to arrive, approximately 15
to 20 minutes after she called 911, not the police. she testified that the
paramedics did a “quick check” on the male. after the paramedics confirmed that
she had called 911, she was told they could leave. she thought they left the
scene between 9:00 and 9:30. she described the weather as “fine” that evening.
officer hickey’s testimony:

officer
hickey received the call about this accident at 8:43 p.m. he was advised that a
white lexus suv was involved in a collision. he arrived at 8:55 p.m.

first
responders and a tow truck were already on the scene when he arrived. the
heavily damaged white suv was blocking two lanes of the exit ramp to hurontario
street.

after
officer hickey exited his police cruiser, he approached the white suv and found
no occupants.

officer
hickey testified that he was “directed” to the paramedic's vehicle, where he
located mr. singh in the rear being assessed by the paramedics. he believed the
individual who directed him to the paramedic vehicle was “the independent
witness,” who was female and had stopped to check on the driver's well-being.

officer
hickey spoke to mr. singh, who identified himself with his driver’s licence.
mr. singh confirmed that he was the driver and that no one else was in the car.
analysis:

there
was evidence that mr. singh was operating his vehicle when it collided with the
barrier, as ms. nguyen saw. she observed him standing outside of the damaged
vehicle. no one else was nearby or close to the damaged vehicle. there was no
evidence that anyone other than mr. singh had been in the vehicle.

the
crown cannot rely on any conscripted evidence, such as mr. singh’s
pre-cautioned statements inside the ems van, to prove the issue of identity. statements
of the accused without the right to counsel can only be used as an
investigative tool to confirm or reject the officer's suspicion that the driver
might be impaired. they cannot be used as direct evidence to incriminate the
driver. (see:
r. v. elias,
2005 scc 37 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 37 (scc).)

in
r. v. soules, o.j. no. 2500,
2011 onca 429, leave to appeal
refused s.c.c.a. no. 375 (s.c.c.), the ontario court of appeal ruled
that any statements compelled by statute are not admissible in evidence against
that person; such derivative use would violate the right against
self-incrimination, soon after parliament responded by enacting section
320.31(9).

police
are empowered to investigate drivers for impaired driving both at common law
and pursuant to provincial highway legislation. evidence they obtain from
questioning the driver or compelled roadside sobriety tests before the detained
person can access counsel goes only to the officer’s grounds to make an arrest
and approved instrument demand. it may not be used to incriminate the accused
at trial. in that way, the limit on the right to counsel at the roadside has
been considered reasonable. statements made to a peace officer, including a
statement compelled under a provincial act, are admissible for the limited
purpose of justifying a demand under s. 320.27 or s. 320.28. (see: section
320.31(9).)

officer
hickey attended the ems van to find only one person being tended to by the
paramedics. he was alone. the police cruiser’s dashboard video camera showed
officer hickey attending to the ems van.

in
a single-car collision, mr. singh was alone and being tended to by ems
personnel. a reality-based analysis would logically conclude that the person in
the ambulance was the driver who smashed into the guardrail. there was
independent evidence that mr. singh was directed into the care of the emergency
personnel.

any
suggestion that there may have been an unidentified third party who went
unnoticed by ms. nguyen lacks any basis in this record to provide even the
slightest support for this far-fetched claim. engaging in such idle speculation
would be a legal error. a reasonable doubt based on an inference not supported
by facts misapplies the law. (see:
r. v. polley,
 n.s.j. no. 347
at para. 18, c.a.)

there
is a strong chain of custody of mr. singh from the moment of the collision to
his arrest by officer hickey. there was other evidence, as i have mentioned, to
support the claim that mr. singh was the vehicle's driver. there is nothing to
raise a reasonable doubt about the driver’s identity.

mr.
singh only testified on the
voir dire
and not the trial proper. i have
not considered his testimony nor ms. nguyen’s identification of “lovejit” as
the person they followed before the collision. still, i have determined that
the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that he was the vehicle’s
driver.
could officer hickey reasonably rely on the “fail” on
the asd due to a potential residual mouth alcohol issue?
the evidence:
officer hickey’s testimony:

officer
hickey testified that after the paramedics had cleared mr. singh and observed
that his eyes were very bloodshot and glossy, he asked mr. singh if he had
consumed any alcohol during the “evening or prior to”, to which mr. singh
replied that he had “a few shots of tequila”.

this
response also formed part of his suspicion that mr. singh had alcohol in his
body while driving. this led officer hickey to read the alcohol screening
demand to mr. singh at 9:07 p.m.

officer
hickey was uncertain whether he had asked about mr. singh’s alcohol consumption
while he was in the paramedic van or the back of his police cruiser. officer
hickey did not inquire when mr. singh had consumed the tequila shots, nor the
time of his last drink. he was also aware that a false high reading or failure
on the asd could occur if a person had consumed alcohol within 15 minutes of
the test being administered.
the residual mouth alcohol issue:

for
police to arrest someone, they must have reasonable and probable grounds
("rpg"). rpg requires, among other things, a subjectively held honest
belief by the arresting officer that the person has committed an offence, and
that subjective belief must be objectively reasonable.

a
residual mouth alcohol problem can lead to a false positive reading if the alcohol
screening demand test is done within 15 minutes of alcohol consumption. if an
officer knows that residual mouth alcohol will make a result unreliable, then
there can be no honestly held subjective belief that an offence has been
committed. (see:
r. v. notaro,
2018 onca 449
at para.
38.)

the
court of appeal stated in that decision the following, at paragraph 43, concerning
the objective grounds for the rpg test:
(a)
if the information known to an arresting officer about a suspect's
residual mouth alcohol would make it unreasonable for the officer to rely on
the accuracy of an asd fail result, reasonable and probable grounds will not be
established, whether or not the arresting officer turned her mind to the
presence or effect of residual mouth alcohol.
(b)
if it is reasonable for the arresting officer to rely on an asd fail
result based on the information known to her, then the failure of the arresting
officer to turn her mind to the presence or effect of residual mouth alcohol is
immaterial.

the failure of an officer to turn their mind to the residual mouth
alcohol issue will not, in and of itself, amount to a
charter
breach. (see:
notaro
at para.
50.)
analysis:

in this case, officer hickey’s first contact with mr. singh was at 9:06
p.m. the failure was ultimately received at approximately 9:10 p.m. he
understood that the accident had occurred at approximately 8:43 p.m., close to when
the 911 call was made to report the accident. officer hickey arrived at 8:55
p.m. despite mr. singh’s admission of consuming alcohol, officer hickey did not
turn his mind to the possibility of residual mouth alcohol.

in
this case, i infer that officer hickey had a subjective belief that the asd he
was using was in proper working order. he had checked the calibration on the
device, and he did a self-test at the beginning of his shift, which gave a zero
reading, and this made sense to him because he had not been drinking. when the
failure test result was received from mr. singh, he reasonably believed that
mr. singh had just been operating a motor vehicle with over 80 mg of alcohol in
100 ml of blood.

this
belief was objectively reasonable. officer hickey had information that the asd
was calibrated correctly, and his self-test at the beginning of the shift
confirmed this belief. further, it was consistent with other information that
officer hickey had, namely, mr. singh’s single-car collision into the bullnose
of the guardrail and his very bloodshot and glassy eyes. officer hickey
conceded that he did not have reasonable and probable grounds based on all the
information to arrest mr. singh for impaired operation. officer hickey's
subjective belief, in all the circumstances, that an offence of 80 plus had
been committed was objectively reasonable.

there
was no evidence at all which would cause officer hickey to believe that mr. singh
had been drinking “a few tequila shots” in the 15 minutes before the alcohol
screening demand failure. the mere possibility that he had been drinking during
that time is not enough to undermine the subjective belief that the offence of 80
plus had been committed here. i repeat that his subjective belief was
objectively reasonable.

in
my view, there was no section 8 violation. the immediacy requirement for an alcohol
screening demand and provision of a breath sample was met. i am also satisfied
that there was no residual mouth alcohol problem present here.
after forming a reasonable suspicion that mr. singh
may have alcohol present in his system, was officer hickey's decision to place
mr. singh in the rear of his cruiser to administer the alcohol screening demand
considered arbitrary detention and did it constitute a breach of section 9 of
the
charter
?
the evidence:
officer hickey’s testimony:

as
mentioned above, officer hickey formed a reasonable suspicion that mr. singh
had alcohol in his body, based on his observations of mr. singh and an
admission that he had consumed alcohol and had been driving.

officer
hickey testified that it was “very, very windy, very cold” that evening and
that mr. singh was placed in his cruiser to keep him warm at mr. singh’s request.
he maintained that the door was kept open all the time. he informed mr. singh
that the in-car camera was turned on and activated. he was also advised that he
was not under arrest.

officer
hickey did not think that there was anything wrong with complying with mr.
singh’s request to sit in the rear of the cruiser for the test, since it was a
cold evening. he could not recall if mr. singh had his coat with him that
evening. however, in the video, mr. singh had his jacket with him but did not
wear it while seated in the back of the cruiser.

whether
or not mr. singh asked to sit in the cruiser, officer hickey testified he was “not
comfortable with the public standing on the side of the road while i’m
investigating a motor vehicle collision. it’s a very dangerous scene so i most
likely would have even offered to him to sit in the vehicle.”

he
also commented that despite the completely blocked roadway, he was concerned
about passing motorists and still considered the scene dangerous.

officer
hickey was adamant that he did not direct mr. singh into his cruiser. he
testified, “he wasn’t forced to sit in the cruiser. i would have offered it. if
he said no, he would have been able to just stand by the side of the road or
sit in the tow truck while his vehicle was being hooked up.”

officer
hickey testified that he agreed to mr. singh’s request to sit in the back of
his cruiser because it was cold, and mr. singh was cooperative.
officer hickey’s in-car camera video:

when
mr. singh was about to sit in the rear of the cruiser, as the door opened,
officer hickey instructed him to sit in the cruiser so they could chat. he
advised mr. singh that he was not under arrest.

as
he entered the cruiser, mr. singh carried his jacket, which he placed on the
seat beside him.

officer
hickey told mr. singh he needed to read something, and mr. singh responded that
he felt under arrest.

incorrectly,
officer hickey told mr. singh that he had a suspicion that mr. singh was impaired
by alcohol.

on
two occasions, the rear passenger door closed. on one occasion, mr. singh remarked
that he was “very” cold, and on another occasion, he expressed concern that the
door was closed on him.
mr. singh’s testimony:

mr.
singh’s testimony on the
voir dire
was intended to address the ss. 8 and
9 arguments.

mr.
singh is 38 years old. he is married with three children. he is a mortgage
broker. he has no criminal record.

mr.
singh testified that after he left the ambulance, he stood outside for approximately
three minutes until officer hickey directed him to his cruiser because it was
cold outside.

mr.
singh confirmed that it was windy that night, but he never complained about the
cold to officer hickey and that he never asked to sit in the cruiser.

mr.
singh testified that when sitting in the cruiser and the door closed twice, he
felt “scared, a little bit nervous and was uncomfortable.”

in
cross-examination, he conceded that he was also nervous in the ambulance, but
not because of drinking, but rather that he had been involved in a collision
with his father’s car.

in
cross-examination, he agreed that the door was opened quickly after it closed
on both occasions.
reasonable suspicion, section 320.27(2) of the
code,
and roadside testing in a police cruiser:

i
am satisfied for the following reasons that officer hickey had a reasonable
suspicion and had also complied with the prerequisites in section 320.27(2) of
the
code
in making a demand.

section
320.27 of the
code
provides the police with two authorities through
which they may demand an alcohol screening sample. these are the
"reasonable suspicion" found in s.320.27(1) of the
code
(reasonable suspicion) and the "mandatory alcohol screening" under
s.320.27(2) of the
code
(mandatory alcohol screening) powers.

the
first authority is grounded in the
charter
standard that police may
detain a person for investigation, provided they possess "reasonable
grounds to suspect" criminal activity. in the context of alcohol screening,
an officer may demand a screening sample provided they have a "reasonable
suspicion" that "a person has alcohol... in their body and that the
person has, within the preceding three hours, operated a conveyance."

the
second power, mandatory alcohol screening, does not require any grounds. the
police may issue a mandatory alcohol screening demand, provided:
i. the subject of the demand "is operating a motor
vehicle";
ii. the officer is in the "lawful exercise" of
their duties;
iii. the officer possesses an approved screening device on
hand, and
iv. the demand and ensuing sample are
"immediately" provided.

the
immediacy requirement of the demand and breath test is integral to the
constitutionality of the screening regime and supports the suspension or deferral
of engaged
charter
rights.

the
mandatory alcohol screening provision has been repeatedly found to be
constitutional. the
charter
permits the police to employ this
investigatory step without any grounds. the police must comply with the
statutory requirements before demanding that a driver provide an alcohol
screening sample of breath.

officer
hickey satisfied all statutory preconditions before relying on the mandatory
screening authority. mr. singh was "operating a motor vehicle". in investigating
the cause of the collision and then checking whether the driver may have been
impaired by alcohol, officer hickey was in the "lawful exercise" of his
duties. the officer had an approved screening device in his possession. there
was an "immediate" demand and ensuing screening process.

section
320.27(1)(b) permits an officer to demand an alcohol screening sample upon
forming a "reasonable suspicion" that the ostensible driver has
alcohol in their body. "reasonable grounds to suspect" is a lower and
less rigorous standard than reasonable grounds to believe". this lower
charter
threshold authorizes less intrusive investigatory steps (for example, alcohol
screening) where a person's privacy interests are diminished (for example,
while one engages in the highly regulated act of driving).

the
"reasonable suspicion" standard must be based on "objectively discernible
facts," considering the totality of the circumstances. (see:
r. v.
chehil,
2013 scc 49, para.
26.) it engages reasonable
"possibilities" as opposed to "probabilities" of criminal activity.
a reasonable suspicion need not be the only available inference to be drawn
from all the facts. "exculpatory, neutral, or equivocal information cannot
be disregarded when assessing a constellation of factors", but the
threshold may still be satisfied when innocent inferences are also present. (see:
chehil, at para.
5.)

officer
hickey had reasonable suspicion that mr. singh had alcohol in his body before
he made his alcohol screening demand. there had been a single-car collision.
mr. singh had admitted to driving and having a few tequila shots. officer
hickey had observed mr. singh’s eyes to be very bloodshot and red.

while
"reasonable suspicion" must be objectively based on facts, there is
also a subjective requirement for the officer.

the
testimony must provide objective grounds to support the requisite suspicion
relied upon by the officer. officer hickey testified that he had observed very
bloodshot and glossy eyes, and mr. singh’s admission that he had consumed
alcohol by the time he issued the screening demand. the only reasonable
inference from this constellation of facts is that the officer subjectively
believed mr. singh was driving with alcohol in his system. as i found earlier,
this belief was objectively supported.

accordingly,
i find no violation of mr. singh’s ss. 8 and 9
charter
rights. to
reiterate, reasonable suspicion is no longer required for alcohol screening if
the officer has an approved screening device - see s. 327.27(2).

i
now turn to the other argument, that officer hickey arbitrarily detained mr.
singh by directing him to sit in the rear of his cruiser to conduct the alcohol
screening test.

based
on mr. singh’s testimony, it was argued that officer hickey told or directed
mr. singh to sit in his cruiser. however, the crown submits that officer hickey
followed mr. singh’s request to sit in the cruiser as he stated that he was
cold, despite having a jacket. furthermore, the defence submitted, and i accept,
based on the video evidence, that the passenger rear door of the cruiser did
not remain open the entire time while mr. singh was seated. the door closed
twice, possibly caused by the wind that evening. officer hickey denied that he
closed the door on purpose. both times, officer hickey opened the door. it was apparent
officer hickey wanted to keep the door open as a matter of convenience for mr.
singh. it was a windy night, as evidenced by officer hickey’s pants, which
could be seen flapping in the wind. he made it clear to mr. singh that he was
not under arrest.

i
do not believe that i need to reconcile this difference in opinion as to how or
why mr. singh ended up in the rear of officer hickey’s cruiser. in the final
analysis, mr. singh was detained pursuant to a lawful investigation at the
roadside.

in
support of his position that ss. 8 and 9 were breached in these circumstances, mr.
lent provided the following decisions:
r. v. romaniuk,
 o.j. no.
1735;
r. v. dimaria,
 o.j. no. 2067;
r. v. comrie,
 a.j.
no. 1422
and
r. v. orde,
 o.j. no. 6317. these cases are all distinguishable
on their facts. these cases all involved handcuffing the accused as part of the
alcohol screening demand. absent exceptional circumstances, courts have ruled
that handcuffing a person for the alcohol screening demand / test is a
violation of the right to be free from unreasonable search and seizure and
arbitrary detention as set out in ss. 8 and 9 of the
charter. mr. singh
was placed in handcuffs after he failed the alcohol screening demand / test and
was arrested.

in
r. v. klotz,
 o.j. no. 4137, justice botham found fault with the
officer conducting the test inside his cruiser rather than on the other side of
his cruiser, so both would have been protected from passing traffic. she found
that the officer chose to conduct this test and other screening tests that
evening in his cruiser solely based on a location he had chosen and did not
turn his mind to whether a less restrictive manner of detention would have been
possible. her honour found that the officer’s decision to conduct the roadside
testing of the accused inside his cruiser was not reasonably necessary and did
constitute a breach of the accused's section 9 rights. (see:
klotz, at paras.
26-27.) she was entitled to make that decision. given the brief detention, i
am unsure i would make the same decision. given the circumstances, i am certain
i am not making the same finding in this case.

i
prefer the reasoning of justice duncan in his decision in
r. v. mahipaul,
 o.j. no. 2688, at para. 20, in which he expressed the following view:
20 placing defendant in police car: i do not think that the
case of
aucoin
stands for the proposition that placing a detainee in the
back seat of a police car is per se unlawful or a
charter
violation.
this would particularly be so in the asd demand situation where the officer is
specifically authorized to require the detainee to accompany him for the
purpose of conducting the test. the interior of a police car might reasonably
be seen as an appropriate place for reasons of safety, warmth, quiet or other
circumstance. in my view,
aucoin
decides that a police officer cannot
unilaterally expand his own powers of search by making an unnecessary and
unreasonable decision as to where to place a detainee. in this case there is no
evidence that placing the defendant in the police car involved any further
search of his person. accordingly, that placement did not infringe the
charter.

he
further expanded upon this, in the context of placing the accused in a cruiser
that triggers a search that is not authorized, in his decision in
r. v.
chandarh,
 o.j. no. 7199 at paras. 14-15:
14 to expand somewhat: in my view application of
aucoin
to roadside sobriety investigation should be approached with caution in that
the roadside law permits such investigations, even randomly conducted, and
provides the police with exceptional powers to conduct them;
r v orbanski.
a motorist can be detained, subjected to asd testing, field sobriety testing,
questioning and obviously be the subject of observation of smells, slurs,
stumbles etc. if all these things can be done at the scene, detaining the
motorist in the process, it seems to me to be of little significance as to
where that investigation takes place - in or out of the police car. it might be
apt to ask the question: did the placement of the defendant in the police car
permit the police to do something, such as search, that they otherwise would
not lawfully have been permitted to do? it is only if that occurs that the
reasonable necessity issue is reached.
15 in this case, for the reasons given, there was no
unlawfulness in placing the defendant in the police car. however, if i am wrong
in that conclusion and must consider the issue of reasonable necessity, i would
further conclude that it was reasonably necessary. this was a major
intersection, traffic was still moving through the area, the defendant was
unsteady, possibly from the collision, his car was wrecked, leaving the police
car the only reasonable alternative to standing outside or sitting on wet
ground.

officer
hickey was a credible and reliable witness, despite two minor inconsistencies
in his testimony. firstly, officer hickey testified that he believed he entered
the ambulance from the rear door, but the video showed him entering the side
door. secondly, he thought that the door to his cruiser was never closed when
mr. singh was in the rear of his cruiser. the video showed that the door closed
twice momentarily. i do not see anything turned on these inconsistencies very
much, nor do i see that undermining officer hickey’s reliability. the fact that
he felt he went through the rear door versus the side door is inconsequential.
the point is that when he entered the ambulance, he found only mr. singh being
treated and no one else, and he made his observations. i can understand if
officer hickey mistakenly thought the door closed on mr. singh, as it may have
been the case that the wind blew the door closed or he inadvertently closed it.
in any event, it was never officer hickey’s intention to lock mr. singh in the
rear of his cruiser at this point. finally, it is understandable not to recall
those details accurately when testifying about an event from nearly 16 months
ago.

mr.
singh was a fair witness. i am not prepared to find that he was only scared in
the rear of the cruiser because the door was closed twice for a few seconds. as
he said in his evidence, he was already a little nervous for other reasons.

there
is no doubt that the ambit of section 9 extends beyond the mere basis for
detention and protects an individual's right against an unreasonable manner of
detention. (see:
r. v. aucoin,
2012 scc 66 (canlii), 3 s.c.r. 408 at para.
35.) the
question, therefore, is whether, having regard to the other options available,
the brief detention of mr. singh in the rear of officer hickey’s cruiser during
the alcohol screening demand / test was unreasonable. i do not believe it was.

i find that there
was no unlawfulness in placing mr. singh in the cruiser's rear to administer
the test. whether mr. singh asked to go into the cruiser to keep warm or if it
was a kind suggestion by officer hickey is not a relevant consideration, but
rather, was placing mr. singh in the cruiser's rear reasonably necessary?

officer hickey
appeared to be alone. mr. singh’s car had significant front-end damage. in my
view, it was unsafe and unreasonable to perform the alcohol screening demand /
test on the shoulder or the blocked-off exit lanes of highway 401. it was a
cold and windy night. for example, mr. singh admitted on video that he felt
cold while sitting in the rear of the cruiser with the door open. additionally,
he was visibly shaking in the back of the cruiser.

there was no
other reasonable place or means besides the cruiser to administer the test. the
risks identified by the officer justified taking precautions, and briefly
placing mr. singh in the rear of his cruiser,
unrestrained,
as a minimally intrusive means to mitigate these risks. this
was a clear case of “reasonable necessity.”

even if i am
incorrect in my assessment of this detention being reasonably necessary, i
would not exclude the evidence as the detention was “brief” and there was a
reasonable excuse for mr. singh’s detention.

there were no
breaches of mr. singh’s sections 8 and 9 rights.
was officer hickey’s delay
of five to six minutes in giving the rights to counsel to mr. singh a violation
of section 10(b) of the
charter
?
the evidence:
officer hickey’s testimony and the in-car video
recording:

after mr. singh
failed the alcohol screening demand / test at 9:10 p.m., officer hickey
arrested mr. singh at 9:10 p.m. the video recording showed that mr. singh was
removed from the cruiser, turned around and placed his hands on the side of the
cruiser. officer hickey testified that he handcuffed and searched mr. singh. the
rights to counsel commenced at five or six minutes later. there was no evidence
from officer hickey as to what he did after handcuffing and searching mr. singh
until he began reading the rights to counsel.
the right to counsel without delay:

section 10(b) of
the
charter
states the following:
everyone has the right to on arrest or detention.
(b)to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be
informed of that right.

with respect to
section 10(b), the police must immediately inform the detainee of their right
to counsel when the detention arises. (see:
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33,
para.
41.) at para. 42, the court closed the door on the flexibility of
reading the rtc subject to officer or public safety concerns:
in our view, the words 'without delay' mean 'immediately'
for s. 10(b). subject to concerns for officer or public safety, and such
limitations as prescribed by law and justified under s. 1 of the
charter,
the police have a duty to inform a detainee of his or her right to retain and
instruct counsel, and a duty to facilitate that right immediately upon
detention.

regrettably,
this decision did not resolve the ongoing litigation concerning the timing of
the right to counsel.

however, a short
delay in reading rights to counsel while the police conduct necessary tasks,
such as handcuffing and searching the accused or bringing them back to the
police cruiser, will not violate s. 10(b). (see:
r. v. fisk,
2020 oncj
88
at para.
51;
r. v. agnihotri,
2019 oncj 551
at para.
9;
r. v.
singh,
2017 oncj 386
at para.
19.)

further, the
ontario court of appeal has held that a brief delay in searching, securing the
parties, and gaining control of the scene is a reasonable limitation on the
immediacy requirement. (see:
r. v. pileggi,
2021 onca 4
at paras.
57-62.)

it is sufficient
for arresting officers to rely on generalized safety concerns in support of a
decision to place an arrested individual in the rear of a police cruiser before
informing the individual of their right to counsel. (see:
r. v. lep'okhina,
2023 onsc 2850, at para.
21.) police officers are not required to handcuff the
accused with one hand and, with the other hand, read the right to counsel from
their notebooks. (see:
fisk, at para.
51.)
the analysis:

the case law is
clear that the “immediacy requirement” for the rights to counsel has less
flexibility.

i agree with the
defence that there was a section 10(b) violation with respect to the delay in
providing rights to counsel in this case. as mentioned above, the arrest was at
9:10 p.m., and the rights to counsel were provided at 9:15-9:16 p.m. in my
view, the delay is not quite six minutes. officer hickey testified that he
handcuffed and patted down mr. singh but did not provide a time or estimate of how
long that process took. i would deduct about two minutes from the five or six-minute
delay between 9:10 p.m. and 9:15-9:16 p.m. to allow for the handcuffing, which
is an officer safety issue and may be deducted from the right to counsel delay.
let me say that whether the delay was three minutes or four minutes, the delay
here was relatively minor in my view.

no reason for
the delay in providing rights to counsel was apparent. the right to counsel
should have been provided right after the handcuffing. allowing two minutes for
the handcuffing, the delay was about three to four minutes, which was a breach
of s. 10(b), albeit a minor one.
section 24(2) of the
charter:

i have concluded
that there was a three-to-four-minute violation with respect to giving the
rights to counsel that caused a section 10(b) breach.

let me say that
the section 10(b) breach does not support the exclusion of the breath sample
evidence under section 24(2) in any material way. the section 10(b) breach was
brief, only three to four minutes. the delay in giving rights to counsel was never
explained. on my view of the facts, the police did not seek to obtain evidence
from mr. singh during the delay or without allowing him to consult duty counsel.
but that is not determinative of the issue. as justice paciocco recently stated
in
r. v. smith,
2023 onca 227, at para.
67, if the police did not seek
to elicit incriminating evidence during the delay by not committing a second
breach, it does not lessen the impact of the informational breach. officer
hickey should have provided the rights to counsel immediately after handcuffing.
however, according to my calculation, the delay was only three to four minutes.
there should have been no delay, but i consider the breach to be of low
seriousness and to have had a minimal impact on mr. singh's
charter
rights. i am aware of the alleged "systemic" issues concerning the
delay in providing rights to counsel in peel. still, i consider that the
section 10(b) breach here was not serious, had little impact on mr. singh, and
does not justify the exclusion of evidence.

society's
interest in adjudication on the merits favours the inclusion of the evidence.
balancing all the
grant
factors and considering the s. 10(b) breach, the
admission of the breath samples would not bring the administration of justice
into disrepute.

in summary, on
the section 24 issue, the section 10(b) breach does not support excluding the
breath sample evidence. the application is dismissed.
did the crown prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
mr. singh’s ability to operate a vehicle was slightly impaired by alcohol,
contrary to section 320.14(1)(a) of the
code
?
the evidence:
jennie nguyen’s testimony:

ms. nguyen
testified that she spoke with mr. singh; he did not slur his speech or stutter,
nor did she smell the odour of alcohol on his breath. he did not have any
difficulty walking, nor did he display any problems with his motor skills.
officer hickey’s testimony:

officer hickey
observed that mr. singh had very bloodshot and glossy eyes.
sergeant nasr’s testimony:

the qualified
breath technician, sergeant nasr observed mr. singh on the video in the booking
area and agreed that he had no difficulty walking. what he did note that
evening, however, was that mr. singh did have an odour of alcohol on his breath.
on the other hand, mr. singh’s speech was not slurred, his gait was fine, and
there was no swaying. he did find that, based on the readings and the
observations, that the effects of alcohol were “slight.” he conceded in cross-examination
that had he not known what mr. singh’s readings were, he would not have concluded,
based on his observations and interactions, that mr. singh’s ability to operate
a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol.
impaired driving:

the test for
impaired operation of a motor vehicle has been set out in
r. v. stellato,
1993 canlii 3375 (on ca), 78 c.c.c. (3d) 380 (on ca), affirmed
1994 canlii 94 (scc), 90 c.c.c. (3d) 160 (s.c.c.):
the trial judge must be satisfied that the accused's ability
to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol or a drug. if the evidence
of impairment is so frail as to leave the trial judge with a reasonable doubt
as to impairment, the accused must be acquitted. if the evidence of impairment
establishes any degree of impairment ranging from slight to great, the offence
has been made out. the offence is not met merely by someone drinking alcohol and
being in care or control of a vehicle. neither is it made out by evidence of
impairment alone. the impairment must be such to be a contributing factor to an
impairment of the ability to operate a motor vehicle.

the “
stellato
test” is now incorporated into the wording of s. 320.14(1)(a) of the
code.
slight impairment to drive involves a reduced ability in some measure to
perform the complex task of driving through reduced physical ability in motor
function or balance, or a reduction in the many mental faculties necessary to
drive safely such as vision, reaction time, perception, divided attention,
processing multiple tasks and regard for rules of the road. indicia of
impairment are not considered individually; rather, the totality of the
evidence as a whole must be considered. (see:
r. v. grant, o.j.
no. 1143 at para.
50,
2014 onsc 1479;
r. v. bush, o.j. no. 3453
at para.
47,
2010 onca 554.)

the legal test
of impairment to any degree does not mean that slight evidence will be
sufficient to prove impairment beyond a reasonable doubt. as the alberta court
of appeal explained in
r. v. andrews, a.j. no. 8,
1996 abca 23,
leave refused s.c.c.a. no. 115, the “
stellato
test,” speaks to
the degree of impairment in the ability to drive, which must be proved.
analysis:

the arresting
officer never smelled the odour of alcohol on mr. singh’s breath—sergeant nasr
did record the presence of alcohol on his breath. but i remind myself that the
smell of alcohol alone, by itself, does not establish the amount of alcohol in
a driver’s blood nor establish that the driver's ability to operate a motor
vehicle was impaired due to the consumption of alcohol. (see:
r. v. singh,
 o.j. no. 1164 at paras. 7 and 10.)

mr. singh’s unexplained
(or something or someone cut him off) collision with the bullnose of the
guardrail between the 401 collector lanes and the exit lanes to hurontario
street at 9 p.m. is not by itself an indication of impairment in the ability to
drive. it is evidence of careless driving. careless driving could be an
indicium of impaired ability, involving
inter alia, an inability to pay
due care and attention or a failure to control the vehicle too quickly. (see:
r.
v. chung, o.j. no. 5325,
2004 oncj 347.)

there was no
evidence of how long ms. nguyen observed mr. singh wavering in his lane. i did
not find her evidence very compelling on this point. the driving was not
lengthy or imperilling, and what she observed was not necessarily consistent with
impairment by alcohol, but a sudden and late change of course to continue in
the westbound collector lanes rather than exiting at hurontario street.

i have observed
mr. singh in the cruiser and booking videos; he displayed no physical signs of
impairment. furthermore, ms. nguyen did not notice any signs of impairment. it
is a relevant consideration in my analysis that sergeant nasr would not have
concluded mr. singh was impaired by alcohol without being aware of the
readings.

although the
readings are admissible, they can only be used to confirm that alcohol had been
consumed and nothing more. (see:
r. v. tusiuk,
 o.j. no. 802 (s.c.j.)
at para. 4
and
r. v. dinelle,
 n.s.j. no. 246 (c.a.).)

despite the
unexplained accident, consumption of some alcohol before the accident (based on
the readings), the odour of alcohol detected on his breath in the breath room,
along with his bloodshot eyes, does still leave me with reasonable doubt about
mr. singh’s ability to operate a motor vehicle while impaired by alcohol.
did the crown prove that mr. singh drove in a manner
that, considering all the circumstances, was dangerous to the public, contrary
to section 320.17 of the
code
?
the evidence:
jennie nguyen’s testimony:

as mentioned
above, the only evidence regarding mr. singh’s motor vehicle operation was from
jennie nguyen, a passenger following behind mr. singh.

she observed
that mr. singh’s car was “wavering between heading straight on the highway or
exiting.” (transcript dated march 5, 2025, page 2, line 10.) she testified that
the vehicle was “wavering between the two lanes.” (transcript dated march 5,
2025, page 2, lines 21 and 22.) she observed mr. singh’s vehicle strike the
divider separating highway 401 from the exit lanes to hurontario street and
lift into the air. ms. nguyen testified that they observed the vehicle for some
time, but it was just before the accident that she noticed the “wavering”.
dangerous driving:

dangerous
operation of a motor vehicle or a conveyance is defined in section 320.13(1) of
the
code
as follows:
everyone commits an offence who
operates a conveyance in a manner that, having regard to all of the
circumstances, is dangerous to the public.

these
circumstances include, for motor vehicles, the nature, condition, and use of
the place at which the motor vehicle is being operated and the amount of
traffic that at the time is or might reasonably be expected to be at that place.

dangerous
driving involves a “significant” or “marked” departure from the standard of a
reasonable, prudent person. (see:
r. v. macgillivray,
1995 canlii 139 (scc), s.c.j. no.
20, 1 s.c.r. 890 (s.c.c.).) it is erroneous to equate dangerous driving
to failing to exercise the standard of care of a prudent driver. (see:
r. v.
bartlett,
1998 canlii 2998 (on ca), o.j. no. 1608, 124 c.c.c. (3d) 417 (ont. c.a.).) a
momentary act of negligence (crossing the highway's centre line) was
insufficient evidence to support a finding of dangerous operation. (see:
r.
v. beatty,
2008 scc 5 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 5, 1 s.c.r. 49 (s.c.c.).) the minority
held that the “marked departure” requirement applies to both the
actus reus
and the
mens rea
of the offence of dangerous operation of a motor
vehicle.

the distinction
between a mere departure, which may support civil liability, and the marked
departure required for criminal fault is a matter of degree. still, the trier
of fact must identify how and in what way the driver went markedly beyond mere
carelessness. evidence of a single and momentary error in judgment, albeit with
tragic consequences, did not provide evidence on which a properly instructed
trier of fact, acting reasonably, could convict. (see:
r. v. roy,
2012 scc 26 (canlii), 
s.c.j. no. 26, 281 c.c.c. (3d) 433 (s.c.c.). however, in applying
roy, a
trial judge must not allow the “momentary” nature of the dangerous driving to
obscure the central issue: what a reasonable person would have foreseen and
done in the circumstances of the accused. (see
r. v. chung, 
s.c.j. no. 8,
2020 scc 8 (s.c.c.).)

the onus lies on
the crown to prove both the
actus reus
and the
mens rea
of the
offence of dangerous operation of a motor vehicle. for the
actus reus,
the accused’s conduct must be measured against the wording of section 320.13.
the trier of fact must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that, viewed
objectively, the accused was driving in a manner that, “having regard to all of
the circumstances, [was] dangerous to the public”.

how the motor
vehicle was operated is at issue, not the consequence of the driving. the trier
of fact must also be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the required
mens
rea
accompanied the accused’s objectively dangerous conduct. in making the
objective assessment, the trier of fact should be satisfied based on all the evidence,
including evidence about the accused’s actual state of mind, if any, that the
conduct amounted to a marked departure from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would observe in the accused’s circumstances. moreover, suppose
an explanation is offered by the accused. in that case, to convict, the trier
of fact must be satisfied that a reasonable person in similar circumstances
ought to have been aware of the risk and the danger involved in the conduct
manifested by the accused.
analysis:

in my view, neither
the
actus reus
nor the
mens rea
of the offence of dangerous
driving has been made out.

there was no
evidence of the vehicle’s speed before impact. indeed, there was no evidence
that mr. singh was speeding. the only term to describe mr. singh’s driving was
“wavering” before the collision. ms. nguyen used this term to describe her
impression that mr. singh was indecisive about exiting or continuing in the
collector lanes. she also used the term to describe mr. singh moving from side
to side between two lanes.

there was no
evidence of the amount of traffic or the traffic flow at this time.

there was no
evidence of erratic driving beyond “wavering” between lanes.

i am uncertain
that this was a case of careless driving or an indecision on whether to exit at
hurontario street or continue along highway 401.

it is an error
to consider alcohol consumption in deciding a dangerous driving case. (see:
r.
v. churchill,
 b.c.j. no. 2949 (b.c.c.a.).)

for these
reasons, i cannot be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the driving was a
marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in
the circumstances.
conclusion:

the
charter
application is dismissed. the breathalyzer readings are admitted into evidence.
there will be a finding of guilt on count #2. for the reasons already stated,
mr. singh is not guilty of counts #1 and #3.
released: april 24,
2025
signed: justice paul t. o’marra