source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj556/2025oncj556.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. liu, 2025 oncj 556
date: 
2025 10 22
court
file no.: newmarket 998-23-91107152
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
panpan liu
before
justice michael perlin
heard
on september 15 and 16, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 22, 2025
brooke wakegijig............................................................................... counsel
for the crown
carson hurley............................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
perlin j.:
i.
overview and positions of the parties

a traffic stop for unauthorized licence plates
led police to charge the accused, mr. liu, with failing to provide a breath
sample into an approved screening device (asd) contrary to
s. 320.15
of the
criminal
code, r.s.c. 1985, c. c-46. at trial, the crown relied on video evidence
and the testimony of police constables lau and velema. the crown asks me to
find mr. liu guilty: he was arrested lawfully for having unauthorized plates; an
odour of alcohol furnished grounds for the police to demand that he provide a
breath sample into an asd; and he failed to provide a sample.

the defence called no evidence, and focussed on
three alleged
charter
breaches:
(1)
a unreasonable search, contrary to s. 8, when
officers opened mr. liu’s car door and visually inspecting the interior;
(2)
an arbitrary detention, contrary to s. 9, when
officers arrested mr. liu for “unauthorized plates” without reasonable grounds
to believe he had committed that provincial offence; and
(3)
a breach of the s. 10(b) right to access counsel
without delay, when mr. liu was held for almost two hours at the roadside
without access to counsel.

mr. liu asks for two remedies. first, he submits
that if the arrest was unlawful the odour of alcohol it disclosed must be
excised from the officer’s grounds to make the asd demand. without that
evidence, there were no grounds for the demand. without a lawful demand – an
essential element of the charge – the charge must be dismissed.

second, mr. liu submits that the
charter
breaches
should lead to the exclusion of the evidence of his failure to comply with the asd
demand. if this evidence is excluded, it would also result in the dismissal of
the charge.

the defence also argues that the asd demand was
unlawful because it was not made “forthwith”, and that mr. liu had a reasonable
excuse for failing to comply based on information police gave him regarding his
right to counsel.

before analyzing these issues, i will briefly
summarize the evidence.
ii.
brief summary of the facts

on august 17, 2023, pcs lau and velema were
operating separate marked cruisers in markham. pc lau observed a white porsche
suv. he queried the suv’s licence plate in his computer system and learned it
was registered in relation to a brown porsche suv. pc lau decided to stop the suv
for “unauthorized plates” – i.e., using “a number plate upon a vehicle other
than a number plate authorized for use on that vehicle”: see
highway traffic
act, r.s.o. 1990, c. h.8, s. 12(1)(d). he testified that he thought the suv
might be stolen, based on its location in markham.

at 12:15 a.m., pcs lau and velema initiated a
traffic stop. pc lau used his cruiser to block the front of the suv in a live
lane of traffic. pc velema blocked it from the rear. the officers approached and
found a male driver, mr. liu, and a female passenger. pc lau told mr. liu he
had been stopped because his licence plate was for a different car.

pc lau demanded mr. liu’s driver’s licence,
insurance and motor-vehicle permit. he demanded mr. liu’s keys to prevent him
from fleeing. pc lau testified that mr. liu complied with the demand for his
keys. pc lau also testified that he decided to open the suv’s driver-side door
to take mr. liu’s keys, and did so. inside the door, pc lau saw an open can of
beer and advised mr. liu, “now you’re being investigated under the lla” (i.e.,
the
liquor licence and control act, 2019, s.o. 2019, c. 15, sched. 22
(llca)).

mr. liu told officers the suv was his and that
the colour did not match because he had had the suv “wrapped” to change its
colour to white. pc lau told mr. liu that he could be arrested for the
non-matching plate, but that the officer was not arresting him.

mr. liu gave the officers his whole wallet and a
collection of papers. his driver’s licence was found in the wallet. pc lau
glanced at the papers and they did not appear to contain the insurance or
permit information. mr. liu said he would need to call someone to get the
documents requested.

at 12:17 a.m., pc lau arrested mr. liu for unauthorized
plates, based on mr. liu not being able to provide documentation and insisting
the suv was his, and the fact that the suv was supposed to be brown but was
white. he handcuffed mr. liu and conducted a search incident to arrest.

while both officers were near mr. liu during the
search, they both smelled an odour of alcoholic beverage coming from him.
during the search, officers also discovered a suspected controlled substance in
his pocket and arrested him for possession. officers later searched the suv
under the llca and found more suspected drugs.


at 12:19 a.m., based on the odour of alcohol, pc
velema demanded that mr. liu provide a breath sample into an asd. officers
placed him in the back of pc lau’s cruiser.

at 12:21 a.m., pc lau read mr. liu his right to
counsel in relation to the unauthorized-plate and controlled-substance arrests.
mr. liu requested a lawyer and a mandarin-language interpreter. pc lau
requested that pc chang, a mandarin-speaking officer, attend the scene.

pc chang attended. between 12:29 a.m. and 12:35
a.m., he spoke with mr. liu and read him the asd demand again. he also read mr.
liu his right to counsel, and mr. liu indicated he wished to call a lawyer. mr.
liu was asked three times to provide a sample into the asd. on all three
occasions, he indicated that he wanted water. when officers presented an asd
and asked if he would provide a sample, he said “of course not”.

at 12:31 a.m., pc lau checked the vin (vehicle
identification number) of the white suv, which was visible on its dash, and
learned that it matched the vin for the brown suv. pc lau determined that mr.
liu had not committed the “unauthorized plate” offence.

sometime between 12:38 a.m. and 12:40 a.m., pc
chang advised mr. liu that pc lau and pc velema would be charging mr. liu with
refusing to provide a sample.

after pc chang had told mr. liu he would be
charged, pc lau continued to encourage mr. liu to provide a sample. mr. liu
never completed the asd test.

pc lau testified that he told mr. liu that if he
wanted to speak with a lawyer, he could do that back at the station. he also
told mr. liu that he could release mr. liu at the roadside if he wanted to
speak to a lawyer later. mr. liu did not indicate a preference.

at 2:28 a.m., pc lau released mr. liu at the
roadside. mr. liu’s suv had already been towed away at this time. pc lau
testified that at no point between the initiation of the stop at 12:15 a.m. and
mr. liu’s release at 2:28 a.m. had efforts been made to implement mr. liu’s
right to counsel. after releasing mr. liu, pc lau drove to the station, which
was approximately six minutes away.
iii.
analysis of alleged
charter
breaches

mr.
liu argues police breached his
charter
rights by
(a) opening his car door, (b) arresting him without grounds and (c) failing to facilitate
access to counsel.
a.
section 8: opening the suv door

the crown concedes that pc lau, by opening the
suv’s driver’s-side front door and visually inspecting its interior, conducted
a search. section 8 of the
charter
provides a right against unreasonable
search and seizure. a search, for the purposes of s. 8 of the
charter,
occurs when the state interferes with a reasonable expectation of privacy. mr.
liu, as the driver of the suv, had a reasonable expectation of privacy in it:
r.
v. belnavis,
1997 canlii 320 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 341, at para.
19. pc lau interfered with mr.
liu’s reasonable expectation of privacy by opening the door and inspecting the
interior.

a warrantless search is presumptively
unreasonable and an infringement of s. 8, unless the crown establishes that the
search was authorized by law, the authorizing law is reasonable, and the search
was conducted in a reasonable manner:
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12, at paras.
45-46.

no one suggests this search was authorized by
statute. in some cases, police will have common-law authority to open a car
door and inspect the interior: see e.g.,
r. v. aguilar,
2025 oncj 474. in
this case, there was no such common-law authority. the
waterfield
test
governs whether police action that interferes with individual liberty is
authorized by common law. the test requires, in part, that the police action be
reasonably necessary for the carrying out of a particular police duty in all
the circumstances:
fleming v. ontario,
2019 scc 45, at paras.
43-49;
r.
v. mcdonald,
2014 scc 3, at paras.
35-37.

i am satisfied that opening the door was not
reasonably necessary for pc lau to carry out his duties. pc lau testified that
he opened the suv’s door to get the key to prevent mr. liu from attempting to
drive away. he could have secured the key without opening the door. he was speaking
to mr. liu at close proximity through an open window. in cross-examination, he
agreed nothing would have prevented him from reaching through the open window rather
than opening the door. further, the evidence does not allow me to conclude that
the key was still inside the suv when pc lau opened its door. on the
in-car-camera, pc lau asked for the keys within seconds of beginning to speak
to mr. liu. pc lau also testified in chief and in cross-examination that mr.
liu complied and handed over his key in response to pc lau’s demand.

opening the door was not reasonably necessary.
the search was not authorized at common law. by opening the car door and
visually inspecting the interior, pc lau breached mr. liu’s s. 8
charter
right.
b.
section 9: grounds for the arrest

the next major event at the roadside was pc
lau’s decision to arrest mr. liu for unauthorized plates. the defence contends
that the arrest was not founded on reasonable grounds to believe that the
offence had been committed, so was unlawful and arbitrary contrary to s. 9 of
the
charter. the arrest was what led the officers to detect an odour of
alcohol on mr. liu’s breath, which furnished the grounds for the asd demand.

reasonable grounds for arrest exist where
“compelling and credible information” establishes “a
reasonable probability
of crime”. the officer must have subjective and objective grounds. subjective
grounds exist where “the arresting officer honestly believed that the suspect
committed the offence”. the officer’s subjective belief “must be justifiable
from an objective viewpoint”. the “objective assessment is based on the
totality of the circumstances known to the officer at the time of the arrest,
including the dynamics of the situation, as seen from the perspective of a
reasonable person with comparable knowledge, training, and experience as the
arresting officer”:
r. v. beaver,
2022 scc 54, at paras.
72
(1), (2),
(3), (6) (emphasis in original).

if an officer forms reasonable grounds, they
have no obligation to undertake further investigation to seek exculpatory facts
or rule out innocent explanations:
beaver, at para.
72
(6). however, in
determining whether they have grounds, officers cannot assess the information they
have in a piecemeal fashion. they must consider all relevant information. they
may “disregard only information which [they have] good reason to believe is
unreliable”:
r. v. chehil,
2013 scc 49, at para.
33;
r. v. golub,
1997 canlii 6316 (on ca).

section 12(1)
(d) of the
highway traffic act,
r.s.o. 1990, c. h.8, makes it an offence to use “a number plate upon a vehicle
other than a number plate authorized for use on that vehicle”. i am satisfied
that pc lau did not have reasonable and probable grounds to arrest mr. liu for this
offence. he explained that he decided to arrest mr. liu based on two factors:
first, the plates were supposed to be on a brown porsche suv but were on a
white porsche suv; and second, mr. liu’s conduct in response to requests for
his documentation was suspicious.

on the first factor, i find that pc lau wrongly
excluded information from his assessment. mr. liu told the officer that
he had had the suv “wrapped” — i.e., he had changed its colour. he volunteered
this information after pc lau had advised him that he had been stopped because
he was driving a white porsche with incorrect plates, but before being told
that the police database had reported that the suv was brown. the information
volunteered by mr. liu was a completely plausible, innocent explanation for pc
lau’s observations. it demonstrated independent awareness that the issue was
not just that the plate was attached to a white suv, but that the colour could
be the source of confusion. the fact that this information came from the
suspect, mr. liu, does not make it inherently unreliable such that pc lau was
entitled to disregard it entirely. mr. liu’s plausible
explanation had to feature in the analysis. once it was considered in
combination with the fact that the registered suv and the suv driven by mr. liu
were the same make and style, in my view, pc lau had a reasonable suspicion,
but not reasonable and probable grounds. there was a reasonable possibility of
an offence, but not a reasonable probability of an offence.

the second factor relied on by pc lau – mr. liu’s conduct – did not
convert the reasonable suspicion into reasonable grounds. pc lau pointed
to the fact that mr. liu “insisted that the vehicle was his”. i cannot see how
this denial of guilt suggests he was in fact guilty, unless one improperly
presumes that mr. liu was guilty and was lying to avoid accountability. if he
owned the car, asserting this fact does not make it less true.

pc
lau also pointed to mr. liu’s inability to produce documents pc lau had
requested. mr. liu provided some papers in response to the demand for his
insurance and permit documents. pc lau testified he glanced briefly at the
papers and concluded that “they did not appear” to contain the documents he had
demanded. he did not see the colours of paper he would expect for insurance and
permit documents. i accept that this factor could properly be seen as
suspicious. but it is not sufficiently probative as to convert pc lau’s
suspicion into reasonable grounds, particularly given that pc lau only glanced
briefly at the papers and only concluded they did not “appear” to include the
documents he had demanded. this factor would have carried more weight if pc lau
had reviewed the papers carefully and had been sure the documents were not
there.

although police contemplating an arrest are not obliged to
investigate further when presented with an exculpatory explanation, if they
lack grounds, further investigation may be the only practical way forward. there
was an obvious step for pc lau to take that would have either converted the
suspicion into reasonable grounds or demonstrated it was unfounded. shortly
after the arrest, pc lau checked the vin on mr. liu’s suv and compared it to
the vin for the licensed suv, and learned that the white suv and the brown suv
were one and the same.

in the absence of grounds, the arrest was
unlawful, and infringed mr. liu’s s. 9 right against arbitrary detention:
r.
v. grant,
2009 scc 32, at paras.
55-57.
c.
section 10(b): failure to facilitate access to
counsel

section 10(b) of the
charter
provides
that a person, “on arrest or detention”, has the right “to retain and instruct
counsel without delay and to be informed of that right”. when a detainee
is advised of their right to counsel and indicates a desire to exercise that
right, the police must facilitate access at the first reasonably available
opportunity. if access to counsel is delayed, the crown bears
the burden of demonstrating that the circumstances could not afford a realistic
opportunity to consult with counsel – i.e., the ability and opportunity to
contact, seek advice from, and receive advice from counsel. delay may be
justified by, e.g., “practical obstacles to access” and “privacy and safety
issues”:
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50, at paras.
24,
27-29, 32, 34;
r. v. edwards,
2024 onca 135, at paras.
36-42;
r. v. torsney,
2007 onca 67, at para.
13.

an asd demand suspends the obligation to comply
with the informational and implementational components of s. 10(b) in relation
to both the impaired-driving investigation and any other offence being
investigated. the suspension is a reasonable limit on the detainee’s
charter
rights. it exists to permit relatively brief roadside screening tests. it
terminates when those tests are completed:
r. v. breault,
2023 scc 9, at
para.
35;
r. v. commisso,
2020 onsc 957, paras.
26-49.

at 12:21 a.m., after police arrested mr. liu for
unauthorized plates and the controlled substances, they read him his right to
counsel. he said he wished to speak to a lawyer. a few minutes later, sometime
between 12:29 a.m. and 12:35 a.m., pc chang read him his right to counsel and
asked him if he wished to call a lawyer. mr. liu said he did, and that he
wished to call his friend to get his lawyer’s number. pc chang also read mr.
liu the asd demand during this interaction. at this time, while the demand was
outstanding, mr. liu’s s. 10(b) right was suspended. police did not need to
read mr. liu his right to counsel in relation to any of the charges. but they
did so, and learned that mr. liu wished to exercise his right.

sometime between 12:38 a.m. and 12:40 a.m., pc
chang advised mr. liu that pc lau and pc velema would be charging him with
refusal and that they would be completing his release documents. i am satisfied
that at that point, the suspension of the right to counsel concluded. it
appears that no one re-read mr. liu his right to counsel after the decision had
been made to charge him. for the next one hour and 50 minutes, until 2:28 a.m.
when pc lau released mr. liu from the roadside, mr. liu was never given access
to counsel. pc lau agreed that at no point did he attempt to facilitate access.

officers decided to release mr. liu at the scene
and to forego facilitating access to counsel. mr. liu cannot be seen as having
implicitly agreed to this approach. at 12:40 a.m., pc chang told mr. liu, “if
you insist on talking to your lawyer, we’re going to have to take you back to
the station”. at 12:42 a.m., pc lau said, “i’m going to let you go […] as soon
as possible, so i’m going to give you some paperwork, okay? so you can, you can
call your lawyer after, okay? okay?” pc lau then tried to encourage mr. liu to
provide a sample. mr. liu indicated he wanted a lawyer. pc lau then said, “you
want your lawyer now?” and mr. liu began complaining about how he was being
treated. a few minutes later, at 12:46 a.m., pc lau advised mr. liu, “[s]o
right now, my plan is to release you right away. you can call your lawyer
after. ok? i want to let you go right here.”

mr. liu asked to speak to a lawyer. he was
entitled to do so. the crown bears the burden of justifying the nearly-two-hour
delay on the basis that access in that time was not realistically possible. the
crown has not discharged this burden. on pc lau’s evidence, the station was
only minutes away, and, if mr. liu had been booked at the station, he would
have accessed counsel within 30-to-60 minutes. instead, he was held at the
roadside without counsel for one hour and 50 minutes. the delay occurred
because officers had decided to release mr. liu at the roadside rather than
provide access to counsel. they wrongly saw this as a binary choice that was theirs
to make. their preference to release mr. liu from the scene could not supersede
their constitutional obligation to implement mr. liu’s right to consult
counsel, and to do so without delay.
iv.
remedies
a.
excision of evidence obtained through the
unlawful arrest

a lawful asd demand is an essential element of
the offence of failing to comply with an asd demand under s. 320.15(1). if the
demand is unlawful, the subject has no obligation to comply and, in failing to
do so, does not commit the offence: see
r. v. grant,
1991 canlii 38 (scc), 3 s.c.r.
139, s.c.j. no. 78, at para.
19;
r. v. squires,
2002 canlii 44982 (on ca), o.j. no.
2314 (c.a.), at para.
24;
r. v. breault,
2023 scc 9, at para.
68.

the asd demand was made under s. 320.27(1)(b),
which requires that an officer have reasonable grounds to suspect that the subject
has alcohol (any amount) in their body and has operated a conveyance within the
preceding three hours.

the
reasonable suspicion standard is satisfied where “objectively discernible
facts” furnish a reasonable basis to suspect (i.e.,
when there is a
“reasonable possibility, rather than probability”) that the requisite facts are
true. to determine whether this standard is met, the court must consider the
“constellation of objectively discernible facts” available:
r. v. chehil,
2013 scc 4, at paras.
26-34.

pc velema made the asd demand. she testified
that her grounds rested on mr. liu being belligerent and the fact that she detected
an odour of alcohol on his breath when she was close to him while pc lau was
conducting a search incident to arrest.

with that information in hand, pc velema’s
grounds were objectively reasonable. an odour of alcohol on a driver’s breath
is sufficient to furnish grounds for an asd demand:
r. v. lindsay
(1999), 134 c.c.c. (3d) 463;
r. v. carson,
2009 onca 157;
r. v.
schouten,
2016 onca 872, at paras.
17, 26-28.

however, the observation of the odour must be
excised. it was detected only because of the unlawful arrest. the supreme court
of canada has held that “reasonable grounds […] cannot be supplied by actions
that involved violations of the
charter
”. unconstitutionally obtained
evidence must “be excised from the factual matrix” when analyzing the
sufficiently of grounds:
r. v. zacharias,
2023 scc 30, at paras.
30, 44
(
per
rowe and o’bonsawin jj.) and 107 (
per
martin and kasirer
jj.).

once those observations are excised, what
remains is the belligerence, which pc velema testified was, in her mind, not
enough to satisfy the standard of reasonable suspicion. she did not
subjectively believe the belligerence furnished reasonable grounds to suspect
there was alcohol in mr. liu’s body. i agree that belligerence alone would have
been insufficient. i also note that, on my review of the video evidence, during
the initial interactions before mr. liu was arrested, i do not see his conduct
as belligerent.

with the odour of alcohol excised, pc velema did
not have the reasonable suspicion necessary to make the demand. the demand was
unlawful. mr. liu’s failure to comply with the demand is not an offence. for
this reason, he must be found not guilty.

b.
section 24(2): exclusion of the evidence of mr.
liu’s failure to comply

mr. liu asks the court to apply s. 24(2) to
exclude evidence of his failure to provide breath samples. although i have
concluded that the arrest was unlawful and the charge must be dismissed on that
basis, in the event i am wrong, i have considered whether the evidence should
be excluded based on the other two breaches, under ss. 8 and 10(b).

section 24(2) directs courts to exclude evidence
(1) “obtained in a manner that infringed or denied any of the rights or
freedoms guaranteed by the
charter
” if satisfied that (2) “the admission
of it in the proceedings would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute”.
1
“obtained in a manner” and the
actus reus
exception

defence counsel provided cases dealing with
whether evidence of a failure to comply with an asd demand can be excluded
under s. 24(2) or is instead subject to the
actus reus
exception from
r.
v. hanneson,
1989 canlii 7159 (on ca). if the exception applies, it would
place the impugned evidence beyond s. 24(2)’s reach. courts in ontario have
grappled with how
hanneson
applies where a breach precedes a failure to
provide a breath sample: see e.g.,
r. v. soomal,
2014 oncj 220, at
paras.
62-83;
r. v. kraus,
2015 onsc 2769;
r. v. o’shea,
2019 onsc 1514;
r. v. doobay,
2019 onsc 7272, at paras.
60-61;
r. v.
odemi,
2022 onsc 2292;
r. v. kerr et al,
2023 onsc 3638, at paras.
83-111;
r. v. mcnair,
2024 oncj 217,
at paras.
83-97. the crown did not argue
that
hanneson
applies in this case. defence counsel did not make
submissions on its application.

hanneson
cannot
be read as barring the exclusion of all evidence constituting the
actus reus
of an offence. a few years after it was decided, in
r. v. cobham,
1994 canlii 69 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 360, the supreme court excluded evidence of a refusal to
provide a breath sample. the rule is narrower. it arose in a particular factual
context. accused persons, whose s. 10(b) rights had been violated, made false
statements to investigators, leading to charges of obstructing justice, and an
application to exclude the false statements. in this scenario (1) police breached
a person’s rights while investigating them for an offence (offence #1); (2), after
the breach, the person allegedly committed another offence (offence #2); and
(3), at a trial for offence #2, the person sought to rely on the breach to
exclude evidence constituting the
actus reus
of offence #2.

the facts of the present case are distinguishable.
first, while
hanneson
involved a breach that occurred before “offence
#2”, in this case, the s. 10(b) breach occurred after “offence #2 (the failure
to provide a breath sample). second, although the s. 8 breach here occurred
before mr. liu’s failure to provide breath samples,
hanneson
does not suggest
how its rule would apply, if at all, in a situation involving
charter
breaches that occurred both before and after the creation of the evidence
sought to be excluded. i do not believe that the s. 8 breach can be
disentangled from the s. 24(2) analysis.

if
hanneson
were not distinguishable, to follow
it, i would have to disregard binding contradictory authority from the supreme
court of canada. in
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12, at para.
78, the supreme
court held that to determine whether evidence is subject to being excluded
under s. 24(2) in that it was “obtained in a manner” that breached an accused
person’s
charter
rights, courts must take “a purposive and generous
approach”, examining the “entire chain of events”. “evidence will be tainted if
the breach and the discovery of the impugned evidence are part of the same
transaction or course of conduct”. the court further held that the necessary
connection may be satisfied by a connection that is “temporal, contextual,
causal or a combination of the three”: “[a] causal connection is not required”.
the court rejected the premise of bright-line rules in this context: “there is
‘no hard and fast rule for determining when evidence obtained following the
infringement of a
charter
right becomes too remote”.

hanneson
is
inconsistent with
tim
in at least two ways. first, a categorical rule
prohibiting the exclusion of certain types of evidence conflicts with the
supreme court’s flexible articulation of the “obtained in a manner” threshold. second,
the rule in
hanneson
arose from a concern regarding the absence of a
causal connection between a breach and the evidence sought to be excluded: see
r.
v. ha,
2010 onca 433, at paras.
6-8;
kerr et al, at paras.
90-92,
102-04. in
tim, the supreme court held that a causal connection is not
required.

tim
sets out the
principles i must consider to determine whether the evidence of mr. liu’s failure
to provide a breath sample is capable of being excluded under s. 24(2). there
is a sufficient connection between each breach and the impugned evidence such
that the evidence should be seen as having been obtained in a manner that
infringed mr. liu’s
charter
rights. the ss. 8 and 10(b) breaches are
contextually and temporally connected to the evidence mr. liu seeks to exclude.
the breaches formed part of the same transaction and course of conduct as the
discovery of the evidence.
2
grant
analysis

pursuant to
r. v. grant,
2009 scc 32, the
remaining question is whether admission or exclusion of the evidence would
better serve the “overall repute of the justice system, viewed in the long
term”. the analysis starts from the conclusion that a breach has occurred, “and
seeks to ensure that evidence obtained through that breach does not do further
damage to the repute of the justice system”:
grant, at paras. 68-70. the
analysis considers three factors: (1) the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
state conduct; (2) the impact of the breach on the accused’s
charter
-protected
interests; and (3) society’s interests in an adjudication of the case on its
merits:
grant, at para. 71.
a)
seriousness of the breach

i find that the first factor strongly favours
exclusion of the evidence.

the search of the suv was not a serious s. 8 breach
but was also neither trivial nor technical. pc lau could not identify any
authority he had to search the suv when he opened the door. he testified, “i do
not view it to be a search”. the existence of a driver’s reasonable expectation
of privacy in a motor vehicle has long been settled law: see e.g.
r. v.
belnavis,
1997 canlii 320 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 341, at para.
19. pc lau’s ignorance of
charter
rights enhances the seriousness of the breach. i cannot find the breach was
made in good faith. pc lau testified he suspected a far more serious offence
had been committed (auto theft), and approached the investigation in a more
aggressive manner than he would for an ordinary investigation into unauthorized
plates. i am satisfied that the search flowed from this aggression. pc lau had
a hunch and pursued it without regard to mr. liu’s rights.

the s. 10(b) breach was serious. mr. liu asked
to speak to counsel multiple times. the police took no steps to facilitate
access to counsel. they chose to release him from the scene and held him without
access to counsel for nearly one hour and 50 minutes while preparing paperwork.
police unilaterally chose to prioritize their administrative preference over
mr. liu’s
charter
rights. comments made to mr. liu to the effect that if
he chose to exercise his rights, he would have to be brought to the station,
tended to undermine mr. liu’s
charter
rights, discouraging him from
exercising them.

the breaches arise from independent forms of
misconduct in the same course of conduct. their effects must be considered
cumulatively: see
r. v. zacharias,
2023 scc 30, at para.
49;
r. v.
truong,
2025 onca 69, at paras.
38-44;
r. v. james,
2025 onca 213,
at para.
37. while i do not find that police deliberately breached mr. liu’s
rights, i am satisfied that both breaches demonstrate that police were unaware
of, or disregarded, mr. liu’s rights. collectively, the misconduct must be seen
as serious.
b)
impact on mr. liu’s interests

the second factor also strongly favours
exclusion of the evidence.

the s. 8 breach had only a moderate impact on
mr. liu’s
charter
-protected interests. by opening the door, police were
able to make observations of the inside of the suv. those observations were a
but-for cause of a
llca
search of mr. liu’s suv. the impact of the search is
mitigated by the fact that driving is a heavily-regulated activity, and there
were likely a variety of ways in which the suv’s door could have been opened
lawfully. for example, officers could have made a mandatory asd demand under s.
320.27(1) without reasonable grounds to suspect he had alcohol in his body.
this likely would have led mr. liu to open the door to exit the suv.

the impact of the s. 10(b) breach was
significant. the court of appeal explained in
r. v. rover,
2018 onca
745, at para.
45, that
lengthy delays can be inherently harmful:
the right to counsel is a lifeline for
detained persons. through that lifeline, detained persons obtain, not only
legal advice and guidance about the procedures to which they will be subjected,
but also the sense that they are not entirely at the mercy of the police while
detained. the psychological value of access to counsel without delay should not
be underestimated.

mr. liu was left in a vulnerable state: under
arrest for cdsa charges and apparently about to be charged for refusing to
provide a breath sample. he wanted legal advice. police subtly discouraged him
from asserting his right to counsel: he was told that if he insisted on speaking
to a lawyer, he would have to submit to attending the police station. police
held him for nearly two hours at the roadside. the investigation was
effectively over, so there was little risk that further investigative action
would call on mr. liu to decide whether to cooperate. however, throughout this
time, the prospect of the additional charge was left hanging over him. although
pc chang had advised mr. liu that the other officers were going to charge him
with failing to provide the breath sample, pc lau gave mr. liu an additional
opportunity to provide a sample. it appears that no one advised mr. liu that he
was indeed being charged until he was released at around 2:28 a.m. he had been
told he had the right to speak to a lawyer and had asked to exercise that right.
nothing was done to satisfy his request. all these factors combined to create
an atmosphere of confusion and uncertainty in which access to legal advice was crucial.
i note that the impact of the s. 10(b) breach would have been more significant
if mr. liu had given an incriminatory statement while in custody, or if the breach
had led to the discovery of evidence sought to be excluded.

the cumulative impact on mr. liu’s
charter
-protected
interests was significant.
c)
society’s interests in an adjudication on
the merits

the third factor strongly favours admission of
the evidence. drinking and driving offences are serious crimes that jeopardize
public safety and that must be deterred and denounced through effective
prosecution and punishment:
r. v. ramage,
2010 onca 488, at paras.
74-75. the impugned evidence proves that mr. liu failed to provide a breath
sample. in the clearest example of his failure to comply with the demand, when
an asd was presented to him and he was asked if he would provide a sample, he
responded, “of course not”. excluding the evidence would gut the crown’s case.
d)
balancing

the
final stage of the
grant
analysis involves assessing and balancing each
of the three factors, “focussing on the long-term integrity of, and public
confidence in, the administration of justice”:
tim, at para.
98. the
question is whether admitting the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute:
beaver, at para.
133. in this balancing, where
the first two factors strongly favour exclusion, the third factor “will seldom,
if ever” lead to inclusion; if only one of the first two factors strongly
favours exclusion, the third factor becomes important. it always pushes, to
varying degrees, in favour of inclusion. it does so strongly “where the
evidence is reliable and critical to the crown’s case”:
r. v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 365, at paras.
62-63.

i
conclude that the evidence of mr. liu’s failure to provide a breath sample must
be excluded. the first two factors strongly favour exclusion. the police
conduct in this case – unlawfully searching mr. liu’s suv and holding him for nearly
two hours without taking any steps to facilitate access to a lawyer – is, when
viewed cumulatively, serious misconduct that significantly impaired his
charter
-protected
interests. although members of the public would be concerned about the
exclusion of evidence critical to the crown’s case on a serious charge relating
to drinking and driving, i find the public would be more concerned by the
court’s failure to take steps to disassociate itself from the conduct at issue.
admitting the evidence would do more harm than excluding it.
v.
disposition

the
charter
motion is allowed. police
infringed mr. liu’s rights under ss. 8, 9 and 10(b) of the
charter. the
odour of alcohol must be excised from the officers’ grounds to make the asd
demand. in the absence of that evidence, the asd demand was unlawful. a lawful
demand is an essential element of the charge.

in the alternative, if the arrest was lawful, the
ss. 8 and 10(b) breaches require that the evidence of mr. liu’s failure to
comply with the breath demand be excluded under s. 24(2). without that
evidence, the crown cannot prove that mr. liu failed or refused to comply with
the breath demand – another essential element of the offence.

both excision and exclusion lead to the same
result: the charge must be dismissed. mr. liu will be found not guilty.
released: october 22, 2025
signed:
justice michael perlin

mr. liu was charged with two counts of possession under the
controlled drugs
and substances act, s.c. 1996, c. 19. mid-trial, at the crown’s invitation,
i dismissed those charges.

at the time, officers also had identified authority for a search of mr. liu
under the
llca, having found the open beer can in the suv. however, the
beer-can observation was made only through the unlawful search. it must be
excised from an analysis of, and was the only basis for, the grounds for the
llca search.