source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj564/2025oncj564.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. narang, 2025 oncj 564
date: 
2025 10 29
court
file no.: central west (peel) region 998-2331109708
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
karan narang
before
justice r. tomovski
ruling
on s. 11(b)
charter
application
heard
on october 23, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 29, 2025
sakithyan bala.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ruaridh mccartney …………………………….. counsel
for the accused karan narang
tomovski j.:
i. introduction

the applicant’s original trial date was scheduled
to proceed just over 18 months after the date of the charge. there was apparently
no objection from the applicant, as no s. 11(b)
charter
application was brought. 
the trial did not proceed as scheduled, largely due to defence-related delays. 
despite a direction given by the judge to the applicant and the crown to ensure
the trial coordinator was advised to prioritize rescheduling the trial, that
direction was not acted upon. the trial was rescheduled for a year later, with
no intervening dates being offered, putting the total delay well over the
presumptive ceiling. the applicant subsequently raised a concern with the delay,
which has culminated with his having brought the current application pursuant
to s. 11(b) of the
charter
alleging a violation of his right to be tried
within a reasonable time and seeking a stay of proceedings as a remedy. the
key issue is whether, and how, the delay between the original and current trial
dates should be apportioned.

the applicant argues that irrespective of the
reasons for the adjournment of the original trial date, the crown and court
failed to prioritize the rescheduling of the trial and are, therefore, equally responsible
for the ensuing delay. conversely, the crown argues that the applicant’s underestimation
of the time needed for trial necessitated an adjournment and the applicant should
be responsible for the entire ensuing delay.

for my reasons that follow, i allow the
application. i find that once defence delay is deducted from the total delay,
the net delay is above the presumptive ceiling established in
r. v.
jordan,
2016 scc 27
and there are no exceptional circumstances to justify the presumptively
unreasonable delay. although the applicant’s actions resulted in an underestimation
of the time needed to complete the trial and necessitated an adjournment, once
notice was given by the applicant that delay was an issue the crown and court
did not take any steps to prioritize the applicant’s case including seeking an
intervening
jordan
-compliant date.
ii. background

the applicant is charged with operating a
conveyance both while impaired by alcohol and while his blood alcohol
concentration was over the legal limit. the incident date is august 26, 2023.

the information was sworn five days later, on august
31. the anticipated end of trial is february 25, 2026, the third day of a three-day
trial. as a result, the total delay is 909 days or 29 months and 25 days,
which is well over the
jordan
presumptive ceiling for unreasonable delay
of 18 months for a trial in the ontario court of justice, when the crown has
elected to proceed summarily, which it has in this case.

for analytical clarity, the history of the
proceedings can be divided into three phases, as will become apparent in these
reasons: the disclosure and crown pretrial phase, the original trial-setting
phase and the trial-rescheduling phase.

starting with the disclosure and crown pretrial
phase, the applicable period is from the date the information was sworn (august
31, 2023) and the date the applicant finally received core disclosure
consisting of video footage of the arrest and the breath room (january 30,
2024), a period of 152 days. this phase can be broken down as follows.

the first court date was september 6, 2023. initial
disclosure was not available. the applicant followed up with a request for it
on september 7. initial disclosure was provided on september 18. however, it omitted
key items, including notes from the arresting officer and breath technician, as
well as video footage of the arrest and the breath room. the applicant wrote
to the crown on september 19, october 6, november 9, and december 15 requesting
the outstanding items. the applicant reiterated his request for outstanding
disclosure during the october 11 and december 20 court appearances.

at the december 20 court appearance, the
applicant indicated he would conduct a crown pretrial once core disclosure was
received. the matter was put over to january 31, 2024. the following day,
december 21, 2023, the applicant had a meeting with an “r1” crown, who are
available every day in this jurisdiction to discuss pretrial issues, to discuss
outstanding disclosure.

core disclosure was finally provided on january
30, 2024. the following day, at the january 31, court appearance, the
applicant put the matter over to march 13 to review disclosure and to have a
further crown pretrial. however, it was not until march 6 that the applicant
had a meeting with an “r3” crown, who are not available every day in this
jurisdiction. the meeting was scheduled on january 24 for the earliest date of
march 6, despite an r1 crown being available every day from when core
disclosure was received.

as referenced above, core disclosure was not
provided until january 30, 2024, five months after the applicant was arrested
and charged. as i noted in
r. v. van meeteren,
2025 oncj 546, at para.
10,
concerns in this jurisdiction regarding disclosure delays persist:
i wish to address
what i find is far too common an approach by the crown that contributes to a culture
of complacency that must change to ensure the re-occurrence of this type of delay
is prevented. the supreme court in
jordan
at paras.
4, 29 and 40
referenced a culture of complacency and a tolerance for excessive delay and
identified insufficient practices as one contributing factor to that culture.
that recognition was nearly 10 years ago. neither in its written materials on
this application nor during its oral submissions did the crown provide an
explanation, or satisfactorily attempt to provide one, for why it took nearly
seven months for the applicant [five months in mr. narang’s case] to be
provided a copy of the alleged victim’s statement to police [video footage of
the arrest and breath room in mr. narang’s case], despite numerous requests by
the applicant for it. the statement was recorded on video and obtained prior
to the applicant’s arrest [obtained at the time of arrest in mr. narang’s case].
many justice system participants – including the accused…and the public – deserve
and should expect the crown to seek out an answer to avoid re-occurrence of
this kind in future cases. this approach would align with the framework’s
prospective approach in taking proactive measures to remedy delay:
jordan
at para.
108. while i may not be the first to raise these concerns, as a
justice system participant, i share in the responsibility of helping to resolve
an apparent crown and police indifference to remedying the repeated failure to
provide timely core disclosure: see
r. v. scott-wolf,
2024 oncj 502
at
paras.
57-59;
r. v. stefan, v.
2024 oncj 565
at para.
52;
r. v. smith,
2023 oncj 222
at para.
49; and
r. v. hotaki,
2023 oncj 261
at paras.
29-33.

turning now to the original trial-setting phase,
at the march 6 crown pretrial, the applicant received the crown’s resolution
position and a trial estimate form, which noted the time required for trial as
2 days based on the applicant’s input, which indicated no
charter
application
would be brought, and 0 to 1 defence witness would be called.

despite having the resolution position and the
trial estimate form since march 6, the applicant appeared at the following
three court appearances – march 13, april 10 and may 8 – without having
obtained a trial date. further, it was not until may 6 that the applicant booked
a trial scheduling meeting with the trial coordinator for may 13.

at the trial scheduling meeting, the court
offered dates more than nine months away of february 5-6, 20-21 and 25-26, 2025,
all of which were available to the crown but not the applicant. a 2-day trial
of march 4 and 5, 2025 was secured, which is more than 18 months from the date
the information was sworn.

at the may 30 court appearance, the applicant confirmed
the trial dates. he did not seek to set an intervening s. 11(b)
charter
hearing or reference any concerns with delay at that stage.

turning finally to the trial-rescheduling phase,
i will start by outlining the circumstances which caused the original trial
date to not proceed, followed by discussing the circumstances which led to the
current trial date being set.

as referenced earlier, the trial was set for two
days, to commence on march 4, 2025. several issues arose that made proceeding
as scheduled nearly impossible. first, the applicant filed a late
charter
application (on february 7, five days short of the thirty-day notice under rule
3.1(1) of the criminal rules of the ontario court of justice). second, as
acknowledged by the applicant, he failed to file the application on the crown
through the latter’s centralized “virtual” crown email address. instead, the
applicant only served the assigned crown, who was no longer assigned by the time
of the trial, which resulted in the trial crown not receiving the application
until the morning of trial. third, and perhaps most critical, the applicant
did not indicate during the crown pretrial that a
charter
application would
be brought (alleging breaches of ss. 7, 8, 9 and 12), which, understandably,
did not factor into the trial estimate. further, the applicant now intended to
call a second defence witness which also did not factor into the trial
estimate.

the applicant and crown revised the trial
estimate based on the above-noted issues, agreeing that the trial would now
take three days to complete. the judge, who was in the process of being transferred
to another jurisdiction, agreed with the applicant and the crown that it would
be faster to complete the trial by securing three new days than to commence the
trial and find a continuation date before the same judge, especially since a
half day of court time had been expended discussing the implications of the
above-noted issues. to ensure faster dates were obtained, the judge directed the
parties contact the trial coordinator and the case be given priority.

the parties met the trial coordinator the
following day, march 5 to secure a 3-day trial. despite the judge’s direction
that priority be given to the matter and the total delay already being over 18
months, the first date offered by the trial coordinator was february 23-25,
2026, a further year away, which was available to both parties. neither party offered
any evidence in this application to suggest that any priority was given in
rescheduling the matter including that the trial coordinator was even informed
of the trial judge’s comments.

the new trial dates were confirmed at the may
28, 2025, court appearance. notably, when asked if delay was an issue due to
the total delay, the applicant stated, “i don’t have instructions but that means
that it’s likely not an issue given that i don’t have any instructions”. in
response, the crown stated, “if 11(b) issues change, please let our office know
as soon as it becomes an issue”. it was not until june 11, 2025, that the
applicant advised that delay was an issue. once they were put on notice, the
crown and court did not take any steps to try to secure an earlier trial date.

the application proceeded before me on october
23, 2025. i reserved my reasons to october 29, 2025.
iii. analysis
a.
the
jordan
framework

below is a summary of the
jordan
framework, as outlined in
van meeteren, supra, at paras.
24-35.

the supreme court in
jordan
outlined the
framework by which delay is to be assessed under s. 11(b) of the
charter. 
the framework as it applies to the ontario court of justice is summarized as
follows.

there is a presumptive ceiling of 18 months:
jordan
at paras.
5, 46, 49, and 105. delay above that mark is presumptively
unreasonable, whereas delay below it is presumptively reasonable:
jordan
at paras.
47-48, 68, 82 and 105.

delay is considered and calculated in different
ways at different stages of the framework. at the outset, the total delay must
be calculated. this period is calculated from the date of the charge to the
end of the trial:
jordan
at para.
60. the former equates with the date
the information is sworn: see
r. v. allison,
2022 onca 329
at paras.
35-43;
r. v. kalanj,
1989 canlii 63 (scc).

defence delay is subtracted from the total
delay:
jordan
at paras.
49, 60, and 66.

defence delay can result from an explicit or
implicit waiver or delay caused solely or directly by the defence’s conduct:
jordan
at paras.
61, 63 and 66. an example of the latter is when the crown and court
are ready to proceed but the defence is not:
jordan
at para.
64. 
however, legitimate defence conduct is not defence delay:
jordan
at
para.
65.

when the delay is above the presumptive ceiling,
the onus is on the crown to establish the presence of exceptional circumstances
that justify the delay:
jordan
at paras.
47, 68, 81 and 105. 
exceptional circumstances are circumstances that are reasonably unforeseen or
reasonably unavoidable and the ensuing delay emanating from those circumstances
cannot reasonably be remedied by the crown:
jordan
at para.
69. the crown
must show that it took reasonable steps to avoid the delay before the
presumptive ceiling was surpassed:
jordan
at para.
70. those steps need
not be successful in preventing the delay:
jordan
at para.
70.

generally, exceptional circumstances fall into
two groups: discrete events or particularly complex cases:
jordan
at
para.
71. the former includes medical emergencies or unexpected illnesses,
whereas the latter includes cases with novel or complicated legal issues, voluminous
disclosure or many witnesses requiring a lengthy trial:
jordan
at paras.
77-78.

like defence delay, delay caused by exceptional
circumstances is subtracted from the total delay:
jordan
at para.
75.

when the delay is below the presumptive ceiling,
the onus is on the applicant to show that the delay is otherwise unreasonable
by establishing that it “took meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained
effort to expedite the proceedings” and the case took “markedly longer than it
reasonably should have”:
jordan
at paras.
48, 82 and 105.

meaningful and sustained steps include seeking
and setting the earliest available trial dates and giving notice when delay is
becoming a problem:
jordan
at para.
85.

whether a case took markedly longer considers
multiple factors including the case’s complexity, local considerations, and
whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the proceedings:
jordan
at para.
87.

stays beneath the presumptive ceiling will be
granted only in clear cases:
jordan
at para.
83.
b.
the
hanan
principle

i have substantially reproduced below from
van
meeteren, supra at paras.
36-39, in which i summarized the principle in
r. v.
hanan,
2023 scc 12
and subsequent cases that have interpreted
the principle.

in
hanan
at para.
9, the supreme court rejected
a bright-line rule of attributing the entirety of ensuing delay to the defence after
the rejection of an initial date because of unavailability. instead, a
contextual analysis was emphasized in which all relevant circumstances are to
be considered to determine if and how the ensuing delay should be apportioned.

in
r. v. jones,
2025 onca 103
at para.
32,
the court of appeal noted that
hanan
did not “adopt an inverse
bright-line rule apportioning the defence with none of the delay”. the court at
para. 33 reiterated that all relevant circumstances must be assessed to decide
how to apportion the delay among the parties: see also
r. v. jacques-taylor,
2024 onca 458
at paras.
5-7;
r. v. shaporov,
2025 onca 281
at para.
33;
and
r. v. m.e.,
2025 onca 729
at paras.
17-18 and 26.

in
r. v. k.d.,
2025 onca 639, the court
of appeal further clarified the principle in
hanan. the court at para.
46 noted, “it is not that the apportionment of delay is warranted in every
case, but rather that the circumstances of every case must be considered to
determine whether apportionment is warranted”.

in
r. v. bowen-wright,
2024 onsc 293
at
paras.
38-48, the summary conviction appeal court identified several factors that
would inform any contextual analysis in the apportionment of ensuing delay
after the rejection of an initial date. those factors include the reason for
the need to reschedule and whether it was caused by the defence; the extent to
which the defence was available; and the reasons for the defence unavailability.

since my decision in
van meeteren, the
court of appeal released
m.e., supra, in which it applied the principle
in
hanan
differently to two separate periods of delay. first, in setting
an initial trial date, although the defence was unavailable for several earlier
dates the court offered and the crown was available, subsequent dates offered
by the court that the defence was available, but the crown was not, was held to
be a relevant factor. the court of appeal at para. 16 stated, “all relevant
circumstances, including the fact that on some proposed dates the defence was
not available and on others, the crown was not available, should be
considered”. the court of appeal apportioned the delay, with the initial
period as defence delay and the subsequent period as crown delay.

second, in the setting of a trial continuation, although
the defence was unavailable for earlier dates offered, there were no further
dates offered from the defence’s unavailability to the date chosen. the court of
appeal at para. 24, referenced its decision in
k.d., supra, at para.
45,
which noted “the defence cannot fairly and reasonably be held wholly
responsible for a span of time largely comprising a period where the court was
unavailable”. the court of appeal added “this is so even if the period of
delay began because the defence was not available on the first date offered”. 
the court of appeal at para. 25 further added that both the defence and the
crown failed to take steps to seek intervening dates from the court, which led
to this period of delay being apportioned equally between the defence and the
crown.
c.
jordan
and
hanan
applied

the total delay in the applicant’s case is from august
31, 2023 (the date the information was sworn) to february 25, 2026 (the anticipated
end of trial). the total delay is 909 days or 29 months and 25 days.

in find that there are four periods of delay
that are exclusively defence delay that are to be deducted from the total
delay.

first, after the applicant obtained core
disclosure, aside from an acceptable amount of time to review disclosure and take
necessary next steps (e.g., get updated instructions), which i find to be 14
days, the applicant then unreasonably delayed scheduling and conducting a crown
pretrial. the applicant obtained core disclosure on january 30, 2024, yet waited
until march 6 to conduct a crown pretrial with an r3 crown, instead of opting
for an earlier pretrial with an r1 crown. this 37-day period, minus 14 days
for review, leaves 23 days. i find this entire remaining period is defence
delay.

subtracting this 23-day period from the total delay
of 909 days leaves a net delay of 886 days.

second, after the applicant conducted a crown
pretrial on march 6 and obtained a trial estimate form, the applicant
unreasonably delayed waiting to set a trial scheduling meeting until may 6. 
the meeting was held on may 13. this is a period of 68 days is defence delay.

subtracting this 68-day period from the net
delay of 886 days leaves a remaining net delay of 818 days.

third, when the original 2-day trial was being
set, the applicant was unavailable between the period of february 4 to march 3,
2025, when the crown and court were ready to proceed. this is a period of 27
days and is defence delay.

subtracting this 27-day period from the net
delay of 818 days leaves a remaining net delay of 791 days.

fourth, this period starts with when the original
trial date was vacated on march 4 and ends with when the applicant gave the
crown and court notice on june 11, 2025, that delay was now in issue. several relevant
circumstances occurred during this period as i explain below.

i find the applicant’s actions solely caused the
need for an adjournment of the original trial date because of his failure to
allow for a proper trial estimate to be arrived at. further, there is no
evidence to suggest the applicant made the crown or trial coordinator aware the
following day at the trial scheduling meeting that delay was an issue, which
precluded the latter from taking steps at that time to minimize any ensuing
delay. even further, when the current trial dates were confirmed at the may 28
court appearance, i find the applicant’s comments in response to being directly
asked if delay was an issue (“i don’t have instructions but that means that
it’s likely not an issue given that i don’t have any instructions”) and the crown’s
response (“if 11(b) issues change, please let our office know as soon as it
becomes an issue”), effectively amounted to an express waiver of delay, overriding
the judge’s expressed concerns. i find the crown was entitled to rely on this
waiver despite the judge’s prior direction that the case be given priority in
rescheduling the trial. however, i find the waiver ended once the applicant
gave notice on june 11 that delay was an issue. this period of 99 days is
defence delay.

subtracting this 99-day period from the net
delay of 791 days leaves a remaining net delay of 692 days.

the crown argues that the applicant’s failure to
conduct an initial crown pretrial after receiving initial disclosure is
properly defence delay. specifically, the crown says the relevant period is
from september 18, when initial disclosure was received, to december 21, 2023,
when an initial crown pretrial was held to discuss outstanding disclosure.

the crown referred me to justice monahan’s
decision of
r. v. mansour, an unreported decision of the ontario court
of justice dated august 29, 2024. however, in that decision it was held that the
failure to conduct a timely pretrial was only after “substantial” disclosure
had been obtained: see p. 4. unlike
mansour, the applicant made multiple
requests for substantial disclosure including in writing on four separate
occasions, during two court appearances and even conducting an initial crown pretrial,
all before receiving substantial disclosure. i find the applicant’s actions were
entirely appropriate in insisting on core disclosure before conducting a
further crown pretrial or setting a judicial pretrial, especially when the
items (i.e., notes of the arresting officer; video footage of the arrest and
the breath room) are perhaps the most important items of disclosure in a
drinking and driving prosecution that would allow for a meaningful pretrial. 
requiring the applicant to schedule a pretrial simply to remind the crown, yet
again, this time in a different forum, of its constitutional obligation to
provide meaningful disclosure is a practice not worth endorsing.

the remaining period of delay is from the
original trial date, march 4, 2025, to the anticipated end of the current trial
date, february 25, 2026, minus the period of 99 days subtracted for defence
delay from march 4 to june 11, 2025 (supra at paras. 50-51). this period of
delay (358 minus 99 days) is 259 days.

in applying the principle in
hanan
to
this period, i am to consider all relevant circumstances in deciding whether,
and how, to apportion the delay. relevant factors include the reason for the
need to reschedule and whether it was caused by the defence and court
availability in rescheduling the trial.

the crown argues that the entire period of delay
(starting from march 4) ought to be attributed as defence delay. it points to the
applicant’s failure to allow for a proper trial estimate to be arrived at (by
not advising of its intention to bring a
charter
application and call an
additional defence witness), which solely caused the original trial date to not
proceed and resulted in a new trial date having to be set. in support of its
position, the crown relies on justice singh’s decision of
r. v. heron,
an unreported decision of the ontario court of justice dated september 3, 2025. 
justice singh at paras. 22-28 attributes as defence delay the defence’s failure
to meaningfully engage the crown in pretrial discussions, including not
advising that a
charter
application would be brought, to arrive at an accurate
trial estimate which resulted in the trial not completing and requiring
continuation dates, which were 4.5 months away. although reference is not made
to
hanan, justice singh appears to have apportioned all the ensuing
delay as defence delay.

in applying the principle in
hanan, i
find other relevant circumstances present in the applicant’s case that were not
present in
heron. further, i find the crown’s submission in asking for
the entire delay to be attributed to the defence indicative of the bright-line
approach that was rejected in
hanan. i find the crown’s position fails
to account for the crown’s ongoing role in ensuring any delay is mitigated,
especially when put on notice.

at first glance, several relevant circumstances point
to the entire period being attributed to the applicant. the applicant solely
caused the need for an adjournment of the original trial date because of his
failure to allow for a proper trial estimate to be arrived at. further, as
referenced earlier, there is no evidence to suggest the applicant made the crown
or trial coordinator aware that delay was an issue at the time the new trial
date was obtained, which precluded the latter from taking steps at that time to
minimize any ensuing delay.

there are, however, relevant circumstances that point
to the delay being apportioned between the applicant and the crown. it appears
the crown did not take heed of the trial judge’s direction that priority should
be given to the applicant’s matter when new dates were obtained. further, there
is no evidence to suggest the crown made the trial coordinator aware that delay
was an issue at the time the new trial date was obtained, which precluded the
latter from taking steps at that time to minimize any ensuing delay. the
difference between the applicant and the crown in this circumstance (i.e.,
notifying the trial coordinator of the judge’s direction) is that the latter
has an ongoing responsibility to minimize delay especially when it is above the
presumptive ceiling. the crown effectively accepted a single trial date offered
nearly 12 months away (compared to only 4.5 months away in
heron
), even though
the delay at that point was already over the presumptive ceiling (compared to
heron
where the delay was below the presumptive ceiling). even further, although i
have found the crown was initially entitled to rely on the applicant’s waiver
despite the judge’s direction that the case be given priority, once that waiver
ended on june 11, eight months prior to the current trial date, the crown did
not take any steps to prioritize the applicant’s case including seeking an
intervening
jordan
-compliant date.

the court shares in the responsibility to
minimize delay. the applicant’s case at the original trial date was already
above the presumptive ceiling. once it was determined the trial would not
proceed, in rescheduling the trial, the court’s offer of a single date a year
away, putting the total delay at 29 months and 25 days, was simply contrary to efforts
to minimize delay. like the crown, the court took no steps to minimize the
ongoing delay. the defence was not offered any earlier, reasonable dates.

as referenced, there are relevant circumstances
for and against apportioning the entire period of delay to the applicant. i
have decided not to apportion the entire period to the applicant. i rely on the
court of appeal’s recent comments in
m.e.
at para.
24:
[t]he defence
cannot fairly and reasonably be held wholly responsible for a span of time
largely comprising a period where the court was unavailable. this is so even
if the period of delay began because the defence was not available on the first
date offered

in
m.e., the delay was apportioned
equally between the crown and the defence. i see no rational basis to depart
from similarly apportioning the delay in this case equally between the applicant
and the crown. as such, 129.5 days of the 259 days should be attributed as
defence delay.

subtracting this 129.5-day period from the net
delay of 692 days leaves a remaining net delay of 562.5 days or 18.5 months. as
such, the onus falls on the crown to rebut the presumption of
unreasonableness. i find that it has failed to do so.

having already attributed all the delay in the
case, there are otherwise no exceptional circumstances. the applicant’s case
is not a complex one. it is a “routine” drinking and driving prosecution. the
applicant’s
charter
application is not suggestive of novelty or
complexity even with a s. 7 excessive force argument. it simply suffered from
late service, albeit five days short of the required notice of 30 days. the
assigned crown failed to ensure the trial crown was made aware that a
charter
application had been served, an unexplained breakdown in the notion that the
crown is a single indivisible entity. as referenced earlier, the crown (and
court) did not take any steps to minimize the delay once the presumptive
ceiling was breached and when it was breached even more.

it is unfortunate that these charges cannot be
adjudicated on their merits due to unreasonable delay.
v. conclusion

the application is granted, and the charges are
stayed.
released: october 29, 2025
signed:
justice tomovski