source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj553/2025oncj553.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. ngong, 2025 oncj 553
date: 
2025 10 23
court
file no.: hamilton 998-23-47101391; 998-23-47103324
between:
his
majesty the king
(respondent)
— and
—
lual ngong
(applicant)
charter
ruling on garofoli review
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
may 1 and july 3, 17 and 24, 2025
reasons
released october 23, 2025
tessa moran......... agent for the
respondent, public prosecution service of canada
kendra stanyon.................................................... counsel
for the applicant, lual ngong
garg j.:
overview

the applicant is charged with drug and firearm
offences following police searches of a residence and motor vehicle. the
searches yielded fentanyl, cocaine, a handgun, ammunition, and cash. the
applicant challenges whether the warrants could have issued and seeks to
exclude the resulting evidence.

a search warrant represents a careful balancing
act. the warrant only issues when the state’s interest in investigating crime
outweighs the individual’s privacy interests. the affiant presents the police case
through an “information to obtain” (ito), which must disclose credible
information establishing reasonable grounds to believe that the searches will
afford evidence with respect to the commission of an offence at the places to
be searched.

i am satisfied that the ito met this threshold.
it was not flawless. notably, the inclusion of the applicant’s occurrence
reports—internal police records of prior interactions—without clarifying
whether charges were laid or how they resolved, risked painting an incomplete
picture. other issues, such as the affiant’s decision to include certain
details and omit others, required correction on review. but viewed holistically,
the corrected ito gave a basis to search the residence and motor vehicle at the
time when the warrants were sought. i find no intent to mislead the issuing
justice and no negligence in the ito’s preparation.

the ito was sufficiently reliable. the warrants
could have issued. the applicant’s
charter
rights were not breached. the
evidence from the searches is admissible at trial.
facts

i will start by summarizing the relevant context.
investigative and
procedural history

the police began investigating the applicant and
a person believed to be his girlfriend, ms. lauren thompson. the police
received information from a confidential informant who claimed that the
applicant was a drug trafficker. the police then conducted surveillance of the applicant
and ms. thompson. on various days in december 2022, the police saw the
applicant or ms. thompson using a white mercedes and attending at or near a
residence located at 72-6 chestnut drive in grimsby, ontario (“the residence”).

the police sought and obtained tracking warrants
for the mercedes as well as a black jeep. the devices were installed in january
and february 2023, respectively. the applicant no longer challenges the authorizations
for the tracking devices.

the police conducted further surveillance on two
days in february 2023. they then sought search warrants for the residence as
well as the two motor vehicles. the warrants were granted on march 1, 2023, and
executed on march 3, 2023. the police located evidence in the residence and the
mercedes that resulted in the charges before the court. no evidence was found
in the jeep.

the warrants for the residence and the mercedes were
issued off the same ito. the applicant contends that once the ito is corrected
through the
garofoli
review process, the warrants could no longer have
issued.
the ito

the relevant ito was filed as exhibit 7. i have
only considered the redacted ito. i have not relied on the unredacted version or
the summary of the redactions.

detective constable ryan tweedle of the hamilton
police service was the affiant of the ito. he deposed that he had reasonable
grounds to believe that the applicant and ms. thompson possessed fentanyl and cocaine
for the purpose of trafficking. he concluded that the items to be searched for—fentanyl,
cocaine, scales, currency, debt lists, drug packaging, cell phones, and tenancy
or identification documents—would afford evidence of the offences and were
present in the residence and vehicles.

the affiant principally relied on the following bodies
of information in forming his grounds:
(1)
information from a confidential informant who
advised that the applicant possessed fentanyl and “deals a lot of drugs”. the
informant also referred to the applicant’s girlfriend driving a white mercedes
and holding a “large amount of drugs” for the applicant and trafficking them.
(2)
information linking the applicant to his “girlfriend”,
ms. thompson.
(3)
information linking the applicant and ms.
thompson to the residence and motor vehicles to be searched.
(4)
the applicant’s criminal history.
(5)
surveillance observations of the applicant and
ms. thompson engaging in driving patterns interpreted by the police as
counter-surveillance efforts.
(6)
surveillance observations of the applicant and
ms. thompson engaging in what the police interpreted as multiple drug
transactions.
legal principles

the affiant’s legal obligation when seeking an
ex
parte
authorization is the full, fair, and frank disclosure of material information:
r. v. araujo,
2000 scc 65
at para.
46. in the context of a search
warrant, the affiant must include all material information that could
undermine: (a) the probability that the offence occurred; (b) the probability
that evidence will be found at the place of the search; and (c) the reliability
and credibility of the information establishing grounds for the warrant:
r.
v. booth,
2019 onca 970
at para.
56. only information that bears on the
merits or substance of the authorization is “material”:
r. v. nguyen,
2011 onca 465
at para.
51. omissions are material if the issuing justice would
have been concerned about granting the warrant had they known about the missing
information:
r. v. alizadeh,
2014 onsc 1624
at para.
13.

misleading or inaccurate information can be
excised outright from the ito:
r. v. shivrattan,
2017 onca 23
at para.
26. information that should not have been included in the warrant application will
always be excised in this way:
booth
at para.
58.

alternatively, material omissions or inaccuracies
can be corrected by adding information to present an accurate picture or by
replacing incorrect details with accurate ones:
r. v. morelli,
2010 scc
8
at paras.
57, 60, 96. however, information cannot be added that would
strengthen the warrant application:
booth
at para.
59. i will describe
this process as “addition” instead of “amplification” to distinguish between
the expansive defence tool of adding information and the narrow crown tool of
amplifying the ito: hasan, nader, et al.
search and seizure.
toronto: emond montgomery, 2021 at 608-609, 621-623.

whether information has been excised or added, extensive
or significant edits may demonstrate that the affiant failed in their duty to
be full, fair, and frank. the corrected record might demonstrate that the
affiant deliberately, or at least recklessly, misled the issuing justice,
rendering the entire ito unreliable as a basis upon which to issue a warrant:
shivrattan
at para.
27;
r. v. debartolo,
2018 onsc 916
at para.
38. however, as
blair j.a. cautioned in
nguyen
at para.
57:
[t]he review is not an exercise in
examining the conduct of the police with a fine-toothed comb, fastening on
their minor errors or acts or omissions, and embellishing those flaws to the point
where it is the police conduct that is on trial rather than the sufficiency of
the evidence in support of the application.

the scope of warrant review is narrow. i must
decide whether the corrected record supplies information, reasonably capable of
belief, based on which the warrants could have issued. the onus is on
the applicant to show that the warrants could not have issued:
r. v.
paryniuk,
2017 onca 87
at para.
43;
r. v. sadikov,
2014 onca 72
at
paras.
83-88.
correcting the ito

the applicant proposes numerous corrections to
the ito. i accept the respondent’s argument that i must apply a holistic lens
to the analysis. while the affiant’s manner of framing certain information in
the ito might appear slanted or exaggerated in isolation, disregarding the
context of what the affiant had observed or learned during the investigation
would distort the analysis. i acknowledge the potential for confirmation bias; namely,
that the police might interpret information in a way that confirms their pre-existing
suspicions of criminal activity (see e.g.,
r. v. woo,
2017 onsc
7655
at para.
56
). the police cannot engage in circular reasoning. believing
someone is a drug trafficker does not make everything they do evidence of
trafficking. however, the assessment of reasonable grounds
also considers an officer’s experience:
r. v. mackenzie,
2013 scc 50
at
paras.
62-63;
r. v. wu, 2015 onca at para. 50. it would be artificial to
disregard the affiant’s experience
during the investigation
when
evaluating how the information was presented in the ito.

i turn now to each proposed correction:


paragraph 33
–
the affiant listed the applicant as a person of interest in a human trafficking
probe in which ms. thompson was his surety. the associated occurrence report
says there were no grounds to start a human trafficking investigation and does
not disclose a connection between the applicant and ms. thompson. the paragraph
is erroneous and ought not to have been included in the ito. it is excised.

paragraph 34
– the
affiant fairly summarized the occurrence report outlining an incident between
ms. thompson and the applicant’s family. the paragraph does not suggest the
applicant being involved in the incident. it was appropriate for the affiant to
include information that strengthened the connection between ms. thompson and
the applicant (even if indirectly via the applicant’s family). the paragraph is
not misleading and does not require correction.

paragraph 37
– it
was appropriate in this paragraph for the affiant to introduce the applicant’s
occurrence reports on police databases. the applicant does not suggest that the
paragraph is erroneous. the paragraph does not require correction. however, i
accept the applicant’s argument that it was misleading for the affiant to then
include details of occurrences without indicating whether charges were laid,
and, if so, their disposition in court. it is not sufficient to paste the cpic into
the ito and expect the reviewing justice to conduct a manual cross-check. such
an exercise is unwieldy. it is unclear how the reviewing justice would know
which occurrence related to which entry—or lack thereof—on the cpic.

the needed corrections will be
addressed in the subsequent paragraphs.

paragraph 38(a)
–
the affiant summarized a 2014 occurrence in which the applicant and others were
apparently found in an apartment containing cocaine and a rifle. the paragraph starts
with the heading, “trafficking cocaine”. i see no basis to quibble with how the
affiant summarized the occurrence report. my concern is that he included the
report without disclosing the outcome of the charges. the only reasonable
inference from the cpic is that the applicant was not convicted of anything. the
affiant ought to have included that information. even if the affiant was
uncertain about the disposition, he could have said as much in the ito. as it
stands, i find that the paragraph is misleading and must be excised. as the
court of appeal recognized in
r. v. adler,
2020 onca 246
at para.
31, the
legitimacy of including certain information in an ito might depend on whether
it is placed in sufficient context.

paragraph 38(b)­
–
the affiant summarized a 2016 occurrence in which the police found drugs and
drug paraphernalia in a vehicle occupied by the applicant and two others. the
paragraph again starts with the heading, “trafficking cocaine”. the applicant argues
that the affiant omitted important details, such as the fact that the vehicle
did not belong to the applicant and that he was seated in a passenger seat. in
my view, the significant omission is that the affiant failed to disclose that
the applicant was only convicted of simple possession. without that detail, the
affiant failed to cite facts that he knew or ought to have known and thereby invited
the issuing justice to draw unwarranted inferences: see
r. v. morelli,
2010 scc 8
at para.
58. i have already explained why pasting the cpic into the
ito was insufficient. nevertheless, the whole paragraph does not need to be
excised. it is sufficient to add the disposition.

addition is appropriate
because the conviction to the lesser included offence was already shown in the
cpic and does not advance the warrant application. also, the “trafficking
cocaine” heading is excised.

paragraph 39 –
the
occurrence outlined in this paragraph is excised in its entirety on the consent
of the parties because the associated charges had been stayed following the
finding of a
charter
breach.

paragraph 40(a)
–
the affiant noted the applicant’s outstanding charges for driving-related
offences. while not particularly probative, there is no need for excision.

paragraph 40(e)
–
this paragraph leads into the applicant’s cpic. the affiant wrote, “he has many
convictions shown below”. the word “many” is fair and does not require
excision. the inclusion of the cpic allowed the issuing justice to agree or
disagree with that characterization.

paragraph 50 –
the
time noted for when the police observed the applicant during their surveillance
is amplified on consent. it should read 2:26 pm instead of 2:46 pm.

paragraph 51(a)
–
the affiant noted that the counter-surveillance tactics lasted for 25 minutes.
the duration is excised on consent. the ito erroneously presents the duration
as a direct observation instead of an inference.

paragraph 60­
–
the applicant was observed over two days in a black nissan sedan. the affiant
indicated that the vehicle was a rental. the affiant added his opinion that car
rentals are frequently used by drug dealers to try and conceal their identity. i
find that the paragraph is not misleading. the applicant’s primary argument is
that the affiant did not spell out other factors that could sap the probative
value of the applicant using a rental car. however, the ito states when the
rental car was used and what the police observed on those days. the affiant did
not overstate the applicant’s use of a rental car. when an ito indicates what
the police observed, there is no need to add what was not observed. furthermore,
the stated relevance of the rental car—that potential drug traffickers use them
to switch up their vehicles and avoid police detection—is consistent with the
police having observed the applicant engaged in counter-surveillance tactics
and using different vehicles. the affiant was entitled to rely on his experience
regarding the link between drug trafficking and rental cars: see
r. v.
cartmer,
2024 onca 674
at para.
15. no corrections are required.

paragraph 65
– the
affiant outlined observations of ms. thompson delivering items to a house. the
applicant argues that the affiant ought to have included additional details to
allow the issuing justice to assess whether ms. thompson was engaged in drug
trafficking as opposed to decluttering her car. the following information is
added: “when exiting the residence, ms. thompson was seen moving items in the
trunk of the mercedes and went into the residence a few times to place small
bags or items from the back door into the trunk and was moving stuff around”.
despite adding this information, i see no need to correct the affiant note opining
that ms. thompson subsequently engaged in drug trafficking.

paragraph 70
– the
affiant summarized the police observations of a driver’s route. the driver was
believed to be the applicant. the affiant described him as “looping [an] industrial
area”. but the route described was not a loop. the phrase is excised as
erroneous.

paragraph 73

– the affiant
continued to describe the driver’s route. there is no suggestion that his
description was erroneous. there is no basis for excision.

paragraph 81(a)
–
the affiant opined that the illogical route, the stops and starts, the u-turns,
and the last-minute lane changes showed counter-surveillance driving. i decline
to excise this opinion. the affiant fairly outlined the underlying
observations, which allowed the issuing justice to form their own opinion. the
inference of counter-surveillance driving is reasonable and is not at all undermined
by the applicant driving a rental car. the police also did not need to see the
applicant’s ultimate destination to conclude that his route along the way was
illogical. for example, the route outlined in paragraph 73 is plainly
illogical. the applicant was observed entering the highway only to exit at the
next interchange and double back in the direction from which he had come.

paragraph 86(a)
–
the affiant outlined observations of ms. thompson. the applicant challenges the
affiant note that the observations were typical of a drug transaction and the
accompanying belief that one had taken place. the applicant is correct that the
police did not observe details that would strengthen the inference of drug
trafficking, such as the other person attending at ms. thompson’s window or reaching
into the vehicle. but the affiant fairly summarized what the police did
observe. his note is explicit that the police did not observe a hand-to-hand
transaction. there is no basis for excision.

paragraph 100
– the
affiant outlined observations in a parking lot and included a detail that a
person walked up to the mercedes and briefly interacted with the applicant on
the passenger side of the vehicle. the applicant challenges this detail as
erroneous because it does not appear in the central scribe notes. however, the
affiant gave a potential explanation for the discrepancy under
cross-examination. he explained that the central notes were not his sole source
for surveillance details. my assessment of the affiant’s testimonial
credibility and reliability appears later in these reasons.

at this point, i simply say
that there is no basis to excise the detail.


paragraph 100(a)
– the affiant opined that the meeting in the parking lot was pre-arranged. i
see no basis to excise the opinion. it is not unreasonable. the possibility
that a random person approached the vehicle and interacted with the occupants
for some benign reason does not negate the reasonable inference that the
meeting was pre-arranged. the fact that ms. thompson parked at the wendy’s and went
inside does not mean that the parties did not also attend for a pre-arranged
meeting. the police are not required to negative every alternative inference on
the ultimate issue, much less with respect to opinions they form along the way:
see
r. v. lao,
2013 onca 285
at para.
59. however, since all material
facts that could undermine grounds should be put before the issuing justice,
the details with respect to ms. thompson’s conduct are added to the ito.

paragraph 114
– the
affiant summarized tracker data on the mercedes. the affiant wrote that the
vehicle was parked overnight at the residence “for the most part” during the
period in question. i accept the applicant’s argument that the description is potentially
misleading and must be excised. it is replaced with the vehicle being there for
29 out of 49 nights. “for the most part” could suggest a higher frequency than
what the underlying data supports.

paragraph 115
– the
affiant stated that the mercedes did not exhibit any pattern of frequenting
specific locations, apart from time parked at the residence and at a car
dealership in niagara. he then asserted that this indicated there was no other
location where drugs were being kept. that assertion is conclusory. as phrased,
it presumes as fact the existence of drugs. it is likely that the affiant merely
intended to convey that the absence of other locations increased the likelihood
that drugs, if present, would be found at the residence or in the vehicles.
while this flaw appears to stem from imprecise drafting, i nonetheless excise
the assertion.

paragraph 117
– the
affiant stated that the tracker data on the mercedes indicated that the driver did
not maintain conventional employment or adhere to normal business hours.
regardless of whether this information adds much to the affiant’s grounds,
there is no basis for excision. the wording of the paragraph does not discount the
possibility of remote employment.

paragraph 118
– the
affiant outlined that the mercedes made several long-distance trips to the
kingston area for stays of very short duration. i accept the applicant’s
ultimate submission that the following information should be added: “there were
also overnight and multi-day trips made to the area in the same time period”.

while the paragraph is not
misleading, i agree that more context is appropriate.

paragraphs 119(a) and 120(a)
– these affiant notes are similar. each follows details about two
specific trips in which the vehicle traveled a considerable distance—from
grimsby to belleville or kingston—and remained for only 23 and 67 minutes,
respectively, before returning to grimsby. the affiant opined that the trips were
indicative of a higher-level drug transaction. the applicant argues that the
opinions should be excised because they are unsupported, particularly given the
vehicle’s overnight and multi-day trips. i disagree. the existence of longer
trips does not diminish the relevance of two trips involving six to eight hours
of travel for a very brief stay. the affiant was entitled to include his
opinion that such trips were indicative of drug trafficking, and he
acknowledged the limitations of that opinion. while the trips could have been
benign, as i noted earlier, the reasonableness of the opinion is assessed
against all conduct associated with the mercedes that was known to the affiant when
submitting the ito. i decline to excise the opinions.

paragraphs 124 and 126
– these paragraphs concern the jeep. they are otherwise the same as
paragraphs 115 and 117 respectively. i therefore reach the same conclusions.
the second sentence of paragraph 124 is excised. i make no corrections to
paragraph 126.

paragraph 127­ –
the
affiant described 17 short-duration stops by the jeep at a cemetery where it
parked at the most secluded location in the back. the affiant opined that these
frequent, brief visits were indicative of trafficking. the applicant argues
that this paragraph should be excised as irrelevant. i disagree. the
information is relevant because it aligns with a broader pattern of vehicles
associated with the applicant or ms. thompson making short stops at various
locations. whether this evidence significantly advances the affiant’s grounds
is a separate question. however, excision is not warranted based on relevance.
nor was it misleading for the affiant to include his opinion, given that he
disclosed both the basis for the opinion and its frailties.

paragraphs 131 and 132
– the affiant outlined observations of ms. thompson driving to a sandman
hotel and moxies restaurant complex. the applicant was the front passenger.
upon arrival, the applicant ran into the restaurant and returned three minutes
later without any food or take-away bags. as ms. thompson pulled away, the
applicant fully reclined his seat. ms. thompson then drove to a nearby wendy’s
drive thru and lcbo before returning to the residence. i agree with adding to
the ito that the parties made purchases at the wendy’s and lcbo. the additions give
context to the applicant exiting the moxies without any food.

paragraph 132(a)
–
the affiant opined that the visit to moxies was indicative of a drug
transaction because of its short duration followed by the applicant exiting
without any food and reclining his seat in the vehicle. unlike other affiant
notes that i declined to excise, this opinion is not reasonably supported by
the underlying facts. i accept that the affiant made unwarranted logical leaps
in forming his opinion. the opinion is therefore misleading and must be
excised. the underlying observations remain.

paragraph 134
– the
affiant indicated that tracker assisted surveillance allowed the police to
locate the jeep in the chatham kent area. no corrections are needed because the
addition suggested by the applicant is not material.

paragraphs 137 to 139­
– these paragraphs concern observations of the applicant attending a
residence in the chatham-kent area with an unknown male. the affiant detailed
what he learned from local police: an individual named derek holdaway was
subject to conditions requiring him to reside at that address. the affiant
summarized mr. holdaway’s outstanding charges and prior convictions and noted
that he had been the target of search warrants and was associated with drug
trafficking and firearms possession. one might question the affiant’s choice to
describe mr. holdaway as a “well-known criminal”. but the risk of misleading
the issuing justice was attenuated because the description was immediately
followed by mr. holdaway’s outstanding charges and convictions. i see no basis
for excision. the applicant does not allege that the affiant inaccurately
conveyed this information. counsel argued that the police never observed the
applicant directly associating with mr. holdaway. however, the ito does not
assert any such association or that mr. holdaway was present during the
applicant’s visit. it simply records that the applicant entered a residence
where mr. holdaway was required to live.

paragraph 139(a)(i)
– the affiant note is excised in its entirety on the consent of the
parties.

paragraphs 140 and 140(a)
– in these paragraphs, the affiant summarized police observations
of the applicant interacting with the driver of a dodge pickup truck. the
applicant seeks excision of the affiant’s description of a “brief interaction”
in paragraph 140 and the statement in paragraph 140(a) that the applicant
“paused briefly at the driver’s side window.” these details matter because they
bear on the strength of the inference that the applicant engaged in a drug
transaction. the applicant argues that the details are erroneous because they
do not appear in the central scribe notes. i decline to excise the details. the
affiant testified that he was drafting the ito in real time while monitoring
surveillance chatter. i accept that he heard that the applicant had paused at
the truck. the details are therefore not erroneous. my assessment of the
affiant’s testimonial credibility and reliability appears later in these
reasons.

to be clear, amplification by the crown is not permitted to add facts from the
affiant’s testimony into the ito; i refer to the testimony only to address the
applicant’s argument for excision.

paragraph 141
– the
affiant outlined how the applicant drove in an illogical loop for no apparent
purpose and returned to “the exact spot”, parking behind a waiting suv. the
phrase “the exact spot” is excised because the affiant acknowledged in his
testimony that it was overstated. the affiant also indicated that the suv’s
engine was running and its trunk was open. i see no basis to excise the detail
about the engine running. finally, the affiant stated that the suv’s occupants
exited after the applicant stopped behind it. the applicant argues this detail
is erroneous and should be excised. i once again accept the affiant’s testimony
on this issue. i do not excise the detail.

paragraph 141(a)
–
i do not excise the affiant’s summary of the above observations and his opinion
that the police observed a clear drug transaction. the earlier excision of the
applicant returning “to the exact spot” does not undermine the observation of
him doing an illogical loop. the affiant’s opinion of the loop being a counter-surveillance
tactic was reasonable.

paragraph 143
–
the paragraph is part of the summary of the affiant’s belief that an offence had
been committed. the excision of the affiant note at paragraph 139(a)(i) applies
here to remove the reference to specific drugs in mr. holdaway’s outstanding
charges. no further excisions are required given that i did not excise the
balance of paragraphs 137 to 139.

paragraph 144
– excision
of the summary of the applicant’s conduct is unwarranted. the affiant’s
description of the suv as “waiting” was appropriate. officers saw the applicant
park behind the suv and then interact with its occupants.

paragraph 147
– the
affiant noted that the applicant has a “history” of trafficking illegal drugs “spanning
many years”. the “spanning many years” portion is excised on the consent of the
parties. the rest of the paragraph remains. the one entry on the applicant’s cpic
for drug trafficking, though not recent, supports the affiant’s use of the word
“history”.

paragraph 148
– the
paragraph appears in the affiant’s summary of his grounds to believe an offence
had been committed. the applicant’s cpic, which is reproduced in the ito,
already specifies his exact number of convictions for drug and firearm
offences. repeating those details would undermine the purpose of a summary. no
corrections are required other than changing the word “firearms” to the
singular on the consent of the parties.

paragraph 150
– no
corrections are required to how the affiant summarized the tracker data
regarding the mercedes’ long-distance trips of short duration. however, the reference
to ms. thompson continuing to exhibit characteristics of someone attempting to
conceal her activities is misleading. based on the information in the ito,
there is no basis to say that ms. thompson “continues” to engage in such
conduct. the phrase “continues to exhibit” is excised and replaced with “has
exhibited”.

paragraph 151
– the
affiant concluded that police surveillance showed the applicant and ms.
thompson working together from the residence. i decline to excise this
paragraph. at this stage, the affiant was summarizing his grounds based on the
totality of the investigation. it was reasonable for him to opine that the
applicant and ms. thompson were acting together given the surveillance of them
in the same vehicle. whether the residence is accurately described as their
“primary” residence is immaterial; what matters is that the ito sufficiently
establishes their significant connection to that location.


paragraph 164
– in
summary form, the affiant stated that the tracker data showed many trips, some
believed to involve drug transactions, beginning and ending at the residence. i
disagree that the paragraph is misleading because it omitted the absence of
recent surveillance that linked the residence to drug trafficking. the
paragraph is confined to the tracker data, and the affiant had already
acknowledged its limitations. even if the trips tied to drug trafficking are
limited to the two described in paragraphs 119 and 120,

the affiant did not claim that
there were “many” such trips. from my reading of the ito, the word “many” describes
the trips to and from the residence generally. i take no issue with that word
given that the mercedes was there for 29 of 49 nights.

paragraph 175
– the
affiant concluded that the police surveillance observed 11 suspected drug
transactions. the applicant acknowledges that little turns on whether this
conclusion is corrected on review. the issue is whether the ito provided a
basis for the issuing justice to form their own conclusions in line with those
reached by the affiant. while i have quibbled with the affiant’s opinion that
some observed interactions were drug transactions, this paragraph does not
present those opinions as fact; the affiant appropriately used the qualifier
“suspected.”

the following table summarizes my conclusions
with respect to the proposed corrections:
paragraph
type
details
33
excision
entire paragraph
34
no corrections
37
no corrections
38(a)
excision
entire paragraph
38(b)
addition; excision
add: “the applicant was only convicted of
 the lesser included offence of simple possession of cocaine”
excise heading “trafficking cocaine”
39
excision
entire paragraph
40(a)
no corrections
40(e)
no corrections
50
amplification
change time from 2:46 pm to 2:26 pm
51(a)
excision
phrase “for 25 minutes”
60
no corrections
65
addition
“when exiting the residence, ms. thompson
 was seen moving items in the trunk of the mercedes and went into the
 residence a few times to place small bags or items from the back door into
 the trunk and was moving stuff around”
70
excision
phrase “looping industrial area”
73
no corrections
81(a)
no corrections
86(a)
no corrections
100
no corrections
100(a)
addition
“ms. thompson parked at the wendy’s,
 exited the vehicle, and went inside”
114
correction
replace “for the most part” with “29 out
 of 49 nights”
115
excision
second sentence: “this indicates that
 there is no other location where drugs are being kept other than the vehicles
 and residence sought”
117
no corrections
118
addition
“there were also overnight and multi-day
 trips made to the area in the same time period”
119(a)
no corrections
120(a)
no corrections
124
excision
second sentence: “this indicates that
 there is no other location where drugs are being kept other than the vehicles
 and residence sought”
126
no corrections
127
no corrections
131
no corrections
132
addition
“the parties made purchases at the
 wendy’s and lcbo”
132(a)
excision
entire paragraph
134
no corrections
137
no corrections
138
no corrections
139
no corrections
139(a)(i)
excision
entire paragraph
140
no corrections
140(a)
no corrections
141
excision
phrase “the exact spot”
141(a)
no corrections
143
excision
specific drugs of the outstanding charges
144
no corrections
147
excision
phrase “spanning many years”
148
correction
replace “firearms” with “firearm”
150
correction
replace “continues to exhibit” with “has
 exhibited”
151
no corrections
164
no corrections
175
no corrections
could the
warrants have issued?

the applicant argues that the warrants could not
have issued on the corrected ito. there are two facets to the applicant’s
argument: whether the warrants could have issued on the face of the corrected
record, and whether the affiant’s approach rendered the ito insufficiently
reliable to support issuance of the warrants. i will address each claim in
turn.
whether the
warrants could have issued on the face of the corrected record

i must assess whether the corrected ito presents
reliable evidence that might reasonably be believed that could have led the
issuing justice to issue the warrants:
r. v. vu,
2013 scc 60
at para.
16. i remind myself that the issuing justice could have drawn inferences from
the facts stated in the ito, so long as those inferences were reasonable:
r.
v. el-azrak,
2023 onca 440
at paras.
96, 101. the issuing justice would
have read the ito as a whole and with regard to its author:
r. v. green,
2015 onca 579
at para.
18.

the investigation started when the police received
a tip from a confidential informant. based on the information available in the
redacted ito, the informant told the police in december 2022 that the applicant
possessed fentanyl, dealt a lot of drugs, and was always in supply. the
informant provided the applicant’s home address and motor vehicle (the white
mercedes). the informant also provided information about the applicant’s
girlfriend. the informant shared that the girlfriend drove the white mercedes
and would hold drugs for the applicant and traffic them.

i must assess whether the tip was credible, compelling,
and substantially corroborated by independent police investigation. there is no
evidence that allows me to assess the informant’s credibility at the time that they
shared the tip: see
r. v. curry,
2020 onsc 86
at para.
27. the ito only
says that the informant was a first-time source. there is no information about
their motivations or criminal antecedents, if any. the informant did not have a
history of providing reliable information.

the tip was more compelling. the informant
provided current information. they provided some details, including the
specific drug that the applicant was said to possess. the nuance that the
mercedes belonged to the applicant but was driven by his girlfriend reflected a
degree of insider familiarity exceeding what would reasonably be known to the
general public. however, the ito does not state whether the informant learned
their information through first-hand observations or second-hand hearsay or
rumours; see
r. v. greaves-bissesarsingh,
2014 onsc 4900
at paras.
35-40.

subsequent police investigation, at outlined in
the ito, significantly corroborated the informant’s tip, both in its “innocent”
and “criminal” aspects: see
r. v. campbell,
2003 mbca 76
at paras.
26-27. for example, the police confirmed that the informant correctly provided
the applicant’s address. the informant also correctly gave information about the
girlfriend driving the white mercedes that belonged to the applicant.

as i explained, this was not
a minor biographical fact. it gains particular significance because the vehicle
was being used in what the police believed was a drug trafficking operation. the corroboration therefore does more than
validate a peripheral detail; it strengthens the plausibility of the
informant’s allegation that the girlfriend was actively involved in trafficking
for the applicant, using the very vehicle implicated in the suspected
operation.

of significance, the subsequent investigation, particularly
the police surveillance, corroborated that the applicant and his girlfriend (ms.
thompson) were engaged in drug trafficking.

the police did extensive surveillance, during which they made observations that
reasonably supported a belief that the conduct of the applicant and ms.
thompson was consistent with drug trafficking: see
r. v. cartmer,
2024
onca 674
at para.
15. the surveillance must be examined holistically. the
police were not required to establish that each individual interaction was a
drug transaction. the surveillance showed the applicant and ms. thompson frequently
driving and meeting with people for short durations in different locations. any
one of these meetings could be benign, but in conjunction they formed a
pattern. the surveillance enabled the police to make the following observations:

•
december 14, 2022 – ms. thompson was driving the
mercedes, and the applicant was the front passenger. ms. thompson drove in an
illogical manner that suggested counter-surveillance tactics. both the
applicant and ms. thompson were looking around and staring at other cars. later
in the day, the applicant was seen walking away from the area of the residence wearing
a backpack that looked full. he was attentive and looking around.
•
december 20, 2022 – ms. thompson was driving the
mercedes and entered the residence. two people in succession drove to the
residence for a quick interaction before departing. ms. thompson then drove
away from the residence to a house with something in her hand. she quickly
returned to her car and drove back to the residence. the details that i added
to paragraph 65 do not undermine these police observations.
•
december 20, 2022 – the applicant was driving a
rental car. he did counter-surveillance driving.

•
december 21, 2022 – the rental car and the
mercedes were both parked near the residence. the applicant exited the
residence. he was attentive. he got into the rental car and sped away. ms.
thompson then exited the residence and got into the mercedes. she drove to a
residence where someone attended the passenger side of the vehicle for a brief
interaction before ms. thompson quickly drove away.
•
december 28, 2022 – ms. thompson was driving the
mercedes and was attentive to the police surveillance. she conducted loops
through a residential area. she eventually parked at the residence. she got out
and looked inside cars parked on the street. she got back into the mercedes and
continued her abnormal driving (e.g., looping the area at a very slow
speed). she eventually parked in a parking lot. another vehicle immediately parked
in the lot. ms. thompson did two loops of the parking lot before parking right
next to the other vehicle. the driver of the other vehicle got out and had a
brief interaction with ms. thompson. later that evening, the applicant and ms.
thompson got into the mercedes. they were holding arms and scanning the parking
lot. after some more illogical driving (e.g. driving in and out of a residential
complex and a gas station for no apparent purpose), a person was seen walking
away from the passenger side of the mercedes. ms. thompson then pulled into a
gas station and looped the lot before settling in the parking lot. an unknown
person without anything in hand walked up to the mercedes and had a brief
interaction with the applicant on the passenger side. ms. thompson also went
inside the nearby wendy’s.

ms. thompson then drove towards the 403-highway eastbound but made a last-minute
lane change to go westbound.
•
december 29, 2022 – ms. thompson was driving the
mercedes. she drove in an illogical manner. she eventually reached the
residence. she then pulled out of the residential complex and looped the
residential area until the police could not continue the surveillance.
•
february 23, 2023 – ms. thompson was driving the
jeep. the applicant was the front passenger. ms. thompson drove from the
residence to a moxies restaurant. the applicant briefly entered and exited
without any takeaway bags. he reclined his seat in the vehicle.

the parties then made
purchases at the wendy’s and lcbo before returning to the residence.

•
february 28, 2023 – the applicant was driving
the mercedes with an unknown male passenger. the applicant and the unknown male
went inside a home and exited 50 minutes later. the applicant was wearing a
medical mask and showing heightened signs of awareness. mr. holdaway, who has a
conviction for a firearm offence and faced outstanding drug charges, was on
conditions to reside at that home. the applicant later walked to a variety
store and paused briefly at the driver’s side window of a pickup truck. whoever
was driving the pickup truck immediately drove away after the interaction. the
applicant and the unknown male returned to the mercedes. the applicant drove in
an illogical loop before parking behind a suv that had its engine running and
trunk open. the occupants of the suv got out and walked to the driver’s side of
the mercedes. the interaction through the driver’s side window only lasted about
10 seconds. the occupants returned to the suv, and the applicant drove away.

this surveillance sufficiently corroborated the informant’s
tip in material respects and supplied reasonable grounds to believe that the
applicant and ms. thompson were trafficking drugs. the surveillance had its
limits: it captured no hand-to-hand exchange and, at times, no physical
interaction. but the standard for a warrant is not proof beyond a reasonable
doubt, nor proof on a balance of probabilities. it requires only reasonable
grounds to believe, and i am satisfied that the ito met that threshold.

this conclusion does not end the analysis. reasonable
grounds must be current and tied to a specific location. the applicant principally
argues that the ito failed to provide a reasonable basis to believe that drugs
would be found in the residence in march 2023 (the warrants were issued on
march 1, 2023). whatever grounds might have existed in december, the applicant
argues that the issuing justice could not have issued a warrant for the residence
at the beginning of march. as counsel argued, “an obvious takeaway is perhaps
there was something at [the residence] in december. maybe [the applicant] was a
drug trafficker in december. it doesn’t mean he’s still one actively in march”.
in making this submission, counsel contrasted the relative strength of the
december observations with the weaknesses of the february ones, adding: “even
if you find those [december observations] probative, that’s december 20th.
we’re now talking march when the warrants are being drafted. [the police] don’t
have any current information about [the residence] and the tracker data and
surveillance hasn’t helped them. and in fact, it’s taken away from the argument
[that the warrants should issue]”.


i acknowledge the factual underpinnings of the applicant’s
argument. the police conducted more surveillance in december than in february,
and the inference of drug trafficking is more easily drawn from the december
observations. nevertheless, i disagree that the warrant to search the residence
could not have issued in early march. when the surveillance is considered collectively
along with the tracker data, the issuing justice could reasonably infer that
the residence remained connected to drug trafficking.


as a starting point, i find that the december observations
were not so distant that they had become irrelevant a little over two months
later. there is no fixed rule as to how recent information must be to remain
relevant:
r. v. james,
2019 onca 288
per nordheimer j.a. at para. 55.

the passage of time is only
one factor to consider:
r. v. fuller,
2021 onca 411
at paras.
9-10.
the activities that the police observed did not suggest that the drug operation
was transitory.

furthermore, tracker data bridged the gap from
december to march by maintaining the connection between the mercedes, the
residence, and the inference of drug trafficking. first, the data showed that
the mercedes was overnight at the residence for 29 of the 49 days between
january 10 and march 1, 2023. second, the data linked the mercedes—and
therefore the residence—to trafficking activity. on february 16 and 25, 2023,
the mercedes made long-distance trips from grimsby to belleville and kingston,
remaining for only 23 and 67 minutes respectively before returning to the area
of the residence. as i explained earlier, it was reasonable for the affiant to include
his opinion that these trips were indicative of higher-level trafficking. while
the tracker data alone might not say very much, in context it reinforced the
pattern observed in december: the use of the mercedes for quick visits to various
locations before returning to the area of the residence.

the february surveillance then afforded observations
that continued the pattern. even if no inference of drug trafficking can be
drawn from the surveillance on february 23, what matters is that the observations
put the applicant and ms. thompson at the residence. then, five days later, the
surveillance on february 28 provided a strong inference that the applicant was
engaged in drug trafficking. the police once again observed the applicant
engaged in counter-surveillance driving and meeting briefly with unknown people
who were waiting for him in parking lots.

the applicant argues that the absence of
counter-surveillance driving or other efforts to conceal the residence on
february 23 suggests that drugs were no longer present in that location. that
is one possible inference. it may mean that the presence of drugs at the
residence in early march was not the only reasonable inference: see
r. v.
nero,
2016 onca 160
at para.
71. however, when the ito is considered as a
whole, i am satisfied that the issuing justice could have reasonably authorized
the warrants for the residence and the motor vehicles: see
r. v. reeves,
2017 onca 365
at para.
82.

whether the entire
ito was too unreliable to support issuance

up to this point, my analysis has accepted the
corrected ito at face value. i have proceeded on the basis that the police
fairly recorded and conveyed their surveillance observations, which the affiant
then summarized in the ito. the applicant raises a further argument. he submits
that i should not place trust in the police in this case; that the affiant’s
misrepresentations and omissions, whether deliberate or reckless, infected the entire
ito and rendered it too unreliable to support issuance. this submission relies
on the following principle from
r. v. debartolo,
2018 onsc 916
at para.
38:
where there are deliberate
misrepresentations and omissions in the ito these defects may impact on the
assessment of the reliability of the balance of the ito even if deliberate
misrepresentation and material omission has not been proven with respect to the
details contained in the balance of the ito after excision.

i do not give effect to the applicant’s
submission. my analysis proceeds in three parts.
flaws in the ito
and their effect

i acknowledge flaws in the ito. the inclusion of
the applicant’s prior occurrence reports without stating whether charges were
laid and, if so, their disposition, had the potential to mislead the issuing justice.
that practice is not acceptable. cross-referencing should be a straightforward
step. if an officer cannot determine a disposition, that information gap should
be disclosed in the ito. furthermore, some of the affiant’s drafting was
imprecise. for example, he used “exact same spot” when he meant the “same exact
area of the city”. and certain affiant notes were overstated. at times they
presented individual observations—standing alone—as indicative of drug
trafficking. for example, i struggle to understand how running into a
restaurant, returning a few minutes later without any take
‑
out bags, and reclining in the passenger seat of a vehicle is
“indicative of a drug transaction on several levels”.

the same concern applies to
the note about the tracker data showing the jeep making 17 short
‑
duration stops at the back of a cemetery.


despite these flaws, i do not find that the
affiant intentionally sought to mislead the issuing justice, nor do i find
negligence or recklessness in his approach. the record suggests that the
affiant sometimes struggled to distinguish between what could be inferred from
isolated observations and what he inferred from the totality. that difficulty
does not mean his notes had the real potential to mislead. the issuing justice
was required to consider the ito in its entirety and to draw independent
conclusions. “a narrow focus on a portion of the ito is inconsistent with the
legal requirement that the issuing justice act judicially, which would include
diligently and independently reviewing the entire ito and considering its
contents”:
r. v. victoria,
2018 onca 69
at para.
97. the inclusion of
the occurrence reports was not altogether inappropriate, as certain ones tied
the applicant to the drug subculture and thus provided some corroboration of
the informant’s account. the applicant’s reliance on
r. v. adler,
2020
onca 246
at paras.
30-31
does not change my assessment.
adler
featured
markedly more troubling conduct, including the failure to mention in the ito a
prior warrantless entry into the accused’s home or share with the crown the
real reasons to adjourn a bail hearing. it is telling that the corrected ito in
this case is not materially different from the version submitted to the issuing
justice. some points are clearer and additional context has been added, but the
strength of the inferences sought to be drawn remains about the same.

i generally accept the affiant’s explanations
for why he drafted the ito the way that he did. for example, the affiant was
cross-examined on how he summarized the surveillance from december 20, 2022.
paragraph 65 did not include details of ms. thompson moving items in the
mercedes trunk and transferring small bags and other items from the residence
into the trunk. i accept that this omission was not an effort to suppress
exculpatory context. the affiant fairly summarized salient points for the
warrant application rather than reciting every observed movement. more broadly,
the ito contains several instances where the affiant expressly demonstrated his
understanding of the need to be full, fair, and frank—by identifying unknowns,
flagging the limitations of the tracker data, and avoiding categorical
assertions.


the affiant’s use of generalizing language was not
materially distorting. the tracker showed the mercedes at the residence for 29
of 49 nights (approximately 59%). the affiant is not a meticulous solicitor who
might consider “for the most part” a touch overstated: see
r. v. green,
2015 onca 579
at para.
18. the affiant did not say that the mercedes was
“always” at the residence. the numerical pattern still supported the
residential association relevant to the inference being drawn. likewise, where
the affiant used qualifying language—“appears”; “had the characteristics
of”—those qualifiers signalled that he was drawing inferences rather than
asserting certainties.

affiant credibility on core surveillance
details

the applicant suggested that the affiant
fabricated key surveillance facts and inserted them into the ito to bolster the
drug trafficking inference. if made out, that allegation would establish bad
faith and undermine the reliability of the entire ito.

i reject that the affiant fabricated anything. i
found the affiant credible and his testimony reliable. he was cross-examined
about surveillance details from february 28 that appeared in the ito but not in
the central scribe notes. he explained that he was keenly listening to the live
surveillance chatter
while drafting the ito. he was not part of
the surveillance unit, and his focused drafting role left him free of other
surveillance duties. in those circumstances, i am not surprised that he
captured details from the live feed that do not appear in the scribe notes. i
accept that he drafted the ito contemporaneously, even if he did not record
that methodology in his notes. the fact that other officers did
not note his monitoring carries little weight, as he was not part of the
surveillance team. there is no evidence before me on whether the other officers
were even aware of his monitoring. i found the affiant’s testimony on this point
to be logical, coherent, and compelling:
q. what you’re indicating you heard over
the radio, is that an independent memory that you have now, today?
a. i don’t remember that independently now,
no.
q. so, fair to say you are assuming that
you heard these [surveillance] details over the radio?
a. i am saying that i had more than just
what is [in the central scribe] notes, and if you take [those] notes at face
value and compare it to what’s in the ito, that’s not all i had access to. i
also had the live feed over the radio of what was said, and i also had a
conversation with the team when they got back, and we ensured that what i put
in the ito was correct.
prior credibility assessments in other cases

prior credibility assessments from other cases
do not negatively affect my assessment of the affiant’s credibility or
reliability. the applicant relies on two decisions. in
r. v. sodhi,
2019
oncj 463, both the affiant and sergeant hall (a surveillance officer in the
case at bar) testified at trial; fiorucci j. made negative credibility findings
regarding sgt. hall (see paras. 32-33, 40) but none against this affiant—at
most, certain aspects of his testimony were not accepted. in
r. v. russell,
2024 onsc 529, on a
charter
application concerning a no-knock entry
executed by a team that included the affiant and cst. lentz (another
surveillance officer in the case at bar), goodman j. found the officers failed
to justify the no-knock (para. 14), noted parts of their testimony were
contradicted by cctv, held the entry breached s. 8, and excluded the evidence
under s. 24(2). goodman j. made no express adverse credibility findings
against this affiant. he principally found that the police evidence was
insufficient to justify the no-knock entry (see paras. 59, 64-66).

the prior decisions neither import a propensity
to lie nor undermine reliability here. it is not uncommon for a trial judge to
accord less weight to testimony that conflicts with other proof without finding
mendacity. the opinions of other judges regarding the officers’
credibility do not, without more, render those officers discreditable:
r. v. ghorvei,
1999 canlii 19941
(ont. c.a.) at
para.
31. there was no application in these proceedings to
cross-examine sgt. hall or cst. lentz as sub-affiants, and i am not prepared to
discount surveillance observations recorded by sgt. hall merely because one
judge in 2019 was troubled by his testimony in a different context.

even after taking
sodhi
and
russell
into consideration, i find the affiant credible and reliable
on the record before me.
conclusion

in sum, i do not find that the affiant sought to deliberately
mislead the issuing justice. he did not intentionally add erroneous details or
omit necessary ones. portions of the ito were sloppily drafted; others were
overstated when viewed in isolation. but i would not say that the affiant was
reckless in his approach. considered as a whole, as the issuing justice was
required to do, the corrected ito remained a reliable basis to authorize the
warrants; see
r. v. victoria,
2018 onca 69
at paras.
97-98. the
identified defects do not infect the entire ito.
residual discretion

even though the warrants could have issued, the
court retains a common law authority to set them aside. this residual
discretion is not contingent on finding a
charter
breach. rather, the
residual discretion can be used when the police conduct was so subversive of
the authorization process that the warrant must be set aside to protect the
court’s process:
r. v. paryniuk,
2017 onca 87
at paras.
69, 74;
r. v.
araujo,
2000 scc 65
at para.
54;
r. v. nyadu,
2024 onsc 4092
at
para.
273. the standard to use this discretion is high:
r. v. phan,
2020
onca 298
at para.
56. it has been described as conduct that amounts to an abuse
of process:
r. v. vivar,
2009 onca 433
at para.
2.

given my findings above, i see no basis to
invoke this residual discretion. the police conduct did not subvert the
authorization process. any failings in the obligation to make full and frank
disclosure were not the product of bad faith: see
r. v. booth,
2019 onca
970
at para.
121. the affiant did not undermine, corrupt, or weaken the
integrity of pre-authorization process.
exclusion of
evidence

i find that the warrants could have issued and
do not set them aside. the applicant does not advance other
charter
claims. i find no
charter
breaches and do not consider the exclusion of
evidence under s. 24(2).
conclusion

the application is dismissed. the warrants are
upheld. the evidence is admissible.
released: october
23, 2025
signed: justice davin m.k. garg

the excisions on consent are already reflected in exhibit 7.

respondent’s counsel was unable to conduct the cross-check. “in looking through
this and trying to match up the outcomes, it is clear in looking at the record
that there is a youth conviction for 5(2)
cdsa
i believe from 2013, and
there is not a conviction for 5(2)
cdsa
after that point. there is a
conviction for a 4(1). as a federal crown, i didn’t have the information to
assign which one exactly went to which one”: submissions on july 24, 2025, at
p. 29.

i took respondent’s counsel to not dispute that this occurrence resolved in the
manner described by applicant’s counsel.

the reference to paragraph 72 in the applicant’s table is a typographical
error.

see paragraphs 79-85 of these reasons.

unlike the observations from february 28, 2023 (see paragraphs 140-141 of the
ito), where counsel squarely challenged the affiant on the accuracy of the
“pause” detail and elicited testimony about his reliance on live surveillance
chatter, no similar questions were put to the affiant regarding this detail from
paragraph 100. the applicant did not confront the affiant with the suggestion
that this detail was erroneous or seek an explanation for its inclusion. i
decline to excise the detail for that additional reason: it was not tested in
cross-examination, and the record does not support the applicant’s assertion
that it is inaccurate.

see submissions on july 3, 2025, at p. 102.

see paragraphs 79-85 of these reasons.

the description as the “primary” residence is also reasonable based on the facts
disclosed in the ito.

i took applicant’s counsel to not dispute that those trips had started or ended
at the residence. “i don’t see how tracker data that shows that a car goes to
kingston, even just for half an hour, and the fact that it started that day and
ended that day at 6 chestnut, but we don’t who was driving or what happened,
how does that help show that drugs are going to be at 6 chestnut?” see
submissions on july 3, 2025, at p. 118.

see for example paragraphs 47 and 48 of the ito.

whether ms. thompson was actually the applicant’s girlfriend is immaterial. the
description is apt given that they were frequently seen together and were at
one point holding arms.

i have identified the individuals as the applicant and ms. thompson. there are
times in the ito where the individuals are not immediately identified as such,
but the police ultimately formed a reasonable belief as to their identity based
on subsequent surveillance.

there are two entries for december 20, 2022, because the surveillance was being
conducted at two different locations.

i added this fact to the ito.

i excised the affiant opinion that the observed behaviour was
indicative of a drug transaction.

i added this fact to the ito.

submissions on july 3, 2025, at pp. 62, 119.

i use “connecting to drug trafficking” as shorthand for saying that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that evidence of drug trafficking would be found
in the residence.

nordheimer j.a. was writing in dissent at the court of appeal, but his decision
was adopted by the majority at the supreme court:
2019 scc 52.

see also the chart provided by respondent’s counsel comparing the ito in this
case with the itos in
r. v. caissey,
2008 scc 65;
r. v.
macdonald,
2012 onca 24; and
r. v. jacobson,
2006 canlii 12292
(ont.
c.a.). the courts upheld the warrants in each case.

see paragraph 132(a) of the ito.

see paragraph 127(a) of the ito.

see for example paragraphs 65(a) (“although it is unknown what was being
delivered”) and 140(a) (“no physical transaction was observed due to [the] view
being obstructed”) of the ito.

see for example paragraph 65(a) of the ito.

the present case is not like
r. v. mitchell,
2019 onsc 2613
at paras.
54-55, where the officer was cross-examined on the facts of a prior decision
and given an opportunity to respond.