source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj131/2025oncj131.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that
the following notice be attached to the file:
a non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding
has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this
subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the
presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on application
— in proceedings in respect
of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the
presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order
made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. j.s.,
2025 oncj 131
date: 2025 02 04
court file no.: pembroke 20-1592
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
js
before justice j.r. richardson
heard on november 20, 2024
reasons for judgment released on february 4, 2025
goher irfan........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
daniel howard................................................................................. counsel
for the accused
richardson j.:
introduction

on march 19, 2024, i
found js guilty of one count of assaulting jm, contrary to
section 266
of the
criminal
code
and one count of sexually assaulting jm, contrary to
section 271
of
the
criminal code.

on april 15, 2024, i
released my reasons for those convictions and my reasons for acquittal on other
charges that were before the court. those reasons are reported at
r. v. js
2024
oncj 185.

the issue i must now
decide is what is the appropriate sentence.
the facts

the facts of both
incidents are thoroughly described in the trial judgment.

js and jm are
step-brother and step-sister. the incidents occurred in renfrew county,
ontario after js came to live with jm’s family. js had been estranged from his
father, ss, for a lengthy period of time. they became reacquainted when he was
living in nova scotia.

ss invited js to come
and live with him and his family, which included his wife ar and his daughters
jm and jzs. at first, js lived with the family in ottawa. they then became
estranged again.

js participated in some
treatment at harvest house, which is an ottawa social agency that assists
people with addictions. one year, just after christmas, js lost his harvest
house placement and ss invited js to come live with the family.

js resided in the
basement of ss’s, ar’s, jzs’s and jm’s home in killaloe, hagarty and richards
township. the two incidents that led to the conviction happened here.

js and jm did not know
one another and were working on establishing their relationship when the
incidents took place.

the assault is the
first of a number of incidents which jm testified about at trial. jm and js
were playing a video game. they had a conversation about the videogame in
which jm called js “a fag” and told him that he was “gay”. this caused js to
become angry and put his hands around jm’s neck. he demanded that she tell him
that she was sorry. jm stated that she could barely breathe.

the sexual assault incident
occurred days after a hide and seek game in which jm accidently touched js in
the dark. js demanded that jm apologize for touching him and told her that he
wanted her to express how sorry she was. jm offered to give js a hug, but he
said it was not good enough. when she asked him what action on her part would
satisfy him, js asked her to strip in front of him.

jm took her pants off
and asked js if that was good enough. js said it was not good enough and
complained that all he could see was her legs. jm then removed her pants and
quickly bent over in front of him.

even though this
incident did not involve js actually touching jm, i found that it constituted a
sexual assault. i wrote at paragraphs 437 through 439 that:
….the
whole point of the exercise was to exploit the sexuality of jm, affront her
sexual integrity and dignity, sexually humiliate her and demonstrate to her
that she was sexually subservient to him.
jm
was much younger, smaller and vulnerable. when this incident took place,
she was home with js alone. requiring her to take her clothes off while
he watched in order to demonstrate to him that she was sorry for an earlier act
where she accidentally touched him in the course of a game is obviously an act
of power, aggression and control.
jm
testified that the exposure of her vaginal area was very brief. she then
ran upstairs and cried. she tried to call her boyfriend but she couldn’t
stop crying. when the crown asked her how she felt, she said she was
disgusted. in my view, this more than amply demonstrates the fact that jm
was sexually humiliated.
the victim
impact statement

jm filed a very short
victim impact statement. she expressed feeling relieved and being more at ease
because she saw the judgment in this case as “justice for what he has done”.

she stated that as a
result of this offence, she has trust issues, social anxiety and she
experiences nightmares. she despises the accused’s first name and essentially
cringes when she hears it.

she expressed “heart
ache” because her father, ss, must suffer with the knowledge of what js did.
the criminal
record

js has a three-page
criminal record which commences in 2008 with convictions for the following
offences:
a)
break and enter (three
convictions);
b)
fail to comply with
disposition under the
youth criminal justice act
(one conviction);
c)
possession of a weapon
(one conviction);
d)
uttering threats (two
convictions);
e)
assault (five convictions);
f)
fail to comply with a
recognizance (one conviction);
g)
fail to attend court
(one conviction);
h)
fail to comply with a
probation order (one conviction);
i)
failing to comply with
an undertaking (one conviction); and
j)
mischief under $5000
(one conviction).

the longest sentence he
has served is two years less one day in 2008. every disposition has involved a
probation order, often for a lengthy period of two or three years.

despite the length of
his record,
js
has never received a conditional sentence.

there are two gaps in
his record. the first one is between 2008 and 2016. for about two years of
that period, js would have been either in jail or on parole. for a further
three years, he would have been on probation. the second gap is between march
2016 and march 2020. for about two years of that period, js was on probation.

js’s record discloses
convictions in annapolis royal, nova scotia, ottawa and pembroke.

it must be remembered
that the charges that js has been convicted of in this case occurred before
some of the convictions on his record. still, the record discloses a
significant problem with assaultive and threatening behaviour.
the
gladue
report

a
gladue
report,
dated september 26, 2024, was entered into evidence.

js is an algonquin from
the pikwakanagan first nation. he inherits his indigenous ancestry from his
mother. ss is not indigenous.

js’s mother now resides
in nova scotia. js has limited contact with her; they speak through social
media.

js was six when his
parents separated. there was one other child of their union, ms. ms
apparently also lives in nova scotia and js is estranged from him. he
described their relationship to the
gladue
writer as “rivals”.

when js’s parents
separated, his mother moved to nova scotia with his step-father. js did not
see ss. he told the
gladue
writer “that’s the way my mom wanted it”.

if there is one word
that
describes
js
’s family, it would be “dysfunctional”. js told the
gladue
writer:
i was always an outsider. i’ve never been able to
stay close or even relatively close with family. a lot of the family has ended
up falling apart when we moved away. there’s also been this big family war
going on for years where certain people in the family don’t want to see other
people and it got ridiculous, so nobody really talks to each other.

js complained that his
father ss was a drunk and drug addict. he also complained that ss physically
abused his mother. he stated that his mother went to a shelter with his
brother ms when js was six. he stated that his mother left him behind. he
reported that when his father got home, he was abusive toward js.

while i accept that
this family was dysfunctional, i note that none of this background has been
confirmed by collateral contact. given that ss was a witness at trial (and may
have been a complainant against js on other charges himself) i am reluctant to
rely on
js
’s uncorroborated reports concerning ss.

js complained that the
community he lived in in nova scotia was nice, but there was not a lot for
children to do. he described his step-father as strict but not abusive.
js
stated
that he was in foster care when he was 13 because he rebelled. he did
not like his foster parents because they were “strangers” and they were too
religious for his liking. he complained that his parents cut him off and but
for one short-lived reunion, he did not return. his step-father got a “peace
order” against him.

js reported that he had
difficulties throughout school. he reported frequent detentions and
suspensions. he stated that he and ms were victims of racism because they were
indigenous. he has difficulties with paying attention and was diagnosed with
adhd when he was nine. he was prescribed ritalin, which he did not like, and
he stopped taking it as soon as he got away from his parents.

js
stated
that he
dropped out of grade 9. he ended up in halifax where he got in trouble with
the law and was homeless until he was 16. he stated that he completed up to
the end of grade 11 when he was in jail in halifax.

when js was 21 years
old, he returned to the ottawa area and reconnected with his father through
social media. he reported living with his father for about six months until
tension developed over marihuana use and drinking. he was homeless and ended
up at harvest house.

he has either been
supported through ontario works or worked as a roofer or in a pizzeria. i note
that i also heard some evidence about js attending programming and work
programs at trial.

with respect to
substance abuse,
js
states
that his father is addicted to alcohol, marihuana
and painkillers. as i have set out below, there is some evidence at trial
which supports the proposition that his father was a regular drinker and a user
of marihuana. he stated that his mother and step-father used marihuana. he
did not report that they had issues with alcohol.

js
states
that in
addition to using marihuana, he has been addicted to morphine and oxycontin. he
also has had difficulty with alcohol. his friend kn reported that when js is
drinking, he “is a completely different guy” and has to shut him out because
she does not want him hurting her children.

she has tried to help
him access mental health and addiction for over eight years. he refuses to
attend anger management. she stated, “…if he took alcohol out of his system
completely, [js] would be a great guy. when he’s not drinking he is absolutely
phenomenal.” kn reports that js’s addiction to alcohol and drugs is getting
better.

despite his apparent
reticence to attend treatment in the past, js told the
gladue
writer
that he was prepared to do “whatever it takes”. he is motivated by his relationship
with kn and her children.

with respect to his
mental health, js reported feeling depressed throughout his life. he reported
self-harming when he was a teenager. he stated that there was one attempt to
take him to a hospital to get mental health support when he was 14 which
“didn’t go so well”.

js
stated
that he was
prescribed medications to treat his depression, which he attempted to overdose
with. this occurred while he was living with his foster family.

kn reported that she
called the police once because js attempted suicide. like the alcohol problem,
however, she reported that this behaviour was starting to get better and they
often work things out by going for a walk and talking.

js reported difficulty
controlling his anger. he has tried to take some anger management therapy in
the past with mixed success.

he also reported having
had some mental health admissions at the royal ottawa hospital. he stated that
he was hoping to get further referrals.

the only consistent
person supporting js is kn, who provided a letter of support, which i will
discuss in greater detail below. according to the
gladue
report, js
does not live with kn, but he lives near her and is in regular contact with
her. when he is not working he supports kn with her children and plays video
games. he is working as a roofer.

js reported that his
mother told him that their family survived residential school. he recalled
that his grandmother was able to speak algonquin. she died young.

js
stated
that he has
visited pikwakanagan about five times since he moved back to the area. he
expressed a desire to get more connected with his ancestral home but
transportation is an issue.

he has gone to pow-wows
and participates in smudging and sweat lodges.
letter of
support from kn

kn provided a letter of
support. she stated that:
a)
js has struggled with
suicide, alcohol and authority.
b)
he has significantly
changed over the past few years, noting that he stopped drinking and seems
calmer and happier.
c)
he is a great support
to her children. she stated that he is the children’s cousin and their godfather. 
they refer to him as uncle j.s. and he goes to church with them. he spends
every day that he is not working with them.
d)
incarcerating js would
be stressful for the children, one of whom suffers from anxiety.

she expressed the view
that js “just needs the time, patience and help to find his way.” she asked me
to help js get the help that he needs. she asked me not to incarcerate him.
letter of
support from lisa mcqueen

lisa mcqueen is a
“clinical behaviorist”. i was not given a
curriculum vitae
or any
other information as to what her qualifications are.

she wrote a letter
dated july 20, 2022 in which she indicated that she had been working as js’s
anger management counsellor. the letter was written when js was applying for
bail.

ms mcqueen
stated that
js
attended weekly sessions between may 2022 and his arrest for the offences
before the court.
crown
submissions

following
r. v. friesen
2020 scc 9
and the cases that follow it, the crown sought:
a)
12 months in custody;
b)
three years probation;
c)
an order for the taking of the
accused’s dna;
d)
a
soira
order for ten years;
e)
a section 109 order;
f)
a section 161 order.

the crown noted that the primary aggravating
factors present were:
a)
the complainant was under the age
of 18;
b)
js was in a position of trust or
authority.

the crown noted that the accused
was not entitled to any mitigation for an early guilty plea.
defence submissions

defence counsel agreed that
the offences called for a period of custody. defence counsel submitted that a
sentence in the “upper range” of a conditional sentence would be appropriate
having regard to the following factors:
a)
the accused was cut off from his
community at an early age. he has never been able to fully explore his
indigenous ancestry.
b)
the accused’s father was absent
from his life when he was growing up. his mother wanted it that way. the
accused moved from ontario to nova scotia which alienated and distanced him
from his father.
c)
the accused tends to work and has
worked in the roofing industry for the past seven years.
d)
the accused’s use of drugs, other
than marihuana, and alcohol is “under control”.
e)
the accused has positive community
support from kn.
f)
the accused is amenable to
treatment.
analysis

in
r. v. lacasse
2015
scc 64, the supreme court of canada determined that the “cardinal principle” of
sentencing law is the principle of proportionality, that is, the more serious
the crime and the greater the degree of the offender’s responsibility, the more
severe the sentence will be. this must be balanced against the moral
blameworthiness of the offender.

lacasse
also describes
sentencing as a “delicate
task”. other cases have established the principle that sentencing is a highly
individualized process.

the sentencing in this
case must address js’s penchant for assaultive and threatening behaviour. this
assault in this case is his sixth assault conviction. it also involves the putting
his hands around the neck of jm and interfering with her breathing, which is
very aggravating.

the sentencing in this
case must also address a new dimension to his offending behaviour – sexual
offences.

jm was js’s
half-sister. as i have pointed out in the trial judgment, she was younger,
smaller and very vulnerable. his behaviour towards her is deplorable and
shameful. he turned what should have grown to be a wholesome, loving and
supportive relationship into an abusive relationship where jm was sexually
humiliated at his bidding.

there is no evidence
before me that js expresses any insight into this new dimension to his
offending behaviour.

the sentencing
authorities are clear that absent an issue going to the offender’s moral
blameworthiness, custody is called for and conditional sentences are rare in
cases of sexual assault. denunciation and deterrence are the primary
sentencing goals.

at the same time, the
sentencing must also reflect that js is indigenous. he has a deprived
background which is, at least in part, no doubt connected to his indigenous
ancestry and canada’s deplorable record with respect to indigenous people.

js’s mother, from whom
he inherited his indigenous ancestry, left ontario when js was a young boy and
moved to nova scotia. this deprived js of any interaction with his father, ss,
until much later
in
js
’s life when they connected through social media.

the intergenerational
trauma of the residential school experience may help explain how and why js did
not have the benefit of a strong relationship with his father as he was growing
up. as i have pointed out, js told the
gladue
writer that he was an
“outsider” and has been for most of his life. somehow, js must come to grips
with and start to try to heal from the emotional dislocation that he feels. 
this sentencing must somehow acknowledge and address these truths.

in
r. v. friesen,
supra, at paragraph
5, the supreme court of canada made it clear that the
law of sentencing with respect to sexual offences against children must
change:
we send a strong message that sexual offences against
children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit children’s vulnerability
and cause profound harm to children, families, and communities. sentences for
these crimes must increase. courts must impose sentences that are proportional
to the gravity of sexual offences against children and the degree of
responsibility of the offender, as informed by parliament’s sentencing
initiatives and by society’s deepened understanding of the wrongfulness and
harmfulness of sexual violence against children. sentences must accurately
reflect the wrongfulness of sexual violence against children and the
far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes to children, families, and society
at large.

in
friesen,
the
supreme court discussed – at length – the inherent wrongfulness and profound
harmfulness of sexual offences against children and the life-altering
consequences that are visited on the victims of these offences. at paragraph
76, it instructed sentencing judges to “recognize and give effect to (1) the
inherent wrongfulness of these offences; (2) the potential harm to children
that flows from these offences; and (3) the actual harm that children suffer as
a result of these offences". see, generally, paragraphs 50 to 86.

friesen
completely changed the sentencing paradigm
in cases of sexual offences against children. “out” was the old ethos of
measuring the sentence according to a yardstick of how physically invasive the
sexual assault was with touching at the low end and penetration at the highest
end.

“in” is a more holistic
approach where the determination of a fit sentence will be based on the
following factors, of which the physical invasiveness of the sexual offence is
only one:
a)
the likelihood of the
offender to reoffend;
b)
the abuse of a position
of trust or authority;
c)
the duration and
frequency of the abuse;
d)
the age of the victim;
e)
the degree of physical
interference;
f)
the emotional and
psychological harm.
see
friesen, supra,
paragraphs
122 to 147.
the
likelihood of the offender to reoffend

i do not have the
benefit of a sexual behaviours assessment to assist me with assessing the risk
that js will reoffend.

i find that there is a
high likelihood, given js’s track record, that he will reoffend in an
assaultive or threatening manner.

as i pointed out,
however, this is js’s first sexual offence. the facts are disturbing. the
fact that the complainant is his half-sister is also disturbing.

kn reports that js
assists her with her children and they refer to him as “uncle.” she says that
he is caring and she is concerned about the effect his incarceration may have
on them, particularly one child who has anxiety issues.

what became clear to me
through the trial is that js needs treatment to address his sexual behaviour. 
there were a number of incidents in this case. although i was in doubt with
respect to some of them, the tenor of the evidence at trial makes it clear that
js needs work in the area of boundaries with younger women. there are aspects
of his behaviour that some would see as “grooming” which is of concern.

i find that this
treatment can be obtained in the community through a conditional sentence order
and a probation order and it is not necessary to incarcerate js in order to deal
with this criminogenic needs.
the abuse of a position of trust or authority

i have already
discussed this and i believe js’s moral blameworthiness on this factor is very
high.

this factor militates
in favour of a carceral sentence.
the duration and frequency of the abuse

the sexual offence in
this case was a one-time event. the abuse was short in duration.

this is not a case
where there was a prolonged period with a number of incidents of sexual
violation which would be much more aggravating.
the age of the victim

the complainant was
approximately 14 when this occurred. this is not a case where a young child
was violated which would be much more aggravating. that said, any violation of
any child, no matter how old, is a serious affront to justice, particularly on
these facts where the accused and the complainant were step-siblings.
the degree of physical interference

although i have made it
clear that this offence is degrading, disgusting, humiliating to the victim and
a clear expression of js’s power and control over her, this is not a case where
js sexually offended in a hands-on manner. there is no touching, forced
fellatio, or digital or penile penetration, all of which would be more
aggravating.

i note, however, the
facts of the assault involved a high degree of physical interference with the complainant. 
i found at trial that jm provided compelling details in relation to this,
including the fact that she could barely breathe and felt like she was
breathing through a straw. this ups the ante with respect to the degree of
physical interference that js is capable of.
the emotional and psychological harm

the victim impact
statement in this case was very short. it may well be that jm has minimised
the emotional and psychological harm that this offence has caused her. she
discloses trust issues, social anxiety and nightmares.

without in any way
minimizing these impacts, it does not appear that this is a case where there is
severe emotional and psychological harm which impacted the complainant’s
ability to go to school, work or function. those would all be more
aggravating.
conclusion with respect to appropriate length of
sentence

having considered all
of the aggravating and mitigating factors, i would assess a carceral sentence
for js which involves six months for the assault and six months for the sexual
assault. in other words, subject to my comments below, i agree with the crown
that the appropriate sentence in this case is about 12 months in custody.

following that sentence
i would impose a three-year probation order to address the numerous issues that
js must address if he is to remain offence-free going forward.
is a conditional sentence available?

because the sentence
being imposed is within the reformatory range, i am required to consider
whether a conditional sentence is advisable and should be ordered.

this is probably the
most difficult aspect of this case.

in
r. v. proulx
2000
scc 5, the supreme court of canada found that there was no general rule that
conditional sentences were not available for certain categories of offences,
provided that:
a)
a conditional sentence
would not endanger the safety of the community;
b)
a minimum sentence
which involved imprisonment was not mandated by parliament;
c)
the appropriate length
of sentence was less than two years;
d)
the sentence was not
inconsistent with the fundamental principles of sentencing in the
criminal
code.

proulx, supra,
recognised that although a conditional
sentence is not as denunciative as imprisonment, “…
a conditional sentence can still provide a
significant amount of denunciation. this is particularly so when onerous
conditions are imposed and the duration of the conditional sentence is extended
beyond the duration of the jail sentence that would ordinarily have been
imposed in the circumstances.”:
proulx, supra,
at paragraph
102.

only where “…
the need for denunciation is so pressing
that incarceration will be the only suitable way in which to express society’s
condemnation of the offender’s conduct.” is a conditional sentence inappropriate:
proulx, supra,
at paragraph
106.

proulx
also allowed that although a conditional
sentence does not have the same deterrent effect as imprisonment. the supreme
court cautioned at paragraph 107:
judges should be wary, however, of placing too much weight on
deterrence when choosing between a conditional sentence and incarceration:
see
wismayer,
supra, at p. 36. the empirical
evidence suggests that the deterrent effect of incarceration is uncertain: see
generally
sentencing reform: a canadian approach,
supra, 
at pp. 136-37. moreover, a conditional sentence can provide significant
deterrence if sufficiently punitive conditions are imposed and the public is
made aware of the severity of these sentences.

only where
“
…the offence is one in which the effects of incarceration are
likely to have a real deterrent effect” and where “…the circumstances of the
community in which the offences were committed
”
render a conditional sentence inappropriate, should the court
rule one out:
proulx, supra,
paragraph
107.

parliament amended the
criminal code
in 2005 by adding
section 718.01, which requires the court
to give “primary consideration” to the principles of denunciation and
deterrence when imposing sentence in a case that involves the abuse of a person
under the age of 18.

enter
friesen. 
in calling for higher sentences for individuals who sexually abuse children,
the supreme court of canada commented on section 718.01 in this way at
paragraphs 102 to 104:
the
words “primary consideration” in s. 718.01 prescribe a relative ordering of
sentencing objectives that is absent from the general list of six objectives in
s. 718(a) through (f) of the
criminal code
(renaud, at §
8.8-8.9). as kasirer j.a. reasoned in
rayo, the word “primary” in
the english text of
s.
718.01
[
translation
]
“evokes an ordering of the objectives... that is... relevant in the
[judge’s exercise of discretion]” (para. 103). this ordering of the sentencing
objectives reflects parliament’s intention for sentences to “better reflect the
seriousness of the offence” (
house of commons debates, vol. 140, no. 7,
1st sess., 38th parl., october 13, 2004, at p. 322 (hon. paul harold macklin)).
as saunders j.a. recognized in
d.r.w., parliament thus attempted to
“re-set the approach of the criminal justice system to offences against
children” by enacting
s.
718.01
(para. 32).
section
718.01 should not be interpreted as limiting sentencing objectives, notably
separation from society, which reinforce deterrence or denunciation. the
objective of separation from society is closely related to deterrence and
denunciation for sexual offences against children (
woodward, at
para. 76). when appropriate, as discussed below, separation from society
can be the means to reinforce and give practical effect to deterrence and
denunciation.
section
718.01 thus qualifies this court’s previous direction that it is for the
sentencing judge to determine which sentencing objective or objectives are to
be prioritized. where parliament has indicated which sentencing objectives are
to receive priority in certain cases, the sentencing judge’s discretion is
thereby limited, such that it is no longer open to the judge to elevate other
sentencing objectives to an equal or higher priority (
rayo, at
paras. 103 and 107-8). however, while
s. 718.01
requires that deterrence and
denunciation have priority, nonetheless, the sentencing judge retains
discretion to accord significant weight to other factors (including
rehabilitation and
gladue
factors) in exercising discretion in
arriving at a fit sentence, in accordance with the overall principle of proportionality
(
see
r. v. bergeron,
2013 qcca 7, at
para.
37
(canlii)
).

since
friesen,
many
judges have found that conditional sentences are not appropriate in cases of sexual
assault – sometimes even minor ones – in order to satisfy the denunciative and
deterrent aspect of sentencing.

in
r. v. mm
2022
onca 441, a case dealing with the possession of child pornography in a
situation that involves a breach of trust, the court stated at paragraph 16:
conditional sentences for sexual offences against children
will only rarely be appropriate. their availability must be limited to
exceptional circumstances that render incarceration inappropriate – for
example, where it gives rise to a medical hardship that could not adequately be
addressed within the correctional facility. it would not be appropriate to
enumerate exceptional circumstances here and we make no attempt to do so.
suffice it to say that no exceptional circumstances are present in this
case.

in
r. v. faroughi
2024
onca 178
at paragraph
99,
justice zarnett discussed the ratio
in
mm
as
follows:
this court has consistently reiterated post-
friesen
that
conditional sentences will rarely be appropriate for sexual offences against
children:
see
m.m.,
at para.
16;
b.m., at para.
2. even so, in some exceptional circumstances, incarceration
will not be appropriate. for example, without creating any bright-line rules,
this court in
m.m.
suggested
that some offenders experiencing medical hardship that cannot be adequately
addressed within a correctional facility may fall within these circumstances:
at para. 16. as i will explain, i am satisfied that, given the appellant’s
immaturity and sexual inexperience at the time of the offence, the fact that
this was his first offence, his recent medical hardships, and his impressive
efforts in taking accountability for his actions and serving his community
post-sentence, a conditional sentence is available in these
circumstances.

in
r. v. pike
2024
onca 608, chief justice tulloch also recognised the tension between the supreme
court’s recognition
in
proulx
that conditional sentences can be
denunciative and deterrent offences and the court of appeal’s
decision in
mm
that exceptional circumstances were required in order to impose a
conditional sentence. he reconciled these approaches this way at paragraphs
179 to 182.
….courts
must decide whether a conditional sentence is consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing, especially the fundamental principle,
proportionality. this test requires considering not only personal circumstances
and mitigating factors of people who possess child pornography, but also the
severe wrongs and harms that they cause, their moral blameworthiness, and
parliament’s prioritization of deterrence and denunciation:
mccaw, at paras. 27-29;
r. v. m.m.,
2022
onca 441
at paras.
15-16. as this court
held in
m.m., applying
this second step ordinarily results in custodial sentences because parliament
has prioritized denouncing and deterring the wrongs and harms that people who
possess child pornography cause real children: at paras. 15-16.
i
must reconcile the “exceptional circumstances” term that
m.m.
used
to express this point with the supreme court’s
decisions in
r. v. proulx,
2000
scc 5,
 1 s.c.r. 61, and
parranto. at first glance,
m.m.
’s use of
this term might seem contrary to these cases, which respectively hold that
appellate courts can neither create presumptions that conditional sentences are
inappropriate for specific offences (
proulx, at paras.
80-83
), nor require exceptional
circumstances to depart from a range (
parranto, at para. 40).
but
in my respectful view,
m.m.
did not and could not have intended to depart from
proulx
by
creating an offence-specific presumption against conditional sentences. rather,
it used the “exceptional circumstances” term to convey that, since
proulx,
parliament has increased maximum sentences and prioritized denunciation and
deterrence for sexual offences against children and, further, that the courts’
understanding of the harmfulness and wrongfulness of these offences has
deepened:
friesen,
at paras.
109-110;
see
m.m., at paras.
13-15. thus, while there is no
presumption against conditional sentences, these post-
proulx
changes
require more compelling personal circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the
absence of aggravating factors, to justify a conditional sentence than might
have been the case when
proulx
was decided more than two decades ago.
nor,
in my view, did
m.m.
intend to depart from
parranto
by
requiring exceptional circumstances to impose a conditional sentence.
rather,
m.m.
used “exceptional circumstances” as shorthand for personal
circumstances and mitigating factors that are sufficiently compelling to make a
conditional sentence proportionate,
as
in
r. v.
padda,
2019 bcca 351, at para.
36. not only is there no
closed list of such circumstances and factors (
m.m., at para.
16
), but
multiple seemingly non-exceptional factors taken together, such as being a
young first offender with family support who poses little risk and takes
responsibility for his actions, can collectively render a conditional sentence
proportionate:
r.
v. faroughi,
2024 onca 178,
435 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at
para.
99. this is consistent with
parranto
’s holding that
sentencing must focus on proportionality, not pigeonholing
cases into ill-defined exceptional circumstance categories: at para. 40;
see
r. v. ellis,
2022 bcca 278,
417 c.c.c. (3d) 102, at para.
118. [emphasis mine]

see also, most
recently,
in
r. v. al
2025 onca 9.
conclusion re sentence to be imposed

in my view, a
conditional sentence in this case is an appropriate sentence having regard to
the following aspects of the case, which, taken together, are sufficient to
constitute exceptional circumstances:
a)
the accused has been in
trouble with the law since he was a youth. despite numerous brushes with the
law, there is no evidence before me that a conditional sentence has ever been imposed
on him. all of the sentences imposed have been carceral or probationary
sentences.
b)
the accused was
separated from his father when he was young. he grew up with a step-father. 
he considered himself an outsider.
c)
the accused has an
indigenous background. his mother’s family went to residential school. the
devastating impacts of residential schools on indigenous families, their
ability to parent and the resulting intergenerational trauma are well known.
d)
the accused has always
felt like he is an outsider. he recalls feeling like he had to hide his
indigeneity. he recalls his brother, who looks more indigenous than he does,
having being subjected to outright racial discrimination based on his
indigeneity.
e)
like many indigenous
children, the accused was supervised by child welfare authorities and placed
with a foster family. he also rebelled against them because they were not his
family. they were also very religious.
f)
the accused has an
alcohol and drug problem. indigenous people have alcohol and drug problems at
a disproportionate rate to the rest of society. he has attempted to stop
drinking and using drugs through a faith-based program in ottawa. he had some
success before his participation in the program was terminated.
g)
the accused clearly has
mental health problems. he was diagnosed with adhd when he was a youth and
prescribed medication which he stopped taking. he has attempted suicide. as a
youth he also engaged in cutting and other forms of self-harm.
h)
he is amenable to
counselling. although his success with some counselling (such as the
faith-based residential program) has been mixed, the letter from lisa mcqueen
supports the proposition that he is capable if he applies himself.
i)
carceral offences have
not worked to stop js from committing offences. rather than blindly follow a
step principle and impose another custodial sentence, this case,
notwithstanding its seriousness, provides an opportunity to impose conditions
which would have a meaningful impact on js and in doing so, protect society and
contribute to the long-term protection of the public.

in my view, a
conditional sentence is proportionate to the gravity of his offence, his degree
of responsibility and his moral blameworthiness, having regard to the following
factors:
a)
the accused needs
ongoing treatment and rehabilitation for his sexual offending, his anger
problem, his mental health difficulties and his substance abuse. i find that
he is more likely to receive this treatment when he is under the direction of a
conditional sentence supervisor than he would be if he were simply “doing time”
in a reformatory.
b)
a conditional sentence
allows me to impose a greater period of supervision, treatment and programming
than i would be able to impose if i were imposing a carceral sentence. when
combined with a three-year term of probation, which i also intend to impose, js
will be under the firm guiding hand of a probation officer/conditional sentence
supervisor for a total period of almost five years.
c)
on the facts of this
case, a conditional sentence, particularly one like this one where there will
be a lengthy period of house arrest, is sufficiently denunciative and
deterrent. js knows that in the event of a breach, the likelihood of
reincarceration is very high.
d)
this case involves a
sexual offence against his 14-year-old step-sister when js was in a position of
trust or authority over her, which is extremely aggravating and which almost
tips the balance in favour of a carceral sentence.
e)
the sexual offence took
place once and although it was demeaning and humiliating to the complainant, it
did not involve hands on contact. furthermore, the victim impact statement
does not disclose severe emotional, psychological or physical harm that has
impacted her ability to work, or go to school. in saying this, i am in no way
minimising the social anxiety or nightmares which jm suffers from. more
frequent abuse, hands-on sexual contact or more severe victim impact may well
have tipped the balance in favour of a carceral sentence.
f)
a conditional sentence
of a lengthy term with a significant portion being served under house arrest,
with gps monitoring, denounces js’s crime. contrary to the general impression
by ill-informed members of the general public, serving a lengthy conditional
sentence with a house arrest component is not easy.
g)
a conditional sentence
will deter js, and others, from committing similar crimes. in this case, a
conditional sentence will deter js from committing any crime, given that the
risk of reincarceration is almost certain in the event of a breach.
sentence imposed

the sentence that i
impose is:
a)
two years less one day
conditional. this will be imposed on the sexual assault and concurrent on the
assault. this is an artificial concurrent sentence that i have ordered to make
it easier for the court staff, the supervisor/probation officer to administer. 
absent that administrative reality and the need to impose a holistic global
sentence, the sentence would have been twelve months on each charge
consecutive.
b)
in addition to other
optional conditions, the conditional sentence will include a house arrest term
for a period of twelve months. the accused will also be subject to electronic
monitoring.
c)
three years probation
on each count, concurrent.
d)
a section 109 order for
ten years.
e)
an order requiring js
to register for the
sexual offender information and registration act
for
period of twenty years.
f)
an order for the taking
of his dna. the sexual assault is primary. the assault is secondary. the
order will be made on both offences.
g)
an order under
section
161
(c) of the
criminal code
for a period of twenty years. this may be
varied by the court if there is a material change
in
js
’s circumstances. the
order will have exceptions for incidental contact in the course of brief
commercial transactions, while js is employed or going to school, or if
permission is granted by a child welfare authority.

js, the time has come
for you to take responsibility for your life, accept help that is offered to you,
stop making excuses and change your ways. failure to do so will have dire
consequences.
released: february 4, 2025
signed: justice j.r. richardson