source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj330/2025oncj330.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. j.m.,
2025 oncj 330
date: 
june 13, 2025
court
file no: 998-23-42102823
o n t a r i o c o u r t of j u s t i c e
b e t w e e n:
his majesty the king
-and-
j.m.
­­­­­­
­­­­­­­­­­­
before
justice m. g. march
heard
on march 20, april 25 and may 15, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 13, 2025
gordon
filmore………………...…………………counsel for the provincial crown
george
joseph………...………………………………………………counsel for j.m.
march, m.g., j.:
introduction:
1.
the accused, j.m., stands charged that at the township of gorham, on, between
august 1 and 31, 2022, he did:
a)
for a sexual purpose touch, p.p., a person under the age of 16 with his
hands contrary to
s. 151
of the
criminal code of canada
(“the
code
”),
and
b)
commit
a sexual assault on p.p. contrary to
s. 271
of the
code.
2.
by way of background and following a contested pre-trial application
brought by the crown under
s. 486.2
of the
code
on march 20, 2025, i
ruled that p.p. would be permitted to give her evidence at j.m.’s trial from the
toba centre in winnipeg, mb. when she did so on april 25, 2025, she was 13
years old. the language of the
code
is mandatory – “the judge.... shall,
on application of the prosecutor in respect of a witness who is under the age
of 18.... order that the witness testify outside the court room”.
3.
j.m. and his counsel were able to see p.p. from the same vantage point on
a large screen within the court room as crown counsel and i, as the presiding
judge, could. her location elsewhere while she gave her evidence did not, in
my opinion, “interfere with the proper administration of justice”. it made no
difference that she was in winnipeg as opposed to being at the court house in
thunder bay testifying from a ‘child friendly’ anteroom.
4.
at
the outset of the trial proper on april 25, 2025, j.m. admitted, through his
counsel, the complainant p.p.’s ability to identify him as the accused before
the court and the jurisdiction of this court to hear this matter.
5.
as with so many criminal trials, the outcome of this case turned, as i
predicted while giving my
s. 486.2
ruling, on an assessment of the credibility
and reliability of the witnesses called to testify.
6.
the central issue was whether the crown had proven beyond a reasonable
doubt if the acts complained of by p.p. happened.
family dynamic:
7.
p.p. is the daughter of c.m., the accused j.m.’s wife. p.p. referred to
c.m. as her “biological mom” in her statement to police on august 4, 2023, when
she first spoke to the authorities about what she alleged occurred to her in
august 2022 at the hands of j.m.
8.
p.p. explained that her father and mother are divorced. at present, she
lives in mccreary, mb, with her father and her stepmother.
9.
her biological mother, c.m., lives just outside thunder bay with j.m.,
an old high school flame of hers with whom she rekindled a relationship in the past
five years. c.m. and j.m. married on august 24, 2023.
10.
c.m.
testified that she and her former partner, p.p.’s father, separated in 2018
after living together for several years in mccreary. in 2020, c.m. then moved
to thunder bay to care for her ailing father. p.p. remained in mccreary residing
with her father.
11.
by
agreement c.m. had with p.p.’s father, p.p. would spend four to five weeks in
thunder bay during the summer post-separation.
12.
in
2022, p.p. recalled spending part of her summer visiting c.m. at j.m.’s place. 
p.p. stayed there for almost all of august. at the end of her visit, on august
27, 2022, p.p. flew back to winnipeg accompanied by mother, c.m.
13.
p.p.
added that she did not really know j.m., but she loved c.m. her mother was the
person in thunder bay for whom p.p. had more affection, and with whom she had the
greater connection. at the same time, p.p. made clear, c.m. was not the
individual to whom she would go if she had any kind of problem.
the incident:
14.
on
april 25, 2025, p.p. was asked about a statement she gave to police on august
4, 2023. the videotaped interview was played in court and adopted by her under
s. 715.1
of the
code, thus forming part of her evidence-in-chief at
j.m.’s trial.
15.
she
recalled an occasion when she slept in c.m.’s and j.m.’s bed with them while
staying at their trailer home near thunder bay in august 2022. at that time,
she was 10 years of age. p.p. wanted to watch a movie. the only tv capable of
streaming movies was the one located in c.m.’s and j.m.’s bedroom, p.p.
explained. for that reason, they watched one there together.
16.
p.p.
may have fallen asleep watching the movie, “the greatest showman”, she thought. 
she later awoke multiple times during the night to j.m. touching her under her
nightgown and on her underwear line. she “made sure he didn’t”, but it
“happened multiple times”, she told police.
17.
his
chest, shins and feet were touching her body. she thought he was wearing a
t-shirt and underwear, but she was not sure. he may also have been wearing a robe
because he wears that “all the time”.
18.
she
described him as having gone under her underwear strap. he was “trying to
reach for my vagina, and i was blocking it.” she was attempting to push her
elbow into her hip to prevent access. in turn, he was seeking to push her hand
out of the way.
19.
she
knew he was awake half the time because he snores, and at times he would not be,
so she knew he was up almost all night.
20.
she had tried laying on her
stomach, so he could not touch her. she moved to the foot of the bed to create
distance between them. however, she was tired. it was quite late at night. she
fell asleep again.
21.
at one point too, she
recalled, he was touching her vagina and rubbing it in a circular motion with
his finger. it made her feel very uncomfortable. she was scared. she did not
know what to do. her nightgown was pulled up and he was under her underwear. she
tried and managed to push his hand away. she did not know how long he had been
doing it before she awoke.
22.
she could only see his arm
while he was rubbing her vagina. a tiny bit of light was entering the bedroom
from the bathroom.
23.
about
10 minutes later, he got up to go to the bathroom. that was when she crawled
her way to sleep at the end of the bed. she had curled herself up into “a
ball”, but while he was awake, he continued reaching with his hand for her thigh
every few seconds, attempting to make his way to her vagina. sometimes, she
would try pulling down her nightgown, but he kept it up.
24.
she
added that “[j.m.] is an alcoholic. he has liver problems.”
25.
he
was saying something to her while she was at the end of the bed, asking why she
had moved there. she did not answer or say anything. she was too frightened.
26.
p.p.
did not tell her mother, c.m., who was on the other side of the bed from j.m.
sleeping the whole night. p.p. was between c.m. and j.m. in the middle of the
bed. j.m. was to the right of her, and c.m. was to the left.
27.
nor
the next morning did p.p. speak about what had happened. she clarified that j.m.
was telling her not to say anything to anybody about the incident as c.m. was
going to work. p.p stated, “but like he wasn’t really talking to me. he was
making sure, like i heard it, but not to tell anybody about it,” and “trying to
get into my head”. p.p. maintained, “he was just repeating himself about that”. 
p.p. just kept playing xbox while this was happening.
28.
p.p.
explained that she did not disclose the incident to “her other mom”, c.m.,
because “she just doesn’t believe anything i say most of the time and lots of
the time”. p.p. thought c.m. would not care and, if she had told her, she
would respond, “[j.m.] would never do something like that”. indeed, that is
what p.p. indicated c.m. ultimately said after p.p. and her father told c.m.
about the incident over the phone.
29.
under
cross-examination, p.p. was questioned further about the statement she gave to
police. she testified she did not say anything to j.m. while he was touching
her. she was then reminded, she told police that she said to him, “don’t touch
it”, but he just kept doing it.
30.
she
confirmed that 2022 was the last time that she went to see her mother, c.m., in
thunder bay. that was the occasion upon which they watched, “the greatest
showman”. it was the one and only time that p.p. had ever been in her mother’s
and j.m.’s bed. however, p.p. denied that that was the last night she spent in
thunder bay while visiting them before flying the next day to winnipeg with her
mother.
31.
she
recalled that she wore a nightgown to bed. she disagreed that she was wearing a
hoodie and sweatpants at the time.
32.
she
stated that she remained in between j.m. and c.m. in the bed. her mother did
not move her out of that position. p.p. specifically denied that she was transferred
over to other side of her mother’s body to sleep, so that c.m. could be directly
next to j.m.
33.
initially,
p.p. was not sure whether her older sister, c., and her fiancé, b., stayed over
at the trailer home the night she was touched by j.m. p.p. later testified
they were not.
34.
she
was not certain whether she hugged j.m. before leaving to go to the airport to
return to manitoba with her mother. she disagreed that she told j.m. and c.
that she wished she could stay longer in thunder bay.
35.
p.p.
did not know whether her mother was awake during any point in time when j.m.
was touching her.
36.
p.p.
did not disclose what had occurred until she started school in 2022. she then
told her friend, e.b., that j.m. had touched her inappropriately. she did not
say anything to her father or her stepmother until the beginning of july in
2023. as p.p. put it, she “got the nerve” to tell her parents because she did not
want to go visit c.m. and j.m. that summer.
37.
her
parents had continued asking her why she did not want to go. they wondered if j.m.
had sexually touched her because, according to p.p., that was what they were
thinking. eventually, she told them he had.
38.
when
c.m. testified at j.m.’s trial on april 25, 2025, she recounted that she moved
to thunder bay in 2020. she had lived in manitoba where p.p. was born and grew
up for many years before returning to her hometown after separating with p.p.’s
father.
39.
for
four or five weeks during the summer post-separation, c.m. would have her
daughter, p.p., come to stay with her in thunder bay. in 2022, c.m.
specifically recalled that the last night p.p. was with her, they watched “the greatest
showman” in her bed along with her new partner, j.m. usually, p.p. would sleep
in the spare bedroom of the trailer home c.m. shared with j.m.
40.
prior
to going to bed, c.m. recalled visiting hillcrest park with p.p. and j.m. later,
they had dinner together. at the campfire at the end of the night, they were joined
by c.m.’s older daughter, c., and her fiancé, b., who slept over with them at
the trailer home.
41.
c.m.
remembered that p.p. was wearing a blue jogging suit at the campfire. her
daughter wore the same clothing as well to bed. p.p. wanted to watch a movie. 
c.m. suggested “the greatest showman”. on no other occasion did they watch that
movie together.
42.
c.m.,
j.m. and p.p. got into the queen-size bed together in the master bedroom of the
trailer home. standing at the foot of the bed and facing it, j.m. was on the left,
p.p. was in the middle, and c.m. was on the right. at the end of the movie,
c.m. told p.p. to move over to her side, so that she could cuddle with j.m. it
was also the only time that p.p. slept in the same bed with j.m. and her.
43.
c.m.
described herself as a “light sleeper”.
44.
when
she awoke the next morning, p.p. was still wearing the same jogging suit. her
daughter was in a good mood, but she was upset that she had to return home to
manitoba. she wanted to stay longer in thunder bay. she told her mother, c.m.,
“i don’t want to go home. i’m going to miss you.”
45.
c.m.
and p.p. flew back to winnipeg later that afternoon on august 27, 2022. upon
arrival, p.p. grabbed her bag off the carousel at the airport. her father was
there waiting for her. c.m. stayed overnight at a hotel in winnipeg and flew
back to thunder bay the next day.
46.
under
cross-examination, c.m. testified that the trailer home she shares with j.m. has
two bedrooms. there is a satellite box for the tv in the living room. in j.m.’s
and her bedroom, there is an android box for streaming movies. that is why p.p.
was invited into their bed to watch “the greatest showman”.
47.
bonfires,
c.m. confirmed, were a regular routine for an end of evening activity at the
trailer home. typically, p.p. would wear a nightgown to bed, as would c.m.
herself. j.m. would wear pajama pants and a house robe. he would take off his
robe to sleep.
48.
c.m.
explained that she did not become aware of p.p.’s allegations implicating j.m.
until july 5, 2023. she was certain that she flew to winnipeg with p.p. on a saturday,
august 27, 2022. she acknowledged that, by that point, a full year had almost
passed since she thought about the last day she spent with her daughter, p.p.
49.
nevertheless,
c.m. was certain that p.p. was wearing a jogging suit the night before she
returned to manitoba. c.m. looked back several times on photographs she had
taken that evening to refresh her memory. she agreed that she had taken no
photographs of p.p. while her child was in bed with j.m. and her, or the next
day when they flew to winnipeg.
50.
on
july 5, 2023, c.m. testified that p.p. told her, when they spoke over the phone
that day, what j.m. did to her happened on august 26, 2022. the photos c.m. had
were date and time stamped. that was the actual date of the last night her
daughter spent with her during the summer of 2022. it was a friday.
51.
on
august 27, 2022, they left the trailer home for the airport at 2:00 pm. their
plane departed at 4:30 pm.
52.
c.m.
packed her daughter’s belongings the night before their flight. p.p.’s bag was
left in the spare bedroom where she typically slept. c.m. agreed her daughter
could have accessed her clothing herself if she had wanted to, but it was her
plan to sleep in the same clothes she would wear on the plane. as well, c. and
b. were sleeping in the spare room that night.
53.
c.m.
denied that she looked at j.m.’s disclosure to know what p.p. said he did to
her, or to know what p.p. said she was wearing at the time. c.m. admitted
however that j.m. and she spoke about the allegations.
54.
c.m.
confirmed that it was not unusual for j.m. to get up during the night to use
the washroom, and she could not say whether he did on august 26 going into
august 27, 2022.
55.
c.m.
was clear that her sympathies lie with j.m. because she was present when the
sexual touching was alleged to have occurred. she would have noticed if her
daughter had crawled over her to position herself next to j.m. again. c.m. was
adamant that no one moved from their sleeping positions in the bed that night
after the movie ended. indeed, she was certain that she was kicked in the side
a few times by her daughter during the night. at no point did c.m. recollect
her daughter being at the foot of the bed.
56.
nor
at any time did p.p. seem upset to c.m. the summer of 2022. when p.p. and she awoke
the next morning on august 27, 2022, they sat together and had their breakfast.
everyone said their goodbyes. nothing seemed out of the ordinary.
57.
c.m.
went to see her daughter, p.p., in manitoba in august 2023 after she made the
allegations implicating j.m. c.m. wanted p.p. to tell “her story”.
58.
under
re-examination, c.m. confirmed that when she was interviewed by police on
september 6, 2023, she was asked questions about the sleeping arrangements for
j.m., p.p. and her on the night in question. she did not recall whether she was
questioned about what they were wearing.
59.
when
j.m. testified on may 15, 2025, he indicated that c.m. and he started into a
relationship roughly five years ago. they are now married and live together in
his trailer home just outside thunder bay.
60.
the
home has only two bedrooms, a master and a guest. it also has a living room, a
kitchen area, a laundry room and one bathroom.
61.
j.m.
works full-time as a bartender in a local hotel. his wife, c.m., is employed in
the finance department of a child protection agency.
62.
he
met c.m.’s daughter, p.p., approximately six to 12 months after he started
dating her mother. on two occasions in 2021 and 2022, p.p. had an extended,
month-long visit with c.m. and him.
63.
j.m.
explained that on many occasions he has been left alone with p.p. during her
stays. his work hours are from 4:00 pm to 11:00 pm. c.m. works from 9:00 am
to 5:00 pm. he would be with p.p. during the day and would take her to his place
of employment until her mother came to collect her at the end of the business day.
64.
he
recalled that on august 26, 2022, the last night of p.p.’s visit that summer, c.m.
and he watched “the greatest showman” with her in the master bedroom. earlier
in the evening, c. and b. came over and decided to stay the night. they all chatted
in the kitchen. they later started a campfire to pass the time together around
10:00 pm. at the end of the night, c. and b. went to sleep in the guest room
where p.p. would typically be.
65.
j.m.
specifically remembered that p.p. was wearing a light blue tracksuit. when it
was time for bed, c.m. and he discussed p.p.’s wish to watch a movie. they
agreed that p.p. would sleep in their bed with them. that never happened
before.
66.
regarding
their placement, looking forward from the foot of the bed, he was on the left,
p.p. was in the middle, and c.m. was on the right. they watched the entire film
together. p.p. liked it. he then got up to go to the washroom before falling
asleep. at that point, c.m. moved p.p. out of the middle of the bed and to the
other side of her, so that c.m. could cuddle into him. he saw p.p. crawl over
her mother to get to the other side of her.
67.
p.p.
remained in the clothes she was wearing that day, a track suit, to sleep. c.m.
then curled up beside him. he had his back to both c.m. and p.p.
68.
j.m.
stated that he slept through the entire night with c.m. beside him. he denied
that he ever touched p.p. inappropriately. nor did he make contact with her
accidentally. he could not reach her. furthermore, c.m. was snuggled into his
back the whole time.
69.
c.m.
and p.p. awoke and were out of bed before j.m. he later saw them in the kitchen
together. they said their goodbyes before c.m. and p.p. left for the airport
around 2:00 pm. everyone was crying. p.p. told them, “i wish i could stay
longer.”
70.
regarding
alcohol consumption during the friday evening of august 26, 2022, j.m. indicated
that he had only two short cans of budweiser while at the fire over the course
of roughly three hours, and one more can while watching the movie.
71.
under
cross-examination, j.m. acknowledged that almost a year had passed before he
first became aware of what p.p. said he did to her. he agreed that there was
nothing unusual about the last evening she had spent with c.m. and him.
72.
j.m.
was informed, shortly after p.p. and her father placed a call to c.m., about
what p.p. said he did to her. c.m. then told j.m. that they needed to have a
talk. he could not recall the actual date. he was at home when c.m. spoke to
him about p.p.’s allegations. they discussed them in their entirety. he
understood that p.p. was saying he had touched her inappropriately. he was
shocked by the news. c.m. was too, and she expressed to him how she did not
believe her daughter.
73.
j.m.
confirmed that c.m. and he talked to one another about their respective
recollections of what had occurred on the night in question. they remembered
having watched together “the greatest showman”.
74.
he
remembered that p.p. had her suitcase packed and ready to go except what she
was wearing that day. normally, she wore pajamas to bed, a pant and shirt combination,
but not that night. j.m. did not ever recall her wearing a nightgown.
75.
he
clarified that after the three of them slept in the bed together. they did not
get up until around 11:00 am the next morning. there was approximately three
hours for them to spend some time together before c.m. and p.p. would have to
go to the airport. he agreed that this would have left p.p. ample time to
change her clothing, should she wish to. he maintained nevertheless that she
remained in the same clothing for two days.
76.
he
opined that the tracksuit p.p. wore to bed was not constrictive, nor tight. he
agreed it was possible for him to insert his hand under her waistband to access
her private area. he did not remember her ever wearing that tracksuit to bed on
any other occasion.
77.
he
stated that he drank water over dinner that evening after c. and b. arrived at roughly
8:00 pm. he could not remember what they had for a meal, but he was sure he
drank only water with dinner. c.m. was having wine, which he does not like to drink.
they also had at their disposal hard liquor, but none was consumed that night.
78.
he
conceded that he had no reason to count how much he had to drink, but he was 100%
certain that it was only three budweiser beers in total. he would buy the beer
in bulk, a 24 case, or sometimes 30 in a carton. he agreed that there was more
beer available to him, should he want. he denied that there was any possibility
he could have had more than three beers to drink, or less for that matter. he
did not recall whether c. and b. were drinking at all, nor how much c.m. had.
79.
he
estimated that c.m., p.p. and he did not start watching the movie until around
1:00 am. that was no usual bedtime for p.p. he stated it was roughly 2:00 am. they
tended to stay up late and sleep in the next morning, not rising until around
11:00 am.
80.
he
disagreed that he went to the washroom during the night. nor could he recall c.m.
ever doing so. when he did go to the bathroom at the conclusion of the movie,
it was then that c.m. and p.p. changed their positions on the bed. he denied
that he ever saw p.p. sleeping at the foot of the bed.
81.
c.m.
slept through the night, he thought, as did he. she was still in the same
position when he went to sleep and when he woke up.
82.
he
acknowledged that his version of events and c.m.’s closely mirrored one
another. basically, they were identical. when the allegations were first made, he
gave to her his account of what he could remember of the night in question,
then she gave him hers. they discussed the clothing p.p. was wearing. he was
unclear as to who first remembered that detail.
83.
he
denied that c.m. and he collaborated and reconstructed a common version of
events regarding that night.
84.
he
confirmed that c.m. would have left him immediately, if she believed he had
touched p.p. inappropriately. however, c.m. and he remained together and very
much in love.
85.
in
terms of the relationship he had generally with p.p., he stated that he had “no
issue” with her. they always got along.
the issues:
86.
crown
and defence counsel were agreed that i must, of course, apply a
w.(d.)
analysis to the evidence adduced at j.m.’s trial. clearly, the credibility of p.p.,
c.m. and j.m. must be carefully assessed. their reliability as historians for
significant past events is very much worthy of consideration as well.
87.
essentially,
in applying the law, i must acquit j.m. if i believe his testimony regarding
the incidents in question, after i assess the evidence as a whole (see
r. v.
hull, (2006) canlii 26572 (onca) at paras. 4 – 5).
88.
if
i do not believe j.m., but his evidence nevertheless raises a reasonable doubt
in my mind upon my assessment of the evidence in its totality, i must find him
not guilty.
89.
even
if i do not accept the evidence of j.m., nor does it raise a reasonable doubt,
i must still be convinced of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt based on the
evidence which i do accept, if i am to convict him.
the law
credibility and reliability:
90.
last year, the supreme court of canada reminded triers of
fact of basic principles to be observed and followed in every criminal trial in
r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7 (canlii). the court held:

the
overarching principle of the presumption of innocence, enshrined in
s. 11(d)
of the
charter,
and the correlative
principle of the crown’s burden of proof, must always govern the fact-finding
process. the presumption of innocence — a “hallowed principle lying at the
very heart of criminal law” (
r. v. oakes,
1986 canlii 46 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 103, at p. 119)
— requires the crown
to bear the onus of proving all essential elements of the offence charged,
beyond a reasonable doubt, before a conviction may be entered (
osolin
)...

the
presumption of innocence also restricts how credibility is assessed in cases of
conflicting testimony
between
defence and crown witnesses. the analysis of testimony must never be treated as
a contest of credibility, and triers of fact need not accept the defence’s
evidence or version of events in order to acquit (
r. v. van,
2009 scc 22,
 1 s.c.r. 716, at para.
23;
r.
v. w. (d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 742,
at p. 757). the
burden
never
shifts to the accused to establish their own
innocence, and the onus always lies with the crown to prove every essential
element (
r. v. j.h.s.,
2008 scc 30,
 2 s.c.r. 152, at para.
13
).

reasonable doubt applies to credibility assessments such
that if the evidence the crown adduced does not rise to the level required of a
criminal conviction, an accused cannot be found guilty simply because they are
disbelieved (
see
w. (d.)
).
some elements of the totality of the evidence
may give
rise
to a reasonable
doubt, even where much — or all — of the accused’s evidence is disbelieved. any
aspect of the accepted evidence, or the absence of evidence, may ground a
reasonable doubt. moreover, where the trier of fact does not know whether to
believe the accused’s testimony, or does not know who to believe, the accused
is entitled to an acquittal (
j.h.s.,
at paras.
9-13;
r. v. h. (c.w.)
(1991),
1991 canlii 3956 (bc ca),
68 c.c.c. (3d) 146 (b.c.c.a.);
r. v. s. (w.d.),
1994 canlii 76 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 521, at p. 533;
r. v. avetysan,
2000 scc 56,
 2 s.c.r. 745, at para.
19
).
91.
later,
the court instructed trial judges on their roles in assessing the credibility
of witnesses in the following passages:

it is widely
recognized that testimonial assessment
requires
triers of fact
to rely on common-sense
assumptions
about the evidence.
in
r. v. delmas,
2020 abca 152,
452 d.l.r. (4th) 375, at para.
31,
aff’d
2020 scc 39,
 3 s.c.r. 780, the alberta court of appeal observed
that triers of fact may rely on reason and common sense, life experience, and
logic in assessing credibility. in
r. v. r.r.,
2018 abca 287,
366 c.c.c. (3d) 293, the same court held that
triers
of fact “must invariably fall back on their common sense, and their acquired
knowledge about human behaviour in assessing the credibility and reliability of
witnesses” (para. 6). finally, in
r. v. s. (r.d.),
1997 canlii 324 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 484, this court considered that the life
experience of trial judges — though of course not a substitute for evidence,
and subject to appropriately circumscribed limits — “is an important ingredient
in the ability to understand human behaviour, to weigh the evidence, and to
determine credibility”, and assists with a “myriad of decisions arising during
the course of most trials” (para. 13). reasoning about how people
generally
tend
to behave, and how things
tend
to happen, is not only
permissible, it is often a necessary component of a complete testimonial
assessment.

in turn,
common-sense assumptions necessarily underlie
all
credibility
and reliability assessments. credibility can only be assessed against a general
understanding of “the way things can and do happen”; it is by applying common
sense and generalizing based on their accumulated knowledge about human
behaviour that trial judges assess whether a narrative is plausible or
“inherently improbable” (
r. v. kiss,
2018 onca 184, at para.
31
(canlii);
r.
v. adebogun,
2021 skca 136,
 1 w.w.r. 187, at para.
24;
r.
v. kontzamanis,
2011 bcca 184, at para.
38
(canlii)
).
common sense underpins well-established principles guiding credibility
assessment — including the now-universal idea that witnesses who are inconsistent
are less likely to be telling the truth — and assists in assessing the scope
and
impact of particular inconsistencies.
reliability also requires reference to common-sense assumptions about how
witnesses perceive, remember, and relay information, invoking generalizations
about how individuals tend to present information that they are remembering
accurately and completely, as opposed to matters about which they are unsure or
mistaken. a trial judge may, for example, infer that a witness was credible yet
unreliable because they appeared sincere but displayed indicia that tend to
suggest an unclear or uncertain memory (e.g., equivocation, phrases such as
“hmm... let me see”, long pauses, or failure to provide much
detail).

assessments of
credibility and reliability can be the most important judicial determinations
in a criminal trial. they are certainly among the most difficult. this is
especially so in sexual assault cases, which often involve acts that allegedly
occurred in private and hinge on the
contradictory
testimony of two witnesses. the trial judge, while
remaining grounded in the totality of the evidence, is obliged to evaluate the
testimony of each witness and to make determinations that are entirely personal
and particular to that individual. credibility and reliability assessments are
also context-specific and multifactorial: they do not operate along fixed lines
and are “more of an ‘art than a science’” (
s. (r.d.), at para.
128;
r.
v. gagnon,
2006 scc 17,
 1 s.c.r. 621
).

with respect to credibility
in particular, while coherent reasons are crucial, it is often difficult for
trial judges to precisely articulate the reasons why they believed or
disbelieved a witness due to “the complex intermingling of impressions that
emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and attempting to reconcile
the various versions of events” (
gagnon, at para.
20; see
also
r. v. r.e.m.,
2008 scc 51,
 3 s.c.r. 3, at para.
28;
r.
v. g.f.,
2021 scc 20,
 1 s.c.r. 801, at para.
81
).
the task is further complicated by the trial judge’s ability to accept some,
all, or none of a witness’s testimony.
92.
i
will, of course, apply these fundamental legal principles to the evidence
called at j.m.’s trial.
inconsistencies:
93.
further,
i will adhere to the general direction offered by way of an endorsement of the
court of appeal for ontario in
r. v. a.m.,
2014
onca 769
as follows:
 several basic principles inform our decision regarding the trial
judge's reasons for judgment.
 first, every witness, irrespective of age, is an individual
whose credibility and evidence should be assessed according to criteria
appropriate to his or her mental development, understanding and ability to
communicate:
r. v. w. (r.),
1992 canlii 56 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 122, s.c.j. no. 56, at p.
134 s.c.r.
 second, no inflexible rules mandate when a witness' evidence
should be evaluated according to "adult" or "child"
standards. indeed, in its provisions regarding testimonial capacity, the
canada evidence act,
r.s.c., 1985, c. c-5
eschews any reference to "adult" or
"child", preferring the terms "14 years or older" and
"under 14 years of age". an inflexible, category-based system would
resurrect stereotypes as rigid and unyielding as those rejected by the recent
developments in our approach to children's evidence:
w. (r.), at p.
134 s.c.r.
 third, despite this flexibility, there are some guiding
principles. generally, where an adult testifies about events that occurred when
she was a child, her credibility should be assessed according to the criteria
applicable to adult witnesses. however, the presence of inconsistencies, especially
on peripheral matters such as time and location, should be considered in the
context of her age at the time the events about which she is
testifying occurred:
w. (r.), at p. 134 s.c.r. see,
also,
r. v. kendall,
1962 canlii 7 (scc), s.c.r. 469, s.c.j. no. 27.
 fourth, one of the most valuable means of assessing witness
credibility is to examine the consistency between what the witness said in the
witness box and what she has said on other occasions, whether or not under
oath:
r. v. g. (m.),
1994 canlii 8733 (on ca), o.j. no. 2086, 93 c.c.c. (3d) 347 (c.a.), at p.
354 c.c.c., leave to appeal to s.c.c. refused s.c.c.a. no. 390.
inconsistencies may emerge in a witness' testimony at trial, or between their
trial testimony and statements previously given. inconsistencies [page540] may
also emerge from things said differently at different times, or from omitting
to refer to certain events at one time while referring to them on other
occasions.
 inconsistencies vary in their nature and importance. some are
minor, others are not. some concern material issues, others peripheral
subjects. where an inconsistency involves something material about which an
honest witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a
carelessness with the truth about which the trier of fact should be concerned:
g.
(m.), at p. 354 c.c.c.
 fifth, a trial judge giving reasons for judgment is neither
under the obligation to review and resolve every inconsistency in a witness'
evidence, nor respond to every argument advanced by counsel:
r. v. m.
(r.e.), 3 s.c.r. 3, s.c.j. no. 52,
2008 scc 51, at para.
64. that said, a trial judge should address and explain how she or he
has resolved major inconsistencies in the evidence of material witnesses:
g.
(m.), at p. 356 c.c.c.;
r. v. dinardo, 1 s.c.r.
788, s.c.j. no, 24,
2008 scc 24, at para.
31.
 sixth, prior consistent statements of a witness are not
admissible for their truth:
r. v. stirling, 1 s.c.r.
272, s.c.j. no. 10,
2008 scc 10, at para.
7. mere repetition of a story on a prior occasion does not make the
in-court description of the events any more credible or reliable:
r. v.
curto, o.j. no. 889,
2008 onca 161, 230 c.c.c. (3d) 145, at paras.
32, 35;
r. v. ay,
1994 canlii 8749 (bc ca), b.c.j. no. 2024, 93 c.c.c. (3d) 456 (c.a.), at p.
471 c.c.c.
the meaning of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
94.
in
a case i decided a couple of years ago,
r. v. mclaren,
2023 oncj 92
(canlii), i adverted, as i must, to the meaning of “reasonable doubt”. i had
the following to say:
181. the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt is an
age-old principle of criminal law in canada and virtually every other common
law jurisdiction. triers of fact must be ever conscious of the high burden
of proof placed upon the crown, if ever the accused’s right to be presumed
innocent is to be rebutted.
182. recently, my colleague, brochu j., in
r.
v. hawryluk, (unreported), offered these helpful commentaries on the
meaning of reasonable doubt:
 like every person accused of a criminal offence, mr.
hawryluk begins this trial presumed to be innocent of the offence with which he
is charged. that presumption remains intact unless and until the crown proves
beyond a reasonable doubt that he is guilty. it is the crown that bears the
onus of proving the essential elements of the offence beyond a reasonable
doubt. that onus never shifts to the accused.
 intermingled with the presumption of innocence is the
standard of proof required to displace that presumption. to secure a
conviction in a criminal case, the crown must establish each essential element
of the charge against the accused beyond reasonable doubt. this standard of
proof is very stringent. it is a standard far beyond the civil threshold of
proof on a balance of probabilities.
 the expression “proof beyond a reasonable doubt"
has no precise definition, but it is well understood. the supreme court of
canada outlined a suggested model jury charge
in
r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc),
 3 s.c.r.
320. this is the
definitive guide for criminal trial courts in canada. it is worth setting out
here verbatim:
* the term
"beyond a reasonable doubt" has been used for a very long time and is
a part of our history and traditions of justice. it is so engrained in our
criminal law that some think it needs no explanation, yet something must be
said regarding its meaning.
* a
reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt. it must not be based
upon sympathy or prejudice. rather, it is based on reason and common
sense. it is logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence.
* even if you
believe the accused is probably guilty or likely guilty, that is not
sufficient. in those circumstances you must give the benefit of the doubt to
the accused and acquit because the crown has failed to satisfy you of
the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
* on the
other hand you must remember that it is virtually impossible to prove anything
to an absolute certainty and the crown is not required to do so. such a
standard of proof is impossibly high.
* in short
if, based upon the evidence before the court, you are sure that the accused
committed the offence you should convict since this demonstrates that you are
satisfied of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
 three years
later, in
r. v. avetysan,
2000 scc 56 (canlii), 
2 s.c.r. 745, the supreme court of canada clarified at para. 13 that:
in situating the
criminal standard of proof, “it falls much closer to
absolute certainty than to proof on a balance of
probabilities”: starr, at para.
242, per iacobucci
j.
w.(d.):
95.
further,
in assessing the evidence of an accused, i will bear in mind the dicta of l’heureux-
dub
é j. in
r. v. l. (d.o.),
1993 canlii 46 (scc), 4 s.c.r. 419, where she stated:
appropriate test
79
the respondent submitted a brief to the trial judge with regard to the
appropriate test for weighing the evidence and in particular with regard to
assessing the credibility of witnesses. he argued that the proper test was
whether an account given by, or on behalf, of an accused might "reasonably
be true". the trial judge did not agree and explained:
whether an account given by, or on behalf of, an accused
might reasonably be true, is not in my view the honest and proper and
established test of whether the crown's evidence should be rejected. it is
simply one factor in assessing the overall impact of the evidence as a whole.
if one were to determine criminal cases simply on an academic test, unrelated
to all the other facts, of whether something might reasonably be true, much of
the impact of truly and compellingly credible crown evidence such as that here,
would go for naught, and truth would be subjugated by plausibility.
in my view, the trial judge was correct, as was o'sullivan
j.a. who succinctly enunciated the test as follows (at p. 317):
the only question for the trier of fact at the end of the
trial is whether or not, on the whole of the evidence, the crown has proved its
case beyond a reasonable doubt. if it has, the accused must be convicted. if
there is a reasonable doubt, the accused must be acquitted.
this is the proper test on which cory j.
in
r. v. w. (d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc),

1 s.c.r. 742, at pp. 757-58, expanded as follows:
a trial judge might well instruct the jury on the question
of credibility along these lines:
first, if you believe the evidence of the accused,
obviously you must acquit.
second, if you do not believe the testimony of the accused
but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit.
third, even if you are not left in doubt by the evidence of
the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the evidence which
you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of
the guilt of the accused.
the respondent's submissions on this point, also made to
us, cannot succeed.
analysis:
do i believe the evidence of j.m.?
96.
i
cannot believe j.m.’s evidence for three main reasons. firstly, his absolute
certainty that he had only three short cans of budweiser on the night in
question is not credible in the slightest. it taints his veracity on virtually
everything else he says about his recollection of p.p.’s last night at his
trailer home on august 26, going into the wee hours of the morning of august
27, 2022.
97.
j.m.
had no reason to reflect on the level of his alcohol consumption that night
until almost a year after the fact when p.p. decided to confirm for her parents
their suspicion as to why she was reluctant to visit c.m. and j.m. during the
summer of 2023. it makes no sense that j.m. would remember with such clarity
the actual number of beers he drank, two at the campfire, one while watching the
movie, no more, no less. yet he maintains he can. why then could he not
remember what he ate for dinner that night?
98.
secondly,
his insistence that he used the bathroom at the end of the movie, but not
during the night, leaves me with no confidence either that he was telling the
truth about how many times he had to go, nor that his recollection of it is
accurate. whether one goes to the washroom during the night is a mundane
detail. it is not something likely to be committed to, or to be etched in
one’s memory, especially when the need to recall the number of one’s trips does
not arise until a year later.
99.
j.m.’s
evidence also conflicted somewhat with his wife, c.m.’s, on this point. she
was clear that it was not unusual for him to use the washroom during the night.
100.
to my mind, j.m. was plainly
being dishonest with this court when asserting that he knew he did not wake
through the night, and that c.m. was snuggled into him for the duration. his
aim, it seems, was to rule out any opportunity for him to have done to p.p.
what she says he did. he simply needed to change from sleeping on his right
side to his left to gain access to p.p. he would only have to put his arm over
c.m.’s body to do so. it was ridiculous for him to suggest he could not reach
her. the three of them occupied a queen-size bed in his trailer home. p.p. was
always literally an arm’s length away from j.m. throughout the night in
question with some simple repositioning on his part.
101.
thirdly, and less
significantly, i seriously doubt he waited to have his first beer at the
campfire, and not earlier in the evening, after other adult company, c. and b.,
had arrived, and even though c.m. was already having a glass of wine over
dinner.
102.
accordingly, i cannot
find that j.m. was a credible and reliable witness.
does the evidence of j.m.. raise a
reasonable doubt?
103.
it does not. it was
strained and contrived, in my view, to marry up with his wife, c.m.’s
testimony. he did not wish to contradict her because he clearly understood her
testimony could completely exculpate him, if believed.
104.
j.m.’s evidence struck
me as being intent upon parroting almost everything about which his wife, c.m.,
had previously testified. j.m. had the benefit of listening to her give her
evidence before him. the only significant difference in her evidence and his
was whether p.p. typically wore a nightgown to bed. j.m. said he could not
remember a single instance when p.p. did, whereas c.m. agreed that that was her
daughter’s usual bedtime attire. to my mind, c.m.’s concession on this point
enhanced her credibility. j.m.’s apparent lack of recall that p.p. typically wore
a nightgown detracted from his.
105.
i will give credit to
j.m. for conceding that he could have put his hand down p.p.’s pants if he had
tried, but his testimony still does not raise a reasonable doubt, in my mind,
about whether he sexually touched p.p.
on the basis of the evidence i
do accept, am i convinced beyond a reasonable doubt in the guilt of j.m.?
106.
my assessment of the
evidence as a whole adduced at j.m.’s trial does not, of course, end with the
completion of my inquiries under the first two branches of
w.(d.). i
must articulate what i am convinced of beyond a reasonable doubt.
107.
turning my mind to the
evidence which i do accept, i am confident in making the following findings. 
they sequentially are:
a)
after
a night involving alcohol consumption by c.m. and j.m. around a campfire, p.p. was
invited into their bed to watch the movie, “the greatest showman”. it was a
treat for the then 10-year-old child, and her idea to be permitted to do so.
b)
it
was also the only time p.p. slept in that bed. it was the last night of her
summer stay with her mother, whom she would not see again for some time.
c)
p.p.
may have fallen asleep during the movie, or she may have watched it to its
conclusion. nothing turns on whether she did or not.
d)
most
critically, i believe c.m. that she moved p.p. from her placement initially between
the adults in the bed to have the child sleep on the other side of her mother, so
that p.p. would be impeded by c.m.’s body from having even accidental contact with
j.m. this makes sense for reasons of propriety.
e)
c.m.
is a light sleeper and p.p. a restless one. i accept c.m.’s evidence that she
was periodically struck in her side by p.p. as the child fidgeted in her sleep
in a strange bed.
f)
c.m.
is not a woman prepared to stand by her man at all costs, to lie for him to
protect him, and to concoct a story to exonerate him. she was a mother pained
by the choice she had to make in testifying as she did. i believe what she
told the court about where her daughter slept through the night and why. i do
so in spite of what p.p. told police was her mother’s tendency never to believe
“anything i say most of the times and lots of times”. p.p.’s allegiance lies
with her father and her stepmother, her custodial parents.
g)
in
essence, i assess c.m.’s account of what happened in that bed as both honest
and accurate. at a minimum, it was capable of reasonably being true, so as to
raise a reasonable doubt in my mind as trier of fact.
h)
j.m.
and c.m. spoke on several occasions about their recollections of the night in
question. they consulted photos to assist them in recalling details such as
the clothing p.p. wore at the campfire and to bed. that is normal for a couple
such as j.m. and c.m. to do when a serious allegation such as the one levelled
at j.m. by p.p. was made almost a year after the fact.
i)
in
my view, c.m.’s credibility would have been severely and negatively impacted if
she had denied having such conversations with j.m. as a caring and loving
mother to p.p., i expect c.m. would have been all over j.m. when the accusation
was first made by her daughter, p.p. as a mother, c.m. would have made her
inquiries of j.m. with vigour to try to get at the truth.
the inconsistencies:
108.
i consider the
following to be a major inconsistency in the evidence of p.p.:
a)
when
challenged by defence counsel that she spoke to j.m. while he was trying to
reach under her nightgown to touch her vagina, she denied she had. she then
was reminded of what she said to police during her videotaped interview, a
statement which she gave some time ago on august 4, 2023, but which was played
in court on april 25, 2025, for her to adopt under
s. 715.1
of the
code
to form part of her evidence-in-chief, a short while before her
cross-examination commenced.
b)
all
other inconsistencies were minor and peripheral. p.p. is a bright and
energetic child. she was fluid in her answers offered to police in giving her
statement, as well as when questioned by crown and defence counsel in court. 
she did not strike me as a vengeful child with an animus for j.m. bent on
telling falsehoods about him.
c)
for
example, whether c. and b. were present in the spare bedroom or not, when p.p.
alleged j.m. was sexually touching her, is trivial in nature and of minor
significance. her older sister’s presence with her fiancé in a different
bedroom is a nonfactor.
conclusion:
109.
let me be clear. p.p. could
have been telling this court the truth. however, that possibility comes
nowhere close to meeting the high threshold the crown must attain to persuade a
trier of fact beyond a reasonable doubt that the offence(s), with which an
accused has or have been charged, have been made out. her mother, c.m.’s
evidence, prevents me from being sure that j.m. sexually touched her daughter
as p.p. testified he did.
110.
c.m. neither saw nor heard
anything untoward occurring despite being a light sleeper and being present in
the bed for the entire night in question.
111.
there was also the influence
exerted by p.p.’s father and stepmother over p.p. which troubled me. it sounded
quite clear to me as though the suggestion was made to p.p. by her father and
stepmother that the reason for her reluctance in wanting to go visit c.m. and
j.m. was because p.p. had been sexually touched by j.m. p.p.’s adopted statement
given to police speaks loudly to her disclosure of the incident coming to light
in this way.
112.
i also highly doubt that a
10-year-old child would form the opinion that j.m. is an alcoholic and has
liver problems completely on her own.
113.
in sum, i am not convinced
beyond a reasonable doubt in j.m.’s guilt after a complete review of the
evidence called at his trial.
114.
for the above reasons,
i must acquit him. assessing the evidence in a balanced and fair manner as a
whole as i must, i cannot be sure whether j.m. sexually touched or sexually assaulted
p.p.
dated: june 13, 2025
________________________________
march,
m.g., j.