source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj133/2025oncj133.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dougherty, 2025 oncj 133
date: 
2025 03 10
court
file no.: thunder bay 23-42100983
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ryan dougherty
before
justice p.t. o’marra
sentencing
submissions heard on november 19, 2024
reasons
for sentence released on march 10, 2025
v. karadzic........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
m. hargadon................................................ 
counsel for the defendant ryan dougherty
p.t. o’marra,
j.:
introduction:

in my reasons for judgment released on september
24, 2024,
r. v. dougherty,
2024 oncj 708, i found officer dougherty
guilty of assault causing bodily harm. i found that while he was re-apprehending
mr. semerling on november 8, 2022, the force he used was unreasonable,
unnecessary, and disproportionate in the circumstances. as a result of the four
closed fist strikes to his face, mr. semerling suffered a broken nose and a
concussion.
on november 19, 2024, i heard
sentencing submissions and reserved my decision on the appropriate sentence to today.
these are my reasons for sentence.
the offence:

in the early morning of november 8, 2022, officer dougherty was at the thunder
bay regional health sciences centre on an unrelated call; a nurse advised him
that mr. semerling had left the hospital and needed to be apprehended. mr.
semerling was the subject of a
mental health act
(
m.h.a.
)
apprehension earlier in the evening. officer dougherty located mr. semerling
walking on oliver road, near the hospital.

officer dougherty pulled up in his suv cruiser and conversed with mr.
semerling. he asked mr. semerling to get into the cruiser, intending to take
him back to the hospital. mr. semerling refused, which frustrated officer
dougherty and led to a struggle resulting in officer dougherty bringing mr.
semerling down. he placed mr. semerling on his back, pinned his arms under his
knees on the pavement, thereby rendering him defenceless, and struck him four
times in the face for not heeding his commands. mr. semerling was transported
back to the hospital in officer dougherty's cruiser and returned to the custody
of the hospital staff under the original
m.h.a.
apprehension. on
november 9, 2022, mr. semerling returned to the hospital and was diagnosed with
a fractured nose and concussion.
the victim impact:

mr. semerling provided a detailed victim impact statement. the assault
has profoundly impacted him. he described the impact as follows:
every aspect of my life has changed since november 7, 2022.
i cannot focus. i have crushing anxiety. i have recurring flashbacks every time
i go outside. i cry, unprovoked. i have retreated from my family and friends. i
do not work the same, i cannot work at the same pace. i cannot work for the
same durations, and i cannot work with other people.
my biggest trauma….is now an ongoing and crippling fear of
the police.
my stomach flips every time i hear a siren…..i will never
call 911 again…ryan dougherty took away my sense of safety…my trust in police
is now shattered.
i am afraid to go outside. i can’t be around other people. i
have a rotting sense of dread in my stomach at all times. i no longer trust
authority figures….i can’t do social service anymore because i don’t trust
people…i no longer have financial security because i’m unable to function in a
workplace. i had to sell my beautiful port arthur home because i am afraid of
the police. i made the conscious decision to move out of thunder bay. my
devastated mind requires constant support from my wife.
i live with psychological scars that continue to cripple my
life.
the positions of the parties:

the crown requests a suspended sentence of two years of probation under
the statutory terms and a prohibition against officer dougherty from communicating
or contacting mr. semerling. the crown also seeks an additional term requiring officer
dougherty to complete 200 hours of community service. given that the offence of
assault causing bodily harm is a primary designated offence, the crown is
requesting a dna order. the crown argues that a suspended sentence is necessary
to satisfy the principles of denunciation and deterrence, which are key
sentencing principles.

the defence contends that a conditional discharge with two years of
probation and 160 community services hours is appropriate under the
circumstances of this case, considering officer dougherty’s lack of a criminal
record, the support of family, friends, and colleagues, a history of exemplary
work and professionalism, participation in counselling services and community
service, the collateral consequences of
police services act
disciplinary
proceedings, and a pending civil lawsuit.
officer dougherty’s circumstances:

officer dougherty is 50 years old and was born and raised in thunder
bay. he had a perfectly normal upbringing without any domestic violence or
substance abuse in the home. he does not consume alcohol. while growing up, he
was taught to respect rules and discipline.

as a youth, officer dougherty played various sports, including
wrestling, baseball, and basketball, and began training in martial arts at 12
years old.

after completing high school, officer dougherty immediately went to
work. he found employment in the automotive sector, installing stereos and
electronics. in 2001, he joined bell canada as a copper and fibre optic
installation linesman which necessitated travel to distant northern
communities, resulting in time away from his family.

he
met his spouse when he was 27 and married her when he was 32. they have two
children, aged 29 and 27.

officer
dougherty has a close and loving relationship with his children. he engages in
pro-social activities with them, including fishing and fixing cars.

officer
dougherty always wanted to be a police officer. he could not realize that dream
when he was younger, taking care of his family. however, he took that leap
later in life, quit his job at bell canada and enrolled as a special officer in
2017. in 2019, at 45, he attended the ontario police college and left his
family for three months. he became a sworn member of the thunder bay police
service, working mainly in primary response as a uniform patrol officer. he was
briefly seconded to the intelligence unit for six months.

since
officer dougherty was charged, he was reassigned to the missing persons unit
and is no longer a uniform patrol officer.

during
his time in law enforcement, officer dougherty has acted as a coach officer.
the defence compendium features multiple letters that showcase his
respectability and competence in this role. this position posed challenges and
required physical endurance, primarily because of the age gap between officer
dougherty and the police trainees. nevertheless, his patience and extensive
experience helped him thrive in this capacity, as evidenced by the reference
letters.
officer dougherty’s allocution:

following
the submissions, officer dougherty read from a prepared statement expressing
his remorse. he acknowledged that he lost his patience during his interaction
with mr. semerling. officer dougherty showed insight into his actions. he
recognized that he let mr. semerling down by causing harm when he should have
offered help. he feels apologetic and embarrassed about his behaviour, stating
the following:
“it pained me to watch mr. semerling struggle to testify in
court, it pained me to see him seeming to have a seizure in my vehicle once he
was apprehended and it filled me with revulsion to see how i spoke to him on my
body worn camera after i apprehended him.”

after
he apologized directly to mr. semerling, officer dougherty apologized to the
public for losing confidence in the police, which was caused by his actions.
the relevant sentencing principles:

imposing
a sentence is a highly individualized exercise tailored to the gravity of the
offence, the offender's blameworthiness, and the harm caused by the crime.
(see:
r. v. nur,
2015 scc 15 (canlii), 1 scr 773, at para.
43.) the goal is always to
impose fair, fit, and principled sanctions. (see:
r. v. parranto,
2021
scc 46, at para.
10.)

the
purpose of sentencing is set out in section 718 of the
code. it states that
“[t]he fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just
sanctions.”

section
718 sets out the sentencing objectives, namely denunciation, specific and
general deterrence, offender rehabilitation, the requirement that offenders be
separated from society where necessary, the reparation for victims, and the
promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders.

the
fundamental principle of sentencing is set out in s. 718.1, which provides that
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender. the “gravity of the offence” refers to the seriousness
of the offence. the “degree of responsibility of the offender” refers to the
offender’s role or culpability in the offence. (see:
r. v. hamilton
(2004),
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca), 186 c.c.c. (3d) 129 (ont. c.a.) at paras.
90-91.)

we
operate in a common law system. while every case is different, courts should
strive to impose sentences like sentences imposed on similar offenders in
similar cases. this reflects the principle of parity and the role of
stare
decisis. it is ultimately a question of fairness that requires that the sentence
imposed falls within an acceptable range of sentences for similar offences
committed by similar offenders. differences in sentences should be capable of
rational explanation (see:
ruby on sentencing, ninth edition, para. 2.29
and
r. v. klemenz,
 s.j. no. 391 (sask. c.a.) at para. 46
).

in
arriving at a fit sentence, the court must have respect for the principles of
restraint embodied in ss. 718.2 (c) to (e).

the
court’s goal is to arrive at a fit sentence. if the sentence reflects the statutory
and common law principles, the court has a certain amount of discretion in
balancing and applying the sentencing objectives in s. 718.1 (see:
ruby on
sentencing, ninth edition, paras. 1.61 to 1.63). the court must regard the
factors set out in the
code, the nature of the offence, and the
offender's circumstances (
ruby on sentencing, ninth edition, para. 2.8).

in
this case, the principle of restraint carries some weight but must be balanced
with the primary need for general deterrence and denunciation. the principle of
restraint is codified in section 718.2(d) and is well established in the case
law.

i
am aware of the principles of specific deterrence and rehabilitation. however,
considering these facts, i believe the message to officer dougherty has been
received loudly and clearly, and his rehabilitation is still in progress.
the breach of trust and police violence:

section
718.2 of the
code
provides:
a court that imposes a sentence shall also take into
consideration the following principles:
(a)
a sentence should be increased or reduced to account
for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the
offence or the offender, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,.....
(iii) evidence that the offender,
in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or authority in relation
to the victim,.....
shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances; ….

any
criminal offences committed by police officers are particularly significant and
are treated severely because the police are in a position of trust, and the
administration of justice relies on fidelity, restraint, and competence.

the
crown filed a casebook with seven decisions that outline principles that apply
to sentencing proceedings involving police officers who have committed criminal
offences in the line of duty.

the
trial and appellant decisions in
r. v. theriault,
2021 onca 517
and
 o.j. no. 4797
were contained. the facts in that case were far more
aggravating. an off-duty police officer and his brother beat a vulnerable
racialized youth with a metal pipe. the conviction for assault and sentence of
nine months in prison was upheld.

justice
di luca, in the trial judgment, discussed the implicit breach of trust in cases
of police violence. he wrote at paras. 45 and 46 the following:
45 the courts have recognized that when sentencing police
officers convicted of committing crimes, the sentence must reflect the special
position that police officers occupy in society; see
r. v. doering,
2020
onsc 5618
at para.
23
and
r. v. cook,
2010 onsc 5016, at para.
29. as my
colleague pomerance j. notes in
doering,
supra, at para.
25:
it has been recognized that
crimes committed by police officers represent a breach of the public trust. it
is for this reason that police are "held to a higher standard than would
be expected of ordinary citizens", and "the principles of
denunciation and general deterrence become magnified" in the sentencing of
police:
see
r. v. forcillo,
2018 onca 402,
361 c.c.c. (3d) 161
at paras.
198-199;
r. v. ferguson,
2008 scc 6,
 s.c.r. 96
at para.
28.
46 simply stated, the police are sworn and duty bound to
serve and protect all members of the community. in order to perform this
function, the police are granted a great deal of trust and power. however, this
trust and power gives rise to a corresponding duty to uphold the law and values
of the community. when a police officer commits a criminal offence, he or she
also breaches the community's trust. this generally means that the sentence
imposed on a police officer will be more severe than that imposed on an
ordinary person who commits the same crime; see
r. v. forcillo,
2015
onca 259
at para.
133.

in
terms of discussing the need for deterrence and public denunciation of police committing
crimes, he said the following at paras. 48 and 49.
48 the criminal law and sentences imposed by due process
under the criminal law reflect a shared set of communal values; see
r. v. m.
(c.a.),
supra, at para. 81. denunciation is the process by which
these values are communicated to the public broadly and to offenders
specifically. when a court imposes a sentence, it denounces the offender's
conduct and sends the message that a violation of shared communal values will
not be tolerated.
49 denunciation is closely related to the concept of
deterrence. by imposing a denunciatory sentence, the court also seeks to deter
the specific offender and other like-minded individuals from committing similar
offences. while the need for denunciation and deterrence varies depending on
the type of offence, it is often heightened in cases where the type of offence
under consideration is an offence generally committed by otherwise law-abiding
people. it is those people who are most likely deterred by stiff sentences; see
r. v. lacasse,
supra, at para. 73.

in
r. v. theriault, chief justice tulloch stated, on behalf of the panel,
at para. 206:
it is well recognized that police are "held to a higher
standard than would be expected of ordinary citizens" because they are
charged with enormous responsibilities and granted a great deal of trust and
power:
r. v. forcillo,
2018 onca 402, 361 c.c.c. (3d) 161, at paras.
198-99, leave to appeal refused, s.c.c.a. no. 258. police officers are
duty bound to serve and protect the community. they are also duty bound to
uphold the law. when the conduct of a police officer runs contrary to either of
these duties, the legitimacy of the rule of law - a postulate of our
constitutional structure - rests on fragile ground. this court has emphasized
that the principles of denunciation and general deterrence become magnified in
these circumstances:
forcillo, at para. 199.

there
is no applicable range of sentence that can be discerned from the caselaw. each
case turns on its facts. the focus remains on ensuring that the sentence does not
depart from the principle of proportionality. (see:
theriault, ca, paras.
221-224.)

in
r. v. kaushal,
 o.j. no. 3946, the crown sought a suspended
sentence, and the defence sought a conditional discharge. a police officer
pleaded guilty to two counts of assault
simpliciter. the peel officer,
while arresting a person, stood him up facing a wall to handcuff him and
forcefully shoved his back twice with his right forearm, causing a minor bump
to his forehead. justice durno outlined other factors to consider when deciding
whether a conditional discharge is appropriate. (see:
kaushal
paras.
68-70.) some of those factors were at play in this case, such as no false notes
were prepared, no effort to conceal the conduct, no premeditation, no
gratuitous humiliation to the victim, the conduct was not prolonged, no racial
motivation and no weapon was used. but, unlike in our case, there was no bodily
harm inflicted. however, in the end, justice durno suspended the passing of
sentence on both counts and found that the wrong message by way of deterrence would
be sent if a discharge was imposed.

in
r. v. beric, an ontario court of justice unreported decision (january
16, 2024), my colleague justice j. o’brien declined to impose a conditional
discharge after findings of guilt for assault with a weapon and assault
simpliciter
on an ottawa police officer for his improper use of a baton while restraining a
vulnerable individual who was suffering from mental health issues. in that
case, the officer pushed the victim, who was in crisis, to the ground. before
he struck him several times in the head with his baton, blood was seen coming
from his head. the officer stood on the victim’s head and neck, which
interfered with the victim’s breathing. the crown sought a conditional
sentence. ultimately, her honour imposed a suspended sentence and placed the
officer on 30 months of probation. after reviewing the aggravating and
mitigating factors, she found that a discharge would be contrary to the public
interest and would not meet the need for general deterrence.

in
r. v. mahmodian,
 o.j. no. 494, justice kozloff imposed a sentence
of 30 days on a police officer who pleaded guilty to assault. the facts of that
case are very different as they involve gratuitous violence on a restrained
prisoner. while the victim was lying prone on the ground, the officer deployed
a taser on him. once he was handcuffed and lying face down, the officer kicked
the victim in the torso. justice kozloff found that the attempt by the officer
to cover up his conduct, giving a false account in his memo book and use of
force report, was significantly aggravating to make a non-custodial sentence unfitting.
the sentence was held up on appeal. (see:
r. v. mahmodian,
 o.j.
no. 6391.)

the
crown argues that this lack of aggravating factor in our case makes a suspended
sentence appropriate.

in
r. v. holmes,
 o.j. no. 4095, after a trial, justice chapman
imposed a suspended sentence for assault causing bodily harm on a police
officer who pushed a cyclist off his bicycle during an arrest for running a red
light, which resulted in a broken shoulder and injuries to the cyclist’s face.
the defence sought a conditional discharge. justice chapman found that there
was a need to emphasize the principles of deterrence and denunciation in
sentencing a police officer who assaulted a detainee. (see:
holmes,
para. 20)

the
key similarity between that case and this case was the context in which the
attempted arrest occurred. the officer got frustrated with the cyclist’s non-compliance,
and instead of considering alternative approaches, he departed from his
training and let his impatience and aggression take over. her honour’s following
comments at para. 16 are equally applicable to officer dougherty:
16 mr. santiago was in a vulnerable position while
straddling his bike in light clothing with one of his hands already cuffed. not
only did he not represent any threat to the officer in this position but it was
clear that he would have great difficulty breaking a fall. the push was done
with considerable force and an injury was clearly foreseeable. the victim
impact is very significant. the assault was motivated by impatience and
aggression in circumstances where the latter was in no way justified. this was
not a gun call or a high risk take down but rather an arrest for a minor poa
offence. there was no need for violence and the situation escalated much too
rapidly due primarily to the approach taken to the situation by officer holmes.
the need for general deterrence and denunciation are to be in the foreground of
any sentence imposed.

in
r. v. baxter,
 o.j. no. 4634, justice odonnell imposed a
conditional discharge and 200 hours of community service after finding the
officer guilty after a trial. in that case, the officer grounded the victim, in
which circumstances were not justified, and left a “nasty gash” on his face. it
is important to note that the victim was a much more provocative and aggressive
complainant than in our case. the court accepted the officer’s actions were
out of character. justice odonnell noted, "society rightfully expects
trained and experienced police officers like sergeant baxter to control their
frustrations, but when they fail to do so, society must recognize that police
officers are human rather than superhuman." (see:
baxter, para. 36.)
 the court held that the sentence satisfied the principles of deterrence,
denunciation, rehabilitation, reparations, and a sense of responsibility in the
offender (see:
baxter, para. 40). it was noted that s. 730 of the
code
provides a discharge for this offence if it is in an accused’s interest and not
contrary to the public interest. in granting an 18-month conditional discharge
with probation, justice odonnell noted that just as a non-custodial sentence
might very well have deterrent value, so may a discharge. (see:
baxter,
para. 32.)

officer
dougherty’s moral culpability is relatively high. police officers are trained
to withstand provocation and, as professionals, are expected to tolerate danger
and abuse. (see:
r. v. thomas,
2021 onsc 6653, at para. 51.) they are
trained to respond appropriately to volatile encounters. (see:
r. v.
theriault, at para.
207
(c.a.) and
r. v. kaushal, at para. 83.)

typically,
police should receive harsher sentences than regular individuals because of
their privileged societal role and the trust that the community places in them.
(
r. v. schertzer,
2015 onca 259, at para.
133.)

when
police engage in assaultive behaviour against arrestees, it breaches the
public’s confidence and trust. this degrades the relationship between the
public and the police, causing the public to lose faith in the administration
of justice. suppose the public perceives that the police are more likely to
abuse their authority. in that case, the public may become more aggressive and
less cooperative during interactions, putting the public in danger.

the
crown submitted that a sentence intended to deter and denounce is essential to
convey a clear message to, and impact similarly situated police officers, such
as officer dougherty—who has no prior criminal record, no disciplinary history,
and the support of family and friends. if general deterrence is to have any
effect, one would think that this population group would be the most affected.
other collateral consequences:

when
considering the collateral consequences in sentencing, in
r. v. nicholls,
 o.j. no. 1532, justice olver stated the following in para. 45:
while i accept the crown's submission that collateral
factors should be given less weight (
i.e., diminished mitigation) in the
sentencing process (see:
r. v. suter,
2018 scc 34, at paras.
45-49, 56;
mahmodian,
supra
at para. 13;
doering,
supra
at paras.
63-64
), i also
accept defence counsel's submission that many courts have recognized collateral
consequences in the sentencing process that are unique to police officers who
have been found guilty of criminal conduct (see:
r. v. griffin,
1975 canlii 1430 (pe scad), 
peij no. 64, at paras.
9-10;
mathieu,
supra;
r. v. holmes,
 o.j. no. 4095, at para. 14;
r. u. gabruch,
 a.j. no. 84;
r.
v. cardinal,
 o.j. no. 3678, at paras. 32-33, 37;
darn ley,
supra;
r. v. fraser,
 nsj no. 266
).

in
officer dougherty’s case, i find the relevant collateral consequences:
(i)
he has lost several friends over the stigma of the charge and finding.
(ii)
his
wife has faced some ostracism at work.
(iii)
his
children are confused and upset over the incident, which is entirely at odds
with how they know their father.
(iv)
given the widespread
media exposure this has received in thunder bay, he has had to contend with the
impact on his reputation in the community. this is particularly acute given the
highly polarized environment between the police and the public, in thunder bay.
(v)
the
outcome of this case will impact the pending
police services act
proceedings,
which will affect his employment with the thunder bay police service.
(vi)
he was
served a $1.5 million lawsuit the day before submissions.

i
am acutely aware of the impact a criminal record could have on a police
officer’s career path. the anxiety of that uncertainty weighs heavily on officer
dougherty, his family, friends, and colleagues.

listing
the applicable aggravating and mitigating features assists me in evaluating
this case properly and imposing a sentence that is just and appropriate.
aggravating factors:

i
find the following aggravating factors to be relevant to my consideration of a
fit sentence:
(i)
this was a breach of public trust as officer dougherty was in the
execution of his duties to serve and protect all individuals, especially a
person who was in his charge and particularly vulnerable. mr. semerling had
suffered a mental health crisis and had been drinking. moreover, he was fundamentally
defenceless when struck four times.
(ii)
this
was not a true crime arrest. when the police arrest individuals who have a
propensity for violence and have committed a criminal offence, the assessment
of the use of force is different. this was an
m.h.a.
apprehension, which
can be unpredictable and volatile but also requires a greater degree of
restraint and effective communication from the police.
(iii)
this was a
violent crime involving excessive force that caused significant injury to mr.
semerling. following the assault, he struggled to concentrate due to the
concussion he sustained.
(iv)
there was
an obvious power imbalance involving officer dougherty and mr. semerling.
(v)
the
impact of this assault on mr. semerling is profound and long-lasting.
(vi)
officer
dougherty failed to document his use of force, advise his superior officer what
had occurred, and did not notify medical staff that mr. semerling may need
medical assistance.
(vii)
officer
dougherty failed to activate his body-worn camera before interacting with mr.
semerling.

regarding
the last two factors, while i was fully satisfied that officer dougherty did
not intend to cover up his actions by failing to report the incident,
accurately documenting his behaviour in his police report, or not activating
his body-worn camera, nonetheless, it was still troubling that he never
candidly admitted what occurred on oliver road.

it
was concerning that both his notes and police report were lacking. without officer
dougherty’s in-car camera video, which recorded his interaction with mr.
semerling—including officer dougherty’s admission that he struck mr. semerling
four times and clarification that mr. semerling did not cause his injuries by
banging his head on the safety partition—officer dougherty might have evaded
accountability.
mitigating factors:

i
find the following mitigating factors to be relevant to my consideration of a
fit sentence:
(i) officer
dougherty is a first-time offender.
(ii)
he has no prior disciplinary history.
(iii)
he has an otherwise excellent record and enjoys the support of superior
officers and colleagues.(iv) he has supported and given back to his community
by working at a soup kitchen.
(iv)
he has engaged
with clinical and forensic/correctional psychologist dr. paul johnston.
(v)
he
has significant community support, as evidenced by the impressive character
references submitted on his behalf.

i have reviewed 21-character references and, during submissions, listened
carefully to counsel quoting various portions of those letters. they are indeed
impressive. however, i am struck by the overlapping descriptions of officer
dougherty’s character, such as his “professionalism,” “kindness,” “caring,”
"empathy," "conscientiousness," "discipline," and
"respect" toward others in the community. this starkly contrasts how
he acted towards mr. semerling on november 8, 2022.

sgt. arnone’s letter stands out. he wrote that officer dougherty
“was
attentive to both the public and his co-workers’….and respectful to everyone he
came in contact with…i have observed him interact with the public, treating
them with respect and dignity, regardless of them being witnesses,
complainants, accused persons, or victims of crime.”

another letter written by sgt. dubuc details a contrasting image of officer
dougherty as well. he wrote,
“officer dougherty has bone fide interest in
conducting himself professionally and properly in accordance with the law and police
procedures and i would like to state with certainty, that he is not an
aggressive or reckless officer who utilizes force inappropriately.”

officer elvish wrote,
“ryan has the ability to remain calm, even
during the most critical situations…. his ability to remain calm and composed
in high-pressure situation (sic) is a testament to his training and natural aptitude
of law enforcement…he has a keen sense of justice and fairness, ensuring that
every individual he encounters gets treated with respect and dignity.”

these comments and opinions are challenging to reconcile with the facts
of this case, as i have found them. i can only conclude that officer
dougherty's behaviour in this matter represented a complete aberration from the
character that everyone has attested to.
neutral factors:

officer
dougherty was found guilty after a trial. it is well established that a plea
of guilty counts as a mitigating factor in sentencing, but neither a decision
to plead not guilty nor how an accused person presents his or her defence is to
be treated as an aggravating factor. (see:
r. v. kozy
(1990),
1990
canlii 2625 (on ca), 58 c.c.c. (3d) 500 (ont. c.a.) at 506, and
r. v.
bradley,
2008 onca 179 (canlii), 234 o.a.c. 363 at para.
16. while mr.
semerling was emotional during his testimony regarding the incident and his
history of ptsd, he was not attacked, and counsel avoided undermining his
dignity. the cross-examination focused on mr. semerling’s memory, which i found
unreliable. in the end, however, i found officer dougherty guilty based on his
evidence. the admissions that were made streamlined this trial. i consider this
a neutral factor.
the appropriate sentence:

in
this case, the parties agree that the sentences that apply to officer
dougherty’s offence and circumstances range from a conditional discharge to a
suspended sentence.

section
730(1) of the
code
sets out the statutory test for the court to apply in
deciding whether to grant a conditional discharge. the test is twofold. the
court must be satisfied that it is in the best interests of officer dougherty
and that it is not contrary to the public interest that officer dougherty
receives a discharge.

i
conclude that for officer dougherty, as is the case for virtually any person
before the court is sentenced, it is in his best interests to be granted a
discharge. however, specific deterrence must not be a relevant consideration
nor rehabilitation. usually, the offender is a person of good character without
a previous conviction, and it is not necessary to enter a conviction to deter
them from committing future offences or rehabilitate them. (see:
r. v.
kaushal, at para. 144.)

the
vexing and the most challenging part of the test relates to whether it is
contrary to the public interest that officer dougherty receive a discharge. a
discharge is not restricted to trivial matters. they can be granted where an
offender has acted entirely out of character or where a criminal record tends
to interfere with employment. they are available in cases which involve a
breach of trust, whether the offender is a civilian or a police officer. the
need for general deterrence must be given due weight but does not preclude a
discharge. (see:
kaushal, at paras. 143-149.) it is not confined to any
class of offences except those specifically proscribed by the
code.
(see:
r. v. sanchez-pino,
1973 canlii 794 (on ca), 2 o.r. 314.)

in
deciding whether a conditional discharge is appropriate in this matter, i am
also guided by justice hill's pronouncement in
r. v.
pera,
2016
onsc 2800, setting out the law relating to discharges. his honour wrote as
follows in para. 95:
our sentencing jurisprudence has developed certain governing
principles relating to discharge dispositions including the following:
(1)
a conditional discharge is a real
sentencing disposition, whereby an offender is subject to probation conditions
to earn a full discharge… it is always to be borne in mind that a person who is
granted a conditional discharge does not go scot-free after committing an
offence.
(2)
a suspended sentence is not
necessarily a greater deterrent to others than a conditional discharge: …
(3)
while discharges are not
restricted to trivial matters…, and therefore over-emphasis on the nature of
the offence as not warranting a conditional discharge must be avoided…, in the
case of violence resulting in injury, the requirement of general deterrence
generally militates against the grant of a discharge notwithstanding considerations
personal to the accused: …
(4)
the sentencing court may take into
account any particular hardship a criminal conviction and criminal record may
have insofar as it relates to an offender's travel and employment: …
…

this
was not a situation in which the assault occurred after mr. semerling had been
taken into custody or was otherwise under the secure control of the police.
instead, it was a dynamic circumstance that escalated quickly. following the
initial contact, officer dougherty perceived mr. semerling's actions as
resistance and a refusal to be apprehended. he acted within the scope of his
lawful duties when he approached and engaged mr. semerling, as indicated in my
reasons; however, once mr. semerling was on the ground and defenceless, officer
dougherty’s use of force was unnecessary and excessive. similar to justice
chapman's remarks in the
holmes
decision, which are relevant to this
case, this was not a high-risk takedown or a gun-related incident. instead, it
was a re-apprehension under the
m.h.a.
of a vulnerable individual.

several
other factors, sometimes referred to as a lack of aggravating factors, exist.
these assist me in determining whether a discharge would be contrary to the
public interest. for example, the assault was not racially motivated, no weapon
was used, and there was no premeditation. i found that officer dougherty was
frustrated that mr. semerling was allowed to leave the hospital after being
brought there by the police. however, his frustration was not directed at mr.
semerling personally but rather at the situation. there was no unnecessary or
prolonged humiliation aimed at mr. semerling. nonetheless, there was bodily
harm inflicted by four closed-fist strikes to mr. semerling's face. the impact
on mr. semerling is significant and continuing.

specific
deterrence is not a concern in this case. officer dougherty has been
significantly deterred by the public five-day trial and being found guilty.

the
more pressing concern is general deterrence and public denouncement of
law-abiding, like-minded, similarly situated police officers. this demographic
is likely to be swayed by sentencing jurisprudence.

this
case is much closer to custodial territory, whether a traditional imprisonment
or a conditional sentence, than to a conditional discharge. the number of
strikes and the nature of mr. semerling's injuries take this case entirely out
of the realm of a conditional discharge and, therefore, would be contrary to
the public interest.

accordingly,
i find the appropriate sentence in this case to be suspended with one-year
probation on statutory terms. officer dougherty shall report to probation
within seven days and thereafter as directed. he shall complete 100 hours of
community service. officer dougherty shall not have direct or indirect contact with
mr semerling except through legal counsel. he shall not attend within 100
metres of any place where he knows john semerling to live, work, go to school,
frequent or any place he knows john semerling to be.

the
offence is a primary designated offence. officer dougherty shall provide a
sample of his dna for inclusion in the dna databank within 60 days from today.

i
am imposing the victim fine surcharge. officer dougherty will have one year to pay
it.
released: march 10, 2025
signed:
justice p.t. o’marra