source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj246/2025oncj246.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. m.g.,
2025 oncj 246
date: 
2025 05 05
court
file no.: 23-48101907
toronto
region
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
mg
before
justice cidalia c. g. faria
heard
on march 14, 2025
reasons
for ruling on admissibility of accused utterance released on may 5, 2025
seeta scully......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
anne marie morphew.............................................................. counsel
for the accused mg
faria j.:
i.
overview

mg is charged with one count of assault, and two
counts of sexual assault against his former wife lsb contrary to
ss. 266
and
271
of the
criminal code.

evidence was heard on november 18, 19 and 20,
2024, and april 4 and 7, 2025. at the end of the crown’s case, the defence applied
for a ruling on the admissibility of an utterance the complainant testified mg
made in early 2007. specifically, lsb testified mc admitted he “raped” her, the
term she prefers, during a joint therapy session just over 18 years ago.
ii.
evidence

lsb testified mg raped her in december 2006.
shortly thereafter, she spoke to mg’s older sister. lsb told his sister that mg
had raped her. mg’s sister suggested she go to therapy, and gave her the name
of her own therapist, maureen toms.

lsb testified she contacted ms. toms and made an
appointment. she went to 3 counselling sessions alone, and then told mg that he
had to attend with her to a joint counselling session with ms. toms to discuss
the “rape” in a “safe environment.”

at the joint therapy session in late january or
early february 2007, lsb testified the rape was “discussed in length.”

lsb specifically testified that when mg was confronted
with the rape, he “denied” and “lied”. she testified:
“he denied, he lied. the therapist was able
to speak to him and she asked him twice, she didn’t use the word rape. she
asked him twice if he had taken me and he got very upset. he was sitting on a
chair with arms on my left side, he punched them, the chair, stood up, and
maureen that he had taken me and then he looked at me and he said yes, i took
you. and then he went for the door, he started putting his shoes on and there
some conversation between maureen and him. she was able to bring him back to
the chair. he sat on the chair with his shoes on and he looked at her and he
said that he was sorry for taking me. and then he looked at me and he said that
he was sorry for hurting me.”


when asked what she understood mg to be
apologizing to her about, lsb responded “by raping me.”

in cross-examination, lsb was insistent that the
only
reason she and mc went to the joint counselling was to “discuss
about the rape”, although in her insistence that it was
only
about the
rape, and that it was “absolutely not true” that they were to discuss issues in
their relationship, she also states, “the purpose was to discuss about the rape
that was caused to the alcohol, and the abuse i was receiving from him.”

iii.
position of the parties

counsel for mg submits there is insufficient
context available for the court to determine the meaning of the words lsb
testified mg uttered. she argues the “admission”, is a partial statement, allegedly
made 18 years ago, and neither the totality, nor significant portions of what
was said during the entire “lengthy” therapy session “discussing the rape” are provided.
therefore, the admission evidence is inadmissible.

the crown submits the admission evidence is
admissible, the issues counsel raises go to weight. the crown argues that lsb
is clear the therapy session was about the “rape” of december 2006, she is
specific about the question and answer portion of the session that led to mg’s
admission, when it occurred during the session, and the actions of the three
parties in the room at the time.
iv.
legal principles

r. v. schneider,
2022 scc 34
is the leading authority on the relevant principles relating to the
admission and use of incomplete statements.

r. v. merritt,
2023
onca 3
succinctly summarizes the principles.
…it is settled law that where a partial or
incomplete statement is offered into evidence as a party admission but lacks
sufficient context to give meaning to the words, that partial or incomplete
statement is irrelevant and lacks probative value. it is therefore
inadmissible. (para. 63)

merritt
quotes rowe
j. in
schneider
who stressed:
that the first prerequisite to admission is ‘whether what
the witness overhead had meaning, such that it was relevant to an issue at
trial’, what he called ‘logical relevance’. he explained that if a jury can
give meaning to the statement the accused made in a manner that is non-speculative
in light of all the evidence, testimony about that statement is relevant and
admissible unless excluded as a matter of discretion because its probative
value is outweighed by the risk of prejudice it presents:
schneider, at
para.
44-45, 63-64, 79. (para. 68)

the
court in
merritt
goes on to state at para
75:
the admissibility of incomplete statement evidence requires
relevance, which is determined as a matter of logic and human experience by
inquiring whether the evidence tends to increase or decrease the probability of
the existence of a fact at issue. (
schneider
at paras.
39, 76
). if the
meaning of the statement offered as an admission cannot be determined, it
cannot logically increase or decrease the probability of the existence of a
fact in issue and therefore does not meet even the low threshold of relevance.
v.
analysis and findings

lsb testified unequivocally that she told mg’s sister
her brother raped her in december 2006. lsb obtained the name of a therapist
from this sister. she attended several sessions on her own and then scheduled a
joint therapy session with mg to specifically “discuss the rape” in early 2007.

lsb testified, again, unequivocally, that during
this specific session, 18 years ago, set to discuss the “rape”, and where they
discussed the rape “at length”, the therapist asked mg directly if he had
“taken” lsb. she testified he responded with “yes, i took you” and he apologized
for hurting her. she testified mg banged the arms of his chair, he went to the
door, he put on his shoes, and he came back to the chair before he made the
admission. she also testified “take” referred to the rape of december 2006.

lsb’s testimony included when the admission was
made, in response to what question, by whom, where, and when, in addition to a
description of mg’s physical choreography during the making of the admission. she
testified the only people in the room were mg, the therapist and herself.

the evidence provides the context for the
admission to be a joint therapy session in early 2007. the session was scheduled
to discuss a rape allegation of december 2006, the same rape allegation at
issue at this trial. the therapist confronted mg with the rape accusation, and
the admission is made in response to the accusation.

in this case, the context is sufficient to give
meaning to the words alleged to have been said that is non-speculative in light
of all the evidence. the admission evidence is relevant to the core issue at
trial of the december 2006 sexual assault charge. the probative value, given
the relevance to the issue at trial, outweighs the prejudicial effect.

counsel’s submissions that this partial conversation
alleged to have taken place 18 years ago, in a disputed context and for a
disputed purpose, and without specific details about the “lengthy” discussion
of this rape, will be relevant to the weight of this incomplete admission utterance,
but they are not persuasive on the issue of whether the admission evidence is
admissible.
vi.
conclusion

the admission evidence that mg said during a
joint therapy session in 2007, “yes” he had “taken” lsb and that he was
“sorry”, is admissible.
released: may
5, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

transcript: november 18, 2025, pgs. 33-34.

transcript: april 7, 2025, pg.6.