source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj240/2025oncj240.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. a.p., 2025 oncj 240
date: 
2025 04 30
toronto
region
ontario court of justice
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
a.p.
before justice m. waby
reasons for judgment released on april 30, 2025
ms brosh...............................................................................................
counsel for the crown
ms khan............................................................................................
counsel for the accused
waby m:

a.p. is charged with a single count of sexual
assault as against j.t. the sexual assault is alleged to have happened on 24th
december, 2022 at the family home of the accused and allegedly occurred during
the course of a family christmas gathering where mr a.p. is alleged to have
laid on top of ms t. while she was on a sofa and ground his pelvis into her
while attempting to unbuckle her trousers. a.p. pleaded not guilty.
overview

the case for the crown is
advanced through the testimony of the complainant ms t. and her estranged wife,
s.l. and is supplemented by a series of photographs that were entered as exhibits
which depict the residence and residents and guests in it as well as brief
evidence from d.c. rescigno, the officer in charge of the case.

mr a.p. testified in his
defence and called three additional witnesses who were guests at his home that
evening; his brother j.p. and close friends and neighbours mr r.m. and his wife
m.m.

it is common ground between
the parties that the crown’s case stands or falls on my findings of credibility
and reliability on the whole of the evidence tendered at this trial.

the test that governs the analysis of
credibility in this context is proof beyond a reasonable doubt. it was
explained by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. w.(d.)
(1991),
1991 canlii 93 (scc),
63
c.c.c. (3d) 397 (s.c.c.)
and other case
law as follows:

if i believe
mr a.p.’s
evidence, i must
acquit him.

even if i do not believe his evidence
but i am left in reasonable doubt by it, or any of the other evidence, i must
acquit him.

finally, even if i am not left in doubt
by his evidence, i still must consider it and all of the evidence and ask
myself, on the basis of the evidence that i do accept, whether the crown has
proven guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

proof beyond a reasonable doubt goes
hand in hand with the presumption of innocence which is a fundamental principal
of our system of justice.

the
burden of proof in a criminal trial always rests with the
crown. the burden of proof is a heavy one. it is proof beyond a reasonable
doubt in relation to each of the offence’s essential elements. a reasonable
doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched, or frivolous doubt. it is not a doubt
based on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone involved in this trial. it is
a doubt based on reason and common sense.

i may accept some, all or none of a witness’s evidence.

to
be clear, it is not sufficient that on the whole of the evidence i am satisfied
that a.p. is
probably
guilty and a criminal trial is
not a credibility contest. even if i believe the accused is probably
guilty or likely guilty, that is not sufficient. in those circumstances a judge
must give the benefit of the doubt to the accused and acquit because the crown
has failed to satisfy the court of the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable
doubt.

in
r v jhs,
2008
scc 30, the supreme court qualified the
w(d)
instruction with an additional
prong, partly in recognition that a trier of fact “may believe some, none, or
all of the testimony of any witness, including that of an accused” (para 10).
this prong is that where the trier of fact is unable to decide whom to believe,
the accused is entitled to an acquittal (paras 11-12).

put
another way, it reflects that the trier of fact must not treat “conflicting
testimonial accounts” as a credibility contest, in the sense of deciding
whether they accept one or the other. “the main point is that lack of
credibility on the part of the accused does not equate to proof of his or her
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt”:
jhs,
ibid
at para 13.

the
burden
never
shifts
to the accused to establish their own innocence, and the onus always lies with
the crown to prove every essential element (
r. v. j.h.s.,
2008 scc 30, 2
s.c.r. 152, at para.
13
).
issues

the central issues in this case before me are those of reliability and
credibility.
summary of
relevant evidence
evidence of d.c.
rescigno

dc rescigno testified as to some of the investigative steps he took
in respect of the allegations when they were made some 10 months following the
alleged incident.
the
officer testified that this included contacting potential witnesses, only one
of whom returned his call and indicated that he did not wish to provide any
information to the officer on the basis of legal advice he had apparently
received. the officer accepted it was possible he had only reached out to
potential witnesses on one occasion and confirmed that the accused turned
himself in when and where requested.
evidence of
j.t.

ms t. gave evidence she has known the accused for approximately
13-15 years. she is married but estranged from her wife s.l. who is the
step-sister of the accused’s wife. ms t. testified on the first day of her
evidence with the support of a service dog and briefly testified as to some of
the mental health challenges that she has been managing for a number of years,
including ptsd for which she had her own service dog. she candidly explained
that she is not comfortable in social situations and does not like to be
touched in any way or enjoy crowded or busy spaces and she does not drink
alcohol.

it was her evidence that she typically only saw the accused and his
family on holidays or other intermittent family gatherings and that she was
supportive of attending the christmas eve gathering as her wife s.l. was keen
to try and rebuild her relationship with her family. prior to the night of the
alleged incident she testified that she had experienced no particular issues
with the accused prior to the alleged incident although he tended to respect
her physical boundaries a little less when he had consumed alcohol but he had
not touched her inappropriately before.

on the date of the alleged incident ms t. gave evidence that she,
s.l. and her service dog reese arrived at the accused’s residence some time
between 4pm-6pm. present were the accused, his wife k.p. and their two young
children, s.l.’s father ja. and his wife ma., two friends and neighbours r.m.
and m.m., their dog and the accused brother j.p.

ms t. testified that that people were chatting and drinking and
socialising prior to the dinner that they all ate together. she described the
general level of intoxication at the table among the other adults and her own
level of anxiety as increasing throughout the meal.

at the end of the meal a family game of cards was played and after
she was eliminated ms t. left the table and went to sit on a 3-seater couch in
the adjoining sitting room by herself with her dog and her phone. this room
was only partially separated from where they had eaten by a wall or large wide
doorway and she could not recall whether she could see any of the other family
members from where she was located. she identified herself, her dog and the
couch and sitting room from photographs that were entered as exhibits.

ms t. testified that she was the only one in the sitting room and
that after about 10 minutes the accused walked in to the sitting room,
approached her and removed her phone from her hands and tossed it onto the
floor. the next thing she recalls was the accused lying directly on top of
her and being stretched out on her back on the couch. she has no recollection
of how she came to be lying on the couch and does not recall the accused
pushing her back or any part of him touching her at that point.

the next thing ms t. recalled was the accused’s head on her chest
and him grunting while grinding his pelvis into hers. she testified that she
felt the accused’s erect penis pressing against her and after refreshing her
memory from her police statement she recalled him trying to pull her pants
down. it was her evidence that she froze while this was happening and said
nothing as she was having flashbacks to a previous similar incident that had
traumatised her.

her evidence was that her dog reese then leapt up and lunged at the
accused and forced him to move away from her and move to the other end of the
couch. she testified that her recollection of what happened afterwards was
vague but she recalls hearing her wife s.l. say words to the effect of “[a.p.],
that’s my wife, what the hell are you doing?” in a jokey tone.

it was her evidence that she and s.l. then left the residence very
shortly afterwards and then as they began to drive away the accused came
running out of the house and briefly clung to their car before they drove away
and he stumbled back.

subsequent to the alleged incident ms t. has not seen the accused or
any of the other family members. she accepted that she and s.l. had spoken
about the incident but testified that the focus had been more on s.l.’s
excessive alcohol consumption and ms t.’s view that this contributed to what
had happened and her concerns about her wife’s excessive alcohol consumption. 
she and s.l. have now separated. when asked why she waited 10 months to report
this incident ms t. testified that she had something similar happen in her own
family and it had torn her family apart and she did not wish the same to happen
to s.l.’s family as she was trying to build a relationship with them.

ultimately it was her evidence that she reported the matter because
she did not feel she could internalise this incident any longer and was afraid
the accused would do the same to someone else.

in cross examination ms t. gave evidence that she was confident she
had been playing hockey with the accused outside before the dinner and that she
was in goal. she confirmed that some of her memories of the evening were clear
and others were not and she confirmed screenshots of some texts messages that
she had taken from her phone and sent to s.l.

ms t. testified that she did not keep original chain of text
messages on her phone as she found this stressful and that she did not want to
review messages relating to the alleged incident that she had sent to her
friend a. she also testified that she did not like keeping long chains of
messages on her phone. ms t. also accepted that she may have told the police
that she had an issue with not remembering things, including messages that she
had sent and received and that this forgetfulness frustrated her

in cross examination ms t. accepted that she suffered from memory
gaps in general and on a variety of topics. she accepted that in one of the
text messages she has texted that “s.l. looked over at her while she was on the
couch during the assault and looked wasted” but testified that she could not
remember that having happened.

when asked whether she and s.l. had conflict over this alleged
incident ms t. gave evidence she didn’t blame s.l. as she believed she was very
drunk at the time and confirmed that she did not like s.l.’s drinking. ms t.
confirmed that s.l. had attended a family meeting some months later about the
alleged incident but she did not attend and did not ask her about it as she did
not want to know what had happened.

ms t. gave evidence that s.l. has apparently recorded the entire
family meeting but she did not want to listen to it. she denied the family’s
suggestion that she was making up the allegation because she had some
significant mental health challenges and had enlisted s.l.’s support.

when it was put to her in cross examination that s.l. had been
outside the residence during the alleged incident ms t. testified that that she
did not remember. she also gave evidence that she did not remember whether the
accused brother j.p. was seated on the love seat in the sitting room when she
was seated on the sofa and the accused came into the sitting room or whether
r.m. was also seated in a rocking chair next to her. ms t. gave evidence
“there could have been a pink elephant in the room and i don’t remember” and
she didn’t recall whether she had ever been in the sitting room alone or not
once she left the others guests.

ms t. disagreed with the suggestion that there was no inappropriate
physical contact between her and the accused and that all the accused did at
one point was to playfully jostle her shoulder and remove her phone from her
hands.
evidence of
s.l.

ms
s.l.’s evidence can be summarized thus. she testified that she and ms t. had
been married for a number of years but had been separated since july 2024.
there is little significant substantial variation between ms l. or ms t. and
of any of the witnesses as to the general events leading up to the alleged
incident which ms l. testified that she witnessed.

it
was her evidence that the culture of drinking is normal in her family. it was
her evidence that as the evening wore on she noticed the effects of alcohol
becoming more apparent on the accused and that he became more touchy-feely,
slurred his words and was a little unsteady on his feet and that while she
herself had been drinking she had not drunk to excess and was not drunk.

ms l. gave evidence ms t. left the dinner table during the card game
and went to the sitting room. she testified that she did not see anyone else
in the room at that time. subsequently she testified that the accused got up
from the table and went into the adjoining sitting room. it was ms l.’s
evidence that shortly after this she stood up and turned and had a clear view
of the couch that ms t. was on and that she saw the accused lying on top of
her.

she recalled seeing no other person in the room with them and only
their dog was also present who was sitting on the floor. it was her evidence
that she stood on the threshold of the two rooms for 3-4 minutes and said
nothing and that the accused seemed oblivious to her presence. she described
the accused as grinding his hips into ms t.’s lower section, his face was close
to ms t.’s and that he was sweating heavily. she described the accused
physical movements as ‘sloppy.’

ms l. testified that that ms t. looked directly at her during the
incident and seemed afraid. she gave evidence that she didn’t do or say
anything for the 3-4 minutes as she was in shock at what she saw. this incident
ended when their dog reese jumped up and lunged at the accused.

she testified that the accused got up and off ms t. and lurched
around towards ms l. and as he did she said to him in a jokey fashion, “hey
what are you doing that’s my wife”. she gave evidence that the accused then
hugged her and pulled her close and that she felt his erection on her leg. she
gave evidence that she saw no one else in the room at this point in time but
ma. subsequently came into the room to apparently console ms t. but she
accepted she couldn’t hear what was said.

ms l. gave evidence that she and ms t. left shortly afterwards but
couldn’t recall if anyone followed them out of the house or where the accused
was located and that no one said anything to them.

in cross examination ms l. confirmed after the alleged incident she
had gone over to her father’s house at some point in the winter of 2023 to take
him to a hockey game and that ma., his wife had told her she wasn’t welcome in
the house. she also testified that that she went to family meeting in october,
2023 to try and iron things out.

when asked what led to the meeting, ms l. gave evidence that ms t.
had been speaking to her care providers and that the incident arose during the
course of her therapy and that ms l.’s sense was that ms t. needed to have the
issue addressed and may have wanted to escalate things and she wanted her
family to know. she also confirmed sending a text message to k.p., the wife of
the accused, requesting a meeting. it was her evidence that she and ms t. made
the decision to stop attending family functions as they did not feel safe doing
so although she still loved her family.

in cross examination ms l. accepted that she and her wife had spoken
about the incident after it had happened and that ms t. had been upset with
her. she confirmed that at some point she had been outside the residence
smoking and that she had seen ms t. playing hockey with the accused.

ms l. could not recall whether the accused brother was present at
the gathering and testified that that she drank approximately 3-4 drinks
herself that night. she could not recall whether the accused had latched
himself on to their car as they left. it was her evidence that she had a good
view of the events she said happened but she could only place the whereabouts
of herself, ja. and ma. she testified that she believed that r.m. and m.m.
had left before the incident.

evidence of a.p.

a.p.’s evidence can summarised as follows. he identified the various
attendees and family members at his house on the night in question and
recounted a broadly similar version of events to that of ms t. and ms l.
leading up to the alleged incident.

it was his evidence that he had been drinking prior to dinner but
not to excess and that he didn’t drink during dinner as he didn’t like to mix
the taste of food with alcohol and that after dinner he probably moved on to
vodka and water as a drink. he described the adults playing cards after the
dinner table had been cleared. at some point ms t. left the table and after
the card game had ended mr a.p. testified that people dispersed.

it was his evidence that k.p., m.m. and s.l. all went outside for a
cigarette, he went in to the sitting room where r.m. was in the rocking chair,
his brother j.p. was on the love seat and ms t. was seated on the sofa and her
dog was sitting on the floor. he recalled ma. remaining at the dining table.

a.p. testified that he sat on the arm of the sofa between ms t. and
r.m. and tried to engage with ms t. who was on her phone. he gave evidence
that he gently removed the phone from her hands and tossed it onto the far side
of the couch. further to this he then performed what he called a ‘steam roll’. this was a motion that he described as being a brief, friendly, non-sexual
movement in which a person physically rolled a part of their body on to that of
another person. effectively a form of ‘jostling.’

a.p. described turning his body to make contact with ms t.’s left
shoulder and upper back. he denied at any point that ms t. was horizontal on
the sofa and denied lying on top of her or placing his head on her chest or
grinding his pelvis into hers. he further testified that that at no point did
either ms t.’s dog or the dog belonging to the m.’s bark or lunge at him.

when asked whether ms l. spoke to him at any point during this
‘steam roll’ incident mr p. gave evidence that she had not as she was not
present and was outside smoking with his wife and m.m. he denied that there
was any obvious physical, verbal or emotional reaction from ms t. and that he
was certain that r.m. and his brother j.p. were present.

after the ‘steam rolling’ a.p. testified that the party just moved
on and that there was more chatting and nothing unusual and that he stood up
and spoke with r.m., j.p. and ma. he recalled s.l., m.m. and his wife coming
back in from their cigarette and hanging their jackets up. the party ended
when people began to disperse, he recalled that j.t. and s.l. left first as
they had the longest drive and that r.m. and m.m. left at around midnight. he
denied hugging s.l. as she alleged and testified that the next time he heard
from s.l. was on 8
th
january when she sent him a text wishing him a
happy 40
th
birthday and welcoming him to the ‘40s club’

mr p. testified that he was shocked when he first learned of the
allegations once s.l. had initially raised them some time after the party. he
described attending the family meeting to discus the allegations and that s.l.
seemed very uncomfortable and that she could barely speak and he formed the
impression she was lying about what was said. he testified that prior to this
incident he had no hostility to either s.l. or j.t. and that he considered them
like sisters and that he did not know or believe that j.t. would have had any
issue with being touched by him in the playful steam rolling incident he
described.

in cross examination mr p. agreed that j.t. had not been drinking
that night. he agreed that he did not ask ms t.’s permission to remove her
phone from her hands as he described nor did he do so with respect to what he
described as the playful ‘steam-rolling.’ he denied being ‘sloppy drunk” or
having drunk to excess on the night of the incident. he accepted that he knew
ms t. had a service dog for emotional support but was unsure of the specifics
as to why. he testified that he and j.t. had previously played hockey
together and it seemed to make her happy but that they had not played on the
day of the incident and that she was confusing this with another occasion.

mr p. accepted that he saw ma. approach ms t. at some point after
the steam rolling but did not know what was said between them. he denied
sexually assaulting ms t. as alleged or that s.l. made any comment to him with
respect to ”her wife”.
evidence of
r.m.

r.m. is a friend and neighbour of the accused and has known him for
approximately 12 years. he recounted a similar chain of events to other
witnesses leading up to the alleged incident and of the various individuals
present at the house that night including his own dog lola who was present.

it was his evidence that after the card game was finished, ja. went
upstairs and he and some others moved into the sitting room and that the
television was on. he testified that that he sat in the rocking chair for the
remainder of the evening and that j.p. was also in the room seated on the love seat
after dinner and that ms t. was on the couch and they all chatted for a while.

it was r.m.’s evidence that a.p. subsequently came in to the sitting
room and approached j.t. and said words to the effect of ‘give me a christmas
hug’ and placed his arms around her to hug her but she pulled away and said
‘no.’ it was his evidence that this amounted to the entirety of the physical
interaction between the accused and ms t.

he gave evidence that neither dog at any point jumped up and barked
and that if reese had done so his own dog, lola, would have done likewise and
he was sure that this had not happened. he was also sure that s.l., his wife
m.m. and k.p. were all outside smoking when the attempted hug occurred. he
recalled s.l. and j.t. leaving shortly after s.l. returned from her cigarette
and that a.p. said he would walk them to their car.

in cross examination mr r.m. agreed that he considered the accused a
good friend and that they had previously spoken about the progress of the case
but not his own recollection of the events. he testified that after the women
came back in from smoking, extra chairs were brought in the sitting room and
everyone chatted for a while before anyone left.
evidence of
m.m.

the evidence of mrs m.m. can be summarised as follow. her evidence
broadly aligned with that of the other witnesses prior to the alleged incident
occurring after dinner and the card game. she accepted that she and her
husband had discussed the allegations and that she had taken the accused to the
police station to turn himself in. she testified that that once a.p. retained
counsel they stopped talking about the incident.

it was her evidence that after the card game had finished she
decided to go outside for a cigarette and that k.p. and s.l. also went outside
with her to smoke too. she estimated that they were outside for about 5 minutes
as it was quite cold and that once they returned, she and k.p. and s.l. went
into the sitting room and she grabbed a drink and sat on the floor and resumed
chatting with people. it was her evidence that at no point did she witness any
physical interaction between the accused and j.t.

m.m. testified that she has keep a journal for many years in which
she writes daily. it she testified that she had also noted nothing of any
significance in her journal for the date of the alleged incident and would have
written it in there had she done so.

in cross examination m.m. accepted that she may have left the siting
room for short breaks throughout the evening but testified that it would not
have been for any significant period of time. she gave evidence that there was
nothing unusual about the timing or manner of j.t. and s.l.’s departure from
the house and that the accused escorted them to the car as he always does with
any guests. m.m. along with her husband also denied being contacted by the
police with respect to the alleged incident.

it was her evidence that she vaguely recalled the accused sitting on
the same sofa as j.t. at some point and that everyone was in and out of the
room throughout the balance of the evening and she recalled no physical
interaction between the accused and j.t. at any point. she described the
evening as pleasant but unremarkable.
evidence of
j.p.

mr j.p. also described the evening as unremarkable as indeed was his
general recollection of the events of the night in question. he testified that
that he had no real recollection of events before dinner and that he had
consumed about 5-7 drinks throughout the night. he recalled his brother being
on the sofa next to j.t. but did not recall any conversation between them or
any physical interaction while he was seated on the love seat in the sitting
room. he denied receiving any call from the police abut the incident.
summary

it is abundantly clear that there are very different accounts of
what occurred on the christmas eve of 2022 at the residence of mr a.p. not
only is there a fundamental difference as between the versions provided by ms
t. and ms l. and that of the other witnesses but there are significant
differences in the versions provided by the accused, r.m. and his wife m.m. 
the accused brother j.p. may fairly be described as a marginal character in
these alleged events. he is one whom several witness’s initially forgot was in
attendance and whose evidence is most accurately summarised as “i don’t
remember”.

i am mindful that courts should not assume a credibility gap in a
complainant, or indeed an accused person, in sexual assault cases because of
inconsistencies in their evidence around minor issues which may have a
legitimate explanation.

given the necessarily high standard of proof required in a criminal
trial, it is not enough for a judge to find that an accused is probably
guilty. as previously indicated, a judge must be satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt of the guilt of the accused. as i have previously indicated a criminal
trial is not a credibility contest between the parties and it cannot be reduced
to that.

ms t. and ms l. presented as consistent and credible witnesses who
each gave their evidence in a candid, clear and forthright manner. the
evidence they recalled was not meaningfully undermined in cross examination. 
they each made reasonable concessions where appropriate and were open to
reasonable suggestions by defence counsel.

both witnesses were clear and unshaken in the core elements of the
allegations as well as their versions of the surrounding circumstances to the
extent that they remembered them, although they do differ significantly as to
the level of ms l.’s intoxication and when r.m. and m.m. departed. i note that
these allegations involve an obvious and sustained sexual assault occurring
during the course of a family gathering in a room readily open to view and
access by nearby family and guests at any point in time and in which ms t.
concedes others may have been present, although she does not recall.

ms t. was open and candid about the considerable memory gaps she
suffers from, both generally and in her recollection of specifics of the night
of the alleged incident. it is important to note that ms t.’s self-declared
mental health challenges do not in and of themselves undermine her reliability
or credibility and her evidence is to be viewed through the same lens as that
of any other witness testifying before a court. it is clear that at times ms
t. found the experience of testifying a challenging and upsetting experience
but it is to her credit that she persevered and was able to deliver her
recollection of the events.

similarly, ms l. presented as a consistent witness for whom the
experience of testifying was not easy and for whom this incident has had a
significant adverse impact on her relationship with both ms t. and her own
family.

both ms brosh for the crown and ms khan for the defence have rightly
identified the central issues in this case as being those of credibility and
reliability and that the outcome in this case is necessarily guided by the
principles in
w.d.
and other related case law.

crown and defence had both raised the spectre of collusion on the
part of the witnesses each side called. in fairness, and perhaps
unremarkably, all witnesses acknowledged discussing the allegations among
themselves. it would not have enhanced their credibility had they denied the
natural and inevitable inclination to do so. nevertheless, while there are
starkly different versions of what occurred, there is no evidence before me to
enable me to conclude any improper collusion occurred as between any of the
various witnesses.

ms t.’s partial recall describes the accused writhing and moaning on
top of her on the sofa in a sitting room adjacent to a kitchen dining area
where numerous family members are present and moving around. she is candid
that she cannot recall whether other guest were in the room when this was
happening or how she went from sitting up to lying down or whether anything was
said to her by anyone.

ms l. describes standing for 3-4 minutes and observing this
encounter from the threshold between the rooms but cannot recall whether she
saw anyone else present and described being ‘ frozen’ throughout this
considerable period of time, unable to speak or move.

r.m. describes sitting in an adjacent chair and seeing the accused
attempt to briefly hug ms t. and seeing her pull back and say “no” while s.l. and
his wife and the accused wife were outside for a cigarette. mrs m.m. also
testified that s.l. left with her and k.p. to go outside for a cigarette after
the card game and that on her return she saw no physical interaction between
a.p. and j.t. and subsequently saw nothing untoward at all take place.

the accused mr. a.p. described his actions as a ‘steam-roll’
movement. namely a brief, non-sexual form of friendly jostling that he employed
to try and engage ms t. in conversation at the party.

given
the necessarily high standard of proof required in a criminal trial, it is not
enough for a judge to find that an accused is probably guilty and that a.p.
probably did some or all of what is alleged. as previously indicated, a judge
must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused. as i
have previously indicated, a criminal trial is not a credibility contest
between the parties and it cannot be reduced to that. nor does the mere fact
one party calls more witnesses than the other imbue those witnesses with more
credibility. quality of evidence and not quantity is determinative.

a reasonable doubt can
also co-exist with a credible
complainant. there is no doubt that ms t. and her partner ms l. both presented
as credible witnesses. similarly, the evidence of the accused was consistent
and he was similarly unshaken from his evidence in cross examination. he
presented as an earnest witness and also made reasonable concessions where
appropriate but was clear and unshaken in his recollection of the key events of
that night.

while he would have probably have done well to be more circumspect about
ms t.’s comfort levels and boundaries, on
his
evidence his contact with
her was at worst, boisterous and slightly irritating but certainly not sexual
in nature and did not represent the application of anything more than transient
and trifling physical contact of an unremarkable kind in this type of family
setting.

similarly r.m. and his wife m.m. presented as down to earth and credible
witnesses who presented their evidence in a clear and unembellished manner.
they similarly possessed all the hallmarks of an honest witnesses. they were
clear about their recollection of s.l. exiting for a cigarette and when and
with whom she did this. r.m. also testified clearly as to a clumsy attempt at
a friendly hug by a.p. on ms t. and nothing more.

i accept, as do all the witnesses, that with the exception of ms t., all
parties had been consuming alcohol to a greater or lesser extent on the night
of the alleged incident. i am unable to determine the extent to which, if at
all, this may have impacted the accuracy of the evidence of any particular
witness. it is also abundantly clear that these allegations and the subsequent
trial have had a profoundly significant impact on the relationship between ms
t. and ms l. as well as on the broader family relationships.

nevertheless, given the various irreconcilable and conflicting versions
of events, i have before me and the associated evidential issues that exist, on
the totality of the evidence, i am unable to conclude that the crown has proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that a.p. sexually assaulted ms t. as alleged and
accordingly i find him not guilty.
released: 30
th
april, 2025
signed:
justice m waby