source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj465/2025oncj465.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. amankwaah, 2025 oncj 465
date: 
2025 08 18
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 48106134-00
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
dwumo amankwaah
before
justice christine mainville
heard
on june 2, july 31 and august 11, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on august 18, 2025
sandra duffey..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ben elzingacheng................................................................... counsel
for mr. amankwaah
mainville j.:

i am sentencing mr. amankwaah after a trial at
which i found him guilty of aggravated assault and failing to comply with
probation.
factual overview

mr. amankwaah stabbed carlos alfaro in the back
four times on february 9, 2024. his motivation for doing so is unclear. the
parties were mere acquaintances, occasionally attending the same makeshift
shelter set up in a public field near jane and finch, where people gathered to
eat and socialize. i was not able to find that mr. amankwaah had any animus
towards mr. alfaro.

mr. amankwaah does suffer from schizophrenia.
the parties take different positions as to whether this mental illness played a
role in this offence.
whether mr. amankwaah’s mental
illness played a role in this offence

the defence submits that the otherwise
inexplicable stabbing is informed by mr. amankwaah’s mental illness. he has
been diagnosed with schizophrenia and has been previously convicted of
inexplicably stabbing his brother, with whom he is close, in may of 2020. i
have a forensic psychiatrist report arising from that incident that concludes
that mr. amankwaah was very much in the throws of a schizophrenic episode when
he stabbed his brother. this was supported by his brother's account of mr.
amankwaah's words and actions at the time of the stabbing.

i do not have this same evidence here. mr.
alfaro was not able to observe very much in the moments surrounding the
stabbing – he was by himself in the shelter when mr. amankwaah suddenly
entered, stabbed him, and promptly departed. he did not recall anything being
said nor could he speak to any motive for mr. amankwaah stabbing him or being
upset with him. they did not have any real relationship, nor many interactions
prior to this incident.

there is video surveillance showing mr.
amankwaah heading towards the shelter area and returning from it around the
time of the stabbing, and further video footage of him going from and to his
residence in the apartment building nearby. that footage shows him calm,
composed, and acting normally. he attends the building's laundry room to check
on his laundry immediately after the stabbing. a short while later, he is seen
in a change of clothes.

it is on this basis that the crown submits i
cannot find a causal link between the stabbing and mr. amankwaah's mental
illness.

where criminal responsibility is not at issue,
as here, mental illness can still serve as a mitigating factor on sentence.
this is because it bears on a person's level of moral blameworthiness. it also
serves to inform what form of sentence is most appropriate in the
circumstances. ultimately, a sentence must be proportionate to the
circumstances of the offence and the offender's level of moral blameworthiness.

for mental health to be considered a mitigating
factor on sentence, however, the offender must show a causal link between their
illness and their criminal conduct – that is, the illness must be an underlying
reason for the conduct: see
r. v. fabbro,
2021 onca 494, at para.
25;
r.
v. prioriello,
2012 onca 63, at paras.
11-12. moreover, there must be
evidence that a lengthy sentence would have a serious negative effect on the
offender such that it should be reduced on compassionate grounds:
fabbro,
at para.
25.

neither party has asked me to find that mr.
amankwaah is not criminally responsible for reason of mental illness.

still, i have no hesitation in finding that
there is a causal link between the stabbing of mr. alfaro and mr. amankwaah’s
mental illness.

mr. amankwaah stabbed his brother in 2020 as a
direct result of his schizophrenia. i have a medical opinion stating as much,
and descriptions of this episode from his brother. indeed, a forensic
psychiatrist opined that the offence “was clearly informed by mr. amankwaah
experiencing psychosis, related to his mental illness.”

at the time, mr. amankwaah’s diagnosis was in
flux, and he had only tentatively been diagnosed with unspecified schizophrenia
spectrum disorder by the forensic early intervention service while in custody
in august of 2019. mr. amankwaah did not follow up with that service which is
meant to assist inmates with medicolegal issues.

though many steps had been taken by his family
to address concerns that they had regarding his mental health since 2018, the
diagnosis and related treatment was not stable. it was only as a result of that
may 2020 offence that mr. amankwaah’s family felt that he was able to access
the help he needed. it is also only following this offence that mr. amankwaah
appeared to have good insight into his condition and the need to treat it with
medication.

after his release on that matter, he had been
taking medication and was stable. he was sentenced to a conditional sentence
order (cso) and probation and was abiding by his conditions of release. he even
went on to find a job and was doing well.

i have received letters of support from members
of mr. amankwaah’s family including his brother who describe him as a loving,
caring, and gentle person. his sister rhonda amankwaah states that he is kind,
creative and patient.

mr. amankwaah’s sister-in-law elaiza porciuncula
also described him as calm, generous, responsible, kind and loving. she
described incidents where mr. amankwaah was the one to diffuse tensions and
de-escalate incidents that could have turned violent, urging the people close
to him to ignore provocations, stating that it wasn't worth it. she described
him as always being the voice of reason within their social group. she also
indicated that he would keep the lines of communication open and lean on her
and his brother in times of worry or stress.

his mother similarly describes her son as
someone who does not like to create problems or make any trouble with people
when he is being properly treated medically.

while mr. amankwaah does have a criminal record
beyond the 2020 stabbing incident, i accept that that stabbing and the present
one - by far the more serious offences on his record - are out of character for
mr. amankwaah. as i will later explain, the other entries on his criminal
record also align with the onset of his mental illness. but i first address the
more recent events and my conclusion that the illness played a role in this
offence.

mr. amankwaah’s family conveyed that he was
doing well after being sentenced for the 2020 incident and was stable through
to the end of 2023, when he was being treated at camh. however, in or around
december of 2023, mr. amankwaah could no longer be seen at camh given a 3-year
cap on treatment there. as a result, he began attending a clinic at keele and
eglinton to receive his monthly injections. this change appears to have
negatively impacted his course of treatment. mr. amankwaah’s family noticed a
slight change in mr. amankwaah’s behaviour following this disruption.

mr. amankwaah was set to have an injection on
january 4
th, 2024, when the clinic cancelled his appointment due to
a holiday closure. the appointment was rescheduled to early morning on january
9
th, but mr. amankwaah woke up late. he nevertheless attended the clinic
to receive his medication on that date but was rescheduled to january 23rd. mr.
amankwaah’s family was concerned about this delay and made efforts to have the
appointment brought forward to ensure that mr. amankwaah had timely access to
his medication. they called and also attended in person, after noticing a
deterioration in mr. amankwaah’s behaviour. ultimately, due to his family's
efforts, he received his dosage on or around january 16, 2024. still, mr.
amankwaah’s mental health had already begun to show signs of deterioration,
though the family did not believe he posed a threat at that time. in february,
the family voiced concerns about mr. amankwaah’s behaviour to the medical
professionals and inquired about any medication change. the doctors advised
that the medication was the same.

it is in this context that the 2024 stabbing of
mr. alfaro occurred. mr. amankwaah’s conduct around the time of the incident,
as reflected by the video surveillance introduced at trial, does not detract
from my finding that his mental illness was an underlying reason for the
assault. it is not necessarily the case that auditory hallucinations or
paranoid delusions, as mr. amankwaah experienced in 2020, translates into overt
actions that could be perceived on limited video-surveillance footage that does
not include audio.

there was no other reason that i can find for
this senseless attack. based on his character and the circumstances surrounding
the disruption in mr. amankwaah’s medical treatment – including the delay in
his medication being administered, and the resulting impact on his mental
health that his family observed – i accept that the offence was directly linked
to his mental health condition.

the evidence on which i make this finding here
is akin to that which was presented in mr. fabbro’s case – in particular how he
was behaving leading up to the incident – where the same finding was made: see
fabbro,
at paras.
24-27.
aggravating and mitigating factors

i then turn to balancing this mitigating
circumstance with other aggravating and mitigating factors that exist in this
case, and first consider the impact of this offence on the victim mr. alfaro.
aggravating considerations

mr. alfaro was given the opportunity but
declined to present a victim impact statement. i did hear from him during this
trial and received in evidence his medical records in relation to this
incident. he suffered four wounds to the back and required stitches. luckily,
they did not pierce any internal organs and were not life-threatening. he was
able to walk to the roadway to call 911 after the stabbing and remained alert
and talkative at the hospital.

the incident would of course have had a
significant impact on him nonetheless, and he testified to it having had a
psychological impact on him beyond the physical impact. but the crown accepts
that the injuries occasioned are not aggravating in nature and are indeed at
the lower end of the range of the injuries typically sustained on charges of
aggravated assault.

the applicable range for this offence already
accounts for injuries occasioned, as aggravated injuries constitute an element
of the offence. i therefore agree that the injuries occasioned in this case, as
serious as they were, do not weigh on the aggravating side of the balance when
determining the appropriate sentence in this case, as acknowledged by the
crown.

in terms of aggravating factors, the crown
submits that i should account for the fact that there was no element of
self-defence or provocation. this is reflected by the context in which the
assault took place - that is, immediately after mr. amankwaah entered the
shelter with no evidence of any conflict between him and mr. alfaro - and based
on the location of the wounds, which were in mr. alfaro’s back. the
circumstances of the offence indeed show that mr. alfaro was defenceless and
did not provoke mr. amankwaah or engage in any physical altercation with him,
and i accept this as aggravating.

the crown adds that i can infer some element of
planning or considered decision-making given the surveillance evidence which
shows mr. amankwaah leaving his apartment in the direction of the shelter,
being gone for approximately 8 mins, then returning to his apartment building –
suggesting that he only left the apartment to commit the stabbing. it argues
that this was not a spontaneous or in-the-moment decision.

the evidence is that mr. amankwaah was at the
shelter earlier in the day and that he had been there at the same time as mr.
alfaro. however, this was apparently several hours earlier, such that mr.
amankwaah could not have known that he would still find mr. alfaro there when
he returned shortly after 8 pm. other than one individual who was not mr.
alfaro, no one resided in the shelter. i also did not find that there had been
any conflict between them earlier in the day.

moreover, i do not know whether mr. amankwaah
only retrieved the knife at the time he committed the stabbing (from which i
could infer that he retrieved it for that purpose), or whether he was already
carrying it on him for other purposes. while it is a small slicing knife
typically used in the kitchen, it had a plastic cover protecting the blade when
it was seized, which would make it safer to carry around without cutting
oneself.

ultimately, while the evidence suggests that mr.
amankwaah likely decided to attend the shelter for the purpose of stabbing
someone, and perhaps mr. alfaro specifically, such that there may have been
some, albeit limited planning, i am unable to find that beyond a reasonable
doubt. in any event, given my finding of a causal link between mr. amankwaah’s
mental illness and the stabbing, that is the more consequential feature of how
this stabbing came about, as it relates to mr. amankwaah’s state of mind.

still, as pointed out by the court in
r. v.
kavinsky,
2017 onsc 3792, at para.
28:
numerous cases
have emphasized … the need for heightened denunciation and deterrence to
address the growing problem of people carrying and resorting to weapons, and
knives in particular, with predictable violent and life-threatening
consequences.

certainly, there was no good reason for mr.
amankwaah to be walking outside with that knife on february 9, 2024, and that
fact is aggravating in the circumstances of this case.

this aggravating factor is related to the fact
that mr. amankwaah was in possession of the knife contrary to a court-imposed
condition that he not possess any weapons. while i am sentencing mr. amankwaah
for breaching this term of his probation, i am effectively treating this
circumstance as an additional aggravating factor given that i intend to have mr.
amankwaah serve his sentence on the breach of probation concurrently with the
sentence on the aggravated assault charge: see
r. v. mccue,
 o.j.
no. 6381 (c.a.);
r. v. fortune,
2024 onca 269, at paras.
31 and 33.

i am doing so given my assessment that these
offences arise out of the same behaviour or delict. indeed, the knife is
otherwise a kitchen knife, and there is no indication that mr. amankwaah possessed
it as a weapon prior to using it to stab mr. alfaro on february 9, 2024. he
informed the police that he owned a knife to cut things like fruit. he attended
the shelter where the stabbing occurred from his apartment, a short distance
away. this is different from the circumstances that existed in
r. v. fortune,
where the offender had two knives on him while residing in a shelter. the
circumstances of that case better justified treating the breach as “a different
invasion of a ‘protected societal interest’” (para. 31).

the key aggravating feature here is mr. amankwaah’s
criminal record, including the related incident of assault causing bodily harm
in relation to his brother. this incident occurred in may of 2020, at which
time he stabbed his brother with a pair of scissors.

mr. amankwaah has also been convicted of
assaults, uttering threats, and fail to comply charges. all entries are from
2019.

as reported by the forensic psychiatrist who
assessed mr. amankwaah in 2021, there had been earlier apprehensions under the
mental
health act. at the time, mr. amankwaah was supported financially by the
ontario disability support program due to a diagnosis of psychosis.

mr. amankwaah reported having first experienced
symptoms of a mental illness in 2019 while in custody at the toronto south
detention centre (tsdc). shortly before that time, mr. amankwaah’s mother had
called the police to have mr. amankwaah brought to the hospital as she did not
believe he was ok. according to the forensic psychiatric report filed in
evidence, he was housed in the mental health assessment unit at the tsdc around
that time in 2019. that is when he was first prescribed an antipsychotic
medication, which he described as helping a lot.

records from humber river regional hospital
referenced in the psychiatric report also indicate that in january of 2020, mr.
amankwaah reported to them that he had been hearing voices for a year. his
sister and mother at that time reported that the decline had started two years
prior. similarly, richmond amankwaah informed the psychiatrist in early 2021
that his brother's mental health issues had begun two and a half years earlier.

mr. amankwaah's criminal record appears to align
with the onset of his mental health symptoms. both started in or around 2018,
when mr. amankwaah was in his mid-twenties.

when interviewed by the forensic psychiatrist in
or around 2021, mr. amankwaah also addressed some of his past charges. in
respect of the utter threat charge, he could not recall what he had said to the
superintendent of his building, who was the victim of the threat. as for an
assault that occurred while he was in custody in 2019, he explained that he
believed the person in his cell was going to attack him.

the lack of recall and belief that he was being
attacked align with the offences being informed by his mental illness. indeed,
mr. amankwaah similarly could not recall another threatening episode he had
towards his brother in january of 2020. shortly before the altercation at the
central east correctional centre, he had requested to see a physician due to
mental health concerns.

in his april 2021 report, the forensic
psychiatrist also opines that mr. amankwaah “accrued his legal problems
following the onset of illness.”

the crown submits that mr. amankwaah’s related
criminal record and the fact that this was an unprovoked attack should
translate into a sentence at the high end of the range set out in
r. v.
tourville,
2011 onsc 1677, at para.
30.

the high end of the range identified there is 4
to 6 years in the penitentiary. justice code in that case identified this range
as applying to recidivists with serious prior records. it also generally
applies to unprovoked or premeditated assaults, where there is no element of
consent or self-defence. the crown submits that these are either/or scenarios,
and that we have both in this case.

while true, i must also account for a number of
mitigating factors, including mr. amankwaah’s mental health. the fact that his
mental illness also informs his prior criminal history – which is not overly
extensive and began in 2019 – should also be borne in mind.

ultimately, i must ensure proportionality. this
means that the sentence in a given case may well fall outside the generally
applicable range, as recognized on many occasions by the scc. as set out in
r.
v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at para.
57:
sentencing
ranges are nothing more than summaries of the minimum and maximum sentences
imposed in the past, which serve in any given case as guides for the
application of all the relevant principles and objectives. however, they should
not be considered "averages", let alone straitjackets, but should
instead be seen as historical portraits for the use of sentencing judges, who
must still exercise their discretion in each case.

turning then to the mitigating factors in this
case.
mitigating considerations

i start with mr. amankwaah’s mental health. as
indicated, there is a clear causal link between his schizophrenia diagnosis and
this offending conduct. and mr. amankwaah’s prior record is also informed by
this mental illness.

in this instance, there was a disruption in mr.
amankwaah’s treatment leading up to the offence. despite mr. amankwaah and his
family’s best efforts at getting his injection at the regular interval, it was
delayed by nearly two weeks. this can have a detrimental impact on a patient's
stability, as it did here. his family indeed observed a mental decline at the
time, which persisted even after mr. amankwaah finally received his regular
medication dosage.

the crown also accepts the defence submission
that residents of the community in which mr. amankwaah resides, at jane and
finch in toronto, face disadvantages when it comes to medical care including –
and perhaps in particular – mental health care. mr. amankwaah’s brother,
richmond amankwaah, explains that the resources in the community where they
were raised and where mr. amankwaah resides are very much lacking, but they
have done their part to get help for their brother despite the obstacles. the
existence of such obstacles appears to be borne out by what happened here.

i also accept that the time that mr. amankwaah
has spent to date in custody is taking a toll on him. he clearly finds it
onerous. the conditions at the toronto south, which i further describe below,
would have a serious negative effect on almost any inmate. those effects would
no doubt be more pronounced on a person like mr. amankwaah who is trying to
contend with a severe mental illness. while there are regrettably many
individuals suffering from serious mental illnesses in ontario’s detention
centres, jail is not deemed to be a place most suited for their needs, a point
made by mr. amankwaah’s mother in her letter to the court. she conveys that mr.
amankwaah’s doctor is aware of the situation and is willing to help further
once he is released.

i accept that mr. amankwaah would be better
supported by his family outside of custody, and that a lengthy sentence would
have a severe negative effect on him.

a second mitigating factor is the insight mr.
amankwaah has regarding his illness and the need for treatment, and his
acceptance of treatment and medication. this is tied to the very strong family
support that mr. amankwaah benefits from.

this is important when it comes to assessing how
mr. amankwaah’s mental health situation should be accounted for on this
sentencing, given the various goals of sentencing i have to account for,
including the protection of the public.

indeed, while the case law is clear that in
circumstances like the present one, the fact that mental health had a role to
play in the offence is mitigating, one can certainly question what is to be
done when it also means that the offender presents a risk to society. i must of
course consider the person's rehabilitative prospects, and both insight and
family support is an extremely important component of that.

here, i have evidence that mr. amankwaah has
continued treatment and accepted medication to address his mental illness
during his time in custody.

while he also accepted treatment prior to this
offence, it is apparent that he did not fully adhere to the recommendations of
medical practitioners in the lead up to the offence. he diligently persisted in
taking his medication, but the recommended course of treatment also included
abstaining from cannabis.

i heard evidence at trial that mr. amankwaah did
not do that. indeed, he smoked marijuana on the day in question, and may have
consumed alcohol. this likely worsened his mental health symptoms. at the
relevant time, he had been doing well and had been able to get a job. after
years of stability, he gave himself some leeway. he must now recognize that
this is an ongoing battle, and that he can never let his guard down. he has
acknowledged that he cannot be on substances when treating his illness.

i accept counsel's submission that mr. amankwaah
is a young man still dealing with the consequences of a life-changing
diagnosis. he has acknowledged his error in regards to his cannabis use.

this incident ought to be a wake-up call for mr.
amankwaah and a clear reminder that he must strictly adhere to doctors’ advice,
or he risks jeopardizing his mental stability.

mr. amankwaah appears to have a better
appreciation of this, though there is still a need for improvement. during this
sentencing process, the parties obtained records from the institution where mr.
amankwaah is currently detained which show that while he has ultimately
consistently accepted his monthly anti-psychotic injections, he has had some
reservations on a few occasions which has led to some delays in the medication
being administered.

this is concerning given the detrimental impact
that even delaying or disrupting the regular intervals at which the medication
ought to be administered can have on mr. amankwaah’s mental health, as demonstrated
by what happened in this case.

mr. amankwaah appears to have had some concerns
or questions with respect to the injections but seems to appreciate that he
needs to treat his affliction. i understand that he is now prescribed daily
oral medication, as opposed to monthly injections. i have no indication that he
has expressed any resistance to taking this form of medication. the fact of the
matter is that prior to this incident, mr. amankwaah took his medication as
directed. his brother wrote that mr. amankwaah has always done his part to make
sure he got his medical treatment as required. i have no reason to believe that
he would altogether want to stop that at this juncture.

still, this new form of treatment may require
enhanced supervision by his family, to ensure that mr. amankwaah takes it
daily. on the other hand, it may prove easier to access and administer
consistently. and it may be that a decision is made to revert back to
injections. either way, i have confidence that mr. amankwaah’s family will take
steps to ensure that he is consistently taking his medication and that it is
the right one for him, to better his rehabilitation. they are now on high alert
for indicia of mental deterioration and will be less hesitant to take the
necessary steps in the face of it.

indeed, mr. amankwaah has strong supports in his
mother, with whom he resides, and in his sister, his brother and his
sister-in-law, with whom he is very close.

mr. amankwaah’s brother, richmond amankwaah, has
consistently attended court on this matter which has had a prolonged history.
he also frequently visits his brother, as does his mother whom i understand
visits him on a weekly basis since his arrest in february of 2024. she works as
a personal support worker. they are both present today.

mr. amankwaa’s sister wrote that the family has
a comprehensive plan to assist mr. amankwaah in his rehabilitation. this plan
includes psychiatric treatment, therapy sessions, ensuring he has a structured
program and he is attending all appointments and taking his medication, and
working on his sleeping patterns, his diet and fitness goals.

all are very much attuned to mr. amankwaah’s
circumstances and his mental health, and they will continue their support –
indeed increase it – upon his release. they know that he needs their support,
and they are there for him. i have witnessed this myself. more importantly,
they know that he needs unwavering support from mental health professionals,
and they will be there to ensure he gets it.

it is true that mr. amankwaah also benefitted
from this support when this offence took place. but while the family was
attuned to mr. amankwaah’s needs and the change in his behaviour, they did not
believe at that juncture that he presented a risk to the public. they now know
better. based on their continued engagement with this matter and the insight
they demonstrated in their letters to the court, i am confident that they will
not take any risks in the future. richmond amankwaah wrote that they will be
making sure that mr. amankwaah “receives adequate care and medication to ensure
public safety to the highest degree.” the forensic report filed in evidence
recounts mr. amankwaah’s psychiatric history and makes plain the fact that mr.
amankwaah’s family has not hesitated to alert the police and physicians when
they were concerned about mr. amankwaah’s mental health. i also heard at trial
that mr. amankwaah’s mother did not keep any knives at home. she will no doubt
seek to ensure that mr. amankwaah also does not keep any knife going forward.

on this occasion, the family’s persistent
efforts did lead to mr. amankwaah getting his medication but it was too late,
as he had begun to descend in a downward spiral. they are very much aware that
there is no leeway here or room for error or delay. i accept that they will be
doubly vigilant when it comes to ensuring prompt medical attention and
treatment.

in this context, mr. amankwaah has good
prospects of rehabilitation.

i also find as mitigating that mr. amankwaah is
generally of good character.

as set out above, his mental illness informs his
criminal record. and while this record is aggravating, it does not entirely
define him.

when he is stable, mr. amankwaah tries to lead a
prosocial life. he has been employed and indeed the resume that was seized in
the context of this investigation shows his efforts at leading a productive
life. his family’s attestations of his character suggest that he is generally a
kind, loving and respectful person, one that doesn't seek trouble and tends to
diffuse situations and avoid fights.

this in fact aligns with how the witnesses in
this case described him. mr. morales described him as a good boy, a very good
person, and someone who doesn’t drink much. mr. soto-gonzales’ and mr. obaga’s
evidence did not detract from this description. unlike others at the makeshift
shelter, he was not perceived as a troublemaker.

i then turn to mr. amankwaah’s pre-trial and
pre-sentence custody, and the conditions of this detention.

counsel for mr. amankwaah filed the lockdown
records for his time in custody up to april 1, 2025. to that date, which
encompasses just over a year, mr. amankwaah had experienced 95 lockdowns – the
equivalent of more than three months of that time. almost all were due to staff
shortages.

the implications of a lockdown are significant.
they mean that inmates have restricted access to rehabilitation programs; fresh
air; showers; cleaning products; laundry; visits and telephone calls with loved
ones; as well as meetings and calls with their lawyers.

as explained by justice molloy in
r. v.
shaikh and tanoli,
2024 onsc 774, at paras.
72
and ff., “inmates are locked
up in small spaces for hours, sometimes days on end. prison is already an
anxiety producing environment. the lockdowns have the impact of exacerbating
these problems and tensions frequently spill over into actual conflicts.”

several judges of the ontario superior court
have decried the conditions of detention at the tsdc, where mr. amankwaah has
been in custody.

at paras. 75 to 77 of
shaikh, justice
molloy further described that:
the toronto
south cells are solid concrete. there are no windows. there is no yard. there
is merely a small area off the cell block which is bounded by concrete, and
uncovered at the very top, so there is some air that can come in that way.
during lockdowns, even that "privilege" is lost.
medical care
for inmates housed in these institutions is also inadequate, particularly
during periods of lockdown.
these
conditions are not humane.

leaving aside his mental illness, in this
particular case, mr. amankwaah required medical attention for his teeth. he had
braces when he was arrested and was unable to have them removed when they were
due to be removed. if braces stay on too long, they will cause permanent damage
to his teeth. mr. amankwaah made a request regarding this issue but it was left
unaddressed. on january 23, 2025, at counsel’s request, i endorsed mr.
amankwaah’s warrant of remand for medical attention for his teeth. the
institutional records obtained by the parties more recently showed that nothing
had yet been done in that regard.

certainly, as the crown points out, orthodontic
care is not a type of care that inmates benefit from. indeed, such care is not
subsidized by the government for the general population either. but this is not
a situation where mr. amankwaah sought to commence orthodontic treatment while
in custody – that would not be a realistic expectation to have of carceral
authorities. rather, having commenced treatment outside of custody, he
eventually required it to be addressed and took steps to address it to avoid
damage to his health. nothing was done other than mr. amankwaah recently being
told that he would see a dentist at some point in time. he was previously
advised by a doctor that they could not remove the braces at the institution.
counsel submits that this failure to provide mr. amankwaah with needed health
care should mitigate his sentence.

i consider this factor in assessing the overall
mitigation effect of mr. amankwaah’s conditions of detention on his ultimate
sentence. further to the direction provided in
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca
344, i think it best to consider what is often referred to as “
duncan
credit” as mitigating, rather than specifically quantifying it.

i accept that some mitigation of mr. amankwaah’s
sentence is in order as a result of his conditions of detention, including his
lack of access to needed health care, so long as the sentence is otherwise
appropriate:
marshall, at para.
52.

to date, mr. amankwaah has spent 550 real days
in custody. to address the above health issue, i very recently granted mr.
amankwaah temporary bail to have his braces removed, further to an appointment
arranged for by his family. the crown consented to this one-week release given
that the matter was not being addressed at the detention centre and given the
time that mr. amankwaah may still need to serve going forward. my calculation
of pre-sentence custody accounts for this circumstance.

at the usual
summers
rate of 1 to 1.5, mr.
amankwaah is to be credited with 825 days of pre-sentence custody. again, i
will not quantify any enhanced credit based on the conditions of detention – i
will instead consider these conditions as a further mitigating factor on
sentence.
position of the parties and final
analysis

the crown submits that a total sentence of five
years minus pre-sentence custody is appropriate. defence counsel submits that a
three-year sentence is sufficient and appropriate in all the circumstances.
this would leave 270 days to serve. while mr. amankwaah believes that he has
spent sufficient time in custody, counsel is right in assessing that a sentence
of time-served would fall outside the appropriate range.

section 718
of the
criminal code
instructs that the goal of any criminal sentence is to protect society,
contribute to respect for the law and help maintain a just, peaceful, and safe
society.

sentencing judges attempt to achieve this goal
by imposing just sanctions that address one or more of the traditional
sentencing principles that are also contained in the
code. these
include denunciation, general and specific deterrence, rehabilitation, making
reparation to victims of crime, and promoting a sense of responsibility in
offenders and an acknowledgment of the harm they have caused the community, and
specific victims in our community.

ultimately, as per s. 718.1, the fundamental
principle of sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the
gravity of the offence committed, and the degree of responsibility of the
person who committed it. this means that, for the sentence i impose to be
appropriate, it must be tailored to mr. amankwaah’s circumstances, and the
circumstances of the offences he committed.

i have considered the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances that are relevant to determining an appropriate sentence.

while mr. amankwaah is a repeat offender and
this offence was not provoked in any way, it is informed by his mental illness
which he is taking steps to address. as i have previously stated, he has good
prospects of rehabilitation. the sentence i impose should serve to protect the
public but should also not be so crushing as to hinder mr. amankwaah’s
rehabilitation. it should also account for the conditions of his pre-sentence
custody, which are even more pronounced for a person living with a serious
mental illness as mr. amankwaah is.

many of the cases that inform the applicable
range relate to first offenders or to offenders who have not previously been
convicted of aggravated assault. here, the sentence must reflect the fact that
mr. amankwaah has committed a similar act in the past. he is not a first
offender, and he again stabbed a defenceless victim.

as such, a sentence towards the higher end of
the
tourville
range does need to be imposed here, as recognized by
counsel.

cases falling within the middle sentencing range identified by code
j. in
tourville, at para.
28, generally involve first offenders and
generally feature some element suggestive of a consensual fight but the accused
has resorted to excessive force. those cases generally attract a sentence of
imprisonment in the mid-to-upper reformatory range (that is, between eighteen months
and two years less a day). that is not this case.

while code j. identified the high end of the range as cases where
four to six years imprisonment have been imposed, and the middle of the range
as cases where 18 months to 2 years have been imposed, as indicated above,
ranges are not straitjackets.

clearly, it is not the case that three-year sentences cannot be
imposed for aggravated assault. some cases will inevitably fall somewhere in
between the high and middle end of the range. in my view, this is one such
case.

though the offence was unprovoked, it is not entirely without
explanation. it is at least partially explained by mr. amankwaah’s mental
illness, which serves to lessen his moral blameworthiness.

the circumstances of mr. amankwaah’s offending and the fact that,
despite his record – which is also informed by his mental illness – he is of
general good character and endeavours to be a productive member of society,
have the effect of placing mr. amankwaah closer to the middle of the
tourville
range.

the crown’s proposed five-year sentence was premised on its
submission that there was no causal link between the stabbing and mr. amankwaah’s
mental illness. i have found that there was, and this must have a bearing on
the sentence i impose.

in
r. v. beale,
2024 oncj 36, after a thorough review of
like-cases, jones j. sentenced a repeat offender to three and a half years for
an aggravated assault committed on a defenceless victim using a machete on the
streets of toronto. the injuries occasioned were permanent in nature. mr. beale
had made recent progress towards his rehabilitation, but he did not benefit
from the more significant mitigating factors that apply here.

mr. amankwaah received a cso when he was first convicted of
aggravated assault, at least partially on account of the fact that it was
informed by his schizophrenic diagnosis, and the steps he had taken to address
it.

a total three-year sentence here in my view adequately achieves the
goals of denunciation and deterrence, while simultaneously advancing the goal
of rehabilitation and giving effect to both the aggravating and mitigating
factors that are relevant to this case. it accounts for mr. amankwaah’s
difficult conditions of pre-trial and pre-sentence detention, while maintaining
a fit sentence.

given the time already served and the resulting sentence to be
served in the reformatory, probation is also available and will further serve
to achieve the goal of protecting the public including mr. alfaro. it will help
ensure that mr. amankwaah continues with treatment and any counselling directed
by the probation officer. he will be placed on probation for two years
following his release from custody.
conclusion

this assault, which wounded mr. alfaro, was senseless and
unprovoked. it involved a knife which mr. amankwaah should not have had on him
in the first place. and this was not the first time for mr. amankwaah.
fortunately, it did not endanger mr. alfaro’s life, though it very well could
have. the violent and serious nature of this re-offending underscore the fact
that i must impose a sentence that meets the goals of denunciation and
deterrence.

but i must not lose sight of mr. amankwaah’s prospects of rehabilitation.
i must also ensure that the sentence remains proportionate to his level of
moral blameworthiness, which is reduced by the fact that a cause of this
stabbing was mr. amankwaah’s mental illness, which he has taken steps to
address. he has strong supports in place and when he is well, he is a good
person.

in my view, a sentence of three years on the count of aggravated assault
is warranted in this case, minus credit for the time spent in pre-sentence
custody. that leaves 270 days to serve. it will no doubt be difficult for mr.
amankwaah to step back into custody today, but he has a future ahead of him.

i will also sentence mr. amankwaah to four months on the charge of
breach of probation, to be served concurrently.

a two-year probation order will be made in respect of both counts,
to be served concurrently.

beyond the statutorily-mandated conditions, he will report to
probation by phone or in person within two days of his release and thereafter
as directed by probation. he will have no contact with mr. alfaro and not be
within 50 meters of anywhere he knows him to be. i understand from richmond
amankwaah's letter that the encampment has since been taken down.

mr. amankwaah will also pursue counselling and programming as
directed by the probation officer and sign the necessary releases to enable the
officer to monitor his attendance and participation. finally, he will not
possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code.

there will also be a dna order imposed on the count of aggravated assault
as a primary designated offence.

i will also impose a s. 109 weapon prohibition order for life, on
both counts.

there will be an order made that he have no contact with mr. alfaro
while in custody.

i will waive the victim fine surcharge given mr. amankwaah’s
circumstances and the time spent in custody.
released: august 18, 2025
signed:
justice mainville