source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj552/2025oncj552.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. al-dawoodi, 2025 oncj 552
date: 
2025 10 22
court
file no.: hamilton 24-47105836
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
mustafa al-dawoodi
before
justice
j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on june 24 and august 22, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 22, 2025
matthew moser and ryan dorsman.............................................. counsel
for the crown
yaroslav obouhov............................... counsel
for the defendant mustafa al-dawoodi
fiorucci j.:
overview

mustafa al-dawoodi entered guilty pleas to
dangerous operation of a conveyance (
s. 320.13(1)
of the
criminal code
)
and failure to stop after an accident (s 320.16(1) of the
criminal code
).

mr. al-dawoodi drove into a parked vehicle and
fled at a high rate of speed driving dangerously with two passengers in his
vehicle. he weaved in and out of traffic nearly colliding with other vehicles
that were travelling in the same direction on a one-way street. he then lost
control of his car and struck a second parked vehicle. fortunately, no one was
injured or killed. mr. al-dawoodi and his passengers fled on foot. police
apprehended mr. al-dawoodi. he was arrested and charged.

mr. al-dawoodi was 20 years old when he
committed the offences. he has a youth court record and a ministry of
transportation driving record. the crown seeks a jail sentence followed by
probation and a driving prohibition. the defence says that mr. al-dawoodi
should be permitted to serve his jail sentence in the community on a conditional
sentence of imprisonment order (cso). the defence agrees that probation and the
driving prohibition sought by the crown are appropriate.

these reasons explain why i sentence mr.
al-dawoodi to serve a 120-day jail sentence in a provincial reformatory concurrent
on both counts, followed by 18 months of probation and impose a driving
prohibition for 2 years plus the 120-day period of incarceration.
circumstances of the offence

on october 5, 2024, at about 8:29 p.m., hamilton
police patrolling around the area of mcmaster university’s homecoming observed
mr. al-dawoodi drive his car into a parked vehicle. mr. al-dawoodi did not remain
at the scene of the collision. instead, he fled at a high rate of speed,
driving carelessly toward main street west. police lost sight of the fleeing
vehicle, but additional police units regained sight of it at the intersection of
main street west and dundurn street south in the city of hamilton. mr.
al-dawoodi was then observed travelling eastbound on main street west, weaving in
and out of traffic at a high rate of speed without using his turn signals,
almost colliding with multiple vehicles traveling in the same easterly
direction. at the time, there was a moderate flow of traffic.

ultimately, mr. al-dawoodi lost control of his car
attempting to weave around other vehicles and collided with a second parked car
on main street west just east of ray street south. the impact of this collision
pushed the front end of the parked car into the rear end of another parked
vehicle ahead of it. mr. al-dawoodi and his passengers got out of their vehicle
and attempted to flee the scene, but at 8:45 p.m., police were able to locate
mr. al-dawoodi a short distance away with the assistance of two witnesses who
had seen the collision occur. mr. al-dawoodi was arrested and released on an
undertaking.

a passenger in mr. al-dawoodi’s vehicle took a video
on his cell phone which shows the view from inside mr. al-dawoodi’s vehicle in
the moments before the collision on main street west with the second parked
vehicle. the video was played in court and made an exhibit.
circumstances of the offender

mr. al-dawoodi is now 21 years old. he was born
in iraq. his immediate family includes his parents, an older sister, and two
younger brothers. when mr. al-dawoodi was about seven years old, he and his
family fled to turkey due to war, where they remained for about two to three
years until mr. al-dawoodi, his mother, sister, and an infant sibling
immigrated to canada as refugees. mr. al-dawoodi’s mother told the author of
the pre-sentence report (psr) that they immigrated to canada in 2015. the
family resided in a shelter before securing permanent housing. in 2017, mr.
al-dawoodi’s father joined the family in canada, but his parents separated
approximately five years ago.

according to mr. al-dawoodi, he assumed the role
of man of the house after the separation, frequently providing translation
services for his mother who does not speak english. mr. al-dawoodi reports a
positive relationship with his mother, who currently receives disability
benefits. mr. al-dawoodi works in his father’s mechanic shop and describes a
good relationship with his father. mr. al-dawoodi has occasional contact with
his sister.

mr. al-dawoodi’s mother says that he was a
well-behaved child and that he now contributes financially to the household and
helps care for his younger siblings. mr. al-dawoodi currently resides with his mother
and two younger brothers who are 11 and 3 years old.

mr. al-dawoodi entered the school system in
canada in grade six. he faced bullying during his early years in canada. his
high school years were much more positive as he made friends and had no issues
with teachers. however, during grades nine and ten he did not put much effort
into his education which impacted his academic progress. this resulted in mr.
al-dawoodi aging out of the traditional secondary school system. he was
transferred to an adult learning centre, where he remains enrolled. mr.
al-dawoodi has one credit remaining to obtain his ged.

mr. al-dawoodi has completed 600 hours toward
his mechanic apprenticeship. once he obtains his ged, he plans to attend
college to complete his in-class portion of the apprenticeship program.

mr. al-dawoodi has a consistent work history. he
has been employed in fast food, landscaping and warehouse positions but his
most notable employment has been with his father in the mechanic shop, which he
started in high school and has continued consistently for the past three years.
his father hopes that he will one day take over the business. this employment
has given mr. al-dawoodi hands on experience in the trade which aligns with his
goal of becoming a certified mechanic. mr. al-dawoodi’s father describes him as
a good worker, who is reliable and capable.

when interviewed by the probation and parole
officer for preparation of the psr, mr. al-dawoodi advised that he was the
victim of a hit and run collision in 2022 or 2023 which resulted in facial
injuries requiring stitches.

mr. al-dawoodi has criminal convictions as a young
person under the
youth criminal justice act
(
ycja). he was found
guilty of the adult offences within the access period for the
ycja
convictions.
i can consider the
ycja
record when determining the appropriate
sentences for the adult convictions of dangerous operation and failure to stop
after an accident.


on may 17, 2021, mr. al-dawoodi was convicted as
a young person of assault, placed on probation for 6 months and prohibited from
possessing weapons for 2 years. on november 29, 2022, he was convicted as a young
person of possession of a firearm or ammunition contrary to the prohibition
order and of carrying a concealed weapon. he received 12 months of probation
for these two convictions and was again prohibited from possessing weapons.

mr. al-dawoodi has the following entries on his
ministry of transportation driving record:
march 9, 2023
improper use of centre lane of 3-lane
 highway (offence date: february 13, 2022)
june 17, 2023
suspended until 2:35 p.m. on july 17,
 2023, racing contest or stunt-administrative suspensions: suspension no.
 3795828
july 17, 2023
reinst-susp. expired or rescinded:
 suspension no. 3795828
october 24, 2023
fail to share road-when overtaking
 (offence date: november 30, 2022)
november 20, 2023
fail to produce driver’s licence (offence
 date: october 4, 2023)
january 10, 2024
new owner fail to apply for permit
 (offence date: august 3, 2023)
march 20, 2024
suspended until 11:38 a.m. on mar.
 27, 2024. suspended re: unpaid fine. suspension no. 4029154
march 27, 2024
reinst-susp. expired or rescinded:
 suspension no. 4029154
march 27, 2024
unsafe move (offence date: october 9,
 2023)
march 27, 2024
speeding 66 kmh in 50 kmh zone (offence
 date: october 9, 2023)
positions of the parties

the crown submits that 120 days jail followed by
18 months of probation and a 2-year driving prohibition is an appropriate
sentence. the crown acknowledges that mr. al-dawoodi is a youthful offender but
says that the principles of denunciation and deterrence require a jail sentence
because of the deplorable driving conduct and mr. al-dawoodi’s driving record.

the defence submits that permitting mr.
al-dawoodi to serve his sentence in the community on a cso would not endanger
the safety of the community and would be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing. the defence takes no issue with a
probation order or the duration of the driving prohibition.
general principles

the principal purpose of the criminal law, and
in particular sentencing, is the protection of society.

this is reflected in the
sentencing provisions in part xxiii of the
criminal code.
section 718
says that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society,
and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives,
to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe
society. these goals are to be achieved by imposing just sanctions. those just
sanctions
are to have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to
victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from society, where
necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or
to the community; and
(f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders,
and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.

in
r. v. nasogaluak, the supreme court of
canada (scc) observed that the objectives of sentencing are given
sharper focus in s. 718.1 by the fundamental principle of
proportionality, which mandates that a sentence be "proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the
offender".

in
r. v. lacasse,
the scc described proportionality as the cardinal
principle of sentencing; “the more serious the crime and its consequences, or
the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility, the heavier the sentence
will be”.


individualization is central to the
proportionality assessment.

as chief justice wagner wrote
in
parranto
“[w]hereas the gravity of a
particular offence may be relatively constant, each offence is ‘committed in
unique circumstances by an offender with a unique profile’”.


section 718.2(b) states that a sentence
should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances. this is known as the principle of
parity.

the principles of individualization and parity,
while important, are secondary principles.

chief justice lamer, writing for the scc, in
r. v. c.a.m.,
said this:
it has been repeatedly stressed that there is no such
thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime… sentencing is an inherently
individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate sentence for a
similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a fruitless exercise of
academic abstraction.


in
parranto, chief justice wagner said
that “
parity, as an expression of
proportionality, will assist courts in fixing on a proportionate sentence”.

he went on to say:
courts cannot arrive at a proportionate sentence based
solely on first principles, but rather must "calibrate the demands of
proportionality by reference to the sentences imposed in other cases".


the
principle of restraint is contained in
ss. 718.2
(d) and (e) of the
criminal
code
mandating that an offender should not be deprived of liberty if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
aggravating and mitigating
circumstances

section 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code
instructs
that a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender.

the
offence of dangerous driving encompasses a wide range of behaviour. a driver
who engages in persistently aggressive driving can be found guilty of dangerous
driving as can a driver who commits a single dangerous act, such as passing in
dangerous circumstances.


although
the elements of the offence of dangerous operation cannot be considered as an
aggravating factor on sentencing, the nature and duration of the conduct can.
the driving conduct in mr. al-dawoodi’s case is a significant aggravating
circumstance. mr. al-dawoodi’s driving conduct is akin to that of the offender in
r. v. parnell,

the case provided by the crown in support of its position. however, mr. al-dawoodi’s
case has the additional aggravating feature of his involvement in two
collisions.

like
justice garg in
parnell, i find that the intentionality of mr. al-dawoodi’s
driving conduct is aggravating. he wilfully drove away from the first collision
at a high rate of speed, driving carelessly to avoid the consequences that
might flow from being involved in the first collision.

the
cell phone video which is exhibit 1 on the sentencing proceedings captures the dialogue
between mr. al-dawoodi and his passengers after mr. al-dawoodi’s vehicle was
involved in the first collision. one of his passengers asks whether he had real
or fake plates on the car. when mr. al-dawoodi tells him that they are real
plates, the passenger is surprised that mr. al-dawoodi was “doing this” with
real plates. one of the passengers then says, “you want to go to jail man”.

at
one point, a passenger says, “court services is right behind you, court
services is right behind you, court services, they got your plates, they got
your plates bro”, to which mr. al-dawoodi responded, “no they’re not getting my
plates, trust, trust, trust, trust, they don’t have dash cams, they have to
write it down”. shortly thereafter, mr. al-dawoodi accelerates and begins
weaving in and out of traffic before his vehicle collides with the second
parked car.

although
parnell
involved an offender who was charged with flight from police in
addition to dangerous driving, the following observations about mr. parnell’s
conduct from justice garg’s decision apply with equal force to mr. al-dawoodi’s
conduct:
mr. parnell wilfully drove through a red light at a
high rate of speed because he was fully committed to escaping the police. his
manner of driving and underlying motivations could be analogized to street
racing. the risk to society is similar. i find that mr. parnell was racing
against police officers that, in his mind, could have been pursuing him.


mr.
al-dawoodi’s driving conduct on main street west just prior to the second
collision, which was captured on video, was accurately described by crown
counsel as deplorable. defence counsel acknowledged that the driving was
disturbing and scary. many vehicles are seen driving in the same direction, in
multiple lanes of traffic, as mr. dawoodi weaves in and out of lanes increasing
his speed to pass vehicles, as he and his passengers are laughing and treating
the thrill of the ride as if they are playing a video game.

mr.
al-dawoodi’s driving was cavalier. he demonstrated a reckless disregard for the
safety of others using the roadway, pedestrians who were in the area, his own
passengers, and himself. in addition to driving in this manner to avoid
detection for the first collision, mr. al-dawoodi treated his vehicle as a toy
for his own enjoyment, and according to defence counsel, to show off to his
friends.

after
the collision with the second vehicle, the video shows mr. al-dawoodi and his
passengers getting out of his car. there are pedestrians within feet of mr.
al-dawoodi’s vehicle and the vehicle that he struck. one person is standing nearby
with a dog that is barking.

a
further aggravating circumstance is mr. al-dawoodi’s criminal and driving
record. his youth convictions, which will now be treated as an adult record,
are for serious offences, albeit unrelated to driving. his driving record
suggests that mr. al-dawoodi has a persistent disregard for the rules of the
road and poses a danger to the public when operating a motor vehicle.

there
are several mitigating circumstances. mr. al-dawoodi entered
guilty pleas as an expression of remorse and acceptance of responsibility. the
guilty pleas have spared the valuable court resources that would have been
required for a trial. saving
the justice
system the time and expense of a trial has been recognized as a mitigating
factor to be considered on sentencing.

there are several factors
which
make mr. al-dawoodi more likely to be successful in his rehabilitative efforts
and thus a lower risk to reoffend. first,
he
has the support of his family. they have been present in court to
support him through the criminal proceedings. mr. al-dawoodi’s consistent work
history and clearly defined goals for his education and future employment are
also positive indicators of his prospects of rehabilitation. with respect to
his goal to become a certified mechanic, mr. al-dawoodi will benefit greatly
from the support of his father who owns his own mechanic shop.

mr.
al-dawoodi has demonstrated that he is capable of being a pro-social member of
the community.
in recognition of the harm his
offences caused to the community, mr. al-dawoodi completed 30 volunteer hours
with the muslim association of hamilton. he also completed a driver improvement
course with g-class drivers which entailed 6 in-class hours and 1 hour in-car.

when he spoke in court at the conclusion of sentencing
submissions, mr. al-dawoodi apologized, especially to his mother for putting
her through the ordeal of the criminal process. he expressed his remorse for
the offences.
i accept that mr. al-dawoodi is genuinely
remorseful, which makes him more likely to be successful in his rehabilitative
efforts and thus a lower risk to reoffend. mr. al-dawoodi continues to take
classes
with the muslim association of
hamilton to try to
better himself. again, these are
positive steps he has taken toward his rehabilitation.
analysis

the crown says that primary consideration must
be given to the principles of denunciation and deterrence and that a jail
sentence served in a custodial facility is required. the defence says that a
cso can adequately address the need for a denunciatory and deterrent sentence.

denunciation
is the communication of society’s condemnation of the offender’s conduct.

the sentencing objective of denunciation reflects the fact that canadian
criminal law is a “system of values”.


deterrence “
refers to
the imposition of a sanction for the purpose of discouraging the offender and
others from engaging in criminal conduct. when deterrence is aimed at the
offender before the court, it is called ‘specific deterrence’, when directed at
others, ‘general deterrence’”.

specific deterrence focuses on imposing sufficient punishment on the offender before
the court to deter the offender from reoffending. general deterrence “
is
to deter any other like-minded individuals who may consider committing the same
offence, by crafting a sentence that demonstrates society’s condemnation for
such acts”.


in
proulx, the scc addressed how, in some circumstances, a conditional
sentence rather than a jail sentence may sufficiently address the principles of
denunciation and deterrence. defence counsel referred in his submissions to the
following passage in
proulx:
finally, it bears pointing out that a conditional
sentence may be imposed even in circumstances where there are aggravating
circumstances relating to the offence or the offender. aggravating
circumstances will obviously increase the need for denunciation and deterrence.
however, it would be a mistake to rule out the possibility of a conditional
sentence ab initio simply because aggravating factors are present. i repeat
that each case must be considered individually.


i have considered the scc’s guidance on how a conditional sentence which
has onerous conditions, and which is of longer duration than the jail sentence
that would ordinarily have been imposed, can provide a significant amount of
denunciation. as the scc noted, the “stigma of a conditional sentence
with house arrest should not be underestimated”.

however, the scc also acknowledged that, “there may be
certain circumstances in which the need for denunciation is so pressing that
incarceration will be the only suitable way in which to express society's
condemnation of the offender's conduct”.


as
for deterrence, in
proulx,
the scc stated that “[i]ncarceration, which
is ordinarily a harsher sanction, may provide more deterrence than a
conditional sentence”.

the scc cautioned that
“judges should be wary, however, of placing too much weight on deterrence when
choosing between a conditional sentence and incarceration”, pointing to the
empirical evidence which suggests that the deterrent effect of incarceration is
uncertain.


the
scc went on to say, “[m]oreover, a conditional sentence can provide significant
deterrence if sufficiently punitive conditions are imposed and the public is
made aware of the severity of these sentences”.

there may be circumstances in which the need for deterrence will warrant
incarceration which “will depend in part on whether the offence is one in which
the effects of incarceration are likely to have a real deterrent effect, as
well as on the circumstances of the community in which the offences were
committed”.


the defence relied on three decisions of trial
courts in ontario in which conditional sentences of imprisonment were imposed for
dangerous driving even when bodily harm and death resulted.

in
r. v. boutrous,

justice dellandrea imposed a
conditional sentence of imprisonment for a period of two years less a day
followed by a 24-month probation order. the offender was driving co-workers
home on her thirty-minute break. she drove at speeds of more than two times the
posted speed limit of 60 km/hr. when the driver of another vehicle initiated a
u-turn, ms. boutrous struck the driver’s side of his vehicle. he was pronounced
deceased at the scene. ms. boutrous’ vehicle was traveling at 151 km/hr when
she struck the deceased’s vehicle. one of ms. boutrous’ passengers also
suffered injuries from which she recovered.

ms. boutrous entered a guilty plea to dangerous
operation causing death, and a
gardiner
hearing was conducted in
relation to certain facts. it was not disputed that speed was the only factor
which made ms. boutrous’ driving dangerous. she was 18 years old at the time of
the offence. she had no criminal record or driving violations. justice
dellandrea noted that, “[t]he catastrophic consequences of her offending were
the result of but a few minutes of horrendously bad judgment, and excessive
speed. she was hurrying to help her friends, and in the process she took
another human life”.


mr. al-dawoodi’s case lacks the aggravating factors
in
boutrous
of a death and bodily injuries. however, the driving conduct
in
boutrous
is limited to excessive speed, which is distinguishable from
mr. al-dawoodi’s persistently aggressive driving even after his collision with
the first parked vehicle.
boutrous
also lacks the aggravating
circumstance of a criminal record and
hta
record. mr. al-dawoodi was not
rushing to help anyone.

in
r. v. beedawia,

the offender was convicted of
dangerous driving causing death and dangerous driving causing bodily harm after
trial. he was a commercial driver operating a tractor trailer unit. again, the
driving behaviour in
beedawia
is of a much different character than mr.
al-dawoodi’s. mr. beedawia failed to stop at a stop sign and collided with
another vehicle in the intersection. he was distracted in the moments prior to
the collision. at the time of the collision, he had been on duty for almost 14
hours and failed to adjust his manner of driving, specifically his speed, to
account for fog conditions and reduced visibility. both vehicles were
travelling at the posted speed limit at the time of the collision. mr. beedawia
had no prior criminal or driving record. justice mitchell imposed a cso of 2
years less a day for the dangerous driving causing death and an 18-month cso
for the dangerous driving causing bodily harm to run concurrently, followed by
a 3-year period of probation.

the case of
r. v. da silva

also involved a guilty plea
to dangerous driving causing death. again, the driving conduct is
distinguishable from mr. al-dawoodi’s case. when mr. da silva realized he had
missed his destination, he pulled his pickup truck over to the gravel shoulder
to make a u-turn on the highway. when he conducted the u-turn, a motorcycle
collided with his truck. the motorcyclist died as a result of the collision. the
da silva
case had the additional aggravating feature of breath readings
of 80 milligrams of alcohol in 100 millilitres of blood. however, mr. da silva
remained on scene and cooperated with police and showed no signs of impairment.
mr. da silva had no prior criminal or driving record. justice conlan imposed a
2 year less a day cso.

in mr. al-dawoodi’s case, the parties agree that a jail
sentence of under two years is appropriate. this requires me to consider
whether a cso is appropriate. it may be that permitting mr. al-dawoodi to serve
his sentence in the community would not endanger community safety in view of the
steps he has taken toward his rehabilitation since being charged and the
continued support of his family.

however,
i find that a conditional sentence of imprisonment would not be proportionate
to the gravity of mr. al-dawoodi’s offences nor adequately fulfill the
principles of denunciation and deterrence. this is a case in which the
circumstances of the community in which the offences were committed warrants
the imposition of a real jail sentence.

the
city of hamilton has been plagued by incidents of dangerous driving, many of
which have resulted in loss of innocent lives and the destruction of families.
as a member of this community, and as a judge presiding in this city, i am
familiar with the devastation these crimes cause, having read and listened to
countless victim impact statements from family members who have lost loved ones
because of the senseless and selfish acts of dangerous and aggressive drivers.


the
prevalence of dangerous driving incidents in our community is a pressing public
concern which requires this court to convey the message that a motor vehicle,
when operated in the manner in which mr. al-dawoodi chose to drive, is a weapon
that can cause serious bodily injury and death. the danger posed to the
community by mr. al-dawoodi’s choice to drive the way he did on october 5,
2024, was akin to the danger posed by discharging a firearm into a crowd of
people.

the
principal purpose of sentencing is the protection of society. the fact that death
or serious bodily injury did not result from mr. al-dawoodi’s crimes was purely
a matter of good fortune. it is incumbent on judges to deter and denounce the
conduct which gives rise to threats to public safety. the message must be sent
that dangerous drivers can expect real jail sentences when, like mr.
al-dawoodi, they selfishly use their vehicle as a weapon that creates danger to
innocent citizens on our highways and public streets.

unlike the offenders in the cases relied on by defence counsel,
mr. al-dawoodi engaged in an intentional course of cavalier conduct.
like-minded offenders should expect jail sentences even when death and personal
injury does not result from their actions. having considered the gravity of the
offences and mr. al-dawoodi’s degree of responsibility, and the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances, i find that the jail sentence sought by the crown is
the least restrictive sanction that can be imposed. it gives effect to the principle
of restraint and accounts for mr. al-dawoodi’s youth, personal circumstances,
and rehabilitative potential.
conclusion

mr. al-dawoodi is sentenced to serve 120 days
jail in a provincial reformatory on the dangerous operation and failure to stop
after an accident counts concurrently, followed by 18 months of probation. i
impose a driving prohibition of 2 years and 120 days.
released: october 22, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci

by operation of s. 119(9)(b) of the
ycja, mr. al-dawoodi’s record as a young
person shall be dealt with as a record of an adult.

sentencing, tenth edition,
clayton ruby, lexisnexis
canada inc., 2020, toronto, on, chapter 1, p. 2, §1.2.
r. v.
morrissette
et al.,
 s.j. no. 269 (sask. c.a.), at para. 3.

r. v. nasogaluak,
2010
scc 6, at para.
40.

r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at para.
12.

r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46,
at
para.
12.

ibid,
at para. 12.

ibid,
at para. 10.

r. v. c.a.m.,
1996 canlii 230 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 500; 1996 scc 230;
 s.c.j. no. 28, at para. 92.

r. v. parranto, supra,
at para.
11, citing
r. v. friesen,

s.c.j. no. 100,
2020 scc 9, at para.
32.

r. v. parranto, supra,
at para.
11, citing
r. v. friesen, supra,
at
para.
33.

impaired driving and other criminal code driving offences, second edition,
karen jokinen and peter keen, emond montgomery publications limited,
2023, toronto, on, chapter 23, p. 482.

r. v. parnell,
2024 oncj 417.

ibid,
at para. 8. i am not treating the mere fact that mr. al-dawoodi
left the scene of the accident as aggravating on the dangerous driving offence
given that he is also being sentenced for the s. 320.16(1) offence.

r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5;
 1 s.c.r. 61,
at para.
102.

r. v. friesen, supra,
at para.
105.

r. v. b.w.p.,
2006 scc 27, at para.
2.

prosecuting and defending offences against children, 2
nd
edition,
lisa joyal, lisa henderson, jennifer gibson, judge david berg,
judge kasandra cronin, emond montgomery publications limited, 2023, toronto,
on, chapter 13, p. 622.

r. v. proulx, supra,
at para.
115.

ibid,
at para. 105.

ibid,
at para. 106.

ibid,
at para. 107.

ibid,
at para. 107.

ibid,
at para. 107.

ibid,
at para. 107.

r. v. boutrous,
2023 oncj 266.

ibid,
at para. 78.

r. v. beedawia,
2024 onsc 3247.

r. v. da silva,
2024 onsc 5629.

r. v. lacasse, supra, at para.
48.
for the principle that a sentencing judge can consider local conditions, see
also
r. v. anderson,
2025 oncj 407, at paras.
41-42
and the cases cited
therein.