source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj208/2025oncj208.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. nguyen, 2025 oncj 208
date: 
2025 04 16
court
file no.: hamilton 998 24 47102552
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
kevin
nguyen
ruling
under
s. 530
of the
criminal code
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on march 21, 2025
reasons
released on april 16, 2025
simon mcnaughton........................................................................... counsel
for the crown
kevin nguyen................................................................................ self-represented
accused
garg j.:
overview

canadian courts are bilingual. an accused person
has the right to a trial in either english or french. the right gives equal
access to the courts for people who speak one of canada’s official languages.
it also helps preserve the linguistic and cultural identity of official language
minorities. someone who requests a french trial is not being “accommodated”. in
the context of institutional bilingualism, the governing principle is the
equality of both official languages.

while every accused enjoys an absolute right to
access the courts in the official language of their choice, the crown can seek
to displace an accused’s choice to proceed in a particular language. the onus
is on the crown to establish that the accused cannot instruct counsel and
follow the proceedings in their chosen language.

in this case, i am satisfied that the crown has
met its onus of showing that the accused, kevin nguyen, cannot have his trial
in french. specifically, mr. nguyen cannot communicate in french and could not
follow the proceedings in french. this conclusion is highlighted by mr.
nguyen’s own recognition that a french trial would have required the court to
provide interpreters to translate the proceedings from french to english (and
then from english to vietnamese).

language rights are fundamental to canadian
society. i must be vigilant and proactive to protect them. the right to have
one’s trial in french or english is distinctly canadian. but allowing this case
to proceed in french would have undermined mr. nguyen’s right to a fair trial.
mr. nguyen’s french capabilities are deficient. the purpose of the right to a french
trial is not advanced by conducting the proceedings in french but then translating
them into english and then vietnamese, as would have been required for mr.
nguyen to participate.
legal principles

institutional judicial bilingualism ensures equal access to the courts
for members of canada’s two official linguistic communities. “the inextricable
link between institutional judicial bilingualism and the protection of
linguistic minorities, as well as the importance of these two concepts, are
reflected in canada’s constitutional fabric”:
r. v. tayo tompouba,
2024
scc 16
at para.
28. “a court should not favour one language in order to give
the impression that it is the only official language and that the second
language must be accommodated”:
r. v. dartiguenave,
2025 onca 2
at para.
75. trial judges are the “ultimate guardians” of an accused’s fundamental right
to be tried in the official language of their choice:
tayo tompouba
at
para.
48.

there is no issue that mr. nguyen was informed of his right to have a
trial in french and requested a french trial pursuant to
s. 530(1)
of the
criminal
code.
section 530(4)
thus plays no role in this case. in deciding how to
proceed, it is irrelevant whether it would be in “the best interests of
justice” to proceed in french. to exercise the right to a french trial, mr.
nguyen only needed to “assert” that french is his “own language”:
tayo
tompouba
at para.
38. mr. nguyen made this assertion in a timely fashion.

the issue is whether the crown has successfully challenged mr. nguyen’s
assertion.
section 530(1)
begins: “on application by an accused
whose
language is one of the official languages
of canada” [emphasis added]. an
accused has the absolute right to a french trial if this statutory precondition
is met. the analysis eschews any inquiry into mr. nguyen’s dominant cultural
identity or personal language preferences. the question is whether mr. nguyen
can “instruct counsel and follow the proceedings” in french:
r. v. beaulac,
1999 canlii 684 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 768 at para.
34. the onus is on the crown to lead evidence showing
that the accused’s “proficiency in the chosen language is insufficient for them
to exercise their right”:
tayo tompouba
at para.
38.

the ontario court of appeal’s decision in
r. v. deutsch,
2005
canlii 47598
at paras.
44-53
provides helpful direction on the applicable
principles and procedures. in that case, the accused applied at the outset of
trial to have the trial proceed in french. the crown opposed the application
and filed materials to show that the accused lacked sufficient french proficiency.
those materials included the ruling of an earlier judge who concluded that the
accused’s comprehension and verbal skills were “quite limited”. the accused chose
not to testify before the trial judge on the language issue. the trial judge
concluded that the accused’s assertion of french being his language was
“unfounded” and that “his inability to operate in the french language might
seriously impair the trial process”. the court of appeal upheld the trial
judge’s ruling.

even though mr. nguyen requested a french trial during a set date
appearance before a justice of the peace, i have jurisdiction as the trial
judge to determine whether the trial will proceed in french:
deutsch
at
paras.
56-57, 65-66.
analysis

i am satisfied that the crown has shown that mr.
nguyen could not follow the proceedings in french. mr. nguyen’s french
proficiency is insufficient. i primarily base this conclusion on three facts.
facts

first, mr. nguyen himself recognized that a
french trial would require the proceedings to be interpreted twice. mr. nguyen
explained that he would need interpretation from french to english and then
subsequent translation from english to vietnamese. mr. nguyen asserted this
position in his representations before me and in emails with the crown that
were filed as exhibits.


second, i find that mr. nguyen’s french
capabilities are very limited. when mr. nguyen testified, the crown put some
questions to him in french.

as a bilingual judge who presides in both french and english, i could assess
mr. nguyen’s linguistic capabilities. the relevant portion of the transcript is
reproduced below:
me mcnaughton: dis quelque chose en
français, s’il vous plaît.
kevin h. nguyen: can you say again. could – répéter, s’il vous plaît.
me mcnaughton: dis quelque chose en
français, s’il vous plaît.
kevin h. nguyen: je ne parle – je ne
comprends pas.
me mcnaughton: quand as-tu appris à parler
en français?
kevin h. nguyen: tu apprendre un peu
[indiscernable...marmonnage].
me mcnaughton: mais pas beaucoup?
kevin h. nguyen: pas beaucoup.
me mcnaughton: non. pourquoi demandes-tu un
procès en français si tu ne parles pas – parlez pas en français?
kevin h. nguyen: parce que à cause – le
langue au canada on doit – on [
indiscernable...marmonnage
].
et au [indiscernable...marmonnage].
me mcnaughton: okay. et donc – you’d need
an interpreter though, right?
kevin h. nguyen: yes.

the above excerpt is charitable to mr. nguyen. i
took notes during mr. nguyen’s testimony and listened to the recording. the latter
two notations of “indiscernable...marmonnage” are not there because mr. nguyen
spoke with poor grammar or in broken french. the notations have nothing to do
with the quality of the recording. rather, the extract as a whole, including the
“indiscernable...marmonnage” portions, reveal that mr. nguyen cannot convey
basic thoughts in french.

third, i accept the testimony of luciana fenech,
who is mr. nguyen’s tenant. ms. fenech speaks french. she told mr. nguyen that
she spoke french when signing the lease. mr. nguyen laughed and responded, “i
don’t speak french, ha, ha”. despite knowing that ms. fenech spoke french, mr.
nguyen never expressed any interest in speaking to ms. fenech in french over
the course of the tenancy. they always used english to communicate orally and
in writing. ms. fenech was not shaken on her testimony that she had shared her
french capabilities with mr. nguyen. she gave credible and reliable details on
when and where that conversation occurred. i reject an argument that an ongoing
landlord-tenant dispute motivated her to give dishonest or unreliable testimony.

before moving on, i wish to address two pieces
of evidence that play no role in my analysis. first, i put no weight on the
testimony of joseph thomas, another tenant who testified that he only dealt
with mr. nguyen in english. the fact that mr. nguyen is proficient in english
is irrelevant to whether he can exercise his right to a french trial. someone can
live day-to-day in english yet still maintain sufficient proficiency to proceed
to trial in french. second, i put no weight on the affidavit of crown counsel
because the assertions contained therein are hearsay. it is for this reason
that i did not ask mr. nguyen if he wished to cross-examine the affiant.
application

i am satisfied that the crown has shown that mr.
nguyen’s proficiency in french is insufficient for him to exercise his
right to a french trial: see
tayo tompouba
at para.
38. the facts lead
me to conclude that mr. nguyen would be incapable of following the proceedings
in french:
beaulac
at para.
34.

since mr. nguyen is self-represented, the requirement that he also
be able to instruct counsel in french does not directly apply. perhaps this requirement
should be adapted for self-represented accused, in the way it is adapted when determining
an accused’s fitness to stand trial. as a self-represented accused, mr. nguyen is
required to communicate directly with the court. it would thus be reasonable to
consider whether he could communicate with the court in french: see
r. v.
bharwani,
2023 onca 203
at para.
94.

nevertheless, i need not resolve whether the test must be adapted
for a self-represented accused. mr. nguyen’s french capabilities are wholly
deficient to meet the requirement of following the proceedings in french. it is
not sufficient that mr. nguyen can put together elementary phrases, like “je ne comprends pas” or “parce que à cause”: see
deutsch
at paras.
46, 50, 52.

even the simplest of criminal cases will involve some sophisticated
phrases, no matter how much the trial judge decants and simplifies the
proceedings. to proceed in french, mr. nguyen must have “proficiency” in
the language:
tayo tompouba
at para.
38. he must have “sufficient
connection” to the language and “sufficient knowledge” of it:
beaulac
at
para.
34. even if the bar for proficiency or sufficiency is set very low, mr.
nguyen does not pass it.


whether he meant to or not, i took mr. nguyen to recognize that
his french abilities were deficient. mr. nguyen asserted that he would require
interpretation from french to english, and then from english to vietnamese.
this recognition, in and of itself, goes a long way toward revealing that mr.
nguyen could not follow the proceedings in french. mr. nguyen cannot opt out of
the requirement to follow the proceedings in french. the proposed chain of
interpretation also raises an additional problem. even with the best
interpretation services available, there is always a risk that nuance or
precision is lost when court proceedings are translated from one language to
another. that risk is magnified if the proceedings are translated twice before
reaching the accused. the court cannot risk a game of broken telephone when mr.
nguyen’s liberty interests are at stake.

i recognize that language rights are distinct from fair trial
rights. appellate courts have emphasized that a breach of an accused’s language
rights will not be remedied by the absence of prejudice to their ability to
make full answer and defence:
tayo tompouba
at para.
42. put another
way, i would fall into error if i ruled that mr. nguyen will have an
english trial because he is competent to defend himself in english:
beaulac
at para.
41. but this erroneous line of reasoning is different from a concern that
granting mr. nguyen a french trial would
undermine
his right to a fair
trial. it necessarily follows that mr. nguyen’s ability to defend himself would
be compromised if he could not follow the proceedings.

finally, i emphasize that administrative
convenience is irrelevant to my decision: see
beaulac
at para.
39. from my perspective, there is no inconvenience to the
administration of justice from running a trial in french. we have bilingual
judges and court staff at the ready here in hamilton.
conclusion

the crown met its onus of challenging mr.
nguyen’s assertion that his language is french. it is for this reason that mr.
nguyen’s trial is proceeding in english.

released: april
16, 2025
signed: justice davin m.k. garg

transcript at p. 7: “i would need an interpreter to be translated from french
to english and another interpreter from english into vietnamese”.

deutsch
at paras.
45, 48
suggests it is
appropriate for an accused to testify on the application and have their french
proficiency “tested”.

for example, mr. deutsch could say “moi je parle français”. the court of appeal
affirmed the findings of the trial court that mr. deutsch’s french ability was
“quite limited” and that “his inability to operate in the french language might
seriously impair the trial process”.

in view of this conclusion, it also follows that the circumstances do not
warrant a bilingual trial pursuant to s. 530(1).

i gave my bottom-line conclusion at the end of argument so
that the trial could start. the crown’s case is now complete. the defence has
not yet started calling its case.