source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj616/2025oncj616.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. cosentino, 2025 oncj 616
date: 
2025 11 25
court
file no.: toronto 24-48130705
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
alberto cosentino
trial
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on november 3 and 4, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on november 25, 2025
h. clow.................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
m. setia.......................................................................................... counsel
for mr. cosentino
jones j.:
introduction

alberto cosentino is charged with three counts relating to events that
occurred on october 3, 2024:
(i)
impaired operation of a
conveyance while his ability to do so was impaired by a drug, contrary to
criminal
code
section 320.14(1)(a);
(ii)
without reasonable excuse,
refused to comply with a demand made by a peace officer to submit to an
evaluation by an evaluation officer to determine impairment by a drug or a
combination of alcohol and a drug, contrary to
criminal code
section
320.15(1); and
(iii)
fail to comply with a term of
a probation order, namely "keep the peace and be of good behaviour",
contrary to
criminal code
section 733.1(1).

the crown proceeded summarily. mr. cosentino is presumed innocent of all
charges. the crown must prove the essential elements of each charge beyond a
reasonable doubt.

on behalf of her client, ms. setia filed a charter application alleging
violations of mr. cosentino’s rights under sections 7, 8, 9, and 10(b). she
requested, as a remedy, either a stay of proceedings under section 24(1) or the
exclusion of all relevant evidence under section 24(2). if i found her client
guilty, she also sought the court's permission to argue that her client was the
victim of police entrapment, which could serve as a separate basis for issuing
a stay of proceedings: see, for example,
r. v. st. georges,
2010 oncj
243.

the burden typically rests on the applicant to prove a charter breach on
a balance of probabilities. however, in this case, as with many impaired
operation investigations, the arrest and the police officers' request for mr.
cosentino to undergo a drug recognition expert (“dre”) examination were made
without a warrant. consequently, under sections 8 and 9 of the
charter,
the crown must prove that his arrest and the subsequent demand were legally
justified: see, for example,
r. v. gerson-foster,
2019 onca 405, at
para.
75.
summary of the crown’s evidence

the crown called four police officers to testify. since the majority of
the officers’ relevant observations were recorded on their body-worn camera
footage (“bwc”), which was entered as a series of exhibits, i will briefly
summarize their testimony and what occurred before examining some of their evidence
more closely later in this judgment.

in the early morning hours of october 3rd, 2024, mr. cosentino called
the police to report suspicious activity at a parking garage. he was concerned
that unknown persons might be involved in criminal activity. at 5:04 a.m.,
police officers found him outside and well away from his vehicle. pc longani,
who testified, estimated mr. cosentino was at least 100, and possibly 200
metres, away from the vehicle when he first located him. mr. cosentino began
explaining the suspicious activity he had observed and subsequently reported to
911.

the officers investigated mr. cosentino’s claims. i do not need to go
over the details of what he alleged had been occurring in this judgment. during
their investigation, several officers listened attentively while near mr.
cosentino to understand his concerns. they were able to observe him directly
and evaluate his level of sobriety.

as the officers continued their investigation into mr. cosentino’s
allegations of suspicious activity, they soon began to question the accuracy of
the information he provided. their independent observations confirmed nothing
he alleged; rather, their investigation led them to conclude he was misleading
them. several of them could be heard on the bwc footage, wondering aloud
whether he was possibly experiencing a mental health crisis.

multiple officers eventually escorted mr. cosentino back to his vehicle.
up to this point in their investigation, the officers had not indicated that
they were investigating him for being under the influence of drugs. nor did
they suggest that they had concerns about his having engaged in criminal
activity more generally.

pc
longani testified that before mr. cosentino was put in his motor vehicle, he
was already concerned that mr. cosentino might have been under the influence of
drugs. as i will explain, i do not find that credible, and it is not mentioned anywhere
on the bwc footage prior to this moment, despite the officers having multiple
conversations about mr. cosentino’s condition.

throughout
the bwc footage, there are also many times when the officers can be heard
questioning the status of mr. cosentino’s mental health once they determined his
reports of suspicious activity in the area appeared to be false. they returned
him to his car, as he had previously stated he was sleeping in it because he
was unhoused. they did not want him wandering aimlessly around the area while
he appeared agitated.

at
5:05:51 - 5:05:18, an officer can be heard saying, “we’re gonna go back, we’re
gonna open the door”, in reference to mr. cosentino’s car. mr. cosentino is
heard saying, “i’m not a nutcase.” he, too, understood that officers wondered
if he was mentally well.

when
mr. cosentino entered his vehicle, he did not start the engine or try to do so.
at that moment, he was surrounded by at least five to six officers, and his
parked vehicle was blocked by a large police suv parked directly behind it.

while
he sat in the driver’s seat of his vehicle, officers asked him multiple
questions. i have included the following excerpts from the bwc footage to
provide a sampling of what the police officers said to mr. cosentino at the
time.
“do you have any mental health
issues?”
“look around you there are ten officers
here because you called us… then you called us a second time saying you saw
people in a minivan”
“we don’t want to get called
back in another 5- 10 minutes”
“my concern is that you might
be seeing things today… so i have a concern for your mental health”
“do you wanna hurt yourself or
anyone else?”

the
questions focused on mr. cosentino’s mental health. they also aimed to
determine whether he deliberately misled the officers when they arrived on the
scene while exploring the veracity of his report to the 911 call taker.

having
reviewed the footage presented at the trial, i find as a fact the following
about mr. cosentino’s condition on october 3, 2024:
•
at all times on the bwc footage, mr. cosentino is alert and
attentive;
•
he can respond to the officer’s questions and take directions
from them;
•
he is not defiant or belligerent;
•
he articulates himself and can be properly understood;
•
he does speak quickly at times, and presents as being somewhat
animated;
•
he walks around normally, and is not unsteady on his feet, or
unable to keep his balance;
•
he does not have noticeable or unusually “bloodshot eyes”,
although he does appear somewhat sleep-deprived.

the
officers did not find any drugs, drug residue, or drug paraphernalia, either
outside the vehicle, on his person, or inside the vehicle. there was a bottle
of prescription medication, which appeared in one bwc, but it was never
specifically identified.

pc
longani stated in cross-examination that he knew mr. cosentino was a crack
user. while i permitted this question because the officer’s prior dealings with
mr. cosentino were relevant during the
charter voir dire, i note that i
cannot assign much, if any, weight to uncorroborated hearsay evidence, even
when evaluating whether there were lawful grounds for mr. cosentino’s arrest.
how pc longani “knew” mr. cosentino used crack cocaine in the past was never
adequately explained to me.

following
this line of questioning, at approximately 5:08 am, the officers asked mr.
cosentino to step out of his vehicle. after further questioning, at 5:11 a.m.,
pc longani informed him that he was being arrested for impaired driving.
shortly afterwards, pc longani made a dre demand.

after
being transported to the police division, mr. cosentino refused to cooperate
with the dre officer’s instructions. the evaluation could not be completed.
testimony of mr. cosentino

mr.
cosentino testified during the charter voir dire. he denied using drugs on
october 3, 2024, or having any mental health issues. he explained that he
genuinely believed he observed suspicious activity, which is why he called the
police. he has poor eyesight and admitted he might have been mistaken. however,
his intentions were genuine when he called 911.

he
explained that if he appeared nervous on the bwc footage, it is because he is
often nervous around the police due to his past experiences with them. most of
those have been negative, especially with officers from 31 division.

he
had not slept well when the officers arrived, and his behaviour might have been
affected by sleep deprivation.

he
did not remember everything the officers claimed he said or did, and accepted
that his memory of the events was not flawless. he insisted that his arrest was
unfair, as he was not impaired by a drug when the officers arrested him.
positions of the parties

on behalf of the crown, ms. clow submits that while there is no
direct evidence mr. cosentino consumed drugs (or alcohol), there is sufficient
circumstantial evidence to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that he was
impaired at the time he was in the driver’s seat of his car. in support of her
argument, she asks me to accept the evidence of pcs longani and singh. they
testified that mr. cosentino was exhibiting hyperactive behaviour, seemed
restless, and spoke quickly. he may have experienced hallucinations, as what he
reported to the police did not appear to have happened. the officers also
noticed bloodshot eyes.

ms. clow relied upon the case of
r. v. kroll,
2025 oncj 296.
in
kroll,
the offender was found in the driver’s seat of a vehicle
parking diagonally in a parking spot. the investigating officers noted that he
was hyperactive, restless, and frantic, and that he spoke very quickly. methamphetamines
were in his pocket. he was convicted of impaired operation due to the
consumption of a drug. i will comment on this case later in my reasons.

in addition, ms. clow submits that the officers had a lawful basis
to make a dre demand. mr. cosentino refused to comply with that demand. she
asks me to employ
section 320.31(10)
of the
criminal code, which permits
a trial judge to draw an adverse inference against the accused when he has
failed to comply with a lawful demand. mr. cosentino’s refusal, she submits, is
evidence of consciousness of guilt.

ms. setia submits that the investigating officers lacked reasonable
and probable grounds to arrest her client or to issue a dre demand. their
entire investigation was flawed and appeared to be based on manufactured
grounds after the officers became frustrated with mr. cosentino. i should find
that mr. cosentino’s
charter
rights under sections 8, 9 and 10(b) of the
charter
were infringed.

ms. setia noted that her client was outside his vehicle when the
police first arrived, and he called them himself due to concerns about possible
illegal activity in the area. the officers can be heard on the bwc footage
asking him various questions about his mental health. they cannot be heard
accusing him of drug use. moreover, pcs singh and longani’s testimony was
neither credible nor reliable in general. they provided evasive, vague answers.

regarding pc longani, ms. setia submits that while he stated more
than once that he had reasons to suspect her client of being impaired by drug
consumption, he was unable to convincingly articulate how it was he formed
reasonable and probable grounds to make an arrest. indeed, she invites me to
draw an adverse inference against the officer’s credibility because, under his
version of events, he escorted mr. cosentino back into his car and allowed him
to sit in the driver’s seat. it was only after this occurred that the officer
suddenly decided he had grounds to make an arrest. he could not point to any
specific event that shifted his subjective view which should cause me to
approach his claim with caution: see
r. v. winter,
2010 oncj 147, at
para.
41. this is illogical, and even if true, it would certainly constitute an
abuse of process, as the officers placed mr. cosentino in the driver’s seat
before arresting him. her client effectively had no choice in the matter, even
if he were impaired.

pc longani further testified that he “knew mr. cosentino to be a
crack user”, and she submits that this demonstrates the officer allowed his
prior prejudice to affect his decision-making on this date.

she contends that i should have a reasonable doubt that her client
was impaired by a drug, and therefore, he should be acquitted of the count of
impaired care or control of a conveyance. she also argues that the officer’s
dre demand was unlawful, and that refusing to comply with it does not
constitute an offence. lastly, her client should be acquitted of failing to
comply with a probation order, as he did not participate in any illegal
activity.
findings of fact, law and analysis
(i)
charter sections 8 and 9 - initial police
investigation, arrest and dre demand

an
officer must have reasonable and probable grounds to arrest a person without a
warrant for a criminal offence:
criminal code
section 495(1)(a). the
officer must subjectively believe the person committed the offence, and
objectively, there must be reasonable grounds for this belief:
r. v. rhyason,
2007 scc 39, at para.
12. when a person is arrested for impaired driving and a
breath demand is made, this is not only a statutory requirement but also a
constitutional one, as it serves as a precondition for a lawful search and
seizure under section 8 of the
charter: see
r. v. shepherd,
2009
scc 35, at paras.
13-17. this principle also applies to a dre demand made under
criminal code
section 320.28(2)(a).

an
officer must consider all available information at the time and can only
dismiss information if they have good reason to believe it is unreliable:
r.
v. golub,
1997 canlii 6316
(ont. c.a.) at para.
21. at the same time, the
presence of other possible explanations for signs of impairment besides alcohol
or drugs does not necessarily undermine the existence of reasonable and
probable grounds:
shepherd, supra at para.
23;
r. v. bush,
2010
onca 554, at para.
57.

this
case involves an allegation that mr. cosentino was impaired by a drug, not by alcohol.
criminal code
section 320.28(2)(a) states (paraphrased) that if a peace
officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a person had operated a
conveyance while their ability to do so was impaired to any degree by a drug,
the peace officer may, by demand, made as soon as practicable, require the
person to submit to an evaluation conducted by an evaluating officer. the
evaluating officer may conduct an evaluation to determine whether the person’s
ability to operate a conveyance has been impaired by drug consumption.

in
the context of a standard impaired driving investigation, this is not generally
regarded as an onerous test: see
bush
at para.
46;
r. v. wang,
2010
onca 435, at para.
17. but the requirement of reasonable and probable grounds
to make a lawful arrest must always be taken seriously, and rigorously analyzed
when challenged by the defence.

after
investigating mr. cosentino’s allegations, the officers could conclude that he
was acting somewhat erratically. he reported events that simply did not occur.
he appeared nervous. it was entirely appropriate for them to question him about
why he called the police and to inquire about his mental health. that was
responsible police work and entirely reasonable.

eventually,
they searched his car and found no evidence of drug use whatsoever. there were
no drugs. no drug residue. no bags or containers linked to drug use. no devices
capable of being used for drug consumption. in fact, there was simply nothing
that could be associated with drug use. pcs singh and longani agreed with this
conclusion during cross-examination.

mr.
cosentino was not even physically near his car when the officers arrived, much
less operating it or sitting in the driver’s seat. he was between 100 and 200
metres away. the officers had plenty of time to assess him before leading him
back to his car. when testifying, pc longani denied having formed his grounds
to make an arrest prior to mr. cosentino being placed in the driver’s seat of
his car by another officer. instead, pc longani testified that he had changed
his subjective determination and formed reasonable and probable grounds for an
arrest because more time had passed and he had made additional observations of
mr. cosentino. the passage of time he referenced amounted to mere minutes when
nothing eventful occurred.

when
asked to explain his grounds for an arrest, pc longani testified that mr.
cosentino was displaying “hyperactive behaviour” and was “jittery” or
“restless.” he made inaccurate claims and claims that “did not make
sense." i agree with ms. clow that these are factors the officer was
entitled to consider. however, pc longani emphasized several times during his
testimony that his observations led him to
suspect
that mr. cosentino
might be under the influence of drugs.

when
he was pressed during cross-examination on what changed for him that elevated
these suspicions into reasonable and probable grounds, he explained that after
placing mr. cosentino in his vehicle, he had spent more time with him and
answered more questions. but none of the answers resulted in any incriminating
statements.

i
did not find pc longani’s answers to many of ms. setia’s questions to be honest
or sincere. at one point, she played the bwc footage of another officer, pc
graham, where pc longani can be clearly heard stating, “we will open the door”
and “check”. this was obviously a reference to mr. cosentino’s vehicle, and it
is not disputed that mr. cosentino ended up back in the driver’s seat of his
car and that officers searched that car for drugs later. pc longani testified
he did not “recall” what his comments were about. this response was totally
unworthy of belief. the point ms. setia was making, that the officer felt the
need to “check” for evidence of drug consumption to confirm his suspicions that
evening, was obvious and logical. for some reason, pc longani felt the need to
attempt to deceive me with this portion of his testimony.

furthermore,
pc longani stated during cross-examination that he asked mr. cosentino whether
he used crack when he first arrived at the scene because he was concerned about
illegal drug use. however, no record of this was found in his memo book. pc
longani could not explain why he did not note this question. that omission
would be significant in an investigation that ultimately led to an arrest for
impaired driving due to drug use. i do not accept his answer given during
cross-examination. additionally, he testified that he also “forgot” to activate
his bwcs until later that evening, meaning there was no audio or video record
of the interaction. pc longani agreed this was a breach of tps policy regarding
bwc use. i do not accept this portion of his testimony either.

ms.
setia also played a section of pc singh’s bwc footage for pc longani, showing
where mr. cosentino’s vehicle was parked. a police vehicle was positioned
directly behind it, effectively preventing movement. the video was intended to
visually demonstrate that mr. cosentino’s vehicle could not be moved out of the
area, even if he tried. pc longani gave evasive answers to ms. setia’s
questions, which were merely intended to have him confirm this glaring and
obvious fact, which was indisputable based on the video evidence. for example,
he stated at one point that it was “hard to tell if the [vehicle] could go
anywhere.” it is also notable that over 10 officers were present at the time,
surrounding mr. cosentino, who was in the driver’s seat with the driver’s-side
door still open and the keys out of the ignition. pc longani’s responses to
this line of questioning did not inspire confidence.

perhaps
of greatest importance, i found that his testimony never convincingly addressed
the most relevant question about how he and the other police officers handled a
key aspect of this investigation. why would they let mr. cosentino back into
his car at all if any of them, including pc longani, suspected that his ability
to operate the vehicle was impaired due to drug use? indeed, having decided to
direct him back into his car, it is hard to believe that the officers genuinely
worried that drugs impaired his judgment. if that were true, it would mean they
knowingly allowed him to operate a vehicle even though they knew there was a
risk he could not do so safely. that, in turn, would have jeopardized their
safety and that of the community. such a degree of negligence would be
astonishing for a police officer.

in
conclusion, i did not find pc longani to be a credible or reliable witness.

regarding
the other officers who testified, pc singh was not a reliable witness. he
answered many questions with “i don’t know” or “i don’t recall.” he relied on
the bwc footage to explain what happened and clarified that pc longani made the
decision to arrest mr. cosentino. pc brown testified that he did not make any
significant observations of mr. cosentino until after he was arrested. the
police cannot rely on observations made after an arrest to justify the grounds
for that arrest: see
r. v. beaver,
2022 scc 54, at para.
72.

i
recognize that
a
ny degree of impairment, from
slight to great, is sufficient to make out the offence of impaired
driving:
r. v. stellato,
1993 canlii 3375
(ontario
c.a.). in this case, there is no direct evidence of drug consumption. the
crown asks me, nevertheless, to conclude on the basis of alleged circumstantial
evidence that the officers could draw a reasonable inference that mr. cosentino
had consumed drugs and thus the arrest and dre demand were lawful.

i
do not agree that such an inference was available to pc longani. in reported
cases where courts have found there were reasonable grounds to arrest a
motorist for impaired operation by drugs, much more evidence has been
presented. for example, in
r. v. dhaliwal,
2014 abqb 717, the arresting
officer stopped a driver for speeding. the officer described the suspect’s red,
bloodshot and half-closed eyes, and that he was unsteady on his feet. there was
also a glass bong in plain view.

if
the officers, including pc longani, had a
suspicion
that mr. cosentino’s
ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired due to drug consumption, they
could have resorted to
criminal code
section 320.27(1). that section
states the following (my emphasis added):
if a peace officer has
reasonable
grounds to suspect
that a person has alcohol or a drug in their body and
that the person has, within the preceding three hours, operated a conveyance,
the peace officer may, by demand, require the person to comply with the
requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (b) in the case of alcohol
or with the requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (c) in the
case of a drug:
(a)
to
immediately perform the physical coordination tests prescribed by regulation
and to accompany the peace officer for that purpose…

the
physical coordination tests are outlined in the
evaluation of impaired
operations (drugs and alcohol) regulations
– sor/208-196, s. 2. these are
performed by a standard field sobriety test (“sfst”) officer. the three tests
described in the regulation can be done quickly to minimize interference with
the suspect’s charter rights during the screening process: see
r. v. parada,
2016 skca 102, at para.
34. the sfst request is the functional equivalent of
the approved screening device demand for a driver suspected of being impaired
by alcohol. it is a tool officers can use to establish reasonable and probable
grounds to believe the suspect has committed a drug-operating offence: see
jokinen, k, and keen, p.,
impaired driving and other offences, 2nd
edition. toronto: emond publishing (2023), at p. 367.

the
officers did not testify that they considered this investigative step, and i
must evaluate their conduct based on what they did and the stated basis for
their actions, not what they could have done: see the dissenting reasons of
tholla j.a. in
r. v. sabiston,
2023 skca 105, at para.
93; adopted by
the majority of the supreme court of canada in
r. v. sabiston,
2024 scc
33, at para.
1. nevertheless, my point is that they had other investigative
means available to them and did not consider them. “reasonable and probable
grounds” is a higher standard than “reasonable suspicion”: see
beaver, supra.
before jumping to an arrest on such a questionable basis, they could have
considered a lawful means to further investigate mr. cosentino and potentially buttress
their belief in mr. cosentino’s impairment, if that belief was genuine.

for
example, in
r. v. wilson,
2020 onsc 1956, justice heeney ruled that
detaining a motorist at a roadside for an evaluation by an sfst officer was
charter
-compliant.
the accused, while driving, hit a building. an officer later found his white minivan
damaged nearby. the officer approached the accused and observed bloodshot eyes,
constricted pupils, and a lethargic speech pattern. he could not answer simple
questions clearly. the driver denied having consumed alcohol or drugs. the
officer issued a demand under the former section 254(2), citing reasonable
grounds to suspect the motorist’s ability to operate was impaired by drugs: see
paras. 11-27. justice heeney then found that the subsequent arrest and dre
demand were lawful, as the officers relied partly on sfst results: see para. 36.

in
this case, my final determination is that pc longani did not have reasonable
and probable grounds to arrest mr. cosentino for impaired operation of a
conveyance. nor did he have reasonable grounds to issue a dre demand.
furthermore, i find pc longani’s testimony that he had a subjective belief in
the necessary grounds to be untrue. at most, he thought he had a reasonable
suspicion. he did not genuinely believe he had reasonable and probable grounds.
he falsely constructed and presented that belief later to justify the arrest he
had already decided to make.

mr.
cosentino’s rights under sections 8 and 9 of the
charter
were violated.
(ii)
mr. cosentino’s degree of impairment

having
reviewed the bwc footage, i find that mr. cosentino was alert, articulate and in
control of his faculties. he was able to answer the officer’s questions. he
walked normally and was not unsteady on his feet. i do not see particularly
“bloodshot eyes.”

the
only notable feature about how he presents himself is that he could be
described as a “fast-talker.”

i
am not prepared to draw the conclusion, based on the circumstantial evidence
presented in this case, that mr. cosentino consumed drugs. there are other,
plausible alternatives, including that mr. cosentino was tired, or is naturally
a nervous person, especially when interacting with police officers: see
r.
v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33, at para.
30.
verdicts

ms.
setia made several other meritorious
charter
arguments that i do not
need to address in light of the conclusions i have already made.

considering
all of the evidence presented by the crown that i accept, i am left with
reasonable doubt that a drug impaired mr. cosentino’s ability to operate his
motor vehicle. furthermore, i found mr. cosentino to be a truthful witness. i
accept his testimony that he did not consume drugs that night. while i
recognize his testimony was confined to the
voir dire, it is important
that he knows i believe him.

i
do not find the case of
kroll,
relied upon by the crown, to be of
assistance. in
kroll,
officers located the offender in his car. mr.
cosentino was originally outside his vehicle. drugs were found on the
offender’s person in
kroll,
and a crack pipe was located in this car;
no drugs or drug paraphernalia were found on mr. cosentino. the offender was
acting “frantically” and at one point placed his feet up in the air in the back
of the officer’s squad car. i find mr. cosentino’s behaviour was nothing akin
to that. finally, there were toxicology results presented to the court in
kroll
that the offender had consumed methamphetamines and ghb: see paras. 8-10, and 26-31.

he
is found not guilty of count 1.

as
i have explained, there was no lawful basis to make a dre demand. therefore, he
must be acquitted of count 2 as well. the demand was unlawful, and it is not an
offence to refuse an unlawful demand:
r. v. alex,
2017 scc 37, at paras.
48-9;
r. v. montana,
2025 oncj 484, at para.
85.

i
am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that he intentionally violated his
probation order by not “keeping the peace,” either, and he is found not guilty
of count 3. on the basis of the facts that i have found, mr. cosentino did
nothing that could constitute “not keep the peace and being of good behaviour”
in any event.
final remarks

this
trial neither started nor finished on its originally scheduled dates. mr.
cosentino, who was detained on these charges, was not brought to court until 2
pm. on the first day of trial. i never received any explanation from the
toronto south detention centre regarding this delay, despite repeated requests.
this was completely unacceptable and, unfortunately, not an uncommon occurrence
in toronto. we often face unexplained delays at this courthouse in bringing
inmates to trial, leading to hours of lost court time.

on
the second day of the trial, while the witnesses completed their testimony, there
was insufficient time to hear counsel's submissions. a new date for continuing
the trial was not available until february 26, 2026.

ms.
clow and ms. setia agreed to submit written arguments instead and to return the
case for a judgment on november 25, 2025. i wish to express my sincere
appreciation to them for suggesting this approach and following through as
promised. their written submissions were excellent: clear, concise, and
directly on point. they allowed me to make a decision for an accused person in
custody within a reasonable time frame, rather than delaying the trial by at
least another three months. their willingness to contribute such helpful
written material on a short timeline demonstrated noteworthy professionalism.
released: november
25, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones