source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj2/2025oncj2.html

ontario youth court of justice
warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the
following notice be attached to the file:
this is a case under
the
youth criminal justice act
and is subject to subsections
110(1) and 111(1) and section 129 of the act. these provisions read as
follows:
110. identity of offender not to be published —
(1) subject to this section, no person
shall publish the name of a young person, or any other information related to a
young person, if it would identify the young person as a young person dealt
with under this act....
111. identity of victim or witness not to be
published —
(1) 
subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a child or young
person, or any other information related to a child or a young person, if it
would identify the child or young person as having been a victim of, or as
having appeared as a witness in connection with, an offence committed or
alleged to have been committed by a young person....
129. no subsequent disclosure —
no person who is given access to a record
or to whom information is disclosed under this act shall disclose that
information to any person unless the disclosure is authorized under this act.
subsection 138(1) of the
youth criminal justice act,
which
deals with the consequences of failure to comply with these provisions, states
as follows:
138. offences —
every person who contravenes subsection 110(1)
(identity of offender not to be published), 111(1) (identity of victim or
witness not to be published)... or section 129 (no
subsequent disclosure)...
(
a
) is guilty of
an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years; or
(
b
) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this
subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of
the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of
failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 
order restricting publication — sexual offences.
—(1) subject to
subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that
any information that could identify the complainant or a witness shall not be
published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in
proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following
offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160,
162, 163.1, 170, 171, 172, 172.1, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272, 273,
279.01, 279.02, 279.03, 346 or 347,
(ii) an offence under section 144 (rape), 145 (attempt to commit
rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156 (indecent assault on male) or 245
(common assault) or subsection 246(1) (assault with intent) of the
criminal code,
chapter c-34
of the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it read
immediately before january 4, 1983, or
(iii) an offence under subsection 146(1) (sexual intercourse with a
female under 14) or (2) (sexual intercourse with a female between 14 and 16) or
section 151 (seduction of a female between 16 and 18), 153 (sexual intercourse
with step-daughter), 155 (buggery or bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166
(parent or guardian procuring defilement) or 167 (householder permitting
defilement) of the
criminal
code,
chapter
c-34
of the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as
it read immediately before january 1, 1988; or
(
b
) two or more offences
being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence
referred to in any of subparagraphs (
a
)(i) to (iii).
(2)
mandatory
order on application.
— in proceedings in respect of the offences
referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or
justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable
opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the
complainant of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by
the complainant, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 
offence.
—(1) every person who fails to comply with an order
made under
subsection 486.4(1), (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. a.b., 2025 oncj 2
date: 
2025 01 06
court
file no.: toronto #23-y4810977
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
a.b. (a young person)
judgment
before
justice brock jones
trial
heard on october 15-17, 28, and december 19, 2024
written
reasons released on january 6, 2025
e. stimec............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
j. pyzer............................................................................................................. counsel
for a.b.
jones j.:
i.
introduction

a.b., a young person, was charged with sexual assault with a weapon (to
wit: a knife), sexual assault – choking, and sexual assault against ms. x.x.

the crown proceeded by indictment. the central issue in this case was the
identity of the perpetrator.

the case against a.b. was fraught with difficulties from its inception.
he did not match the description of the suspect responsible for these offences
in a material way. even his arrest was shrouded in confusion, as the officers investigating
the offences were initially unsure if they had located the correct suspect. ten
months after he was charged, results were obtained from the centre of forensic
sciences (“cfs”) regarding a male dna profile constructed from a bodily fluid
sample deposited on the victim following the assault. a.b. was excluded as the
source of this profile.

despite this exculpatory evidence, the crown chose to proceed with the
prosecution. i acquitted the young person immediately after the trial concluded
on december 19, 2024, and provided oral reasons. in these written reasons, i
explain in greater detail why the crown could not prove the central issue of
the suspect's identity beyond a reasonable doubt.
ii.
summary of the case for the crown

ms. x.x. was a sex worker in downtown toronto. she advertised her
services for sale on the internet. she provided interested customers with
various means to communicate with her. she was 25 years old when she testified.

on june 25, 2023, she received communications from someone named “david”
on whatsapp.

the messages had a phone number associated with them. they negotiated a price
for certain services. these communications took place at approximately 5-6 p.m.
later that day, she took an uber to the address he provided.

she arrived at approximately 10:03 p.m. she proceeded to the customer’s
apartment and entered. he met her just inside the front door.

he took her to a bedroom and sat down on the bed. she expected to be
paid upfront. he did not have the money she was promised. very quickly, he
assaulted her. he held her down on the bed against her will. he placed his hand
on her neck and choked her with tremendous force. he had a knife with a red
handle. the blade was five to six inches long.

he told her to “shut up” repeatedly. she struggled at first but became
subdued when he wielded the knife in a threatening manner. at one point he
warned her, “do you want me to beat you up?”

the man then sexually assaulted her. i will not describe the details of
the assault in this judgment to preserve her dignity, as it is unnecessary to
explain my conclusions. briefly stated the sexual assault involved him forcing
his fingers and penis inside her vagina. he placed his hands over other parts
of her body. the parties did not dispute that these actions established the
charged offences' essential elements.

she
was not sure if he used a condom. the trauma overwhelmed her. she felt like she
fell into a dissociative state.

ms.
x.x. wore glasses, and they fell off during the assault. this greatly
diminished her ability to see her attacker and discern any details of his
appearance. there was low light, and it was “pretty dark.” she could describe
him as a black male, 5’ 5” or 5’6” tall, a “bit muscular,” with a wide face
containing high cheekbones and freckles or acne scars on his face. he had black
hair with short twists or dreadlocks. she estimated he was in his mid or late
20s.

she
believed the man ejaculated at some point because she felt his penis become
flaccid. after he finished his assault, he allowed her to leave. she took an
uber home and saw her partner. she did not report the assault until the next
day. the police interviewed her, and she attended at women’s college hospital.
she was seen by a sexual assault nurse who completed a sexual assault evidence
kit (“saek”).

before
the assault, she noticed someone else was inside the apartment as well. that
person was down the hall, past the kitchen. the person was at least 5’ tall,
with short hair and darker skin. they appeared to look out of a room’s
doorway.

ms.
x.x. testified in a separate room via a video link during the trial. she
could not see a.b. she was never asked to identify him in court as her
attacker.

the
crown next called several police officers to testify, and the parties presented
some agreed statements of fact.

pc
sirbos and pc kim attended the address where the sexual assault occurred on
june 27, 2023, just after 8 a.m. they were allowed to enter the apartment.
there, they located a.b., a teenage boy of 16 years. they also located his
mother, another older woman, and another young male approximately the same age
as a.b. the crown played the body-worn camera (“bwc”) footage of pc kim, which
captured in clear video the appearances of everyone in the apartment.

eventually,
a.b. was arrested based, in part, on the description of the suspect provided by
ms. x.x. the arrest was made by pc kim, who was never called to testify.

in
cross-examination, pc sirbos agreed it took him and his partner some time to
determine who to arrest. that was because they were faced with a confusing
situation when they arrived. assuming the suspect was one of the people in the
apartment, more than one person there generally matched the description. pc
sirbos agreed that nothing really separated either of the young males in terms
of their resemblance to the suspect’s description other than a.b. being more
“muscular” in his subjective assessment and his height appearing to be closer
to the 5’5” to 5’6” range. no one clarified the height of the other male
person.

pc
sirbos agreed that neither he nor his partner made any effort to determine who
normally resided in the apartment. when asked if he felt a.b. looked like
someone in his late 20s, he responded, “age was not at the forefront of my
mind.” he could not explain why pc kim decided to arrest a.b. or what “tipped
the scales.” he simply did not remember.

a.b.
can be seen using an iphone in the bwc footage. that phone was subsequently
seized by the police and searched pursuant to a search warrant. a forensic
examination revealed that a whatsapp account on the phone had the same phone
number associated with it that ms. x.x. said was used to communicate with her.
some of the messages retrieved from this phone appeared to confirm the suspect
used it to send her messages before she arrived at the apartment on june 23,
2023. the phone’s gps data revealed it was present at the apartment during the
time of the assault, or very close nearby.

an
officer photographed the apartment on june 27, 2023. in those photographs, a
knife with a red handle is visible in the kitchen.

cassandra
henry, a sexual assault nurse examiner at women’s college hospital, examined
ms. x.x. around 11 pm on june 26, 2023. she noticed swelling on ms. x.x.’s neck
and she appeared to have difficulty moving her neck due to pain. swabs were taken
from different parts of her body as part of the completion of a saek.

three
biology reports were filed on consent from a forensic biologist at the cfs. the
first report dated november 21, 2023, and the second report, dated
february 5, 2024, included information that ms. henry took a swab from ms. x.x.’s
external genitalia during the collection of samples for the saek. that swab sample
was tested for dna. a mixture of dna from ms. x.x., her partner, and a third
unknown male person was located.


a
third biology report, dated april 15, 2024, compared this dna profile to a
known sample of dna from a.b. he was excluded as a contributor to this sample.
iii.
positions of the parties

mr.
stimec submits the case is “overwhelming.” ms. x.x.’s testimony was confirmed
by several features of the police investigation, including the extraction
reports from a.b.’s phone, and his presence at the crime scene. he matches the
suspect’s description. his status as a teenager does not matter. if ms. x.x.
was mistaken about the suspect’s age that can be explained by the fact people
often make errors of this nature, or perhaps the poor conditions of visibility
she faced during a traumatic experience rendered it difficult to make accurate
observations.

he
further submits that the dna evidence is not a significant hurdle for the
prosecution. the suspect may have used a condom, which could explain the lack
of presence of his dna at the time the saek was processed. i will return to
this feature of the crown’s arguments.

mr.
pyzer submits that even if the only issue i focus on is the identity of the
suspect, the crown’s case is flawed. his client does not match the suspect’s
description in material ways, including that he is far too young. in addition,
the dna evidence points to another person as the suspect.

mr.
pyzer also argued that the crown’s reliance on his client’s phone as a source
of corroborative evidence is misguided. that does not implicate a.b. as the
person who assaulted ms. x.x., because it is unknown who was residing at the
residence when the assault occurred. the crown only introduced evidence of who
was located there by the investigating officers nearly two days later. a phone
can be used by someone other than its owner. mr. pyzer also asked me to
consider that some of the messages sent to ms. x.x. also suggest it was an
adult responsible because they contained references to and pictures of alcohol.
iv.
law and analysis

a.b. is presumed innocent. no one identified him in court as the person
who sexually assaulted ms. x.x.
this case is about the identity of the
suspect. the prosecution will fail unless the only reasonable inference capable
of being drawn from the facts is that a.b. was the man who sexually assaulted
ms. x.x.: see:
r. v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33, at paras.
37-8;
r. v. mcletchie,
2011
onsc 1440, at para.
72.

a trial judge must approach eye-witness identification
evidence with caution due to its well-recognized frailties: see
r.
v. a.w.,
2024 onca 564, at paras.
26-29. in
r. v. hay,
2013 scc 61,
the supreme court of canada described the duty of a trial judge to prevent a
jury from convicting on unreliable eye-witness identification evidence at para.
41 (my emphasis added):
although the duty to assess the credibility and weight of
an eyewitness’ evidence sits with the jury and, in some circumstances, the
testimony of one eyewitness will support a conviction, the jury should not be
permitted to convict on the basis of eyewitness testimony that could not
support an inference of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. in other words,
a jury should not be instructed that it may convict based on eyewitness
testimony alone where that testimony, even if believed, would necessarily leave
reasonable doubt in the mind of a reasonable juror;
see
r. v. arcuri,
2001
scc 54,
 2 s.c.r. 828, at paras.
21-25;
r. v. reitsma,
1998 canlii 825
(scc),
 1 s.c.r. 769, rev’g
(1997),
1997
canlii 3607 (bc ca),
97 b.c.a.c. 303;
r. v.
zurowski,
2004 scc 72,
 3
s.c.r. 509;
united states of america v. shephard,
1976
canlii 8 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 1067, at p.
1080. indeed, where the crown’s case consists solely of eyewitness
testimony that would necessarily leave reasonable doubt in the mind of a
reasonable juror, the trial judge must direct an acquittal upon a motion for
directed verdict (
arcuri, at para.
21
).

in this case, the crown did not rely upon eye-witness
identification evidence, but rather eye-witness description evidence. that evidence
is subject to the same frailties as eye-witness identification evidence:
see
r. v. dosanjh,
2022
onca 689, at paras.
34-36.

the crown’s theory of its case rested on the court's
conclusion that a.b.
resembled
the perpetrator. however, as explained by
justice code
in
mcletchie
at para.
72:
it is settled law that evidence
of a mere resemblance or similarity in appearance, as between the accused and
the perpetrator of an offence, amounts to no evidence of identification
standing alone. however, evidence of a resemblance, when combined with
other inculpatory evidence, can amount to proof of identification. the
existence of dissimilar features, as between the description provided of the
perpetrator and the accused, can reduce evidence of identification to evidence
of a mere resemblance. see:
chartier v. a-g quebec
(1979),
1979
canlii 17 (scc), 48 c.c.c. (2d) 34 (s.c.c.);
r. v. boucher et al
(2000),
2000
canlii 3270 (on ca), 146 c.c.c. (3d) 52 (ont. c.a.);
r. v. rybak
(2008),
2008
onca 354 (canlii), 233 c.c.c. (3d) 58 at 85-9 (ont. c.a.);
r. v. brown
(2009),
2009
onca 563 (canlii), 251 o.a.c. 264 (ont. c.a.).

a resemblance between a.b. and the suspect is, therefore,
insufficient. decades of jurisprudence have established this basic principle.
furthermore, material, dissimilar features
between
the description of the perpetrator and the accused will be fatal to the crown’s
case without other confirmatory evidence:
see
r. v. grant,
2022
onca 337, at paras.
83-87.

the
prosecution was thus always tainted by a fundamental problem. no one could
review the bwc footage of a.b. taken on june 27, 2023, and reasonably conclude
he might be a man in his late 20s. he looked exactly like what he was – a
teenage boy. that was the only evidence i had of his appearance at the time
other than some rici (arrest) photos that were made exhibits. those also
capture his youthful appearance. the confusion that befell the officers when
deciding whether to make an arrest resulted from a.b. not matching this
essential component of the suspect’s description. their confusion was understandable,
and the same issue pervades this trial.

pc
sirbos’ testimony that he wasn’t “thinking about age” when debating whether to
make an arrest is not worthy of belief. he was thinking about age and became
indecisive when he arrived at a.b.’s residence. he was unable to locate an
adult male, as he expected. my observations of a.b. in the courtroom, nearly 16
months after this incident, are that he still looks his age. it defies belief
that someone would have believed he was an adult approaching 30. while he has
minor acne on his cheeks in the rici photos, he does not have freckles or noticeable
acne scars. pc sirbos agreed that he did not notice freckles or acne scars on
a.b. at the time of his arrest.

a.b.
was a black male with a similar hairstyle who was found in the apartment
two days after the assault. pc sirbos stated that a.b.’s height was a factor he
considered, too, as the suspect was described as approximately 5’6”. however, i
did not hear evidence of a.b.’s height on june 25, 2023, or even what pc sirbos
assessed it to be specifically. i cannot accurately discern his height from the
bwc footage. another officer, pc power, wrote in her notebook that the
suspect’s height may have been reported as closer to 5’7”.

when
i asked mr. stimec about these discrepancies, he did not respond convincingly.
he stated that a.b. was certainly not a “pre-pubescent boy” and could be
confused for a man in his 20s. he submits a.b. otherwise generally matched the
suspect description. ultimately, whether a.b. did or did not match the suspect
description is a factual issue for me to resolve. i find he did not match the
suspect description in material ways. i reject mr. stimec’s conclusory
arguments, which are plainly at odds with the evidence.

ms.
x.x. admitted she observed the suspect in poor lighting, and her glasses were
knocked off her face for most of her observations. it was a highly stressful
situation, and she became “disassociated” from what was happening to her. she
focused on the knife and feared for her life. she agreed that many of the
details were difficult to remember due to the passage of time and the trauma
she experienced. therefore, her evidence of the suspect’s physical descriptors
was of questionable reliability and demanded strict scrutiny: see
r. v. mills,
2019 onca 940, at paras.
184-216;
r.
v. jack,
2013 onca 80, at paras.
15, 26;
r. v.
woodard,
2009 mbca 42, at para.
31.

that
is not to say her evidence was in any way lacking in credibility. i found her
to be a careful and compelling witness. however, credibility and reliability
are distinct matters for a trial court to assess.

worryingly,
the officers took no investigative steps to determine who else lived at this
address, regularly or occasionally, to determine who otherwise might be a
suspect. no one testified as to who owns or rents the apartment and who lives
in each room. indeed, no one testified that a.b. lived there, had personal
belongings there, or that one of the bedrooms belonged to him. it appears
these facts were simply assumed. the bwc footage demonstrates that the
apartment had several occupants. the living room was very cluttered with
furniture and assorted possessions. i am left to conclude that the
officers believed a.b. was arrestable on the very thin basis that he bore some
similarities to the suspect and was found in a common area of the apartment two
days after the offences occurred.

it
is worth highlighting that the decision to arrest a.b. required the officers to
compare him to another black male in the apartment. it took them over half an
hour to decide who should be arrested. i was never informed what made a.b. the
more attractive potential suspect from pc kim’s standpoint, who was the officer
who effected the arrest. i also did not hear if this other person was later investigated
or excluded as a possible suspect. he, too, generally matched the suspect’s
description and had a mobile phone. my observations of the bwc footage are
that there is little to distinguish these two individuals from someone
unfamiliar with them. their skin colour, hair, and general build are similar.
their heights appeared roughly similar.

these
factors cast a shadow on whether there were reasonable and probable grounds to
arrest a.b. the same concerns are present before me as the trial judge. the
lack of any meaningful evidence about the regular occupants of the apartment,
whether a.b. actually lived there as a matter of fact, and the presence of a
plausible alternative suspect all serve to compromise the proposition that the
sole reasonable inference available on the whole of the evidence is that a.b.
must have been the perpetrator.

mr.
stimec pointed to a.b.’s iphone and his presence at the same location where the
sexual assault occurred as sources of confirmatory evidence of the suspect’s
identity. circumstantial evidence can sometimes be of sufficient probative
value to support even otherwise unreasonable identification evidence: see
r.
v. wurtz,
2024 skca 16, at paras.
23-27;
r.
v. sandoval-barillas,
2017 abca 154,
at para.
37,
citing
r. v. mccracken,
2016
onca 228. ms. x.x. stated that the suspect
contacted her through whatsapp with the name “david” and a phone number she
remembered. through forensic identification, both identifiers were traced to a.b.’s
phone, and some messages were likely part of this original whatsapp
conversation with the suspect. the iphone’s apple id was in his name as well.

this
evidence demonstrates that the iphone was used to communicate with ms.
x.x., but nothing else.

it does not necessarily mean that a.b. was the person using the phone to
communicate with her before the assault, and it certainly does not establish
that he was the man who assaulted her. i did not hear any evidence of who
was present at the address where the assault occurred at the time of the
assault or shortly beforehand, except from ms. x.x. she could only identify her
assailant and one other person whom she saw briefly. she did not venture into
the entire apartment and was only there for, at most, half an hour.

i
do not know if the phone had a password or other security features to limit who
could use it. curiously, some of the messages ms. x.x. recalled sending and
receiving from the person who contacted her were not present in the extraction
report either. the conversation that remained appeared to be incomplete. this
leaves open the possibility some of the messages had been edited or deleted by
someone before the police seized it.

portable
phones may be borrowed by another user or used surreptitiously. while one
inference available from this evidence is that a.b. used the phone to communicate
with ms. x.x., that inference falls apart in the face of the rest of the
evidence in this case which overwhelmingly points to someone else as the
suspect: see
r. v. c.b.,
2019 onca 380, at paras.
69-72. ms. x.x. was
adamant that the suspect appeared to be in his 20s throughout her
testimony and agreed that she informed the police of that
fact when initially interviewed the day following the assault. she denied
any suggestion the person who assaulted her appeared to be a child.

the
crown presented no other identification evidence pointing to a.b. i did not
hear that ms. x.x. completed a photo lineup, for example, or that his
fingerprints were on the knife or any other piece of property or relevant
location. nor did the crown argue that he might have been a party to this
offence, perhaps using his phone to set up the meeting for someone else.

the
lack of evidence about the knife warrants particular attention. i heard that an
officer seized it but little else. i do not know if its measurements correspond
to the suspect’s description of the knife used by her attacker. i do not know
if any fingerprints were lifted from it. ms. x.x. was never shown a picture of
the knife and asked to identify if it was the weapon held against her. it
may have been a regular kitchen knife unrelated to the attack. or it may have
had more significance as the suspect’s weapon.

while
a.b. was located at the same address where the assault occurred, it was over a
day and a half later. he was not located in the bedroom where ms. x.x.
testified she was taken. as previously explained, i was presented with a
paucity of evidence regarding this apartment and who normally resided there.
mere presence at the general scene of a crime after time has passed is of
little assistance to the crown in this case.

with
these frailties in mind, the case for the crown became untenable after the
introduction of the dna evidence. a sample of bodily fluid obtained from ms. x.x.’s
exterior genitalia taken the day after the assault occurred provided an unknown
male dna profile for comparison purposes. a.b. was excluded as the source of this
evidence. the only other source of male dna located on the victim was
attributable to her partner.


in
response to this exculpatory evidence, mr. stimec argued that there was no reason
to conclude the unknown male dna profile was the “only one ever on [ms. x.x.]”
nor did i hear evidence about how long dna may remain on a body – perhaps it
had been there for weeks, months or even longer. mr. stimec added that the
suspect furthermore may have used a condom, and from that, i can conclude it’s
possible his dna would not have been found on ms. x.x. in summary, the crown’s
position appeared to be that in the absence of a more robust challenge to the
dna evidence and ms. x.x.’s testimony about a condom being used, a.b. cannot
point to this dna evidence as anything more than neutral.

i
utterly reject this argument. ms. x.x.’s testimony about whether the assailant
used a condom was inconsistent and unreliable. she conceded she simply did not
remember and appeared to be making assumptions. she was quite forthright about
these frailties in her memory.

that
evidentiary point aside, i find two features of this crown argument troubling.
first, the argument does not respect that it is the crown’s onus to prove an
accused is guilty and seems to suggest a.b. faced some onus to prove his
innocence. he did not. if the crown wanted to lead evidence about the dna
evidence in a more comprehensive manner, it had the opportunity to do so. i
cannot speculate. a.b. need only point to the existence of reasonable doubt. at
its core, mr. stimec’s argument would require me to conclude that the presence
of an unknown male person’s dna on the victim’s body the morning after the
sexual assault occurred should somehow be dismissed as a source of exculpatory
evidence. even though the central issue in this trial was identity, and the
victim’s testimony was that a grown man, not a teenager, committed this assault.

of
greater concern is that if the crown wished to rely upon evidence of ms. x.x.’s
sexual activity with other persons proximate to the sexual assault, it was
required to bring an application pursuant to the common law principles
articulated by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. seaboyer,
1991
canlii 76: see
r. v. barton,
2019 scc 33, at para.
80.

as noted by justice goldstein in
canadian
alliance for sex work law reform v. attorney general,
2023
onsc 5197, sex workers “
receive
little in the way of recognition or respect from our society”: see para. 11.
courts must not allow the trial process to exacerbate the stigma sex workers
already face from their profession through myth-based assumptions and the
resultant vulnerability that accompanies that stigmatization: see paras. 317-337
of justice goldstein’s decision, discussing the complex interplay of factors at
the heart of this pressing social concern.

in
barton,
the appellant was charged with first-degree murder in the death
of an indigenous woman and sex worker. she was found dead in the bathroom of
his hotel room. the crown, in its opening address to the jury, referred to the
deceased as a prostitute. it did not bring an application before the trial
judge to determine if this evidence was admissible and would serve any lawful
purpose. the majority of the court commented on the need for all justice system
participants to take reasonable steps to address “systemic biases, prejudice
and stereotypes” against sex workers: see para. 20. in a partial dissent,
justices abella and karakatsanis and c.j. wagner noted that “biases against
sex-trade workers can be “as invasive and elusive as they are corrosive”: see
para. 231.

unfortunately,
the crown invited me to draw negative, prejudicial inferences about ms. x.x in
a misguided effort to somehow detract from the exculpatory nature of the dna
evidence. we must do better, collectively, to root out terrible prejudices against
sex workers. for crown counsel, five years after the emphatic warnings from the
supreme court of canada in
barton, to implicitly rely upon such
stereotypes is disappointing.

while not raised by mr. stimec during closing submissions, out of
an abundance of caution, i note that during the trial, ms. x.x. referred to her
surprise to learn that a “child raped her.” this did not bolster the crown’s
case on identification either. as i have explained, she was consistent that she
observed a man “in his late 20s” assault her. that is what she told the police,
and that was her testimony in court. however, after the police made an arrest,
she explained that the officer had told her the accused's name and that this
was a youth court proceeding.

her references to a “child raping her” show how
her understanding of what happened to her was tainted by exposure to post-event
information from the police and crown attorney’s office or victim services. she
conflated her independent recollection that a grown man assaulted her and her
subsequent knowledge that a child, a.b., was charged with the offences. what
explained these utterances was that having learned a young person was charged and
believing the police must have found the “right person,” she referred to a.b.
as a child on the assumption that he was responsible. this does not
somehow rehabilitate the case of the crown. it is an example of a well-documented
concern that witnesses' memories and perceptions of events can be distorted by
exposure to other sources of information. see, for example, the department
of justice’s online publication, “innocence at stake: the need for continued
vigilance and to prevent wrongful convictions in canada,” chapter 3: eyewitness
identification and testimony (
https://www.ppsc-sppc.gc.ca/eng/pub/is-ip/ch3.html
).


i
must consider all the evidence when deciding whether the inferences the crown
asks me to draw on the facts are reasonable. drawing those inferences in this
case would be dangerous. not only does a.b. not match a key component of the
suspect’s description, but the possibility of an alternative suspect has
considerable support in the evidence. i emphasize the dearth of evidence about
who resided at the address where the assault occurred. fundamentally, the dna results
preclude the interpretation of the evidence the crown has proposed.


no
one could conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that a.b. committed the offences
against ms. x.x. as a result, i found a.b. not guilty.
v.
the role of the crown in youth prosecutions

the
youth criminal justice system is based on fundamentally different values and
principles than the adult criminal justice system. it exists because parliament
has chosen to recognize young persons’ heightened vulnerability in dealing with
the criminal justice system and their diminished moral culpability: see
r.
v. s.j.l.,
2009 scc 14, at para.
62. it contains a variety of protections
for young persons unavailable to adult accused persons due to an acknowledgment
of their unique susceptibility to the negative collateral consequences
associated with being a criminal defendant.

for example, the
youth criminal justice act
prohibits the
publication of a young person’s identity who was charged with a criminal
offence (section 110) and places very strict restrictions on access to youth
records (sections 118-129). these provisions ameliorate the negative effects of
labelling a young person as a “criminal.” as stated by binnie j. in
fn
(re),
2000 scc 35, at para.
14:
stigmatization or premature
"labelling" of a young offender still in his or her formative years
is well understood as a problem in the juvenile justice system. a young person
once stigmatized as a lawbreaker may, unless given help and redirection, render
the stigma a self-fulfilling prophecy.

in
r. v. k.j.m,
2019 scc 55, the supreme court of canada
emphasized that
youth matters should proceed
“expeditiously and in a “timely manner”: see paras.
51-55
and
72. prolonged
criminal proceedings “may have a greater psychological impact on a young
person”: see para.
52. as the supreme court
stated in
catholic children’s aid society of metropolitan toronto v. m.
(c.),
1994 canlii 83 (scc), “[a] few
months in the life of a child, as compared to that of adults, may acquire great
significance” (p. 206). young persons addressing criminal charges are faced
with increased “overall feelings of stress, anxiety, and (where applicable)
loss of liberty”:
k.j.m
at para.
52.

t
he police are empowered to lay
criminal charges against young persons, and the crown’s office is vested with
the constitutional responsibility of choosing whether to prosecute them. i
acknowledge the crown’s discretion is broad, “ill-suited to judicial review,”
and should not be subject to “routine second-guessing by the courts”: see
r.
v. t.v.,
1992 canlii 88;
r. v.
anderson,
2014 scc 41, at para.
46. no one would dispute that crimes of sexual violence must
be taken seriously regardless of the age of the perpetrator. the
ycja
recognizes the heightened societal interest in prosecutions for these offences
by making them eligible for custodial sentences when the act is otherwise
focused on rehabilitation and reintegration: see
ycja
section 39(1)(a).

the
offences committed against ms. x.x. were particularly grave. there was a strong
public interest in bringing the perpetrator to justice. as the supreme court
held in
r. v. barton,
2019 scc 33, “ending sexual violence against women
is one of the more pressing challenges we face as a society”: see para. 1. had
the evidence supported the case against a.b., the crown would have been
entirely justified in prosecuting him.

however, the decision to pursue charges against any defendant, especially
a young person, carries a high ethical burden.
i
n
r. v. kahsai,
2023
scc 20, the supreme court
of canada described the role of the crown in criminal proceedings at para.
55
(my emphasis added). these values take on even greater importance in the youth
criminal justice system, where the lives of children and their families are
affected by every decision to prosecute:
the crown also has considerable
responsibility in ensuring trial fairness. as local ministers of justice and
officers of the court, crown counsel have a duty to preserve the fairness of
the criminal justice system for all parties,
including the accused,
victims, and the public (see ontario, ministry of the attorney general,
crown
prosecution manual, last updated may 6, 2023 (online)). because of the
public and quasi-judicial dimension to the crown’s role, their function is not
adversarial or partisan in the traditional sense. rather, it is driven by their
purpose to advance the public interest (
r. v. cawthorne,
2016
scc 32, 1 s.c.r. 983, at para.
27
). as famously expressed by
rand j. in
boucher v. the queen,
1954 canlii 3
(scc), s.c.r. 16, the goal of the crown is “
not to obtain a
conviction, it is to lay before a jury what the crown considers to be
credible evidence relevant to what is alleged to be a crime” (p. 23).
the
crown must always act fairly, dispassionately, and with integrity, both in
the courtroom and in all their dealings with the accused (
r. v. regan,
2002
scc 12, 1 s.c.r. 297, at para.
155, per binnie j., dissenting, but
not on this point).


i
did not hear that any new investigative steps were taken after the dna results
were obtained. those results served to potentially exonerate a.b. and were made
available to the crown on or about april 15, 2024. yet the prosecution
continued for another six months.

it
was logical that a.b. was investigated after ms. x.x. reported the assault to
the police. the crown was entitled to take the time necessary to review its
case against him carefully. nevertheless, it remains unsettling that he was
brought to trial in this manner after all the evidence and the absence of other
evidence that could have been collected was considered.

if
a.b. was the wrong person to arrest, a dangerous suspect remains to be located.
if there was a stronger case to be brought against him that might somehow have
overcome the frailties i have identified, it should have been properly
presented. if no such case exists, the trial was an exercise in futility, done
with disregard for the lives of everyone affected by this tragedy.

a.b.
remained on strict bail conditions from his arrest to the conclusion of the
trial. he and his family had to endure the agony of continuing to live
with the stigma of these charges and the extreme financial and emotional
pressures of having to prepare for a lengthy trial. i was informed they lost
their housing during the nearly 18 months it took to complete the litigation.
every day of the proceeding, his mother sat anxiously behind him. he missed
five days of school.

ms.
x.x. repeated several times during her testimony that she was traumatized by
these events. she referenced difficult experiences in her life that had already
left her vulnerable by the time she was assaulted on june 25, 2023. she had to
relive this terrible assault over two days in court.

the
human toll of a criminal prosecution should never be underestimated. in youth
court, it is felt by the young persons themselves, their parents, and other
family members who attend to support them. it is difficult to imagine a case
that could have a “greater psychological impact” on a young person as described
by the supreme court in
k.j.m
than this one. a.b. may carry this
experience with him for the rest of his life.

respect
for the administration of justice will be enhanced when those empowered to
exercise their discretion do so reasonably and professionally while considering
the hardships inflicted upon every person affected by the trial process: see
r.
v. jordan,
2016 scc 27, at para.
138.
released: january 6, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

i am using fictitious initials to protect the identities of
both a.b. and x.x.

i have used a different, false name to avoid any potential for the young person
to be identified.

other swabs were taken during the saek process on different parts of ms. x.x.’s
body. none of them produced a sample suitable for comparison purposes.

i heard no evidence that mr. x.x. went by the
name “david,” which is not his given name.

i was informed by counsel that a.b. provided a sample of his
dna for comparison purposes to the police on consent.

i do not mean to presume for a moment that any such evidence even exists, as to
do so would be itself a form of unlawful stereotyping.

in
r. v. miaponoose,
1996 canlii 1268, the
ontario court of appeal discussed the psychological phenomena of a witness “filling
in” details,
citing the
law reform commission of
canada study paper on pretrial eyewitness identification procedures (1983): “v
iewers are inclined to fill in perceived
events with other details, a process which enables them to create a logical sequence.
the details people add to their actual perception of an event are largely
governed by past experience and personal expectations. thus, the final
recreation of the event in the observer's mind may be quite different from
reality.
”

i emphasize that the parties simply placed the
biology reports before the court, including the expert’s conclusions concerning
the dna profiles, with no further context. the crown did not call an expert to
testify about the forms of dna typing or interpretation applied in this case. i
did not hear evidence about how dna is deposited or transferred through human
contact. nor did i hear testimony regarding whether environmental factors
should be considered. it was effectively an agreed statement of fact with respect
to this evidence.

my emphasis added.