source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj242/2025oncj242.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. montet, 2025 oncj 242
date: 
2025 04 24
court
file no.: 998 23 31110011
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
robert
montet
before
justice paul f. monahan
trial
held march 19 and 20, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on april 24, 2025
j. mahal................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
o. bedi......................................................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant
monahan j.:
introduction and overview

the defendant is charged with one count of
having equal to or more than 80 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood in his body
within two hours of ceasing to operate a motor vehicle contrary to section
320.14 (i) (b) of the
criminal code. the alleged offence date is
september 4, 2023. having failed an approved screening device (“asd”) test at
the roadside, mr. montet blew into an intoxilyzer at the police station with
blood alcohol content (“bac”) readings as follows: 252 mg of alcohol in 100 ml
of blood at 3:03 am; and 259 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood at 3:26 am.

the defence brought a
charter
application
at trial seeking to exclude the evidence of the breath samples. the defence
alleges violations of section 7, 8, 9 and 10 (b) of the
charter. the
trial and the
charter
application were heard, on consent, on a blended
basis.

the crown called two witnesses: the arresting
officer, peel regional police (“prp”) officer bona and prp officer and breath
technician rebecca scott krawczyk. the defence called no evidence on the trial
proper or on the
charter
application.

this case turns on whether there was one or more
charter
violations and, if so, whether the evidence of the breath
samples should be excluded under section 24(2) of the
charter.

i will address the
charter
issues in the
following order: section 7, 8, 9 and 10 (b).
section 7

as indicated above, the defence alleges a
section 7
charter
violation. section 7 of the
charter
provides
that “everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and
the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles
of fundamental justice”.

the defence argued here that the defendant had
a wet spot on his crotch area which was likely urine and that the police failed
to meet their “obligation” to offer him fresh clothing and that this amounted
to a section 7
charter
violation.

in the case at bar, the defendant was asked by officer
bona whether he had urinated himself and he said he had not. officer bona said
there was no smell of urine. the defendant did not testify on the trial or on
his
charter
application. notwithstanding that it is the defendant’s onus
on a section 7 application, there is no proof that the defendant did in fact
urinate himself and the evidence from the defence is that he had not done so.
the wet spot on his crotch could have been from water or a drink. in my view, having
been told by mr. montet that he had not soiled himself, the police had no
obligation to do anything further. there was no section 7 violation. there is
no reasonable comparison between this case and the cases cited by the defence
namely
r. v. sathymoorthy,
 o.j. 2333; and
r. v. stoney,
 o.j. 6291.
section 8

section 8 of the
charter
provides
protection against unreasonable search and seizure. the provision of breath
samples in response to an asd demand and/or an intoxilyzer demand is a
warrantless search. the onus on a section 8 application is on the crown to
prove that the search was reasonable. in the case at bar, the arresting
officer, officer bona testified that he smelled alcohol coming from the breath
of mr. montet as mr. montet sat in the driver seat of the vehicle with the
passenger window down. the defence pointed out that the notes of officer bona
did not mention the alcohol being on the breath of mr. montet. i was not shown
the note but it apparently did not distinguish between the smell of alcohol
coming from the driver or the car.

i accept officer bona’s evidence at trial that
he smelled alcohol coming from mr. montet’s person and that it was reasonable
for him to suspect that mr. montet had alcohol in his body and that he had been
operating a motor vehicle in the previous three hours. this gave him grounds to
make an asd demand under section 320.27(1).

in addition, officer bona had the basis under section
320.27(2) to make an asd demand because officer bona had an approved screening
device with him and he was in the course of exercising powers under the
criminal
code. in this case, officer bona and his fellow officer, officer davis, jointly
had in their possession an asd and either could make an asd demand. in fact, officer
davis made the first demand and mr. montet produced a failure. after learning
that mr. montet had been drinking five minutes before, the police officers
waited until 1:16 am to do a further test. officer bona made the second demand
for an asd sample which also produced a fail. the two police officers wanted to
eliminate any issues with respect to residual mouth alcohol. this was a
reasonable step to take. the point here is that officer bona had the basis to make
an asd demand under section 320.27 (1) and under section 320.27 (2): see
r. v.
rahmanian
2024 oncj 411
at paras
25 to 30. by reason of the foregoing,
there was no section 8 violation.
section 9

section 9 of the
charter
provides that
“everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained”. the defence alleges an
arbitrary detention amounting to a violation of section 9 on the basis of an
alleged overholding. mr. montet provided his second breath sample at 3:26 am
which registered 259 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood. the defence points out
that mr. montet was not released until 9:59 am which was about 6.5 hours after
his last breath sample was provided.

the staff sgt. was obliged to consider all of
the relevant factors including the bac readings; his blood alcohol content at
the proposed time of release; whether the accused was charged with impaired;
whether the vehicle was impounded; whether the defendant had a criminal record
and whether there was a responsible person available to pick him up. the staff
sgt. is not to be guided by the bac readings only. the factors to be
considered are set out in
r. v. price
2010 onsc 189
at para
93.

both officers bona and krawczyk testified that
the ultimate decision to detain or release mr. montet was on the staff sgt. in
charge of the detachment that night. officer krawczyk testified that she knew
the decision-making process followed by the staff sgt. she explained that she gave
the breath readings to the staff sgt. and the staff sgt. would wait until the
detainee was no longer intoxicated before releasing him. the staff sgt. would
want to make sure that the person could take care of themself. the staff sgt was
told by officer krawczyk that there was no responsible person to pick mr.
montet up so he was aware of this factor. she testified that mr. montet was
twice the legal limit and so he would need to wait a couple of hours. in fact,
mr. montet was three times the legal limit.

mr. montet raised with officer krawczyk the
possibility of calling an uber to which officer krawczyk said it would be up to
the staff sgt. to decide if this was acceptable.

officer krawczyk explained that a person will
lower their blood alcohol content each hour by 15 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of
blood. this means that in 6.5 hours, mr. montet’s blood alcohol content would
reduce by 97.5 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood. accordingly, 6.5 hours after
his last breath reading his bac would be approximately 161.5 mg of alcohol in
100 ml of blood (using his last bac sample of 259). this means that mr.
montet’s bac would still have been twice the legal limit for driving a car at
the time he was ultimately released at 9:59 am.

the assistant crown attorney prosecuting this
case at trial advised the court that the staff sgt. was not available to
testify in this case. the parties did consent to the admission into evidence of
an agreed statement of facts which included a “prisoner details report”
prepared by the staff sgt.

the agreed statement of facts shows that mr.
montet was monitored by the staff sgt and was well treated while in detention.
in particular, the agreed statement of facts indicates that mr. montet was
checked on every half hour during his time in detention and he was fed at 5:59
am.

it would have been better to have the staff sgt.
testify at trial. however, it can be inferred on this record that the staff
sgt. was aware of and considered the
price
factors. the staff sgt. would
know that mr. montet had no criminal record and that his car was impounded. they
would also know that he was not charged with impaired but only over 80.
further, they would know the bac readings and the rate of elimination. they also
knew that there was no responsible person to pick mr. montet up.

there is no evidence as to how mr. montet actually
got home that morning. even the releasing of mr. montet at 9:59 am with a blood
alcohol content of 160 mg in 100 ml of blood which is what happened here posed
a significant risk of liability for the police. in the event that mr. montet
injured himself accidentally after being released, there could well be
liability on the police.

the defence position appears simply to be that
the police should have released mr. monet earlier perhaps into the care of an
uber driver. it would make no sense to delegate responsibility for mr. montet’s
well-being to an uber driver when his bac was so high.

mr. montet chose not to testify on his
charter
application. the onus on a section 9
charter
application is on him. the
police held mr. montet for 6.5 hours after his last breath sample during which
time mr. montel’s bac went from three times the legal limit for driving a car
to twice the legal limit for driving a car. there was no responsible person to
pick him up and take responsibility for mr. montet’s well being. mr. montet’s
bac was extremely high throughout his time in custody. in fact, his bac was on
the rise between the two breath samples. in the face of all of the evidence in
this case, the defence has failed to meet its onus to establish on a balance of
probabilities that the police kept mr. montet longer than they should have and
that there was a section 9
charter
violation

for the reasons outlined above the defence has
not established a section 9
charter
violation.
section 10(b)

the defendant submits that there was a section
10 (b) violation due to a failure by the police to provide rights to counsel
while they were waiting 13 minutes between asd samples. the waiting occurred
because mr. montet advised after his first asd sample registered a failure that
he had recently consumed alcohol. the defence also submits that there was a 10
minute delay in providing rights to counsel from the time of the arrest of 1:18
am until 1:28 am and that this amounted to or contributed to a section 10(b)
charter
violation. the defence also referred to the breath technician’s plan to obtain
breath samples before the defendant had spoken to duty counsel.

i consider that officer bona was essentially a
rookie police officer. he could have moved more quickly but i am not satisfied
that there was a section 10(b) violation. let me explain why.

mr. montet gave one breath sample into an asd at
1:03 am which produced a fail. this was in respect of a sample provided to officer
bona’s partner officer davis at 1:03 am. mr. montet then advised that he had
just recently had an alcoholic drink so the officers had to wait for the
residual mouth alcohol to be eliminated before conducting another test.

in
r. v. bell
2009 onca 321
the ontario
court of appeal cited the scc in
r. v.
bernshaw
(1995)
1995 canlii 150 (scc), 95 c.c.c.
(3d) 193 and the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. george
(2004) 187
c.c.c. (3d) 389 at para 46
for the proposition that “when there is a 15 minute
delay for the purpose of obtaining a proper breath sample, the demand is valid
and the delay is a justified limitation on the right to counsel under section
10 (b)”. applying
bernshaw,
bell
and
george, there was no
right to counsel while they waited 13 minutes for the mouth alcohol to be
eliminated. accordingly, there was no section 10 (b) violation for the time
that passed between 1:03 am and 1:16 am. i would add that there was no time to
call and consult with duty counsel during these 13 minutes. one only has to
look at the time it took once at the station to connect with duty counsel to
reach the conclusion that 13 minutes would not be enough time to both contact
and consult with duty counsel.

the next period is from 1:18 am to 1:28 am. the
second fail was generated at 1:16 am and the arrest was at 1:18 am. it seems to
me that the failure must have been closer to 1:17 or 1:18 am. in any event, it
is clear that the defendant was not arrested until 1:18 am. officer bona explained
that after the arrest at 1:18 am, mr. montet was handcuffed and searched and
placed in the back of the cruiser. accordingly, he was in the cruiser by
approximately 1:21-1:22 am. officer bona said he searched mr. montet on the
computer so that he would understand who he was “dealing with”. this was not an
unreasonable step. this would have taken until about 1:23-1:24 am. he said that
during the time from 1:24 to 1:28 am, mr. montet was argumentative with officer
bona and was saying that he (mr. montet) was not the driver of the vehicle.

the defence played the breathroom video for the
court and had officer bona agree in cross-examination that mr. montet
demonstrated the same demeanour on the breathroom video as he did by the
roadside. he also had officer bona admit that on the breathroom video, mr.
montet was more confused than argumentative.

the defence submitted in closing arguments that
mr. montet was not argumentative on the breathroom video and that it must be
the case that he not argumentative with officer bona at the roadside and that
therefore there was no justified delay in failing to provide rights to counsel
from 1:24 to 1:28 am.

the difficulty i have with this argument is as
follows: officer bona explained that he was wearing a body worn camera that
night. defence counsel told the court that they would be playing the 30 minute
body camera video of the roadside interactions with mr. montet. the defence
then chose not to play any part of the body worn camera video associated with officer
bona’s roadside dealings with mr. montet and asked the court to make a finding
of a section 10 (b) breach based on an alleged lack of argumentative behaviour
on the breath room video and the related cross-examination set out above. the
defence has the onus on a section 10(b) allegation. the defence apparently has
video evidence of the roadside dealings between officer bona and mr. montet. officer
bona said that mr. montet was argumentative at the roadside. if that was to be
challenged, the best evidence, namely the video should have been put to officer
bona and played for the court so that the court could decide if there was a
section 10(b) violation. i repeat that the s. 10(b) argument is a defence onus.
in any event, whether mr. montet was argumentative by the roadside or merely
confused it would not be inappropriate for the officer to take a few minutes to
make sure the detained person understood what was occurring. the court should
not second-guess every step by a police officer in the course of an arrest. the
police officer may need to listen to an arrested person and respond to them:
see
r. v. rossi
2017 oncj 443
at para
34 and 35.

in the case at bar officer bona has explained
what caused the 10 minute delay from 1:18 am to 1:28 am in him giving rights to
counsel. i am not prepared to make a section 10(b) breach finding for what
occurred between 1:18 and 1:28 am. i am satisfied that officer bona’s conduct
during this time was not a section 10(b) violation.

before leaving the section 10(b) analysis i
observe that the breath technician officer krawczyk almost violated mr.
montet’s right to counsel but she did not do so. let me explain. when mr.
montet was given rights to counsel at the roadside, he asked to speak to duty
counsel. after they arrived at the police station, duty counsel was called at
1:54 am but duty counsel did not call back promptly. officer bona placed a
second call to duty counsel at 2:35 am.

officer krawczyk was apparently growing
impatient waiting for duty counsel to call back and she had mr. montet brought
into the breath room at 2:36-2:37 am. she indicated that they had been waiting
for duty counsel to call back for almost 50 minutes. she testified that she
would have gone ahead with the breath tests if duty counsel had not called
back. fortunately, duty counsel did call back at 2:45 am before any evidence
was obtained from mr. montet. mr. montet was able and did consult with duty counsel
before any breath samples were taken.

officer krawczyk appeared poised to breach mr. montet’s
section 10(b)
charter
rights if duty counsel had not call back. she
seemed to be treating the call to duty counsel as a counsel of choice issue.
she thought she had waited long enough for duty counsel to call back. the
police had an obligation to put mr. montet in touch with duty counsel before
taking the breath samples. officer bona’s follow-up call to duty counsel at
2:35 am (which may have been instigated by officer krawczyk) saved officer
krawczyk from breaching mr. montet’s rights to counsel because duty counsel
called back and a consultation occurred before the breath samples were taken.

in summary, for the reasons set out above, there
was no section 10(b) violation of mr. montet’s
charter
rights.
summary

for the reasons set out above, the section 7, 8,
9 and 10(b) rights of mr. montet were not breached and the defendant’s
charter
application is dismissed. as a result, the readings of 252 and 259 mg of
alcohol in 100 ml of blood are in evidence and are not excluded. there will be
a finding of guilt on the equal to or over 80 charge under section 320.14(1)(b).
released: april 24, 2025
signed:
justice paul f. monahan