source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj432/2025oncj432.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of
justice
citation:
r. v. r.s.,
2025 oncj 432
date: 
august 22, 2025
court
file no.: 22-2743-00 | peel region
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
r.s.
before
justice s. robichaud
heard
on august 7, 2025, courtroom 110
reasons
for judgment released on august 22, 2025
eugene wong...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
allison craig.......................................................................... 
counsel for the accused r.s.
contents
contents.
1
the
jordan
framework:
2
a charted history of
the proceedings:
3
attributable defence
delay.
7
the silence of
defence counsel on “above ceiling” trial dates.
11
a stay was warranted
at the anticipated end of the first trial dates.
14
the
trial-coordinator’s policy requiring the defence to schedule new dates.
15
the
dsf
application..
17
exceptional
circumstances.
24
conclusion.
25
s. robichaud j.:

the accused r.s. is charged with one count of
sexual assault and one count of assault relating to an intimate partner. in
compliance with the 486.4 made on a previous occasion, and as made above, i
refer to the applicant on as his initials “r.s.” so as to not indirectly
identify the complainant.

timely justice is a cornerstone of a fair and
democratic society.
section 11(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and
freedoms
guarantees every accused person the right to be tried within a
reasonable time.

this right protects not only the liberty and
security of the accused, but also the integrity of the justice system itself.
when trials are delayed, accused persons remain in legal limbo, victims are
left without closure, and public confidence in the courts is eroded.

as the supreme court emphasized in
r. v.
jordan,
excessive delay has become a systemic issue—often tolerated through outdated
practices and institutional inefficiencies. the framework established in
jordan,
and reaffirmed in
r. v. cody,
requires all participants in the justice system to take proactive steps to
prevent delay and ensure that criminal proceedings are conducted fairly,
efficiently, and within constitutionally acceptable timelines.

at the core of the
jordan
framework is a
presumptive ceiling on delay, beyond which the delay is considered
prima
facie
unreasonable. this ceiling is set at 18 months for cases proceeding
to trial in provincial court, and 30 months for cases in superior court.

if the total delay from the date the charge is laid
(i.e., when the information is sworn) to the actual or anticipated end of
trial—excluding periods of defence delay—exceeds the applicable ceiling, the
delay is presumptively unreasonable. the crown then bears the burden of
rebutting this presumption by demonstrating the existence of exceptional
circumstances. if the crown fails to do so, the delay is deemed unreasonable,
and a stay of proceedings will follow. conversely, if the net delay falls below
the ceiling, the onus shifts to the defence to establish that the delay is
nevertheless unreasonable.

in this case, the information was sworn on march
9, 2022, and the trial is scheduled to end on october 8, 2025. inclusive of the
end day,
the total delay is therefore 1309 days, or
approximately 43 months, or 3.6 years.

the court is therefore asked to consider a stay
of proceedings under section 24(1) of the
charter of rights and freedoms,
by applying the
jordan
framework in the provincial court context and the
corresponding presumptive ceiling of 18 months.
the
jordan
framework:

in 2016 the supreme court of canada provided the
framework to assess the merits of application to stay proceedings pursuant to
section 11(b)
of the
charter
along with the corresponding remedy of a
stay of proceedings under section (24(1). the analysis, as refined and
simplified by the ontario court of appeal in
r v. coulter,

is as follows:
(i)
calculate the
total delay,
which is the period from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial (
jordan, at para.
47
).
(ii)
subtract
defence delay
from
the total delay, which results in the "
net delay
"
(
jordan, at para.
66
)
(iii)
compare the net delay to the presumptive ceiling (
jordan, at para.
66
).
(iv)
if the net delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, it is
presumptively unreasonable. to rebut the presumption, the crown must establish
the presence of
exceptional circumstances
(
jordan, para.
47
). if it cannot rebut the presumption, a
stay will follow (
jordan, para.
47
). in general, exceptional
circumstances fall under two categories:
discrete events
and
particularly complex
cases
(
jordan, para.
71
).
(v)
subtract delay caused by discrete events from the net delay
(leaving the "
remaining delay
") for the purpose of
determining whether the presumptive ceiling has been reached (
jordan,
para.
75
).
(vi)
if the remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the
court must consider whether the case was particularly complex such that the
time the case has taken is justified and the delay is reasonable (
jordan, at para.
80
).
(vii)
if the
remaining delay falls below the
presumptive ceiling, the onus is on the defence to show that
the delay is unreasonable (
jordan, para.
48
).

in addition to this framework, i am mindful
that:
(i)
the “presumptive ceiling” for provincial
courts, as is the case here, is 18 months.
(ii)
a stay of proceedings “below the ceiling”
are rare and require proof of meaningful defence efforts and unreasonable delay.
(iii)
in setting the “ceilings”, the supreme court
factored in tolerance for reasonable institutional delay.

a charted history of
the proceedings:

referencing the materials filed by the applicant
and respondent, including the transcripts of the proceedings, court documents,
trial co-ordinator forms, correspondence, and the “agreed statement of facts”,
the history of the matter is as follows:

date
total delay
event
august 3, 2019
-
date of count #1 on
 information
august 3, 2020
-
date of count #2 on
 information
february 28, 2022
-
arrest date of accused.
march 1, 2022
-
accused released on
 undertaking.
march 9, 2022
-
information sworn by jp
 kevin boothroyd. 2022.09.09 at 09:34:05
march 11, 2022
2 days
application to vary
 undertaking filed by counsel r. christie and consented to by crown d. ida
may 6, 2022
58 days / 1.9 months
first appearance. agent
 for counsel r. christie attends requesting disclosure. crown advises
 disclosure is not yet available. crown does not provide any estimate on when
 it might be ready. adjourned to july 8, 2022.
july 2, 2022
115 days / 3.8 months.
disclosure provided to
 counsel r. christie.
july 8, 2022
121 days / 4.0 months
a canada-wide rogers
 service outage resulted in adjournments of all matters before the court,
 including the applicant’s.

at 12:18 p.m., all matters on the applicant’s docket were adjourned to
 september 16, 2022. the court was advised that the circumstances were
 unforeseen and rendered the courthouse inoperable. the outage took place from
 july 8-9, 2022.
september 23, 2022
198 days / 6.5 months
counsel r. christie
 attends court and advises that a judicial pre-trial was scheduled for
 december 6, 2022. he therefore requested the matter return on december 9,
 2022. there is no indication of other, if any, available dates offered for
 the jpt. the crown offered no opposition or comment on delay. mr. christie
 advised the court he already had instructions to schedule a trial date and
 intended to do so once the jpt was completed. mr. christie notes the crown
 has elected by indictment. no mention of outstanding disclosure.
december 6, 2022
272 days / 8.9 months
judicial pre-trial
 conducted. mcpherson j. trial estimates obtained.
december 9, 2022
275 days / 9.0 months
agent for counsel r.
 christie attends and advises there is a trial scheduling conference scheduled
 for january 12, 202
3,
to
 schedule trial dates in accordance with the jpt held on december 6, 2022. agent
 for counsel requests the matter return on the first date past this conference
 meeting to confirm those dates on the record. matter adjourned to first date
 offered by the court, february 17, 2023.
january 12, 2023
309 days / 10.2 months
trial scheduling
 conference with trial coordinator conducted via zoom. trial and motion dates
 agreed upon. offered dates, availability of crown and defence, and timelines
 for filing stage 1 and stage 2 motions noted on trial coordinator’s “trial
 time estimate form”.
february 17, 2023
345 days / 11.3 months
trial dates of june
 10–13, 2024 confirmed on record; in addition, two motion dates confirmed on
 record. accused election formally pending but noted as “trial” on trial
 coordinator form (this “trial” would be held in ocj). counsel christie
 retained for trial and motions. adjourned to may 5, 2023,
to ensure formal election to
 mode of trial filed with the court.
may 5, 2023
422 days / 13.9 months
agent for new counsel a.
 craig appears. court advised that a crown resolution / pre-trial meeting is
 scheduled for june 23, 2023,
at 09:00. agent advises that this was the first date offered to her for this
 purpose. agent also advise
s
that ms. craig would like to explore the possibility of reducing trial time
 estimates on that date. matter adjourned to july 7, 2023. the court requests
 on the next date, counsel is to provide clear instructions on who trial
 counsel will be, as well as a formal mode of election made as one is still
 pending. trial dates remained in place.
july 7, 2023
485 days / 15.9 months
agent for counsel a.
 craig advises that a crown pre-trial is scheduled for august 15, 2023,
and requests the matter return
 on august 25, 2023. agent for counsel advise trial dates are to remain in
 place for now.
august 25, 2023
534 days / 17.5 months
a second jpt scheduled
 for september 28 by counsel a. craig. matter adjourned to nov 3, 2023. the
 crown advises counsel that if they are not available for the new trial dates,
 then an adjournment application should be brought as soon as possible.
september 28, 2023
568 days / 18.7 months
trial estimate reduced
 from four to two days. stage 1 and 2 motions vacated. trial coordinator
 advised that previously scheduled trial dates (june 10–13, 2024) could not be
 used due to re-estimation.
november 3, 2023
604 days / 19.8 months
agent for a. craig
 advises trial dates are already scheduled in this matter. information shows
 crown elects to proceed by indictment on this date. when asked by the court,
 agent advises they do not have any instructions on whether an 11b motion
 would be brought. adjourned to nov 17.
november 17, 2023
618 days / 20.3 months
new trial dates set for
 august 1–2, 2024. no explanation provided in transcript for why original
 dates were vacated. adjourned to december 1, 2023,
so the applicant can be put to his election of ocj
 trial.
december 1, 2023
632 days / 20.8 months
trial dates confirmed and
 notice of election was confirmed as filed on november 17, 2023.
february 8, 2024
701 days / 23.0 months
stage 1 – 276 motion – 30-minute
 estimate (vacated)
april 11, 2024
764 days / 25.1 months
stage 2 - 276 motion – 2-hour
 estimate (vacated)
june 10-13, 2024
827 days / 27.2 months
trial dates #1 – 4-day
 estimate (vacated)
august 1, 2024
876 days / 28.8 months
second set of trial
 dates set to commence. upon commencement, the court is informed the crown
 filed a
dsf
application the day prior. there was no mention of any
 application being pursued at any of the jpts or other appearances leading up
 to trial. the defence objects to this late filing and advises they cannot
 proceed in a responsible manner. the court attempts to start the trial with
 the examination in chief of the complainant, and then adjourn for subsequent
 dates for the continuation for counsel to properly prepare examination in
 contemplation of a pending
dsf
application and evidence. immediately
 prior to the commencement of this evidence, the trial judge informs counsel
 he is now in a position of conflict that appears unrelated to scheduling. new
 trial dates of november 20
th
to the 22
nd
(3 days) are
 scheduled.
dsf
application remains active.
november 15, 2024
982 days / 32.3 months
crown application
 brought forward seeking adjournment of november 20-22, 2024,
trial dates. counsel not present
 and may not have been advised of the application. counsel paged and does not
 attend. adjourned to the following monday of november 18, 2024, for crown
 motion to trial.
november 18, 2024
985 days / 32.4 months
matter traversed
 administratively to courtroom 302.
november 18, 2024

985 days
courtroom 302. crown
 motion to adjourn trial dates granted. new trial dates will be placed on
 record on return date in january 2025. new trial scheduled for october 7-8,
 2025.
november 20-22, 2024
989 days / 32.5 months
third set of trial
 dates – vacated – injury of complainant – crown adjournment granted.
january 15, 2025
1043 days / 34.3 months
trial dates of october
 7-8, 2025,
confirmed on the
 record.
january 28, 2025
1056 days / 34.7 months
transcripts ordered for
 the purpose of preparing the 11(b) application.
february 12 to
 september 10, 2025
multiple trial dates
 offered in 11(b) triage court. crown and witnesses were available; defence
 was unavailable for all dates prior to october 7, 2025.
april 23, 2025
1141 days / 37.5 months
confirmation hearing
 for 11(b) application
august 7, 2025
1247 days / 41 months
11b motion argued.
october 7, 2025
1308 days / 43.0 months
anticipated trial
 commencement date
october 8, 2025
1309 days / 43.0 months
anticipated trial completion
 date
attributable defence
delay

through my own review of the record of
proceedings, along with the review of the respondent’s factum, i have identified
important ranges that are worthy of addressing as it relates to defence delay.

those ranges are:
•
delay in scheduling the first judicial pre-trial
(23 days)
•
february 13, 2023, to june 10, 2024 – first date
offered for trial compared to the first date scheduled (499 days)
•
rescheduling of new trial dates as per
trial-coordinator policy (52 days)
i will address each in
the order listed above:
(i)
delay in scheduling the first judicial
pre-trial (23 days)

the respondent notes in their factum:
“disclosure was provided to mr. christie on
july 2, 2022 (see tab 2 of this book). at the september 23, 2022, appearance,
counsel advised that a judicial pre-trial (jpt) had been scheduled for december
6, 2022, and that the accused had instructed him to set trial dates shortly
thereafter. despite this, counsel took 32 days to schedule a trial scheduling
conference (tsc) following the jpt. the crown submits that 14 days would have
been a reasonable time to book the tsc. the remaining 23 days constitute
defence delay.”

i accept this as stated. counsel was able to
schedule the next step in the proceedings after the judicial pre-trial was
conducted. this delay was attributable to the defence as it exceeded a
reasonable expected time to do so. considering the 272 days (nearly 9 months)
had elapsed to the jpt, this should have drawn special attention to the defence
to move the matter forward as expeditiously as possible.

as justice b. jones found

in similar circumstances
surrounding the delayed filing of a trial confirmation form:
 [w]hen
a defence application has merit, defence conduct that demonstrates marked
inefficiency towards delay will be characterized properly as a form of defence
delay for
jordan
purposes: see
r. v. cody,
2017 scc 31, at paras.
33-36. phrased differently, “inaction may amount to defence conduct that is not
legitimate.”

in that case, justice jones found 65 of the 75
days adding to the delay attributable to the defence for this reason where 10
would be a reasonable amount of time to obtain instructions and file the
required form to schedule the trial date.

unlike issues addressed below, this was a
positive choice or action by the defence that contributed to the overall delay.

i agree with the respondent
that 23 days of this delay is attributable to the defence.
(ii) scheduling
of first trial dates: february 13, 2023, to june 10, 2024 – 499 days.

in the trial scheduling form dated january 12,
2023, prepared by the trial coordinator “m.a.” stated the following additional
pertinent details to this application:
(i)
an unknown crown representative, and defence
counsel r. christie appeared via zoom to schedule trial and pre-trial motion
dates.
(ii)
the trial coordinator offered dates starting
in january 23-26 of 2023. both the crown and the defence were not available.
(iii)
the first available dates to the crown were
offered in february 13-16, 2023. the defence was not available for these, and
other dates offered in february 2023.
(iv)
after february, the available dates offered
by the trial coordinator jump to june 10-13, 2024 where both the crown and
defence were available.

the unavailability of the defence and the crown
is not surprising considering the first sets of dates offered were within a
couple of weeks of this trial scheduling zoom meeting (tsm).

the dates of february 13-16, 2023, and february
17, 21-23, 2023, offered by the trial coordinator and available to the crown
would require the defence to:
(i)
be available within a month for, what was at
the time, a three-day trial.
(ii)
prepare, file, and argue both stage 1 and
stage 2 of a 276 motion.
(iii)
assuming stage 1 was granted, ensure counsel
for the complainant is available within this time frame to properly prepare
submissions and make themselves available for the stage 2 of the proceedings of
the 276.

this is not to conclude the completion of a
trial within a month from a trial scheduling conference is not possible or
preferred. highly expeditious timelines ought to be aimed for and achieved
where possible. however, it cannot be ignored that such a timeline is generally
unrealistic in trials of this nature and in reasonable consideration of defence
counsel’s schedule.

on the record before me, and in particular the
“trial preliminary inquiry scheduling form”, (tsf), the trial coordinator did
not offer
any
dates in 2023 outside of those january and february dates mentioned
above. as noted above, the chart of availability then jumps to june of
2024
where both the crown and
defence are available.

as noted in
r v godin,
2009 scc 26, para
23
23 …
scheduling requires reasonable availability and reasonable cooperation; it does
not, for
s. 11
(b) purposes, require defence counsel to hold themselves in a
state of perpetual availability.
[…]
to hold that
the delay clock stops as soon as a single available date is offered to the
defence and not accepted, in circumstances where the crown is responsible for
the case having to be rescheduled, is not reasonable.

while
godin
pre-dates
jordan, in
my view, these principle of fairness and reasonableness expressed in
godin
still
applies in assessing a claim of attributable defence delay. a small window of
dates, offered to commence within a month of the scheduling date does not
immunize claims of 11(b) in perpetuity and particularly in these circumstances
where the next available dates were offered over a year following those dates
and past the presumptive ceiling.

there is also an important, critical, and fatal factor
in this case that was overlooked in scheduling the appropriate dates. in the
trial time estimate form notes section, it states:
“278.92 -
stage 1, 1 1/2 hour
(30 days before stage 2),
stage 2, 2
hours (30 days before trial)”

in addition, the ontario court of justice
rules
require such applications are also required to be filed at least 30 days in
advance of the trial date, before the trial judge, under section 2.5(1)(b)(ii).

therefore, and despite the proposed january and february
2023 dates notes on the form, trial-coordinator was not permitted to offer
dates any sooner than 61 days from the trial scheduling to comply with the
30+30 day filing requirements ordered by the jpt judge. this first available
procedurally
compliant
date would therefore be march 13, 2023. this starting point also
assumes perfect availability for the defence, crown, and counsel for the
complainant on stage 2 if stage 1 was granted.

the record before me does not indicate whether
the defence or crown would be available at any time past march 12, 2023, to june
2024 as no dates were offered.

while it is speculative, it is reasonable to
assume that both the defence, crown, and counsel for the complainant would be
available at
some
point in this 13-month range. without a clear record,
i can only conclude that this was part of the institutional delay when taken in
context of the non-compliant and limited dates. the burden rests with the crown
to prove otherwise. i also find that had the defence been offered other
available dates during this 13-month span, the scheduling form and/or the
comments of the crown on the subsequent date would have reflected that.

if the record demonstrated that defence was not
available during this 13-month period, i would not have any difficulty
attributing defence delay relative to that unavailability. that is not the
case. here, the record only demonstrates a small window of unreasonable and
procedurally non-compliant dates were offered.

from there, the next dates offered were well
past the provincial court “ceiling” and presumptively unreasonable – 23 months
for stage 1, and 27 months to the commencement of trial.

i find from the record before me that the jpt
judge imposed mandatory filing timelines, further deemed mandatory by the
ontario court of justice
rules. the trial coordinator was not in a
position to offer compliant dates. defence unavailability was not the cause of
delay—compliance with procedural fairness was.

these timelines are set in place for the benefit
of all parties and reasonable management of trials of this nature. while common
in proceedings of this nature, 276 motions are complicated, take time to
prepare, time to respond to, and require the assistance and availability of
counsel for the complainant should the matter proceed to stage 2. this was all
undoubtedly considered and factored into the ordered timelines by the jpt
judge.

from the trial estimate form, and my own
awareness of the general local practice, it appears that the stage 1 (30-minute
estimate) and stage 2 (1.5-hour estimate) motions were then scheduled in
retrospect once the june 2024 trial dates were agreed upon.

the first trial dates offered past the mandatory
(30 day + 30 day) filing compliance timelines were those accepted by both crown
and defence – june 10 to 13, 2024. at this time, total delay for trial now
reached 824 days, or 27 months – a time well beyond the presumptive jordan
ceiling for matters in the provincial court. there is no evidence of any
defence waiver.
the silence of defence
counsel on “above ceiling” trial dates

as noted, the trial dates scheduled for june of
2024 already placed this case well above the
jordan
presumptive ceiling.
from the swearing of the information on march 9, 2022, to the anticipated end
of the trial date of june 13, 2024, would total 827 days / 27 months.

notwithstanding, neither the defence nor crown counsel
raised this issue when the dates were placed on the record.

as justice monahan wrote in
r. v.
lokubalasuriya,
2024 oncj 46:
 based on
the supreme court of canada rulings in jordan and
r. v. cody,
2017 scc
31
and
r. v. j.f.
2022 scc 17, a considerable body of law is developing
at the ontario court of justice (“ocj”) level to the effect that the failure of
defence to proactively assert their client’s
section 11
(b) rights may lead to
having some defence delay attributed to the defence. relying on
jordan, cody
and
j.f.,
a number of ocj courts have held that where a defendant sets a
trial date above the
jordan
ceiling and says nothing about
section 11
(b)
concerns, then some portion of time associated with the delay in raising these
issues. in particular, a number of ocj judges have attributed as defence delay
50% of the time from when the dates are set until the trial date, or in some
cases, only until the crown is put on notice that the defence intends to bring
a
section 11
(b) application: see
r. v. nigro
2023 oncj 41
(per justice
west);
r. v. ahmed
(unreported per justice caponecchia);
r. v. a.d.
(unreported per justice lai);
r v. macdonald
(unreported per justice
daviau);
r. v. kullab
2023 oncj 458; and
r. v. m.w.
2023 oncj
581. courts have in some cases allowed defence counsel 2 to 4 weeks after the
trial dates are set for defence to order transcripts of past court attendances
in order to finalize the defence’s position on
section 11
(b) (see
ahmed and
m.w.
)
[…]
 in order
to determine whether any defence delay should be attributed to the defence in
this case for a failure to clearly assert
section 11
(b) issues in a timely way,
it is important to understand the legal theory behind why cases like
ahmed,
a.d., macdonald, kullab
and
m.w
and other cases have found
significant defence delay in these cases. in my view, before deducting any
amount as defence delay for failing to raise
section 11
(b) concerns in a timely
way, the court must be satisfied that had the defence acted promptly,
the crown could have and would have prioritized the case and had it
heard under the jordan ceiling: see
ahmad
at para 30;
kullab
at paras at 34 to 37 and
m.w.
at para
38.
formal evidence is not required in this regard and the court can rely upon its
knowledge of local practice and the circumstances in the case before the court.
further, as i observed in
kullab, a finding of defence delay is not an
“exact science” and is “highly discretionary”. the court can, among other
things, have regard to the public record which discloses that the crown in
brampton has regularly prioritized serious cases including those involving
allegations of sexual assault and possession of firearms to give but two examples.
[emphasis added]

in applying justice monahan’s analysis, i do not
find on the record before me that any defence delay deduction should take place
as there is nothing to suggest that “had the defence acted promptly, the crown
could, and would have prioritized the case and had it heard under the
jordan
ceiling.” to the contrary, i find that the “trial preliminary inquiry
scheduling form” was exhaustive of this issue of what dates were available,
offered, and could be set.

the ontario court of appeal addressed the
position in
r. v. mengistu.
there, the crown argued that failing to raise 11(b) concerns on a timely
way may be attributable to the defence when a trial date is scheduled outside
the presumptive ceiling. in dismissing the crown appeal and upholding the stay
of proceeding, the court held:
38
the
crown argues that defence counsel failed to raise
s. 11
(b) concerns in a timely
way and the resulting delay ought to be deducted as defence-caused delay. the
crown points out that defence counsel knew as of march 10, 2020, that mr.
mengistu's trial was scheduled outside the presumptive
jordan
ceiling
and yet did not raise
s. 11
(b) concerns until april 13, 2021, 27 days before
the trial was initially scheduled to start. relying upon the supreme court's
decision in
r. v. j.f.
2022 scc 17,
413 c.c.c. (3d) 293, as well as a series of cases flowing
from
j.f., the crown argues that the defence
cannot wait to complain about the delay until it is locked in, and the crown
can do nothing to mitigate it. the crown further argues that "it is a
reasonable inference" that it would have found an earlier trial date had
defence counsel raised concerns over delay in a more timely way.
39
[…]
40
in
order for
the crown to succeed on this ground of appeal, it must
establish the following: (i) defence failed to raise
s. 11
(b) concerns in a
timely way; and (ii) that failure contributed to the delay in bringing the
matter to trial within the presumptive
jordan
ceilings.
41
in my view, there is an insufficient factual record upon which to
determine the second of these issues and would therefore not permit the crown
to raise it for the first time on appeal.
42
this absence of a sufficient factual record is underscored by the
application judge's consideration of whether the period from april 20, 2020, to
the initial trial date of may 10, 2021, should be deducted on account of the
exceptional circumstance of the covid-19 pandemic. the application judge
rejected the crown's argument on the basis that there was no evidence as to
what steps the crown would have taken, "but for" the pandemic, to
secure an earlier date. the crown does not appeal this aspect of the
application judge's ruling. [emphasis added]

like the trial judge in
r. v. mengistu,
there is no evidence before me of how the trajectory of this case would have
changed if the 11(b) concerns were raised at an earlier stage.

the trial coordinator’s scheduling form confirms
that no earlier dates were offered or available, and there is no indication
that the crown expressed any willingness to prioritize the matter had defence
raised 11(b) concerns earlier. if such factors are to be considered in
attributing delay to the defence, they ought to be clearly reflected in the
record at the time trial dates are set.

i also have trouble accepting that
jordan
places a positive obligation on the defence to take undefined active and
sustained measures to seek earlier dates once trial dates are set – especially
when a complete record is formed on how that unfolded and what was, and was not,
available.

while it is certainly open for the court or
crown to take specific measures as a matter of practice or policy to have those
cases with 11(b) concerns, or that are set above the presumptive ceiling to
return to a practice or special court to consider reprioritization or other
means to address the pending violation, that onus should not fall to the
defence to do so on their own accord.

the defence has no control over how the crown
prioritizes cases, or over control of how the trial-coordinator may recalibrate
other matters and therefore cannot be placed in a state of perpetual ambition
for changing dates they have no control over and are already scheduled through
a process that is presumed cognizant of 11(b) rights.

i am mindful not to conflate the clear onus of
the defence to take meaningful sustained efforts and steps required of the
defence to succeed on a
“below ceiling”
11(b) application, into obligations imposed when a case is
“above ceiling”.

to the contrary,
jordan
makes it clear
the burden rests upon the crown to rebut the presumption when the matter
exceeds the threshold after subtracting delay
caused
by the defence, and
waiver.

such a requirement upon the defence would
incentivize trial dates being purposely or indifferently set past the
presumptive ceilings with below-ceiling dates only to be offered
jordan
-compliant
dates once defence sufficiently and promptly protests and requests special
administrative steps or priority to apply. while aspirational, i do not find it
a requirement as a matter of law on “below ceiling” matters.

if this was the intention of the supreme court
in
jordan,
the supreme court could have easily added this positive
obligation into the comprehensive “above ceiling” framework to nullify defence
delay where the defence remains silent in the face of delayed dates. reading in
such an obligation is inconsistent with the plain language of
jordan
and
the principle that any waiver of delay must be informed and unequivocal.

unless this silence of the defence can be
categorized clearly into actions that
caused
delay (attributable to the
defence), or clearly demonstrate waiver, i do not accept defence silence
per
se
has any application to the
jordan
framework, either on a partial
or complete attribution. for the sake of a
jordan
framework, the record
must be assumed to be complete.

while there may be occasions where silence may be seen as an
intentional or deliberate act by the defence that
causes
delay, i do not
find that to be the case in the applicant’s matter.

further, introducing speculative 'but-for'
scenarios based solely on defence silence does not advance a principled,
predictable, or meaningful analysis or protection of an accused’s rights under
section 11
(b). as set out in
r. v. mengistu,
supra, at para 42,
to evaluate the “but-for” impact, there must be some evidentiary record on how
the trial dates would have changed.

accordingly, i find that the defence’s silence
in the face of trial dates scheduled beyond the
jordan
ceiling does not
constitute waiver or delay attributable to the defence. in the absence of
evidence that earlier assertion would have altered the scheduling trajectory,
and given the completeness of the record, no deduction is warranted.
a stay was warranted at
the anticipated end of the first trial dates

except for the 23 day defence delay relating to the
scheduling of the trial scheduling conference mentioned above, i cannot
attribute any other delay to the defence for other reasons. up to this point,
the accused acted diligently by retaining counsel within days of the arrest as
shown on the march 11, 2022, document “application for consent variation of
police undertaking” where counsel r. christie is listed.

to the contrary, i find several factors outside
the exercised diligence of defence contributed to the delay and overall
attitude of complacency the crown seemed to demonstrate leading up to the june
2024 trial dates.
(i)
disclosure was not provided to the accused
until july 2, 2022, or 115 days / 3.8 months after the swearing of the
information. the disclosure relates to a one-complainant case presented
primarily through a four-hour statement.
(ii)
the allegations date back to 2020. the dated
nature of the allegations suggests there was not a pressing need to have the
accused arrested, or information sworn, until disclosure would be available.
while this is certainly not a requirement of any police investigation, such
things cannot be overlooked when assessing the overall attitude of complacency
towards delay and the ever-pressing importance of an accused 11(b) rights and
strict
jordan
timelines.
(iii)
the “rogers outage” issue may offer some
degree of “exceptional circumstance” that could be subtracted from the overall delay.
however, and like the delay in disclosure, the crown must remain ever vigilant
of the cumulative effect adjournments can have on these applications. while
such outages can happen, the mass adjournment of all matters from the july 8, 2022
docket to september were excessive and without explanation on the need for 2.5
months to rectify this. while an adjournment was required, 1-2 weeks should
have been more than enough time to recalibrate matters into court. the 2.5-month
time seemed arbitrary and without any consideration of how it might later
affect 11(b) constraints. power, internet, and other building management issues
are bound to happen. when they do, the matter should return as soon as
practicable and pick back up from where it was left off. i note that despite
this inconvenience, it did not prevent other courts in ontario from standing
matters down and addressing them later in the afternoon.

whether that was possible in
the present case, it was not reasonable or cognizant of 11(b) obligations on a
matter that was already 4 months old and disclosure outstanding. while some of
the outage itself may qualify as an exceptional circumstance, (i find 1-2 weeks
would be sufficient), the length of the adjournment was excessive and not
reasonably tailored to the nature of the disruption.
(iv)
in effect, the delayed disclosure and outage
left the accused at 6.5 months before a judicial pre-trial was even
scheduled.

minus the defence delay of 23 days relating to
the scheduling of the tsc, this was a total of 678 days (22.3 months to the
stage 1 application,
and 827 days (27.2 months) to
the end of the first scheduled trial dates from june 10-13, 2024.

therefore, and regardless of the analysis to
follow, it is my conclusion that that the applicant was already deserving of a
stay of proceedings under the
jordan
framework, pursuant to
section
11(b)
and
24(1)
of the
charter.

notwithstanding, the delay and continued 11(b)
violation of mr. r.s.’s right to be tried within a reasonable time only became
worse as these first anticipated trial dates in june of 2024 approached.
the trial-coordinator’s
policy requiring the defence to schedule new dates.

as noted above, from the transcripts, and the agreed
statement of facts (“asf”), mr. “r.s.’s trial was originally scheduled for
february 8, 2024, april 11, 2024, and june 10–13, 2024” by previous counsel r.
christie.

in the spirt of ensuring that the positions,
admissions, and estimates taken at the first judicial pre-trial remained in
place, the asf reads:
“when ms.
craig was retained, a further judicial pretrial was conducted on september 28, 2023,
to narrow the issues. ultimately the trial estimate was reduced from four days
to two days, and the pretrial motions were determined to no longer be
necessary. ms. craig was advised that none of the previously scheduled dates
could be used, and two new days would need to be scheduled.”

the asf clarified this policy as:
“the trial
coordinator has advised that their policy is as follows:
[w]hen a
trial is re-estimated—for example, from four days to two—we offer the next
available dates for a two-day trial, not for the originally scheduled four-day
block. we also do not simply convert the original four-day courtroom into a
two-day trial court, as that courtroom can now be reallocated for a matter that
still requires the full four-day window.”

the trial coordinator’s policy, which required
reallocation of courtroom blocks following re-estimation, prevented the defence
from preserving previously scheduled trial dates. while administratively practical,
such policies cannot override constitutional rights under
section 11
(b).

likewise, the imposition of new trial dates resulting from this
policy cannot be construed as a valid waiver of delay, nor as consent by the
accused. based on the evidentiary record before me—further clarified by oral
submissions and concessions from both parties on august 7, 2025—the defence was
not only prepared to proceed on the originally scheduled trial dates but was
willing to significantly shorten the proceedings.

the diligence and professionalism demonstrated
by newly retained defence counsel, ms. craig, in narrowing the issues,
conserving valuable court resources, and abandoning costly, complex, and
intrusive motions under section 276 should be commended—not penalized. at
paragraph 86 in
jordan, the court wrote:
86 […] encouraging the defence to be part of
the solution will have positive ramifications not only for individual cases but
for the entire justice system, thereby enhancing - rather than diminishing -
timely justice.

the practical effects of endorsing the trial
coordinator’s policy would incentivize defence counsel to act in the very
manner
jordan
cautions us against whereby parties fall into a culture of
complacency towards valuable court resources and delay.

in
jordan,
at paras
40-41, and at para 43,
the supreme court pointed out this very issue as it related to the previous
morin
framework and how it, and the entire attitude towards the prompt delivery
of justice must change by all parties involved:
40 … unnecessary procedures and adjournments,
inefficient practices, and inadequate institutional resources are accepted as
the norm and give rise to ever-increasing delay. this culture of delay
"causes great harm to public confidence in the justice system" (lesage
and code, at p. 16). it "rewards the wrong behaviour, frustrates the
well-intentioned, makes frequent users of the system cynical and disillusioned,
and frustrates the rehabilitative goals of the system" (cowper, at p. 48).
41 the
morin
framework does not address
this culture of complacency. delay is condemned or rationalized at the back
end. as a result, participants in the justice system - police, crown counsel,
defence counsel, courts, provincial legislatures, and parliament - are not
encouraged to take preventative measures to address inefficient practices and
resourcing problems. some courts, with the cooperation of counsel, have
undertaken commendable efforts to change courtroom culture, maximize
efficiency, and minimize delay, thereby showing that it is possible to do
better.
[…]
43 complexity is sometimes unavoidable in order
to achieve fairness or ensure that the state lives up to its constitutional
obligations. but the quality of justice does not always increase proportionally
to the length and complexity of a trial. unnecessary procedural steps and
inefficient advocacy have the opposite effect, weighing down the entire system.
a criminal proceeding does not take place in a vacuum. each procedural step or
motion that is improperly taken, or takes longer than it should, along with
each charge that should not have been laid or pursued, deprives other worthy
litigants of timely access to the courts.


if it were not for the
lack
of
complacency of counsel, mr. r.s.’s trial would likely long be over, this motion
would be unnecessary, and court time would have in the end been spared.

while it would have been preferable for defence
to state a clear objection to this policy on the record at the time, i find
that they had no choice in the matter when factoring in the agreed statement of
facts on this policy.
the
dsf
application

on the day of trial, defence attended prepared
to defend the case to meet as scheduled.

however, the court was informed of an
application filed the day before by the crown. this application sought to
introduce prior disreputable conduct of the accused as it relates to the
relationship of an intimate partner. also known as a “
dsf
” application:
the court: whenever you’re both
ready.
a. craig: all right. we can perhaps at least sort of canvass,
procedurally, the issues that we've got, your honour, and take your guidance.
i'm on my feet, so perhaps i'll just sort of brief you. so, this is a two-day
trial set for today and tomorrow. it was set, i think, previously for june, and
then was rescheduled. my friend, as you probably saw, filed a prior
discreditable conduct application yesterday.
the court: yes.
a. craig:...at any of the prior judicial pretrials, and it wasn't my friend that
conducted any of them, so it's certainly not on her; but it was never flagged.
the complainant’s statement is about four hours long. and i would say maybe ten
minutes of it relates to the matters that are actually outlined in the
information, the rest is all sorts of other stuff. so, first of all, i don't
think two days is going to be enough if we're getting into all of that. second,
i prepared for a trial on the charges in the information. i'm going to need a
lot more time if i'm going to be cross-examining her on a four-hour statement.
i need a lot more time with mr. r.s., i need a lot more time preparing a cross
because there's a big, big difference between, you know – i’m just - i haven't
counted, 30 to 40 incidents that are discussed in a four-hour statement, and
the two that are the subject matter of the court.”

the crown’s “
dsf”
application, filed the day before trial,
was not mentioned in any prior jpts or pre-trial discussions, despite 876 days
having elapsed since the information was sworn. defence counsel, having
prepared for the allegations as charged, and having confirmed admissions and
refined the issues for trial at the second jpt, was unable to proceed
responsibly. the late filing necessitated an adjournment, undermining trial
readiness and procedural fairness.

the
ontario court of justice rules

state:
time
for trial applications
2.5
(1) a trial application shall be heard at the start of the trial or during the trial
unless the court orders otherwise.
(2) 
for the purposes of subrule (1), trial applications include
[…]
(b) 
complex evidentiary applications, such as applications for the admission of
(i) similar act evidence,
(ii) evidence of a complainant’s prior sexual
activity, or
(iii) hearsay evidence; and
[…]
times for service
3.1
(1) an application in form 1 shall be
served and filed with proof of service at least 30 days before the date of the
hearing of the application unless the
criminal code
imposes a longer period.
(2) a
response in form 2 shall be served and filed with proof of service at least 15
days before the date of the hearing of the application unless the
criminal code
imposes a longer period.
(2.1)
unless otherwise ordered by the court, proof of service must be filed at the
same time the application (form 1), or response (form 2) is filed.
exceptions
(3) despite
subrules (1) and (2), the time periods set out in those subrules may be
shortened or lengthened
(
a
) by an order of the court; or
(
b
) with the consent of the parties,
subject to approval by the court.

such
dsf
applications are, by their very nature, rarely
unforeseen as they seek to introduce prior disreputable conduct that was
previously known to the police, as was the case here.

r. v. d.s.f.,
1999 canlii 3704 (on ca), o.j. no. 688 affirms the principle
that evidence of prior discreditable conduct may be admissible to assist the
court in understanding the nature and dynamics of a domestic relationship.

in cases involving allegations of sexual and physical abuse
within an ongoing relationship, courts have permitted such evidence to
contextualize the alleged conduct and illuminate the relational backdrop
against which the central issue of consent must be assessed. if permitted the
use of prior disreputable conduct may be admitted to:
•
explain and contextualize the narrative of the complainant’s
account of her relationship with the accused.
•
demonstrating animus toward the domestic partner.
•
establish motive for the charged offence; and,
•
support the complainant’s credibility, particularly in explaining
her delay in leaving the relationship or reporting the abuse.
at paras. 20 and 23–25

in ipv

prosecutions, the potential for
dsf
applications is not only foreseeable
but often central to the crown’s theory. their late introduction undermines
trial readiness and procedural fairness.

in attempting to simplify matters, the crown sought to narrow the
dsf
issue:
t. kim: so, a, b, and c is the
evidence i'm seeking to admit. and a refers to sort of a general description of
the atmosphere of the relationship and the interactions between the two
parties. and then, b is a specific incident which occurred december 28th of
2021. and then, c would be the one-week sort of period, beginning on the family
day long weekend...
the court: i see.
t. kim:...of 2022, which then
ultimately leads to the complainant reporting the incident to police a week
later on 28th of february. so, it's - the incident that i refer to at paragraph
c is essentially explaining how it is and why it is that, at that point in
time, this came to the attention of the police, and what led her to call the
police at that time. and then, the evidence relating to a and b is essentially
explaining why she didn't report before that time period, without getting into
all of the other incidents that she described, because that would be too
prejudicial, in my view. i picked one incident that is remote - or close in
time to the time that she did report, which is february of 2022, and - and kind
of related to her biggest concern, which was sort of her - her children. so, i
don't intend to – myself, in bringing this application, ask the complainant about
all of the incidents that she described. i don't intend to go into specifics
about it, other than to just kind of generally explain the – the nature of the
marriage and the relationship. and i think if my friend wishes to go into the
specifics of those incidents and cross for each – each event, i – certainly,
that's her prerogative. but i don't know that – that i - i – i won't be asking
to lead all of the evidence of the other incidents, your honour, because i – in
my view, that would be prejudicial.
…
t. kim: so, i've narrowed it
down to sort of a general description of the relationship, and then, one
specific incident prior to the - the time of reporting, and then, the very
events that lead to the reporting.

the presiding trial judge at that time, pointed out correctly in
my view:
the court: i guess the concern
that ms. craig has raised is quite apart from what you intend,
it's
difficult to predict what portions or what other events would be essential for
the defence to respond to the crown's case. and she attended - prepared to deal
with just the allegations before the court; a – a – a point i - i – i
accept. i guess, attempting not to waste these days, what i'm asking is, would
you be prepared to call the complainant in-chief? i imagine it's going to be a
relatively lengthy examination in-chief, and we stand down from that point,
assuming
we can find more days that doesn't send this matter into - well into next year
on my schedule. [emphasis added]

as noted in the
rules
commentary under section 2.5,
trial applications can take
many forms. for example, an application to exclude evidence at an impaired
driving trial for a breach of the
charter
is most commonly dealt with in a
blended or combined charter voir dire and trial. however, there are other trial
motions which would benefit from being dealt with by the trial judge in advance
of hearing the evidence at the trial. for example, an application for the
admission of similar act evidence may be better heard in advance of the other
evidence in the proceeding, as the outcome may require the parties to consider
calling additional witnesses or affect a party’s presentation of his or her
case. rule 2.5 is designed to balance the benefits of certainty as to how a
complex issue should be addressed with flexibility to ensure that the
fundamental objective set out in rule 1.1 is properly respected. in general,
where the applicant knows before the trial begins that a voir dire or
admissibility hearing will be needed to tender certain evidence, there should
be compliance with rule 2.5, unless otherwise ordered by a pre-trial or trial
judge.

just before the accused was arraigned, the presiding justice
advised counsel that there was a conflict in this proceeding that prevented him
from hearing the case further. this conflict was independent of scheduling as
efforts were made prior to this declaration to preserve what dates he could.

however, regardless of the conflict of the presiding justice, an
adjournment was required in any event due to the change of the case to meet in
the face of the
dsf
application. from the comments of the trial judge,
even if the trial did commence before him, that adjournment would have been
lengthy and “well into next year” (2025) on his schedule.

traversing the matter to another judge was not pursued. even if
that had occurred, it would not have alleviated the need for adjournment. at a
minimum, the trial was to be adjourned for a bifurcation of the proceedings
whereby an examination in-chief could commence, with sufficient time for
counsel to prepare a properly prepared cross-examination recalibrated towards
the
dsf
issues.

filing a
dsf
application the day before trial, on ipv
sexual assault, is almost certain to necessitate an adjournment in any case,
unless the presiding justice refuses to permit it due to non-compliance with
the
rules
and agreed upon timelines.

the failure to exercise reasonable foresight, in the context
where the trial dates are already well above the
jordan
presumptive ceilings
shows an indifference towards the accused’s right to procedural fairness, legal
fees, and the 11(b) consequences that may flow from that. this approach
undermined not only the accused’s rights but also the integrity of the
proceedings and the interests of all participants, including the complainant.

as a comparison, had the defence filed a
charter
motion the
day before trial, it is a near certainty the crown would be permitted an
adjournment to properly prepare, investigate, research, and recalibrate. such a
hypothetical defence adjournment, if granted, would have likely required a
waiver of 11(b), or at a minimum a clear finding that the delay was entirely
attribute to the defence. the crown must be held to the same standard. the
happenstance of a judge being in conflict does not then turn an inevitable and
lengthy adjournment (on this record) where the crown is clearly responsible,
into “exceptional circumstances.”

nor should the accused be placed in a situation where they are
asked to choose between their right to a trial within a reasonable time or
instructing their counsel to proceed unprepared. in adjourning the file, the
crown stated:
t. kim: thanks for the
indulgence, your honour. counsel and i have discussed it, and we’ve come to the
agreement that it would be – the best course of action would be to adjourn the
trial and schedule a three – three new days.
this “agreement” stated on the record created
circumstances that compromised the voluntariness of the defence’s acquiescence
to the adjournment and cannot be properly said to be a valid waiver of 11(b),
or attributable to defence delay. as stated in
r. v. cody,
2017 scc 31 (canlii), 1 scr
659, at para
27:
“a
waiver of delay by the defence may be explicit or implicit, but must be
informed, clear and unequivocal (
jordan, at para.
61
).”

while
dsf
applications are easy to advance, they are
difficult and complicated to prepare a defence and respond to.

such applications can bring into issues that extend far beyond
the allegations before the court, require further investigations, reviewing
electronic communications, nuances and layers to cross-examination, legal
research, subpoenaing potential witnesses (perhaps children), remote and/or
cctv applications, and possible 276/278 issues depending on the prior
disreputable conduct being advance.

i find the adjournment of the august 2024 trial dates the fault
of the crown.

whatever conflict that arose from the trial judge is a
distraction to a predictable collateral effect to this neglect in proper trial
preparation and diligent case management that resulted in an application sought
to pursue and did not reevaluate their pursuit in the face of a case in excess
of the presumptive
jordan
ceiling. as indicated at paragraph 65 in
jordan:
 to be clear, defence actions legitimately taken to
respond to the charges fall outside the ambit of defence delay. for example,
the defence must be allowed preparation time, even where the court and the
crown are ready to proceed. in addition, defence applications and requests that
are not frivolous will also generally not count against the defence. we have
already accounted for procedural requirements in setting the ceiling. and such
a deduction would run contrary to the accused’s right to make full answer and
defence. while this is by no means an exact science, first instance judges are
uniquely positioned to gauge the legitimacy of defence actions.

this likely has little to do with the trial crown assigned to the
matter; however, the crown is indivisible for these purposes, and it is a
distinction without a difference for the purpose of an 11(b) analysis. i mention
it only to avoid casting blame on any particular assistant crown attorney.

regardless, this case is a good example of why the office of the
crown attorney must reflect and reevaluate how cases of this nature are managed
and prosecuted.

sexual assault files, particularly those involving ipv and
potential for
dsf
evidence, must be assigned to trial counsel early to
provide:
•
informed and binding discussions at jpts and cpts.
•
ample opportunity to contemplate a variety of common motions including
276/278 and
dsf.
•
particularizing and reducing to writing any intended
dsf
application
so that the defence can understand the case to meet and ensure they are
properly prepared on these issues.
•
advice to the complainant on various rights they have, including the
right to counsel on certain proceedings.
•
an awareness of pending disclosure that likely
involves vulnerable witness vetting.
•
an awareness of pending 11(b) issues and
ensuring dates are set well below the
jordan
presumptive ceilings.
•
compliance with filing timelines set by the
court and the ontario court of justice
rules.

unlike an accused, the crown cannot waive delay
under
section 11(b)
of the
charter
or assume responsibility for it in exchange
for an adjournment. this distinction imposes a heightened duty on the crown to
act with diligence and foresight in managing its case. that duty is especially
pronounced in matters involving
dsf
applications, where the evidence
sought to be admitted is often central to the crown’s theory and inherently
complex. these applications frequently engage additional legal and evidentiary
considerations, including potential motions under
sections 276
and
278
of the
criminal code.

given their complexity and potential impact on
trial fairness,
dsf
applications must be addressed well in advance of
trial and discussed at judicial pre-trials. their late introduction undermines
trial readiness, compromises procedural fairness, and risks infringing the
accused’s right to be tried within a reasonable time. in no uncertain terms,
dsf applications cannot be left to the eve of trial or omitted from pre-trial
planning.

while a court may grant a crown adjournment,
such a request will invariably trigger scrutiny under
section 11
(b). in this
case, the late filing of the
dsf
application did not constitute an
“exceptional circumstance” within the meaning of
jordan. it was
foreseeable, preventable, and optional. the crown could have proceeded without
advancing the application, and had it done so, the record would be far clearer
on whether the trial could have commenced before another judge. the adjournment
was not compelled by necessity, but rather by a lack of timely preparation.

this resulted in the scheduling of a third set
of trial dates from november 20-22, 2024. subtracting the defence delay of 23
days noted above, mr. r.s.’s matter now reached a net delay of (985 days) – 23
days =
962 days / 31.6 months.
further to my findings above, this further justified a stay of proceedings as being
presumptively above ceiling in the provincial (and superior) level of court.
exceptional
circumstances

while redundant to the conclusion reached above, i do find there are
two “exceptional circumstances” that do not contribute to the overall delay: 1)
the rogers’ outage, and 2) the adjournment of the third set of trial dates due
to an injury of the complainant.
(a)
rogers outage

as noted above, a nation-wide rogers’ service outage affected millions
of canadian across canada from in the early morning of july 8, 2022. within a day
or two, all services were gradually restored. this was clearly an
unforeseeable, unpreventable, and exceptional discrete event.

while a significant disruption during those two days, it does not
warrant a sweeping justification of the delay incurred as a result. i am
willing to attribute two weeks, which i consider on the high end, to such
circumstances. while considered as an exceptional circumstance and deductible
from the overall delay, this has no material effect on the overall conclusions
reached above as it does not bring the net delay below the ceiling – even with
a full attribution of 2.5 months (which i do not find), the stay of proceedings
still stands.
(b)
the injury of the complainant

the third set of trial dates were scheduled for november 20-22. this
was a result of a serious injury suffered by the complainant. this too, was an
unforeseeable, unpreventable, and discrete exceptional event.

like the rogers outage, such an exceptional event may be deducted
from the overall delay but ultimately has no material effect on the conclusion
i have reached to stay the proceedings considering this all happened a stay was
already warranted.

for the benefit of any reviewing court, i would have found that the
unavailability of defence counsel for multiple trial dates was unfortunate but
not reasonable.

from february 12 to september 10, 2025, multiple trial dates
offered in 11(b) triage court. crown and witnesses were available; defence was
unavailable for all dates prior to october 7, 2025. i would have attributed
five
of these months to defence delay
in subtracting from the overall delay.
however, this all follows my conclusion that a stay was warranted well before
this and becomes redundant in the overall calculation if it is categorized as a
product of “exceptional circumstances” in any event.

the total calculation is therefore as follows:
•
total delay: 1309 days.
•
defence delay: 23
days for delayed filing of trial scheduling form.
•
exceptional circumstances:
14 days for rogers’ outage + 322 days for adjournment of the third
trial dates.

= 950 days
of net delay
(31.2 months or 2.6 years)
conclusion

in sum, the net delay of 950 days far exceeds the 18-month ceiling.

the crown has failed to establish exceptional circumstances
sufficient to rebut the presumption of unreasonableness. defence delay is
minimal and well-accounted for. the procedural history, administratively
prioritized scheduling, and late
dsf
application all point to systemic
issues beyond the control of the accused.

in consideration of the violation of mr. r.s.’s right to be tried
within a reasonable time pursuant to section 11(b) of the
charter of rights
and freedoms
and having found no sufficient justification to rebut the
presumption of unreasonableness,
a stay of
proceedings is hereby ordered pursuant to section 24(1).
released: august 22, 2025
justice
s. robichaud

r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27 (canlii), 1 s.c.r. 631

r. v.cody
2017 scc 31 (canlii), 1 s.c.r. 659

r. v. coulter
2016 onca 704
at paras.
34-41

jordan,
para
83

in calculating the total delay, the start date is excluded,
and the end date is included in the sum.

in the early morning of 8 july 2022, rogers communications inc. (rogers)
experienced a major service outage in its internet protocol (ip) core network
that affected its wireless and wireline services across canada (july 2022
outage). the july 2022 outage lasted from 4:58 edt on 8 july 2022 to 7:00 edt
on 9 july 2022 as services were gradually restored. more than 12 million
customers lost wireless and wireline services, including mobile subscribers,
home internet users, corporate customers, and institutional customers that
provide critical services (e.g., interac e-transfer and electronic payment
services).
https://crtc.gc.ca/eng/publications/reports/xonarp2023.htm

november 18, 2024 (transcript header conflict noted; delay
calculated as 985 days).

r. v. rodriguez
2023 oncj 519, b. jones j.

r. v. mengistu

o.j. no. 3269, at paras 38-43

morgan (power of attorney for property for) v. morgan,
 o.j. no.
964, at para 48

r v jordan, 1 scr 631,
2016 scc 27, 1 rcs 631, scj
no 27, acs no 27, 1 scr 631

https://www.ontariocourts.ca/ocj/criminal-court/criminal-rules/

“intimate partner violence”

although categorized here as ‘exceptional circumstances,’ i would have equally
considered five of these months as defence delay due to unreasonable
unavailability. regardless of classification, the deduction does not alter the outcome.