source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj237/2025oncj237.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. cobb, 2025 oncj 237
date: 2025 04 28
court file no.: windsor
23-81105156
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
brian
cobb
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 21 march
2025
reasons for
judgment released on 28 april 2025
janelle clayton.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
brian cobb.............................................................................................. 
 on his own behalf
ruling
on application to stay proceedings
pratt j.:

on
11 march 2025 i found the applicant brian cobb guilty of one count of uttering
a threat to cause bodily harm. prior to trial, the applicant had filed an
application to stay the proceedings against him on the basis of alleged
violations of the
charter of rights
and freedoms (“the charter”). i elected to
delay hearing that application until after a verdict was reached for two
reasons. first, if i had gone on to find the applicant not guilty of all
charges, the application would have been moot. second, had i elected to hear
the application at the start of trial, it would have prevented the case being
heard on its merits in the allotted time. future trial dates would have needed
to be set. as the charges related to an incident in october 2023, and the
applicant was detained in custody on this matter, i did not want to add further
delay by embarking on a course of action that would have required an
adjournment of the trial.

as
a result, the application was argued on 21 march 2025. this is my ruling.

i
begin by reminding myself that the burden in this application lies on the
applicant. he must establish on a balance of probabilities that one or more
rights guaranteed by the
charter
has been violated, or that the prosecution
against him is otherwise an abuse of process. if he meets that burden on
either front, he must then show why he is entitled to the relief he seeks. in
this case, that relief is a stay of proceedings.
chronology of events

to
place the applicant’s claims in context, it is necessary to set out a detailed
chronology of events in this case. these details are taken either from the
relevant transcripts, or were provided by the applicant in the course of his
submissions and were not challenged by the respondent.

22
august 2023: the applicant was arrested on unrelated charges and
released on bail.

4
november 2023: the applicant was arrested on other
unrelated charges and held in custody. he has been in custody ever since his
arrest.

16
november 2023: the applicant was charged with the
offences before me. they relate to conduct on 31 october and 1 november 2023.

4
december 2023: following a bail hearing, the applicant
was detained in custody. the justice of the peace ordered detention on the
secondary ground noted in s. 515(10), according to the submissions of the
applicant.

6
december 2023: the applicant was charged with a further
unrelated offence.

3
january 2024: the applicant was again detained on the secondary
ground following a bail hearing. in late january, trial dates were set for the
matter currently before me. those dates were 15 september and 15 and 16
october 2024.

1
may 2024: the applicant was detained following a bail review
in the superior court of justice, again on the secondary ground.

6
august 2024: the applicant’s mandatory detention review under s.
525 was, according to the applicant, vacated.

8
september 2024: a friend of the applicant filed a habeas
corpus application on his behalf in the superior court of justice.

12
september 2024: the application was dismissed for non-compliance
with the courts of justice act. a review under s. 525 was set for 24
september. i was not advised of the outcome of this review, if it did take
place.

16
september 2024: this was the first trial date, before
justice bondy. after arraignment and after evidence was received, justice
bondy declared a conflict and recused herself from hearing the matter. her
honour adjourned the case to the second day set for trial in the hopes that
another judge could be put in place to hear the trial.

10
october 2024: counsel evan weber was removed as counsel of
record. the trial dates of 15 and 16 october were left in place. justice
murphy made an order appointing counsel under s. 486.3 to cross-examine the
complainant. the upcoming trial dates of 15 and 16 october were vacated by the
court. the 15
th
was retained but only as a speak-to date to
determine if any counsel had taken the appointment. the applicant objected
strongly to the vacating of the dates and told the court he was prepared for
trial on the dates set.

15
october 2024: new counsel ken golish appeared, willing to take the
s. 486.3 appointment. he was ready to begin trial, having met with the
applicant to prepare. the applicant expressed confusion over why the trial was
not beginning and why he was appearing only by video and not in person. justice
bondy reviewed the status of other outstanding matters and confirmed the matter
was not set to begin trial on that day. the applicant asked for summary
dismissal of the charges. that request was denied. trial co-ordination was
asked about new trial dates and the soonest dates that could be offered were 28
and 29 april 2025. rather than take dates six months away, justice bondy
adjourned proceedings to 18 october before her honour to confirm new dates. in
the meantime, the crown and mr. golish would meet with trial co-ordination to discuss
availability. at the conclusion of the appearance, the applicant asked about
release. crown counsel responded that if he wished to discuss resolving the
matter, his s. 486 counsel could speak to the crown on his behalf.

18
october 2024: the applicant appeared before justice bondy again,
and asked that another judge hear his case as justice bondy had already
declared a conflict. it was at this appearance the applicant first made the
argument that the trial against him had been, in his words, “abandoned” (see
page 12, line 25). justice bondy confirmed her conflict and advised this
appearance was only procedural. crown counsel stated that dates had been
discussed between his office, mr. golish, and the trial co-ordinator. trial
dates in november 2024, and january and march 2025 were considered, though mr.
golish advised he was not available for the november dates and that if they
were chosen, the applicant would have to be given different counsel. the
applicant did not want to set any dates as in his submission, the matter was at
an end and by continuing to be involved, justice bondy was perpetuating the
conflict and causing an injustice. in the end, 25 and 26 november 2024 were
set on the information before me. the applicant spoke on the record about his
belief that allegations had been fabricated against him and that he was being
held as a result of a set-up by the police. the remaining informations were
adjourned into another court to be addressed as justice bondy did not want to
take any further action on them given her conflict.

22
october 2024: justice bazylko addressed the matter, primarily with
regard to s. 486.3 appointments on other files. his honour also confirmed that
the appointment order had already been made on the information before me.

25
october 2024: the s. 486.3 issue was again before justice
bazylko. the applicant expressed concern over his trial dates being further
adjourned as a result of the uncertainty around those appointments given that
he is in custody. matters were adjourned to 29 october for the applicant to
review a list of possible counsel.

29
october 2024: this appearance began with the applicant advising
the court of his concerns about how the police had treated him and people
connected to him. he also provided a form 1 application to the crown and the
court. that application set out his opposition to the manner in which the s.
486.3 application was dealt with on the information before me (the order made
by justice murphy). justice bazylko adjourned that application to a date
before justice murphy. this is the appearance where the applicant first
advised that christina sweet would be involved as appointed counsel. justice
bazylko confirmed the november trial dates on the present information and noted
ms. sweet as appointed counsel. the applicant again alerted the court to the
length of time he’d been in custody and confirmed his wish to be released on
bail.

7
november 2024:
before justice murphy, the applicant
served a new application, the application to which this ruling pertains. in
his submission, the applicant believed this application rendered his 29 october
application moot. as part of his submissions to justice murphy on that day,
the applicant repeated his contention that when the trial dates were vacated,
“the charges have been cancelled, so they’re discharged” (see page 8, lines
7-9). he confirmed with justice murphy that in his view the charges had been
“nullified” (see page 8, line 29). after reviewing his claims regarding the
decisions made by herself and justice bondy, justice murphy told the applicant
he would need to bring his concerns to the superior court of justice. his
request for bail would need to go there as well. the remainder of the
application was referred to the trial judge, as was the 29 october application.

25
november 2024:
the trial of this information was set to
begin before justice bazylko. his honour received this application and needed
time to review it. it appeared crown counsel on the day had also not reviewed
it. the matter was adjourned to the following day.

26
november 2024:
the s. 486.3 application related to the
crown witness katherine marsh was addressed. ms. marsh testified. following
submissions, justice bazylko denied the application as it related to ms.
marsh. as the allotted trial time was used on the application, the matter was
adjourned for trial on 27 february and 3 march 2025.

8
january 2025:
the trial dates were confirmed.

27
february 2025:
the trial began.

the
evidence on the trial concluded on 3 march 2025, and i provided my verdict to
the parties on 11 march.
abuse of process

the
applicant argues his treatment at the hands of the state throughout this
prosecution amounts to an abuse of the court’s process. his rights under s. 7
have been violated, the prosecution has been manifestly unfair, and as a result
he seeks a stay of the proceedings against him.

the
doctrine of abuse of process has been part of canadian law for nearly 150
years. starting with the case of
re:
sproule
1886 canlii 51 (scc),
 12 s.c.r.
140, chief justice ritchie noted the following at paragraph 2:
this writ having
been issued out of this court, under the seal of the court, and tested in the
name of the chief justice (and i know of no other way in which, the writ of
habeas corpus could be issued on the flat of a judge of this court), was a proceeding
in this court, and every superior court, which this court unquestionably is,
has incident to its jurisdiction an inherent right to inquire into and judge of
the regularity or abuse of its process.

over
the course of the following century, the doctrine was developed and in
particular, its applicability to criminal law was confirmed.

in
the case of
r.
v.
young
 o.j. no. 196 (c.j.)
i set out the
history of the doctrine in canada, at paragraphs 17 – 28. i will not repeat it
here, but i summarize the current law as follows:
(1)
a
court has the discretion to stay proceedings when those proceedings
violate the
fundamental principles of justice that underlie the community's sense of fair
play and decency (
see:
r.
v.
young
(1984)
1984 canlii 2145 (on ca),
46 o.r. (2d) 520 (c.a.)
).
(2)
an
abuse may impact charter-protected rights. the specific rights engaged may
vary from case to case (see:
r.
v.
o’connor
1995 canlii 51 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 411
).
(3)
separate
from its impact on
charter
rights, a prosecution may be abusive if it is so
unfair or vexatious that it compromises fundamental notions of justice and the
integrity of the judicial process (
see:
r.
v.
o’connor, supra).
(4)
an
applicant does not need to show misconduct or improper motive on the part of
the crown to establish an abuse of process (
see:
r.
v.
keyowski
1988 canlii 74 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 657
)

a
stay of proceedings should only be granted in the clearest of cases (
see:
r.
v.
jewitt
1985 canlii 47 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 128
).
grounds for the application

the
applicant sets out six distinct headings in his claim for
charter
relief. i
will address the issues according to these headings and in the order he argued
them.
1.
interference in solicitor-client relationship

the
applicant initially had evan weber as his counsel. as noted above, on 10
october 2024, mr. weber was removed as counsel of record. it is clear from the
transcript that the applicant had, in the words of justice murphy, lost
confidence in mr. weber. the crown took no position regarding mr. weber’s
removal. the applicant did voice one concern about the application. at page 4
of the transcript, the applicant confirmed he would represent himself at
trial. he then stated:
brian
cobb: but i’d like to ask mr. weber how he found out that or where he
asserts that i said he was [indiscernible]. how did he find that out?

the
applicant was not permitted to pursue that issue in court that day, but it is
expanded upon in his argument and in his materials.

according
to the affidavit submitted in support of this application, the applicant filed
materials with the court of appeal for ontario. in those materials, he
referred to mr. weber and another lawyer, ed burlew, as “ineffective and
incompetent”. these materials were never provided to mr. weber by the
applicant, and the applicant posits that mr. weber was alerted to the applicant’s
words by the crown. this, he says, was inappropriate. by telling mr. weber
what was in the court of appeal filing, the crown violated his right to counsel
by “poisoning” his relationship with mr. weber.

the
applicant further argues the crown “knowingly conspired to cause mr. evan weber
to remove himself as counsel of record, with intent and malice to create
disruption and delay in the trial proceedings and to continue unlawful
imprisonment of the accused, brian cobb, and to sabotage the accused’s right to
retain and instruct counsel” (see: paragraph 6 of the affidavit).

in
response, crown counsel mr. lesperance did not dispute the allegation that it
was the crown who told mr. weber about the applicant’s statement. he argues
there was nothing stopping the crown from sharing that information with the
person who was at that point still counsel of record. more than that, as the
applicant’s opinion of mr. weber could have made any subsequent trial
proceedings vulnerable to a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, he says
it was entirely proper for the crown to do what it did.

in
essence, this is a claim for relief under
ss. 7
and
10(b)
of the
charter. by
doing what it did, the applicant argues the crown violated his right to life,
liberty, and security of the person through their intent to create disruption
and delay in the applicant’s trial and to continue his imprisonment. they
further violated his right to retain and instruct his counsel of choice by
telling mr. weber what the applicant had said about him.

to
decide this issue, i must only consider the evidence before me. i can draw
inferences from that evidence, but those inferences must be reasonable. i
cannot speculate or fill in blanks with suspicion.

i
have seen no evidence of any intent on the part of the crown to disrupt these
proceedings. throughout, the crown has sought to keep the matter moving
forward despite the various obstacles that have arisen. at no point did any one
crown counsel, or the state more broadly, ever take any intentional steps to
subvert the trial process or compromise the applicant’s rights.

in
his application to be removed from the record, mr. weber said the following:
mr. cobb has filed
a notice of appeal in the ontario court of appeal related to proceedings in the
superior court of justice of september 12, 2024. in the notice and
accompanying materials filed on behalf of mr. cobb, he repeatedly asserts that
counsel evan weber is ineffective and/or incompetent.

the
proceedings referred to from 12 september 2024 were the dismissal of the
applicant’s habeas corpus application by justice carroccia for lack of
compliance with the courts of justice act.

the
question of whether the crown should have told mr. weber what was in the
applicant’s materials is a difficult one. mr. lesperance argues there was
nothing preventing them from doing so. that is true. he also argues that the
applicant’s words created the possibility of an eventual appeal based on the ineffective
assistance of counsel. i find that to be somewhat speculative but not entirely
without foundation.

at
the time the crown received the materials, mr. weber would still have been
counsel of record. it is not surprising that they would speak to him about
them. certainly, they created a potentially awkward and difficult situation. 
but, given mr. weber’s status as counsel of record, i find no fault in the
crown sharing the materials with him.

i
find no breach of either
s. 7
or
10(b)
of the
charter
on this ground.
2.
the
events of 10 october 2024

three
things happened on 10 october 2024: mr. weber was removed as counsel of record,
the upcoming trial dates of 15 and 16 october were vacated, and the court
appointed counsel under s. 486.3. the applicant argues that all of these
events played a role in the violation of his
charter
rights. again, i would
consider this ground to be based on s. 7.

the
applicant argues the removal of counsel five days before what he says was the
trial date is prejudicial to him. it left him without a lawyer less than a
week before the start of trial. such a removal would be prejudicial to any
defendant, but it’s all the more so when that defendant is in custody. i would
agree that suddenly being without counsel five days before trial is an even
bigger problem for an in-custody defendant whose ability to retain new counsel
is likely diminished.

the
difficulty for the applicant is that when asked his position on mr. weber’s
removal, he was not opposed to it. this is from the transcript of that day,
page 4, lines 13-17:
brian
cobb: well, my position is that i have trial in five days. so, i’m
not moving the trial, so that’s going to proceed no matter what, whether or not
mr. weber’s there, i’ll represent myself in that matter.

while
i agree the removal of counsel shortly before trial can be prejudicial to a
defendant, in this case the applicant did not have any issue with it. he was
ready to proceed to trial whether mr. weber was there or not. the applicant
has not shown a breach of his s. 7 rights on the basis of the removal of
counsel

after
counsel was removed, crown counsel ms. landine expressed concern about the
approaching trial dates. the applicant needed to receive his disclosure as a
self-represented litigant, and she also advised the crown needed to bring a s.
486.3 application.

to
the first point, the applicant assured the court that he’d reviewed his
disclosure and was prepared to proceed to trial. the sole remaining issue was
the need for the appointment of counsel to cross-examine the complainant.

the
information before me contains two counts: breaching a release order under s.
145 and uttering a threat under s. 264.1. each count relates to a different
complainant. neither complainant was under 18 years old pursuant to s.
486.3(1) and neither count was an enumerated count under s. 486.3(2). an order
for appointment of counsel for cross-examination would therefore be governed by
ss. 486.3(3) and (4). the sections state:
(3)
in any proceedings against an
accused, the judge or justice may, on application of the prosecutor in respect
of a witness who is not entitled to make an application under subsection (1) or
(2), or on application of such a witness, order that the accused not personally
cross-examine the witness if the judge or justice is of the opinion that the
order would allow the giving of a full and candid account from the witness of
the acts complained of or would otherwise be in the interest of the proper
administration of justice. if the order is made, the judge or justice shall
appoint counsel to conduct the cross-examination.
(4)
in determining whether to make an
order under subsection (3), the judge or justice shall consider
(a)
the age of the witness;
(b)
the witness’ mental or physical disabilities,
if any;
(c)
the nature of the offence;
(d)
whether the witness needs the
order for their security or to protect them from intimidation or retaliation;
(e)
the nature of any relationship
between the witness and the accused;
(f)
society’s interest in encouraging
the reporting of offences and the participation of victims and witnesses in the
criminal justice process; and
(g)
any other factor that the judge or
justice considers relevant.

on
10 october 2024, there was no application before the court. likewise, there
was no affidavit setting out evidence related to the factors listed in s.
486.3(4). ms. landine acknowledged there may not have been an application
filed but did send a draft order to the court clerk.

the
order sought by the crown was discretionary. to obtain it, the crown had to
show on a balance of probabilities that it was needed to allow for the giving
of a full and candid account by the witnesses in question. this required the
calling of reliable and trustworthy evidence (see:
r.
v.
tehrankari
 o.j. no. 5652 (s.c.j.);
r.
v.
doherty
 o.j. no. 947
(c.j.)
) the applicant should have been given an opportunity to cross-examine
any affiant and make submissions on the point (see:
doherty,
supra,
citing
r.
v.
almiri
cited as
2024 onsc 5036
). instead, the order
was made summarily with no evidentiary record or input from the applicant. it
seems he would have had submissions to make had he been asked, as he was asked
about that order on 22 october 2024 by justice bazylko. at page 12, line 20 of
that day’s transcript, he was asked about the order granted on this
information. he said:
brian
cobb: yeah. those – i would like to know the section that they used
and, in particular, i would probably like to question on that one because for –
that one – that one i would object to.

to
be abundantly clear, the steps taken on 10 october, by both the crown and the
learned justice, were motivated by the twin goals of safeguarding the
applicant’s fair trial rights and keeping his case moving forward in a rapidly
evolving (and arguably deteriorating, given mr. weber’s departure) situation. the
granting of the order as it related to maisam al-rais was entirely reasonable. 
it was the way in which this order came about that causes concern.

i
find the applicant has shown a breach of his s. 7 rights based on the manner in
which the s. 486.3 application was addressed.

because
the s. 486.3 order was made, it became necessary to vacate the trial dates. it
was not unreasonable to assume no counsel would be able to take the
appointment, familiarize themselves with the case, and be available for trial
five days later.

the
applicant argues that when the trial dates were vacated, the matter came to an
end. vacating trial dates is, he says, tantamount to dismissing the charges.

the
applicant represents himself in these proceedings. i would not expect him to
be conversant in the language of the legal system. the term “vacating trial
dates” is used regularly in our courts. “vacate” does not mean what the
applicant thinks it means, when used in this context. it is not the equivalent
of a stay of proceedings or the withdrawal of a charge. both of those steps
would indeed bring an end to a prosecution. saying trial dates are vacated,
however, does no such thing. it is functionally the same as saying the
original dates are to be replaced without immediately setting new ones. 
vacating trial dates merely removes them from the trial schedule; it does not
foreclose the setting of future dates.

there
is little caselaw on this point. the decision of justice henry in the case of
r.
v.
goldrick
 o.j. no. 202 (h.c.j.)
dealt with a similar issue. 
there, his lordship considered a defendant who had been released on an undertaking. 
some time after his release, he was charged with breaching two listed
conditions. after being charged with the breaches, a new release was entered,
and the original release was vacated. it was argued at the trial of the
breaches that vacating the initial release had the effect of nullifying the
prior breaches.

in
rejecting that argument, justice henry stated at paragraph 30:
30 the question
is whether, by using the word "vacate" in section 457.5, parliament
intended that the reviewing judge should void the order ab initio so as to
negative its effect for all purposes, or whether, by use of this language, it
merely intended that the reviewing judge should terminate the order and
substitute another order effective from the date of his decision. while the
variation in the use of language is puzzling, it does not appear to me that
parliament intended that by vacating the existing order, pursuant to section
457.5(7), the reviewing judge renders it void ab initio. no reason has been
advanced, nor do i see any, that would render such a result logical, reasonable
or desirable…

and
at paragraph 31:
31 i conclude
therefore, that the word "vacate" used in section 457.5 means nothing
more than that the order is to be cancelled, or terminated, by the reviewing
judge, but that its prior operation is not impaired.

applying
the reasoning in
goldrick
to the present case, vacating a trial date, in
the sense that that word is commonly used in the courts, does not mean the
entire underlying proceeding is halted. it means only that the existing trial
dates are to be cancelled and replaced.

there
is no basis to find that the prosecution met its end when the trial dates of 15
and 16 october 2024 were vacated. the continuation of the case after those
dates were vacated is not a breach of any charter-protected right.
3.
the
conduct of justice bondy

as
noted in the chronology above, the applicant found himself back before justice
bondy on the 15
th
and 18
th
of october.

regarding
the events of the 15
th, the applicant contends that her honour saying
the word “language” while reviewing the information is evidence of the court
covering up an error. at paragraph 24 of the applicant’s affidavit, he states:
at this time, on
october 15, 2024, bondy s. recognizes that a major error has occurred and
begins the cover up of this error by first correcting the language on record
from “trial proceedings cancelled” to “trial proceedings adjourned” thus,
breaching her oath of office under the courts of justice act, committing fraud
upon the court, and breach of trust by a public official.

also
on the 15
th, the applicant requested a dismissal of the charges. 
justice bondy denied that request. this led to an exchange between the
applicant and the court. in his affidavit, the applicant argues that by making
that ruling, her honour was acting improperly given her previously declared
conflict. he also disputes justice bondy attempting to set trial dates over
his objection and her use of s. 486.3 counsel to set those dates on the
applicant’s behalf.

on
the 18
th, the applicant returned before justice bondy. he argues
that by confirming the dates that had been set by the crown and mr. golish, her
honour was perpetuating a miscarriage of justice. this is based on two points:
justice bondy should not have had any further involvement in the case given her
conflict, and the charges had been voided when they were vacated.

the
accusations made by the applicant against justice bondy are of the utmost
gravity. he accuses her honour of breaching her oath of office and committing
a fraud. in a sense, this could be framed as a complaint of judicial bias, as
the applicant argues justice bondy was acting against him by dismissing his request
and continuing to exercise control over his case despite her conflict. as justice
farrar of the nova scotia court of appeal said
in
r.
v.
nevin
2024 nsca 64
at paragraph
49:
proving a
reasonable apprehension of judicial bias requires clearing a high bar, in large
part owing to the strong presumption of judicial impartiality which is a
cornerstone of our legal system. the legal principles engaged by reasonable
apprehension of bias claims were described by saunders j.a. in nova scotia
(attorney general) v. maclean:
 first, as a
matter of law, there is a strong presumption of judicial impartiality, which is
not easily displaced. second, there is a heavy burden of proof upon the person
making the allegation to present cogent evidence establishing "serious
grounds" sufficient to justify a finding that the decision-maker should be
disqualified on account of bias. third, whether a reasonable apprehension of
bias exists is "highly fact-specific". such an inquiry is one where
the context, and the particular circumstances, are of supreme importance. the
allegation can only be addressed carefully in light of the entire context.
there are no shortcuts. see wewaykum indian band v. canada,
2003 scc 45.

justice
farrar’s words deal only with a
reasonable apprehension
of bias, not
with actual bias. that is, even showing the potential for suspected bias is a
daunting challenge. in the present case, the applicant seeks to show actual
bias and misconduct.

dealing
first with his contention regarding justice bondy’s utterance of the word
“language”, i find no support for his argument. at the time her honour said
the word, she was reviewing the information before her. in all criminal
proceedings in canada, defendants have the right to select either of the
official languages. her honour was reviewing the history of the case to that
point. her saying the word, “language” can only reasonably be interpreted as
reviewing the language election the applicant would have made. in any event,
he has offered no evidence for an alternative interpretation. there is no
support whatsoever for his contention that the word was the start of a cover up
where the court changed the word “cancelled” to “adjourned” regarding the
vacated trial dates. he is free to hold that opinion, but there is no evidence
to support it.

i
see no issue with justice bondy denying the applicant’s request for a dismissal
of the charges. summarily disposing of charges is an extraordinary step seldom
taken and seldom left undisturbed on appeal (see:
r.
v.
sohi
[2005[
o.j. no. 1931 (s.c.j.);
r.
v.
siciliano
 o.j. no. 1207
(c.j.)
).

faced
with a situation where criminal charges had not been addressed on the first
trial date, justice bondy acted appropriately by engaging the trial
co-ordinator and attempting to set new dates. when her honour learned the
first available dates were in april of the following year, she adjourned the
matter for three days to allow further dates to be canvassed. in doing so, her
honour acted properly.

this
was by no means an appropriate case for the summary dismissal of the charges. trial
dates had been set. the trial did not proceed because of an unforeseen
conflict. the court then began attempting to set new dates and took steps to
secure those dates as quickly as possible.

the
applicant has provided no evidence to support his exceptionally serious
accusations. i find as a fact that throughout, justice bondy took appropriate
steps to move the applicant’s matter forward. there is no breach of any
charter-protected right on the basis of the court’s conduct.
4.
the
conduct of crown counsel jayme lesperance

the
applicant further takes issue with the conduct of crown counsel jayme
lesperance on that day. he accuses counsel of extortion by making any release
from custody contingent on a guilty plea. his continued detention also
amounts, he says, to kidnapping and forcible confinement.

mr.
lesperance’s participation on 15 october got off to a rocky start when he
called the applicant’s submissions “wholly untrue”. he was referring to the
applicant stating that he thought his trial was going to begin that day. (in
fairness, it is not clear where the applicant would have gotten that impression
as the transcripts from the prior days are clear that the 15
th
had
been changed only to a speak-to date. there was no reason to expect a trial to
commence that day.) the crown may have felt the applicant’s position was
unsupported or unreasonable, but calling it “wholly untrue” likely did nothing
to mitigate the tension in court that day.

from
the transcript, it appears that mr. lesperance and the applicant were talking
past each other when the subject of the applicant’s release was brought up. when
the applicant sought bail at page 26, line 20 of the transcript, mr. lesperance
responded by addressing resolution. later in the transcript it becomes unclear
what the applicant is referring to when he says at page 28, line 9 and onward,
“yeah. that’s what i’m saying. if trial dates aren’t going to be pushed in a reasonable
time until 2025, that we should be able to…come to an agreement on pleas.” so
perhaps he was discussing resolution. or perhaps, bail pending sentence. it
was never clarified by anyone. in any case, there was nothing extortive in mr.
lesperance’s words. the applicant asked about release and the crown responded
with talk of resolution. at worst, this was a misunderstanding of each other. 
it was not an attempt to force a guilty plea from the applicant. i find no
misconduct on the part of mr. lesperance.

another
ground of complaint regarding the crown was mr. lesperance being the third
crown counsel to appear on the matter since the initial trial date of 16
september. at paragraph 19 of his affidavit, the applicant states:
the appearance of
three (3) crown agents/officers since the commencement of trial september 16,
2024 demonstrates the crown and his agents/officers are working as a team to
prosecute and this unfair ganging up on a self-represented litigant shows
prosecutorial misconduct, with intent.

the
essex county crown attorney’s office is staffed by more than two dozen
lawyers. it is one of the busiest offices in the west region of the province. 
it is not surprising at all that different crowns would be involved in a case,
especially a case that is adjourned from its trial dates and needs new dates. 
such matters are typically adjourned to days convenient to either defence counsel
or the court, or, if sent to date-setting court, are put to the day of the week
when matters starting with the defendant’s surname initial are heard. there is
nothing nefarious in different crown lawyers appearing on a file. crown
staffing of courts is the responsibility and purview of the crown attorney and
there is no requirement that the same prosecutor follow a case from start to
finish across all appearances. such a requirement, in fact, would likely lead
to additional delay and prevent cases from being heard in a timely manner when
date setting is placed at the mercy of a busy prosecutor’s schedule.

finally,
as it relates to the applicant’s continued detention, the transcripts reveal
that he’d been through multiple bail hearings and reviews. he clearly
disagreed with his detention, but the issue was being addressed according to
law. it was in no way a kidnapping or forcible confinement.

the
applicant has not established a breach of any charter-protected right related
to mr. lesperance’s conduct.
5.
the
conduct of counsel ken golish

the
applicant contends that mr. golish, appointed only under s. 486.3, stepped far
beyond the confines of his appointment when he participated in setting trial
dates on the applicant’s behalf. he accuses mr. golish of breaching an oath
under the courts of justice act and of committing professional misconduct,
fraud, and breach of trust in so doing.

i
begin my analysis of this point by observing that counsel appointed under s.
486.3 often have a difficult job. they are not the defendant’s counsel. they
are appointed to assist unrepresented defendants in the cross-examination of
certain witnesses. that is the entire scope of their appointment. in
practice, many of the lawyers who take such appointments go beyond the four
corners of their role in an effort to further assist. this additional
assistance is often invaluable and appreciated by all parties.

in
the present case, mr. golish accepted the appointment. according to the
transcript, he met with the applicant to prepare for trial. when it became
clear the trial was not going to proceed, he was involved in the canvassing of
new dates. he attended the trial co-ordinator’s office for that purpose. the
earliest dates to come out of that discussion were in november 2024, when mr.
golish was not available. he said the applicant would have to secure different
counsel as a result. that was the last time mr. golish appeared on the matter.

the
applicant takes issue with mr. golish’s appointment and with his subsequent
actions. he says he was denied any input on who the appointed counsel would
be, and that mr. golish should not have tried to obtain trial dates without the
applicant present.

i
agree with the applicant that he should have had input into who would be
appointed. that said, the applicant seemed content with mr. golish as when he
appeared in court on 15 october, he had met with him and was, he said, prepared
to begin the trial. consequently, any error or
charter
breach related to mr.
golish’s selection seems to have had no negative effect on the applicant.

in
my view, it is all too easy to over-rely on counsel appointed under s. 486.3. 
they provide a crucial service to the court, to the defendant, and to the
administration of justice. the attractiveness of having a lawyer involved in
the prosecution of an otherwise unrepresented litigant is often irresistible. that
cannot mean, however, that the appointment process is a rubber stamp, and that
appointed counsel is
de facto
defence counsel for all purposes. when,
for example, mr. lesperance invited appointed counsel to embark on resolution
discussions with the crown, he went well beyond the parameters of the
appointment. it does not appear, however, that any harm was occasioned by this
suggestion as no resolution discussions ever took place as a result.

i
am concerned, however, about mr. golish attending at the trial co-ordinator’s
office to canvass dates in the absence of the applicant. it must be remembered
that the applicant was representing himself. he had no retained counsel
defending him. mr. golish was there solely to cross-examine certain witnesses. 
all date-setting actions taken in the case should have happened in the presence
of the applicant. there is no evidence the applicant delegated the setting of
dates to mr. golish; on the contrary, the applicant was entirely against that
idea. this is not as serious as a defendant being excluded from a portion of
his trial, but it is still important. it is all the more important when a
defendant is in custody and time to trial is of the essence. the applicant
should have been present when dates were discussed.

on
the evidence before me, there is no support for the argument that mr. golish
ever acted contrary to his obligations as an officer of the court. at no time
did he commit professional misconduct, fraud, or breach of trust. throughout,
i find as a fact that mr. golish attempted to assist the applicant to the best
of his ability. he ought to have insisted the applicant be present for
date-setting with the trial co-ordinator. failing to do so does not equate to
misconduct or fraud.

i
ascribe no ill will or bad faith to any justice system participant on the issue
of mr. golish’s involvement in this case. all were acting in accordance with
accepted practices. the issue as i see it is that those practices could
benefit from review.

while
i have found some areas of concern regarding counsel’s appointment and
subsequent actions, the applicant has failed to show that those concerns rise
to the level of a
charter
breach.
6.
the
crown’s responding factum

in
his response to the crown’s factum, the applicant largely repeats the arguments
made in his initial application. he also addresses certain statements made by
the crown and argues they are further evidence that this prosecution is an
abuse of process.

he
points to the crown alluding to other possible offences arising from the
applicant’s affidavit. specifically, paragraph 5 of the crown’s factum states:
as the accused is
self-represented, the crown feels obliged to outline two of the sections of the
criminal code
of canda [sic] for his benefit that he may of [sic] violated,
subjecting himself to potential further criminal liability, based on the
affidavit mr. cobb has filed with the court and served upon the crown:

the
crown then sets out the offences of perjury pursuant to s. 131 and the swearing
of a false affidavit pursuant to s. 138.

in
response, in argument, the applicant alleges the crown’s conduct amounts to a
breach of trust by a public officer, pursuant to s. 122. as well, as noted
above, the applicant also accused several parties of fraud, breach of trust,
kidnapping, and forcible confinement.

including
accusations of criminality and veiled threats of criminal charges in the pleadings
or argument of any party is unhelpful and should be discouraged in the
strongest terms. this goes for all parties, but is especially so in crown
pleadings, where the crown represents the broader state that actually has the
ability to lay such charges.

the
tone in all pleadings from both sides in this case is angry and aggressive. i
am grateful that this approach did not extend to appearances before me. in
court, all parties have been professional and respectful. i sincerely
appreciate that. it is unfortunate this reserve did not extend to the written
materials filed.

the
applicant has likened the crown’s words to those
employed by crown counsel in
the case of
r.
v.
babos
2014 scc 16 (canlii),
 1 s.c.r. 309. in that case, the
crown threatened additional charges if the defendant did not plead guilty. if
there was no plea, she said, the defendant would be “hit by a train”. at
paragraph 61, justice moldaver called this a “bullying tactic” that “was
reprehensible and unworthy of the dignity of her office.” justice moldaver
concluded his appraisal of the crown’s conduct by saying:
in threatening to charge mr. piccirilli
with more offences if he did not plead guilty, ms. tremblay betrayed her role
as a crown. manifestly it is the type of conduct the court should dissociate
itself from.

while i
am troubled by the tone and content of the crown’s responding factum, it is clearly
different from what was said
in
babos. the crown’s words are in
response to what amounts to a 21-page attack by the applicant on the integrity
of the justice system and all participants. it is not a threat made early in a
proceeding to coerce a guilty plea. it is, at most, an overexuberant defence
after the personal professionalism and honour of multiple counsel and judges
was assailed repeatedly.

on that
note, i pause to observe that it may have been advisable for a crown other than
mr. lesperance to draft the responding factum. given his repeated mention in
the applicant’s materials, it was not impossible that he could have become a witness
in these proceedings. having another, unrelated crown counsel step in to
respond may have been a better course of action.

the
remainder of the crown’s responding factum is devoted to setting out the law
and putting the applicant to the proof of his case. taking the entirety of the
crown’s response into account, i find the applicant has not established a
breach of any charter-protected right related to it.
analysis

in
babos,
supra, justice moldaver confirmed the two categories of abuse set out
in
o’connor: the main category which deals with trial fairness, and the
residual category, which deals with the overarching integrity of the judicial
process.

the
applicant does not differentiate between the categories in his submissions. i
do not hold that against him as this area of law is complicated and i would not
expect a self-represented litigant to be acquainted with the differences
between them.

his
argument is that the multitude of unfair events he has endured must lead to a
finding that the entire prosecution is an abuse. from the time of his initial
arrest to the start of the trial, he submits that he’s experienced repeated
oppression and disregard for his rights. taken as a whole, the entirety of his
experience makes out his claim of abuse and entitles him to a stay of
proceedings.

i will
first consider abuse through the lens of the
charter.

the
only
charter
violation the applicant has established is related to the
appointment of counsel under s. 486.3. i have found that the manner in which
this appointment was made denied him the ability to be heard.

this
breach, like all
charter
breaches, is serious. its seriousness is attenuated,
however, by the fact that had the proper procedure been followed, the
application would likely have been granted in any event. the order was
discretionary, but the grounds for it, had they been presented, were strong. the
witness to whom it pertained was the applicant’s former spouse. given the
relatively low bar set out in the section – the crown need only show it “
would allow the
giving of a full and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of
or would otherwise be in the interest of the proper administration of justice”
–
i
am confident that the order would have been made. this significantly reduces
the seriousness of the breach.

in the
end, the applicant was content with mr. golish being involved until he was no
longer available for trial. ms. sweet, the counsel who took up the appointment
did so with the applicant’s blessing, and represented him well.

regarding
the other areas argued by the applicant, i have not found any to rise to the
level of a
charter
breach. i find the one established
s. 7
violation is not so
grave as to constitute an abuse of process.

that
does not mean, however, that the history of the case is meaningless. even if
events do not disclose a
charter
breach, they could still show an abuse under
the residual category.

the
applicant has pointed to the actions of various justice system participants to
support his claim of abuse. i remind myself that he does not need to show
improper conduct or motive on the part of the state to establish an abuse. if
the entire prosecution is shown to be unfair or vexatious to the point that it
undermines fundamental notions of justice and the integrity of the judicial
process, it may still be abusive even if no malice or intent is shown.

i have
considered all of the evidence called on this application. i have reviewed the
chronology of events, the transcripts, and the many steps this case has taken. 
over nearly two years, the applicant has been through the bail process multiple
times, including reviews in the superior court. he has been through the
date-setting process. he has retained and lost counsel. he has had counsel
appointed, and seen that appointment transferred to other counsel. he has been
given trial dates and seen them adjourned. he has dealt with numerous crown
counsel and been before several judicial officers.

to be
sure, the progress of his case has not been smooth. it has been complicated
and has gone down many side roads on the way to trial. after careful
deliberation, however, i find that neither the manner in which the applicant
has been prosecuted, nor the manner in which his case has been addressed by the
courts, have been unfair or vexatious to the point that they undermine notions
of justice or the judicial process itself. has it been perfect? no. but
perfection is not the standard. to show an abuse of process, the applicant must
show a level of unfairness (through
charter
violations, inherent unfairness, or
both) that renders the entire prosecution an affront to the public’s sense of
fair play and decency. it is a very high standard not easily met. it has not
been met in the present case.

assessing
the applicant’s areas of complaint individually and cumulatively, i find they
do not constitute an abuse of process pursuant to the residual category.

as i
have not found an abuse of process in this case, no stay of proceedings is
warranted.

the
application will be dismissed. we will proceed to sentencing.
released:
28
april 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt