source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj712/2025oncj712.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. luff, 2025 oncj 712
date: 
2025 09 02
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 48109667
4810 998 24 48126495
4810 998 24 48126494
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
seria luff
before
justice peter n. fraser
heard
on april 25, 2025 & august 22, 2205
reasons
for sentence released on september 2, 2025
a. martin.............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
c. zeeh.......................................................................... counsel
for the accused seria luff
fraser j.:

seria luff plead guilty before me to possession
of cocaine, oxycodone and hydromorphone for the purpose of trafficking,
arising out of an investigation on march 16, 2024. she further plead guilty to
breaching the house arrest conditions of her release, possessing cocaine for
the purpose of trafficking, and possessing the proceeds of crime in connection
with the events of august 29, 2024. she has admitted some additional related
criminal activity, as set out below, by way of an agreed statement of fact filed
by the parties.

the crown seeks a penitentiary sentence of 3
years, less credit for time spent in pre-sentence custody. the defence seeks a
conditional sentence.
facts

on march 16, 2024, ms. luff was arrested on an
outstanding warrant while driving a black jeep grand cherokee. a black satchel fell
out of the vehicle as she exited the driver’s seat. it contained a digital
scale, separately packaged quantities of powder and crack cocaine, and several
empty plastic baggies. a purse was found in the back seat containing
a wallet with ms. luff's identification, a large quantity of canadian and us
currency, cellular phones, a teva-oxycocet prescription pill bottle, and a
ziploc-style baggie with additional oxycocet pills.

in the center console of the jeep, officers found an un-labelled pill
bottle containing a large quantity of 8 mg hydromorphone pills and a smaller
quantity of oxycocet pills. there was also a small ziploc baggie with morphine
pills, a used crack pipe, and some additional canadian currency.

police obtained a search warrant for ms. luff’s residence and for another
vehicle, a grey audi, that was registered to her. inside the residence, police
found a small satchel in the hall closet containing a digital scale and powder
cocaine. inside the audi, police found a small baggie of crack cocaine and a
cell phone. the total amounts of the items seized from the investigation were
as follows:
•
crack cocaine: 38.88 grams
•
powder cocaine: 40.76 grams
•
oxycodone: 411.08 grams of oxycocet pills composed of 5 mg
oxycodone and 325 mg acetaminophen (there were 708 pills with an estimated value
of $3540)
•
hydromorphone: 14.43 grams (there were 96 pills with an estimated
value of $1400-$1920)
•
morphine: 13.27 grams (there were 21 pills with an estimated
value of $315)
•
canadian currency: $8271.00
•
u.s. currency: $420.00

on june 20, 2024, ms. luff was released on a house arrest bail for these
offences. she was to remain in her residence unless in the company of her
surety. soon after, the police engaged in surveillance and observed ms. luff driving
the jeep grand cherokee and holding a black satchel bag
on several
dates. they obtained another search warrant for the jeep and for her residence.

on august 29, 2024, the police observed ms. luff outside her
residence, driving the jeep alone. she was arrested and the vehicle was
searched. police found a black satchel on the floor by the driver’s seat containing
cocaine and dilaudid pills (hydromorphone). a quantity of canadian currency was
found in the centre console. the total amounts were as follows:
•
cocaine: 26.25 grams
•
hydromorphone: 67 dilaudid pills
•
canadian currency: $9,993.70
principles of sentencing

sentencing is a highly individualized process:
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58. the court must give effect to a number of different and
often competing sentencing objectives.
section 718
of the
criminal code
directs that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and,
more specifically, to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of
a just, peaceful and safe society. according to s. 718.1, the fundamental
principle of sentencing is proportionality. the sentence must be proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
parity of sentence is a corollary to proportionality. it requires that similar sentences
be imposed upon offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances:
r. v. lacasse,
supra, at para.
2.

where sentences are imposed for multiple offences, the court must
consider the principle of totality. w
here
consecutive sentences are imposed, the court must ensure the combined sentence
is not unduly long or harsh and that the global sentence does not exceed the
offender's overall culpability:
r. v. c.a.m.,
1996 canlii 230 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 500.

i
consider the potential need to separate ms. luff from society in order to
protect the public and the need to promote in her a sense of responsibility for
the harm she has done. i consider the principle of restraint, which is codified
in s. 718.2(d) and (e) of the
code. i also consider the principle of
rehabilitation.
the
gladue
issue

the
defence submits that ms. luff is indigenous and the principles set out by the
supreme court in
r. v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 688, and by parliament in
s. 718.2(e) apply to this case. the crown submits there is insufficient
evidence to establish ms. luff’s indigenous ancestry.

the
defence engaged with aboriginal legal services (als) to obtain a
gladue
report. in a letter addressed to the court,
als
advised that a
gladue
report could not be prepared in relation to ms. luff, as her indigenous
heritage could not be confirmed.

extensive
research had been conducted using the canadian census, newspaper articles, and
ancestry.ca, a user-generated family tree application. this research indicated only
that ms. luff’s ancestry on her mother’s side was european, with specific ties
noted to england, scotland and ireland. records were found relating to over a
dozen ancestors, however, there was no evidence of indigenous ancestry:
there were no indigenous
identifiers for any of these individuals, and none of them appeared to live on
or near a first nation in any record ms. galley could locate. additionally,
even if an indigenous ancestor were able to be identified, on its own, a
connection from the 1800s or earlier is too tenuous for the preparation of a
gladue report.

ms.
luff had never met her father, and little could be learned about his family
background. but, according to the accused’s mother, ms. luff’s father was named
alejandro rodriguez gonzalez and he was from uruguay.

i
also have the benefit of a pre-sentence report in this matter, which is dated
june 19, 2025. ms. luff reported that her family identifies with spiritual
traditions linked to their indigenous background, particularly the wolf clan.
she further claimed that the family regularly attends powwows and participates
in other traditional activities, helping them maintain a connection to their
ojibwe heritage.

these
assertions are contradicted by the letter from aboriginal legal services, which
is dated june 12, 2025. the writer of the letter advised that, “ms. luff could
not speak about her experiences as an indigenous person and did not know more
about that subject.” the same was reported in relation to the accused’s mother,
deanna luff: “she could not discuss her experiences as an indigenous person and
did not know more about that subject, nor could she discuss the experiences of
her family members.”

there
is some question about the standard of proof that should apply to the question of
whether an accused is an indigenous person for the purpose of sentencing. both
counsel ventured that proof on a balance of probabilities, which is the
standard that applies to mitigating factors on sentence, might apply here. i am
not persuaded that one’s status as an indigenous person is akin to a mitigating
factor on sentence, such that the same standard of proof should apply. it is,
rather, a threshold question that determines the principles of sentencing that are
engaged and the lens through which the accused person’s life experiences should
be viewed. i am keenly aware that the destructive effects of colonialism are
themselves the reason many indigenous persons struggle to find reliable
information about their heritage. within this context, i am inclined toward a
lower standard of proof. there is some authority for this approach:
r. v.
brown,
2020 onca 657;
r. v. ninan,
2025 abcj 93.

ultimately,
i need not determine the precise threshold, as the evidence before me falls
short of any standard of proof that might reasonably apply to this question. in
my view, ms. luff’s indigenous ancestry has not been established for the
purposes of sentencing.

this
is not to say that ms. luff
has
no indigenous ancestry. i cannot know
that, nor could als rule that possibility out. but, as a matter of law, i
cannot find that she is an indigenous person for the purposes of sentencing on
this record. and i am unable to evaluate the impact, if any, of that historic
experience upon her specifically, or upon these offences.

nor
is this to say that some of the same considerations that arise in the context
of sentencing of indigenous persons cannot apply here. depending on the
circumstances, an accused person’s background and personal challenges may be highly
relevant to sentencing no matter their ancestry. the disruptions to ms. luff’s
family structure, and the intersection of substance abuse, economic
disadvantage and trauma, are very much relevant considerations in this case. as
counsel for ms. luff submits, her family and personal history are significant
to the sentencing process, regardless of whether she is sentenced according to
the principles in
r. v. gladue.
circumstances of the accused

ms.
luff is a 33-year-old first offender. she had a difficult upbringing and had to
overcome some challenging life circumstances, as set out in the pre-sentence
report. her early family environment lacked stability. she never met her
biological father. she witnessed an incident of physical abuse
by her stepfather towards her mother which led to their separation. ms.
luff reported that she was taken from her mother by the cas for about two
months when she was nine years old. she reported physical, emotional and
neglect abuse in foster care during that time. she struggled in school with
what she described as adhd and what her mother characterized as a mild learning
disability. she described her teenage years as turbulent,
involving negative peer associations, smoking, and an unplanned pregnancy at
age 18.

ms.
luff was in an 18-year relationship with the father of her daughter. that relationship was strained by the partner’s decade-long drug
addiction, which influenced ms. luff herself to engage in substance use. following that, her most recent relationship was abusive,
and ended with her partner’s incarceration.

ms.
luff has reported a history of drug use and addiction. she has asserted that
these charges are directly related to her addiction and to financial hardship.
i am prepared to accept that addiction was a partial motivation for these
crimes. however, i agree with the crown that the quantities of drugs involved
here far outstripped what would be required to support any kind of
subsistence-level drug addiction: on this point see
r. v. cinelli,
2018
onsc 4983
at paras.
29-32.

there
is also information in the pre-sentence report about the family’s history of
economic disadvantage. however, there is little evidence of ms. luff working to
support herself through any legal means prior to committing these offences. her
employment history was limited to some part-time work in her teenage years, and
some work as a house cleaner for 8 months in 2020.

while
i accept that both of these factors played a role in these offences, i find
this was a sophisticated and sustained drug trafficking operation, done
primarily for profit.
aggravating factors

there
are serious aggravating factors in this case. i consider the nature of the
drugs in question. ms. luff was trafficking in hard drugs, including hydromorphone, oxycodone and cocaine. these are highly addictive,
extremely destructive drugs, which is reflected in the heavy sentences that
accompany convictions for possession for the purpose of trafficking. i return
to this later in consideration of the range of sentence.

i
take into account the significant quantity of illegal drugs in this case. these
were large amounts, well beyond what could be associated with personal use.
they are also beyond what a low-end, street level trafficker would possess. i
conclude that ms. luff was a mid-level trafficker, capable of re-supplying
street level dealers with large amounts of hard drugs, including ounce level quantities
of cocaine. i reach this conclusion in view of the large amounts in her
possession, the variety of drugs involved, the significant cash proceeds in her
possession, and the fact ms. luff was able to re-start her trafficking
operation and acquire significant quantities of drugs within a month of being
arrested: see
r. v. graham,
2018 onsc
6817
at para.
27. these considerations, again, are reflected in my
review of the range of sentence.

ms.
luff engaged in a sustained and sophisticated drug trafficking operation. this
was not a one-off event or a single poor decision. this was a continuing course
of conduct, which continued despite ms. luff’s arrest and release on bail. this
was a planned and considered criminal enterprise, by which ms. luff profited at
the expense of drug users and the community at large, who in their turn suffered
the destructive effects of these pernicious drugs.

i
consider that ms. luff committed two separate sets of offences, and that the
second set were committed while she was on a house arrest bail. as i have
decided to impose concurrent sentences for these offences, i will treat them as
aggravating factors in relation to the entire course of conduct.
mitigating factors

i
consider the following mitigating factors on sentence. ms. luff plead guilty. she
has accepted responsibility for these offences. she has spared the court the
time and expense of conducting a trial. this is a significant factor in her
favour.

ms.
luff has no criminal record. the principle of restraint should be applied to
first offenders. the sentence imposed on a first offender should be as short as
possible and be tailored to the individual circumstances of the accused:
r.
v. sousa,
2023 onca 100
at para.
37;
r.
v. al-akhali,
2025 onca 229
at para.
72. at 33 years of age, i do not
consider ms. luff a “
youthful
” first offender for whom there is a
reduced moral culpability or harsher impact upon her due to her early stage in
life as contemplated by the court of appeal in
r. v. priest,
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca), o.j. no. 3369 (c.a.) at para.
23
and
r. v. q.b.,
2003 canlii 4187 (on ca), o.j. no. 354 (c.a.) at para.
36. however, her status as a first
offender is still an important mitigating factor.

ms.
luff has the support of family members and friends in the community, as
evidenced by letters of support and personal attendances in court during the sentencing
hearing. the letters also refer to ms. luff as resilient, thoughtful and
caring. these are favourable indicators with respect to her long-term
rehabilitative potential.

i
am prepared to accept that these offences were motivated in part by ms. luff’s
addiction issues and financial pressures. however, the mitigating value is
substantially attenuated according to my assessment of these features of the
evidence. as set out above, i find these offences were primarily motivated by profit.

since
being charged with the second set of offences, ms. luff has made efforts to
address the substance abuse issue through counselling. she has engaged in
programming for life skills, parenting and problem solving while incarcerated
and on bail. i consider these efforts to be mitigating.

i
consider also the time spent under particularly harsh conditions in
pre-sentence custody, pursuant to
r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754. ms. luff
spent 141 days in custody and was subject to numerous lockdowns. the crown
concedes that a reduction is appropriate, and proposes a total credit,
including
summers,
downes
and
duncan
credit of 1 year. i
have written at some length about the conditions in pre-trial detention in this
province in
r. v. crawford,
2025 oncj 385. i need not repeat what i have
set out in that decision, but i incorporate by reference the remarks contained
in paragraphs 78-100 into this decision. in light of the crown’s concession, it
will suffice to say here that conditions in the remand facilities of ontario
are unacceptable and require urgent remediation.

in
r. v.
marshall,
2021 onca 344
at paras.
51-52, the court of appeal emphasized that
duncan
credit
is a mitigating factor on sentence and need not take the form of a specific
deduction in terms of days or months. the court confirmed there is no error in
apportioning a specific quantum, so long as it does not take on unwarranted
significance and skew the calculation of the ultimate sentence: see,
also,
r. v. ramjoolie,
2020 onca 791
at paras.
63-65.

i
have chosen to identify a specific reduction in the sentence, in order that the
public see clearly why the sentence is shorter than it should be and understand
why it is so: see
r. v. shaikh,
2024 onsc 774
at paras.
21-31. i
will reduce the sentence i would otherwise have imposed by 60 days.
collateral consequences

ms.
luff has a 14-year-old daughter. i must, therefore, consider the family
separation consequences that a sentence of imprisonment would cause to the
accused and to her daughter:
r. v. habib,
2024 onca 830
at paras.
41-50.
this is one of the more difficult issues for a sentencing judge to navigate.

it
must be remembered that offenders and not the courts are to be blamed for the
adverse consequences that family members may suffer, but those family members
are still innocent. they do not deserve to suffer for the crimes committed by
others. courts must, therefore, prevent and mitigate these adverse consequences
as much as possible:
r. v. habib,
supra, at para.
46. the separation
of family members must be taken into account in deciding whether to incarcerate
and, where incarceration is necessary, in determining the length of sentence.

courts
have to be careful not to let these consequences overwhelm the other principles
of sentencing:
r. v. dent,
2023 onca 460
at paras.
124-126. these
consequences should not lead the court to excuse or overlook the harm done, the
need to protect society or the need for denunciation and deterrence. nor can
these concerns lead to the imposition of a disproportionate sentence below the
acceptable range. the court is required to “preserve the family as much as
possible” within these limits:
r. v. habib,
supra, at para.
44.

the
evidence in this case shows that ms. luff plays a significant role in the life
of her daughter. and while their relationship has been strained by these
charges, it will be important for ms. luff to provide guidance and support for
her daughter as she moves into a formative period of her life.
range of sentence

the maximum sentence for possession for the
purposes of trafficking of schedule 1 drugs like hydromorphone, oxycodone and
cocaine is life in prison. there are no minimum sentences. the ontario
court of appeal has emphasized the need for deterrence and denunciation in
sentencing persons who deal in “hard drugs” like these.

hydromorphone is a synthetic heroin substitute with deadly and
destructive effects:
r. v. lynn,
2019 onca 277
at para.
5. the court of appeal has long held that it is as serious a drug as
heroin:
r. v. turner,
 o.j. no. 685 (c.a.) at para. 2. absent
exceptional circumstances, the sale of heroin, even in small amounts by first
offenders who are addicts, calls for a penitentiary sentence:
r. v.
farizeh,
 o.j. no. 2624 (ca) at para. 5;
r. v. banovac,
2018
onca 737
at para.
5. the same is, therefore, true for hydromorphone.

oxycodone is highly addictive and dangerous and has been rightly described
as a “scourge on the community”:
r. v. babineau,
2017 onsc 4872
at para.
18;
r. v. moore,
 o.j. no. 6388 at paras. 5-7. this substance has
been likened to heroin, though it is less powerful, and sentences spanning the
mid-reformatory range to the penitentiary have been imposed for amounts
comparable to this case:
r. v. king,
2013 onca 417;
r. v. bonnie,
2013 oncj 243
at paras.
34-37.

cocaine
is considered a hard drug because it is addictive and because it causes
significant direct and indirect damage to users, their families, and the
community. in
r. v amour,
2004 o.j. no. 1537 at para. 20, bassel j.
emphasized that cocaine trafficking involves very real victims, in view of “the
devastating health effects on cocaine drug users, the terribly addictive aspect
of this drug, the disastrous effects on their families, and the ruination of
their lives.” as code j. observed in
r. v. graham,
supra,
at para.
45:
an additional feature of
cocaine trafficking that is well-known in the courts, and that increases the
gravity of the offence, is that it is associated with violence. that is because
it is an unlawful but lucrative business and so it spawns collateral violent
crime, either to protect territory, to protect and enforce unlawful
transactions, or simply to steal an unlawful product or its unlawful proceeds.

there
is appellate authority setting the range of sentence for an ounce or less of
cocaine between 6 months and 2 years, less a day:
r. v. woolcock,
 o.j. no. 4927 (c.a.);
r. v. ahmed,
2016 onca 831
at para.
4. cases involving half a kilogram or more of cocaine
have attracted sentences in the range of 5-8 years:
r. v. bajada;
2003 canlii 15687 (on ca), 
o.j. no. 721;
r. v. bryan,
2011 onca 273. for intermediate amounts,
carried by mid-level traffickers, the range of sentence generally falls between
2 and 5 five years:
r. v. graham,
supra,
at paras.
47-48.

in
this case, the total amount of cocaine (in crack and powder form) is 106 grams
or about 3.7 ounces. this amount places ms. luff’s case well above the
woolcock
range and into the intermediate range of 2-5 years.

sentencing ranges are not straight-jackets: they
represent the distillation of
sentences
imposed in the past, the direction of the appellate courts, and serve in any
given case as guides for the application of all the relevant principles and
objectives:
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para.
36. there will be situations that call
for a sentence outside the existing range:
r. v. lacasse,
supra,
at para.
58.

a conditional sentence is an available sanction
for the offence of possession of a schedule 1 substance for the purpose of
trafficking. depending on the circumstances, it may or may not represent an
appropriate disposition or a correct application of the principles of
sentencing. the defence has referred me to a number of trial level decisions in
which conditional sentences were imposed for possession for the purpose of trafficking
involving hard drugs. these include the following:
r. v. gordon,
2023
oncj 157,
r. v. grant,
2021 oncj 507;
r. v. hastings,
2024 onsc
6328;
r. v. collins,
2023 onsc 5768;
r. v. mohamud,
2024 onsc
5009;
r. v. whittaker,
2021 onsc 5278;
r. v. goodridge,
2022 oncj
139.

notably, all of these cases involved substantially
smaller quantities of illicit drugs than in the present case. they are
distinguishable on other bases as well. by way of example, in
r. v. hastings,
the accused was not convicted of possession for the purpose of trafficking, but
was sentenced instead for simple possession of fentanyl. the case of
r. v.
whittaker
involved a comparable amount of cocaine to this case, but none of
the other more dangerous drugs. in
r. v. grant, the court found the
offence was an “isolated foray by an 18 year old person of otherwise
good character” into criminality.

the most compelling of the cases relied on by the defence is
r.
v. collins, which represents something of an outlier amongst the
authorities. collins was arrested on one occasion with 24.2 grams of cocaine
and other drugs and continued to traffic illicit drugs thereafter. he was later
arrested after a search warrant was executed and police located 42.89 grams of
cocaine and a loaded firearm with associated drug paraphernalia in his
possession. collins also had a criminal record. the facts are
different but occupy a similar realm in terms of overall seriousness to
the case at bar.

importantly, code j. found a number of serious
charter
breaches in that case and awarded a sentence reduction as a remedy. he also
found the offender's moral culpability was reduced by his extraordinary
challenges growing up. his mother was murdered when he was 13 and his best
friend was killed a year later. he was diagnosed with ptsd. the case is
distinguishable for these reasons. but
collins
is an example of how an
exceptional sentence can be imposed in response to exceptional circumstances.

in the present case, i must consider the
combined effect of ms. luff’s possession of hydromorphone, oxycodone and cocaine
for the purpose of trafficking, and the fact the conduct continued after her
arrest and release on a house arrest bail. standing alone, some of these individual
charges may have warranted a sentence close to 2 years in view of the significant
mitigating factors at play. however, the sum total of the criminal conduct
here, given the large amounts of these drugs, puts this case well into the
penitentiary range. on even the most favourable view of the mitigating factors,
the circumstances are not so exceptional as to move this matter below that
range.

absent the unique combination of factors here, a
sentence of 5 years or more could well have been imposed. the significant
mitigating factors, the collateral consequence of the family separation, and
the principle of totality, all serve to bring this sentence down from that
range substantially, but it still does not approach the reformatory range of
less than two years.

the supreme court noted in
r. v. fice,
2005
scc 32
that credit for pre-sentence custody cannot turn what would otherwise be
a penitentiary sentence into a conditional sentence of imprisonment. in other
words, if the sentencing judge is of the view that a penitentiary term is
warranted on the facts, a conditional sentence will not become available even
though the sentence ultimately imposed is less than two years after deductions
for time served. in my view a penitentiary term is clearly warranted.

defence counsel submits that it is open to me to
attribute all the pre-sentence custody to the august 29, 2024 charges and then impose
a conditional sentence of 2 years, less a day to the march 16, 2024 charges,
thereby avoiding the error committed in
fice. even if this proposal were
correct in principle, i am not satisfied the first set of charges standing
alone could properly attract a sentence below the penitentiary range. given
these findings, a conditional sentence is not available in this case. and, more
critically, i do not believe a conditional sentence would be consistent with
the principles of sentencing in this matter in view of all the circumstances.
the fit sentence

i have carefully considered the relevant sentencing
principles. i have weighed the aggravating and mitigating factors and evaluated
them according to the guiding principle of proportionality. i have addressed
the collateral consequences of the family separation and applied the principle
of totality.

i find that a fit and proper sentence would be a
global sentence of three years in the penitentiary.

in order to account for particularly harsh conditions in
pre-sentence custody, i will reduce the sentence i would have imposed by 60
days, pursuant to
r. v. duncan, supra. this is not a deduction for
pre-sentence custody, but rather the result of my consideration of a mitigating
factor on sentence that i have chosen to quantify for purposes of clarity. this
brings the sentence to 34 months.

this sentence is also subject to a formal
reduction for time spent in pre-sentence custody. ms. luff has served
141 real days in detention. pursuant to the supreme court’s decision in
r.
v. summers,
2014 scc 26, i award her credit at the rate of 1.5 to 1 and
will reduce the sentence by 212 days.

the sentence is subject to further reduction for time spent on
restrictive conditions of pre-trial release. ms. luff has been subject to
restrictive bail terms for a little over a year. i will reduce the sentence by 90
days, pursuant to the court of appeal’s decision in
r. v. downes:
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca), 
o.j. no. 555 (c.a).

the resulting sentence is 2 years. at defence counsel’s
request, i will not reduce the sentence to 2 years, less a day, as ms. luff’s
preference is to serve the sentence in a federal penitentiary, rather that a
provincial reformatory, on account of better programming options in the federal
system. i note here that a federal sentence will give ms. luff the opportunity
to be released on parole earlier, which may re-unite her with her daughter
sooner. the sentences are as follows:
information
4810 998
24 48109667
•
count 2 – possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking [
cdsa,
s. 5(2)] - 10 months credit for pre-sentence custody and
restrictive terms of bail, followed by 2 years jail.
•
count 3
–
possession of oxycodone for
the purpose of trafficking [
cdsa, s. 5(2)] - 2 years
concurrent.
•
count 5 – possession of hydromorphone for the purpose of
trafficking [
cdsa, s. 5(2)] – 2 years concurrent.
information
4810 998
24 48126495
•
count 1 – possession of cocaine for the purpose
of trafficking [
cdsa, s. 5(2)] - 2 years
concurrent.
•
count 3 – possession of the proceeds of crime [
criminal
code, s. 354(1)] - 6 months concurrent.
information
4810 998
24 48126494
•
count 1 – failure to comply with release order [
criminal code,
s. 145(5)] 6 months concurrent.
ancillary orders
•
the offence related property is ordered
forfeited. there will be a 10-year weapons prohibition. a dna order will be
made for the secondary designated offences.
released: september
2, 2025
signed:
justice peter n. fraser