source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj214/2025oncj214.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the
following notice be attached to the file:
a non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding
has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this
subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or
justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify
the victim or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or
transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the
offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding
judge or justice shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario
court of justice
citation:
r. v. singh, 2025
oncj 214
date: 2025 04 17
court file no.: brampton 24 31101758
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
gagan ajit singh
before justice
christopher k. assié
heard on april 15, 2025
reasons for judgment released on april 17, 2025
mr. moses otim................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ms. victoria struguresco........................... counsel for the accused gagan ajit singh
c.k. assié, j.:
introduction

the crown has brought an application
pursuant to
s.
714.1
of the
criminal code
to
permit the complainant in a sexual assault case to testify remotely by video from
another province. the defence objects to the application. the defence also raises
a jurisdictional issue.
counsel takes the position
that
only
the trial judge (or a case management judge appointed under s.
551.1
c.c.
) has the authority to decide the issue. given that i am not
the trial judge, the defence submits that i cannot adjudicate the application.

the two questions i must decide are:
(1)
is a trial judge or case management
judge appointed under s. 551.1
c.c.
the
only
jurist who can
decide a s. 714.1
c.c.
application?
(2)
if i conclude i have jurisdiction to
hear the application, should the crown’s application be granted in this case?
background

mr. singh is scheduled to be tried in
the ontario court of justice in brampton on april 23
rd
through 25
th,
2025. the application was brought before me on april 15
th
in ‘plea
court’ – a catch all court that deals with resolutions and with motions that
cannot be heard before a justice of the peace.

i am currently not assigned to hear mr.
singh’s matter. i say ‘currently’ because in this jurisdiction it is common
for several matters to be assigned to a trial court. as matters are completed
and a court opens up, trials from other courts are moved before whichever
jurist is free to hear the case. it may very well be that on april 23
rd
i end up being the trial judge. however, as it stands now, the trial
coordinator has the matter scheduled to begin before a
per diem
jurist
who is not available to hear the application prior to the first day of trial.

the problem with leaving the decision
to the first day of trial is that either the crown forces the witness to come
in person, thus obviating the need for the application, or the crown waits
until the day of trial, and if the application is unsuccessful, seek an adjournment. 
leaving the decision to a later date would be unhelpful to the parties and to the
administration of justice.
do i have jurisdiction to
decide a s. 714.1
c.c.
application if i am not the trial judge?

i asked both counsel to provide me with
jurisprudence on this point. neither were able to present any caselaw on the
jurisdictional issue. my own caselaw research was fruitless.

the defence position rests on two
arguments:
(1)
only a trial judge has jurisdiction to
hear evidentiary applications and s. 714.1
c.c.
is effectively an
evidentiary application.
(2)
section 551.3(1)
c.c.
provides an
exhaustive list of issues a case management judge may adjudicate as though they
were acting as the trial judge. any issue listed in the section is thus within
the absolute jurisdiction of the case management judge or trial judge. consequently,
any issue listed in the section may
only
be decided by trial judge or
case management judge.

as to the argument that a s. 714.1
c.c.
application is an evidentiary application, i respectfully disagree. a s. 714.1
c.c.
application determines the manner in which evidence is presented –
not its admissibility.

i also have difficulty accepting the
argument that any issue listed in s. 551.3(1)
c.c.
is
solely
within the jurisdiction of the trial judge or case management judge. the
section reads as follows:
551.3
(1) in performing their duties before the stage of the presentation of the
evidence on the merits, the case management judge, as a trial judge, exercises
the powers that a trial judge has before that stage in order to assist in
promoting a fair and efficient trial, including by
(a)
assisting the parties to identify the witnesses to be heard, taking into
account the witnesses’ needs and circumstances;
(b)
encouraging the parties to make admissions and reach agreements;
(c)
encouraging the parties to consider any other matters that would promote a fair
and efficient trial;
(d)
establishing schedules and imposing deadlines on the parties;
(e)
hearing guilty pleas and imposing sentences;
(f)
assisting the parties to identify the issues that are to be dealt with at the
stage at which the evidence on the merits is presented;
(g)
subject to section 551.7, adjudicating any issues that can be decided before
that stage, including those related to
(i)
the disclosure of evidence,
(ii)
the admissibility of evidence,
(iii)
the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms,
(iv)
expert witnesses,
(v)
the severance of counts, and
(vi)
the separation of trials on one or more counts when there is more than one
accused; and
(h)
ordering, in each case set out in subsection 599(1), that the trial be held in
a territorial division in the same province other than that in which the
offence would otherwise be tried.

section 551.1
c.c.
provides the authority
for the chief justice, or designate, to appoint a case management judge. the
case management judge is given the authority to make procedural,
jurisdictional, and evidentiary rulings that are typically within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the trial judge. the trial judge is bound by the rulings made
by the case management judge unless the trial judge is satisfied that it would
not be in the interests of justice if, for example, fresh evidence is adduced.

the defence points to subsection (a) of
section 551.3(1)
c.c.
the section lists one of the areas a case
management judge has the authority to address, which is with “assisting the
parties to identify the witnesses to be heard, taking into account the
witnesses’ needs and circumstances.” the argument is that since a s. 714.1
c.c.
application considers the “witness’ needs and circumstances,” then only a trial
judge or case management judge can hear the application.

the problem with that argument is it requires
omitting the first part of the sentence – “assisting the parties to identify
witnesses to be heard.” i’m not being asked to assist the parties to identify
witnesses to be heard. i’m being asked to decide
how
a witness, who has
already been identified by one of the parties, may be heard. even if i am
wrong on that point, the second problem with the argument is the belief that any
issue that touches a “witness’ needs and circumstances” is the exclusive
purview of the trial judge or case management judge. section 486.2
c.c.
relates to the manner in which a witness in a sexual assault trial may testify
– behind a screen or by video. it explicitly grants the authority for
any
jurist having
jurisdiction in the judicial district where the proceedings will take place
to make the decision. simply because an issue is listed
in s. 551.3(1)
c.c.
does not make it the exclusive jurisdiction of a
trial judge or case management judge.

the opening paragraph of section 714.1
c.c.,
states as follows:
714.1
a court may
order that a witness in
canada give evidence by audioconference or videoconference,
if the court
is of the opinion that it would be appropriate having regard to all the
circumstances, including…

i emphasized the wording of the section
– “the court.” it does not say “the trial judge.”

the language used in s. 714.1
c.c.
is similar to s. 715.235(1)
c.c., which states:
715.235(1)
the court may, with the consent of the prosecutor and the offender,
allow an offender to appear by audioconference or videoconference for
sentencing purposes.

section 715.235(1)
c.c.
grants
jurisdiction to the court to permit an offender to be sentenced by video
conferencing. under section “4(ii) guilty pleas” of
the practice direction
of the ontario court of justice
dated march 31, 2025, titled, “mode of
appearance for ontario court of justice criminal proceedings,” permission to
appear by video may be granted by
any judicial officer
presiding at a
prior court appearance or through a written application submitted to the court
to grant the permission. the authority to permit the offender to appear by
video is not limited solely to the jurist who hears the plea.

given that the language in s. 714.1
c.c.
is identical to s. 715.235(1)
c.c.
as it relates to which jurist has
jurisdiction to decide the issue, i find that i have the jurisdiction to decide
the remote testimony application even though i am not currently assigned as the
trial judge.

the defence position on jurisdiction
becomes even more untenable when section 714.1
c.c.
is compared to s.
486.2
c.c.
– a clause that deals with permitting a witness to testify
from outside the courtroom, including
via
video link. section
486.2(2.1)
c.c.
states:
486.2(2.1)
an application referred to in subsection (1) or (2) may be made, during the
proceedings, to the presiding judge or justice or, before the proceedings
begin, to the judge or justice who will preside at the proceedings or, if that
judge or justice has not been determined,
to any judge or justice having
jurisdiction in the judicial district where the proceedings will take place.

in the case at bar – a case in which the
witness is a complainant in a sexual assault trial – the crown could have
brought an application under s. 486.2
c.c.
to have the witness testify
by video link and i
would
have the jurisdiction to decide the matter. 
however, the defence position is because the crown brought the application
under s. 714.1
c.c.
to have the complainant in a sexual assault trial
testify by video link, i
do not
have the jurisdiction to decide the
matter. i have difficulty accepting that position.

furthermore, there are great practical
reasons to permit any jurist to hear this type of application. if the trial judge
has exclusive jurisdiction to decide the application, then either the
application will wait until the morning of trial or the trial coordinator will
have to assign a trial judge to hear the application ahead of time. waiting
until the morning of trial is unworkable. the parties need to know whether
their witnesses may testify by video or whether they need to travel prior to
the morning of trial.

having the trial coordinator assign
jurists ahead of time also causes difficulty to the efficient use of judicial
resources. trial courts have several trials scheduled for the same day. as a matter
ends in a courtroom, a trial from another courtroom is moved into that
courtroom. if all trials with a s. 714.1
c.c.
application had to be
heard by the jurist who decided the application, then that would make it
impossible to move cases on the morning of trial. currently, the only matters
that cannot be moved are those with ss. 276/278
c.c.
applications
because s. 278
c.c.
explicitly states that those applications
must
be heard by the trial judge. given the post-pandemic experience, s. 714.1
c.c.
applications have become more routine and requiring jurists seized of routine
applications would further make the justice system less efficient.

the fact that a s. 714.1
c.c.
application can be heard by a jurist other than the trial judge does not limit
the authority of the trial judge to make revisions to the order. the trial
judge maintains the ability, as the facts change, to control the trial process
in their court.

in conclusion, i find that any judge
having jurisdiction in the judicial district where the
proceedings will take place to have the jurisdiction to hear an application
under s. 714.1
c.c.
should the witness be permitted
to testify from another province in this case?

now that i have concluded that i have
jurisdiction to hear the application, i must decide the merits of the
application.
background

mr. singh is charged with sexual assault,
uttering threats, an extortion. the parties have advised that the case against
mr. singh rests entirely on the testimony of the complainant. the crown has
filed an affidavit from the officer in charge of the case as part of the s.
714.1
c.c.
application. no
viva voce
evidence was called. the officer
in charge’s affidavit contains information provided from the complainant to an
employee of the victim witness assistance program and to another officer who
has been acting as a liaison with the complainant.

to summarize the information contained
in the affidavit, the complainant has moved to another province and does not
plan to return to this jurisdiction anytime soon. if the complainant was
required to attend court, she would
not
have to take time off work or
school and would
not
incur any financial loss. though she currently assists
her mother because of her difficulty walking following a foot injury, the
complainant has a brother who is also available to assist their mother. the
affidavit details that the complainant is able to use zoom and will be able to
testify from a suitable location in her home without distractions or
interruptions.

without asking the details of where the
complainant resided, i confirmed with the crown that she lived in a
metropolitan area that had direct flights to our jurisdiction.
position of the parties

the crown’s position is the witness
should be permitted to testify by video because she lives in another province
and is assisting with her mother’s recovery. furthermore, the crown notes that
there is no requirement for “exceptional circumstances” to be present for the
application to be granted.

the defence position is that the
witness should testify in person because an assessment of the complainant’s
credibility will be crucial in this case, that there needs to be “exceptional
circumstances” to justify departing from the presumption that witnesses testify
in person, and that the crown has not satisfied its burden to depart from the
presumption.
analysis

section
714.1
c.c.
reads as follows:
714.1
a court
may order that a witness in canada give evidence by audioconference or
videoconference, if the court is of the opinion that it would be appropriate
having regard to all the circumstances, including
(a)
the
location and personal circumstances of the witness;
(b)
the costs
that would be incurred if the witness were to appear in person;
(c)
the nature
of the witness’ anticipated evidence;
(d)
the
suitability of the location from where the witness will give evidence;
(e)
the
accused’s right to a fair and public hearing;
(f)
the nature
and seriousness of the offence; and
(g)
any
potential prejudice to the parties caused by the fact that the witness would
not be seen by them, if the court were to order the evidence to be given by
audioconference.

the starting position is that all
witnesses are expected to testify in person. as justice o’marra recently
stated in
r. v. e.r., et al. (7 april 2025), brampton 23-y3110456-03 (ocj),

section 714.1 is a remedial provision that permits the court to facilitate the
evidence of a witness who seeks to give testimony other than the usual manner.
(
see:
r. v. denham,
2010 abpc 82 (canlii),
 a.j. no. 1435 (alta. prov. court)
and
r.
v. k.s.,
2020 oncj 328
at para.
15
).

a witness seeking the accommodation of s. 714.1 must have a reason to invoke the
section. it is not the law of canada that witnesses have the option to give
virtual evidence simply because they would prefer to do so. implicit in this
principle is the recognition that the best evidence – in-person testimony –
remains the default standard for taking evidence in a criminal proceeding. (see:
r. v. heyman, 2000 yttc 502 (yukon territorial court) and
r. v. k.s.
at para.
16
).

remote witness testimony is increasingly essential in maintaining trial
fairness while allowing the criminal justice system to evolve alongside technological
advances and societal needs. the use of remote testimony has been increasingly
important in recent years since the advent of the covid-19 pandemic. (
see:
r.
v. levogiannis,
1993 canlii 47 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 475, at para.
22
).

much has been written about what is
gained and lost with remote testimony. a significant disadvantage that i would
add to the list of losses when remote testimony is employed is the loss of
solemnity. requiring a witness to attend the courthouse emphasizes the
seriousness of the occasion and the importance of the process on the witness. 
there is a reason why judges and clerks wear robes, why counsel are required to
wear business attire, and why counsel are required to address the court standing
from a lectern. the formality of the process is meant to impress upon the
participants the importance of the trial. the hope is that this will lead to the
presentation of the best quality evidence. we must recognize that adopting procedures
that reduce the solemnity of the occasion will negatively impact the quality of
evidence presented. in some instances, the court may find this is an
acceptable bargain; the court may find it is better to have lower quality
evidence than not to have it at all. however, we must not be blind to the
trade off and we should attempt to minimize it when possible.

the first factor
in the analysis under s. 714.1
c.c.
is an inquiry into the location and
personal circumstances of the witness. in this case the
witness lives in a metropolitan area in another province that has direct
flights to our jurisdiction. she would not have to take time off from work or
school. she does not have small children for whom she is the primary
caregiver. though she assists her mother, the affidavit fairly acknowledges
that her brother is able to fulfill her role.

the second factor is the cost that
would be incurred if the witness were to appear in person. i was not advised
of the details regarding the expenses. however, i can infer it would include
the cost of a return domestic plane ticket, food, taxis, and hotel
accommodations, all of which would be covered by the government.

the third factor is the nature of the
witness’ anticipated evidence. in this case, the witness’ evidence is the
entirety of the crown’s case. there are no other witnesses. the defence will
hotly contest her credibility.

the fourth factor is the suitability of
the location from where the witness will give evidence. the affidavit advises
that the witness has the ability to use zoom and the ability to testify from a
room in her home in which she will not be disturbed or interrupted. the crown
advised that the witness had ‘zoomed’ into court earlier in the morning of the
application and had logged off, though i did not notice her. the crown further
advised, as an officer of the court, that he spoke to her over zoom and there
were no technological issues.

the fifth factor is the accused’s right
to a fair and public hearing. on the one hand, the accused’s right to a fair
and public hearing would be minimally impacted. the video link is public and
accessible to anyone who attends court physically – and virtually by anyone who
connects by zoom. the scope of cross-examination would not be impacted. 
however, the loss of solemnity in having a witness testify from her home may
negatively impact the accused’s right to a fair trial. furthermore, courts are
generally less willing to allow remote testimony the more important the witness
is to the ultimate issue in the trial and the more their credibility will
factor in the case (see:
r. v. s.d.l., nsca 58 at para. 32).

the sixth factor is the nature and
seriousness of the offence. though there are no categories of offences for
which remote testimony cannot be used, the more serious the offence, the higher
the burden is on the party attempting to displace the presumption of in person
testimony. the offence in this case is sexual assault, extortion, and uttering
threats. the offences are serious and demand a significant reason to depart
from the presumption of in person testimony.

in conclusion,
mr. singh faces very serious criminal allegations. the consequence of being
convicted is likely a lengthy custodial sentence. the complainant in this
matter has no employment, education, family obligations, or mobility
difficulties that would prevent her from attending in person. furthermore, she
lives in a metropolitan area in which she can access direct flights to this
jurisdiction. this is a case where the request for remote testimony is out of
convenience and not necessity. the witness’ inconvenience in this case fails
to displace the presumption that her testimony should be provided in person.

the crown’s
application is dismissed.
released: april 17, 2025
signed: justice christopher k. assié