source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj725/2025oncj725.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. hanna, 2025 oncj 725
date: may
2, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 998 24 31101820
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
alex andrew hanna
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 28, 29, and 30 april 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 02 may 2025
n. di-biase and s. weinstock............................................... counsel
for the prosecution
f. davoudi.............................................. counsel
for the defendant alex andrew hanna
ruling on
charter
applications under
ss. 8, 9, 10(b)
renwick j.:
introduction

the defendant is charged on a single count information that he possessed
a schedule i substance, namely cocaine (benzoylmethylecgonine), for the purpose
of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) of the
controlled drugs and substances
act. this is an indictable offence and the defendant chose to have a trial
in the ontario court of justice.

prior to trial, the defendant filed a written application for
charter
relief on the basis of alleged violations of the defendant’s ss. 8, 9, and
10(b) rights. at trial, the prosecution also brought an application to adduce
the defendant’s utterances to police. the parties agreed to have a “blended”
voir
dire
where the evidence taken on the trial could also apply to the
charter
application and the voluntariness
voir dire
for the defendant’s statements.

the prosecution called two police witnesses on the trial proper. also, many
facts were established by the introduction of a statement of agreed facts (exhibit
#1). in addition to the police witnesses, the defendant testified on the
charter
application. during final submissions, the defendant conceded the
voluntariness of his statements to police.

the parties agree that the result of the
charter
application will
determine the outcome of the trial. if the defendant succeeds on his
application under s. 24(2) of the
charter, the evidence obtained by the
search of the defendant’s vehicle will be excluded and he will be acquitted.
conversely, if the 26.66g of cocaine found under the driver’s seat of the
defendant’s vehicle is admissible, the defendant can be found guilty.
the
evidence received
general considerations

in this part, i will outline some of the
evidence with references to specific portions of the testimony and other evidence.
although i will not refer to all of what a witness said, i listened to each
witness carefully, i have taken detailed notes, i have reviewed the exhibits, i
have had access to the digital record of the proceedings, and i have assessed
all testimony for intrinsic and extrinsic consistency, plausibility, balance,
possible interest, and the witness’ ability to recall and communicate.

i do not propose to recapitulate all of the evidence received
during this trial. suffice it to note that i have used ample and many
opportunities during the trial and subsequent to the completion of the
submissions to consider the testimony heard, to review the exhibits, and to re-play
parts of the video evidence or the digital audio recording of the proceedings.
i have thoroughly reviewed the evidence in this case, and i will only discuss
parts of the evidence where it serves to underscore my findings. lastly, despite
any exchanges with counsel during submissions, i came to no conclusions about
any of the evidence received until all of the arguments were made and my review
of the evidence was complete.
the police testimony and
evidence

constable (“cst.”) tyler satino was the main prosecution witness.
his partner, cst. suraj sandhu, assisted him during the investigation and mostly
dealt with the defendant’s passenger (e.l.) on the morning in question.

the police testimony established that the officers entered the
parking lot where they eventually encountered the defendant in his toyota motor
vehicle. as the officers initially drove past where the toyota was parked, both
officers testified that they had their windows rolled down, as was their
general practice in similar circumstances, and they both detected the odour of
freshly burnt cannabis. constable satino testified that he also saw the spark
of what he believed to be a “spliff” (cannabis cigarette) ignited near the
driver’s mouth.

all of the evidence, including the defendant’s, proved that the
police vehicle would have been between six and 10’ in front of the front end of
the defendant’s parked toyota when the police initially drove past.

exhibit 6a is the video recording captured from cst. satino’s
body-worn camera (“bwc”). when the video starts, cst. satino is already
engaging with the defendant, who is going through his documents before handing
his driver’s license to the officer. the audio for the camera did not start
until 29 seconds into the video clip at 06:35:18 according to the time stamp on
the top of the video.

the discussion between this officer and the defendant began as follows:
defendant: i’m literally going
to work, sir (as he handles a plastic bag with his documents).
officer satino: i hear you, my
friend, but, people that smoke and people that drink in their cars, it’s a
serious issue, right. because there’s a lot of impaired drivers here.
defendant: i understand,
completely. (hands his driver’s license to the officer)
satino: thanks man.
defendant: i’m not under the
influence or anything.
satino: fair enough. i’ll be
right back. (officer walks around to speak to and obtain the passenger’s
identification)

before watching the bwc footage in court, this officer testified
that as he approached the defendant, he explained why they were in the area and
conducting patrols, “to ensure people are not consuming alcohol or drugs”
because this can lead to impaired drivers.

the bwc footage also demonstrates that cst. satino maintained a
cordial, professional, and respectful tone and demeanor at all times in dealing
with the defendant.

on the whole, cst. satino was a good witness. i found that his
testimony aligned well with both the sequence of events and the content
recorded on his bwc.

this witness was challenged in cross-examination about several
areas. among the major areas of concern were:
i.
the inability to smell burnt cannabis as they drove in the
parking lot toward the defendant’s vehicle;
ii.
the inability to see that the driver’s window of the toyota was
cracked open, as they drove toward and past the defendant’s vehicle;
iii.
the inability to see the cannabis cannister above the glove box while
standing on the driver’s side and to recognize that it was a cannabis
container;
iv.
the inability to see that the seal of the cannabis container was broken;
v.
the failure to mention these observations/perceptions to the
defendant;
vi.
the mention of “occupant
s
” (plural) smoking in the
officer’s notes and the arrest report despite the testimony that cst. satino
only saw the spliff near the driver’s mouth;
vii.
whether the officer’s window was up or down when he drove into
the parking lot and past the defendant’s vehicle, given the window is up when
the officer goes to his cruiser to check the defendant’s identity; and
viii.
why the officer never mentioned to his partner or the defendant
that he had seen the defendant smoking what he thought was a cannabis cigarette.

these challenges are critical areas of this officer’s testimony
because the entire justification for the police interaction and the claim of
statutory authority to search the occupants and the vehicle began with the
claim of a smell of burnt cannabis, the claim of the sighting of an ignited
spliff, followed by the claim of the observation of an unsealed cannabis
container within reach of the driver.

constable sandhu’s testimony corroborated cst.
satino’s evidence to the extent that he too claimed to have smelled the burnt
cannabis as they entered the parking lot and drove in the area of the
defendant’s toyota.

there were at least two differences in the
testimony of the two witnesses:
i.
cst. satino claims to have been about 50’ away
from the defendant’s vehicle when he became aware of the smell of burnt
cannabis, while cst. sandhu’s evidence was that it was when they passed the
vehicle approximately six feet away; and
ii.
cst. satino saw the spark of a lit cigarette,
which he assumed was cannabis, near the driver’s mouth; cst. sandhu never saw
this.

constable sandhu was not a confident witness. he
seemed unsure of some of his testimony and overall, seemed to be over-reliant
on his notes to assist him while testifying. i do not find that cst. sandhu was
untruthful or less than accurate while testifying, but given his juniority at
the time, his lack of confidence while testifying, his uncertainty during the
investigation (as depicted on his bwc video), and the apparent over-reliance on
his notes during his evidence, i cannot safely rely on his testimony where it
is not corroborated by the bwc footage or other evidence. i find that his claim
of having smelled burnt cannabis is weak corroboration of cst. satino’s
testimony on the point.

in the end, in terms of the issues to be
decided, save for whether or not he smelled burnt cannabis, i am not concerned
with the ultimate credibility or reliability of cst. sandhu’s testimony or his
mediocre presentation while testifying. to the extent that i must determine whether
the police had a lawful basis to detain the defendant, whether the detention
was arbitrary, whether the police had the requisite grounds (a subjectively
held belief that was objectively reasonable) to rely on the search authority
within the
cannabis control act (“cca”), whether the searches were
carried out reasonably, and whether the defendant’s s. 10(b)
charter
right was violated, i am satisfied that the testimony of cst. satino is
determinative. constable satino took control of the investigation, he advised
the defendant of his concerns and the reason for their interaction, he
investigated the identity of the defendant and e.l., he told them he would be
searching the vehicle and the defendant’s person, and he twice attempted to
carry out his obligations pursuant to the defendant’s s. 10(b) right.
the
defendant’s testimony

the defendant was a hesitant witness. he
answered questions carefully, but with a level of insecurity similar to the
testimony given by cst. sandhu.

the defendant denied that either of them were
smoking cannabis before or as the police arrived in the plaza that morning. interestingly,
the defendant did admit to having a cigarette while he drank his coffee, but he
claimed that it was about 15 to 20 minutes before the police arrived. it was
also somewhat coincidental that he too (like cst. satino) described his
driver’s window as “cracked” open while he smoked his cigarette. but the
defendant testified that he had closed the window before the police arrived. the
defendant was quite candid that he had smoked cannabis in his vehicle on
occasion prior to this day, but he could not account for the end of a cannabis
cigarette (exhibit #3) found in his vehicle during the police search. the
defendant used the modifier “believed” (possibly indicating some uncertainty) for
many of his answers while testifying (he said this twice, for example, in
respect of e.l.’s ownership of the blue cannabis container, exhibit #2). this
detracted from his credibility. in response to his last question about his
knowledge of the contents of the blue cannabis container, he answered, “i
believe it was empty, but i’m not 100% sure.” i found it odd that there was no
explanation for how he would possess this belief given his claim that he was
not even aware of the existence of the container (despite the fact that it was
plainly visible above the glove compartment in cst. sandhu’s bwc footage), before
the police found it.
analysis

the defendant applied for
charter
relief. the applicant has
the onus to establish his allegations on a balance of probabilities. if the
defendant’s
charter
rights have been violated, the exclusion of evidence
is not automatic. in order to have the seized contraband excluded from his
trial, the defendant must establish that it is more likely the case than not
that the admission of this evidence in the circumstances of one or more
charter
violations would tend to bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

the parties also agree that the search of the
defendant’s vehicle was warrantless, purportedly authorized by statute. thus,
the prosecution must establish on a balance of probabilities that the police
complied with the statutory regime authorizing their search.
credibility and
reliability generally

this case involves conflicting evidence and credibility
assessments. in assessing witness credibility and reliability i have taken into
account the general capacity of the witness to make their observations, to
remember what they perceived, and their ability to accurately testify to their
recollections. it is also important to determine whether the witness was trying
to tell the truth and whether or not the witness was sincere, candid, biased,
reticent, and/or evasive. a trier of fact is entitled to accept some, none, or
all of a witness’ testimony.

a valuable means of assessing the credibility of any witness is
to examine what is testified to in the context of all of the evidence in the
case and not on an isolated basis. this is true for any inconsistencies and
whether these are inconsequential or significant to the case. if the
inconsistency is significant, then i must pay careful attention to it when
assessing the reliability of the witness' testimony.

triers of fact must consider both credibility
and reliability in determining the facts in a given case. credibility is
shorthand for truthfulness and believability. reliability is the lens through
which one evaluates the accuracy of evidence. trial judges must be careful not
to conflate credibility with reliability otherwise the fact-finding net might
entangle even the least reliable piece of evidence.

it is important to remember that in some cases
credibility takes a back-seat to reliability. for example, there are
prosecutions where the suspect is unknown to the complainant and the latter may
be honestly mistaken about the identity of the perpetrator. in such a case,
reliability concerns govern the analysis because credibility does not guarantee
accuracy. credible witnesses can be mistaken or otherwise inaccurate. thus,
credibility is not a proxy for reliability.


where witness testimony is highly credible,
consistent, plausible, not inconsistent with other evidence, not found to be
the product of bias or motive, largely undisturbed upon a vigorous
cross-examination, and not found to be otherwise unreliable, truth and accuracy
are likely established.

assessments of credibility and reliability can
be the most important and challenging judicial determinations in a criminal
trial. our highest court has reminded us:
credibility
and reliability assessments are also context-specific and multifactorial: they
do not operate along fixed lines and are “more of an ‘art than a science’.”
with respect to credibility in particular, while coherent reasons are crucial,
it is often difficult for trial judges to precisely articulate the reasons why
they believed or disbelieved a witness due to “the complex intermingling of
impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and
attempting to reconcile the various versions of events.” the task is further
complicated by the trial judge’s ability to accept some, all, or none of a
witness’ testimony.


judicial fact-finding is often based on
inductive reasoning and evaluations of “probable interpretations of the
evidence.”

it necessarily depends on common-sense inference-drawing.

to again quote the supreme
court:
reasoning
about how people generally tend to behave, and how things tend to happen, is
not only permissible, it is often a necessary component of a complete
testimonial assessment.

there was no violation of s. 9 or s.
8 of the charter

initially, through his factum, the defendant
argued that his s. 9
charter
right was violated when the police boxed in
his vehicle. during submissions the defendant resiled from this submission.

the defendant also argued that police evidence
was inconsistent because the officer’s notes indicated that one officer smelled
cannabis while the other saw the occupants apparently smoking a spliff. this
submission was not entirely accurate. both officers testified that they smelled
burnt cannabis and that was a reason for their interest in the defendant’s
vehicle. constable satino had an additional reason, he believed that he saw the
driver smoking a cannabis cigarette (based on the spark of the spliff).

i accept the testimony of cst. satino that he
smelled cannabis as they drove into the parking lot and toward the defendant’s
vehicle. both officers testified, and it was not challenged or contradicted,
that burnt cannabis has a distinctive, strong odour. i also accept his evidence
that he could see what he believed was the driver smoking or holding a lit cannabis
cigarette as they drove toward the area where the toyota was parked. the spark
or lit end of a cigarette would have stood out in an otherwise dark car in a
dark parking lot. i find that there was no other reason why the police would
have stopped near the defendant’s vehicle but for cst. satino’s observations
and perceptions.

the bwc of cst. satino captured some of the
initial conversation between the defendant and the officer. the conversation
first captured also provides support for the testimony that at the start of
their interaction, cst. satino explained his concern (smell of burnt cannabis)
and the police presence to investigate a
cca
violation (cannabis readily
accessible to a driver).

though the defendant testified that the officer
did not indicate why he had approached the toyota, i do not accept this
evidence. it makes no sense that there was no introduction or any reason given by
the police for demanding the driver’s documentation. the bwc footage completely
contradicts the defendant’s narrative. the officer and the defendant were
clearly talking about the officer’s concerns (people smoking cannabis in their
car), to which the defendant responded that he was “not under the influence.”

to a limited extent, the testimony of cst.
sandhu provides some corroboration of cst. satino’s evidence, because cst.
sandhu also thought that the odour of burnt cannabis existed in the area of the
toyota. exhibit #3 (the cannabis butt) was found somewhere in the toyota. the
presence of this butt also provides circumstantial support for cst. satino’s
testimony.

i also accept that cst. satino saw the defendant
smoking. the defendant admitted that he had been smoking at some point,
although he said it was well before the police approached. in fact, a cigarette
pack is seen stored in the “centre dash” (where the defendant testified that he
kept his cigarettes) on cst. satino’s bwc video at 06:43:50. i reject the
defendant’s testimony about the timing of cigarette smoking.

in the end, given that i accept that cst. satino
was truthful, reliable, and accurate when he testified that he smelled burnt
cannabis and that he saw the driver apparently smoking a cannabis cigarette, i
am not troubled if he was wrong about the substance being smoked. the smell of
cannabis in the area and the lit cigarette near the driver’s mouth would have
provided ample grounds (more than a reasonable suspicion of a provincial
offence) to approach the toyota to investigate the occupants for a possible
cca
infraction.

i accept as valid the logic of cst. satino in
withholding his belief that he had seen the defendant smoking or his awareness
of the presence of the blue cannister when he first dealt with the defendant. there
was no need to seek to incriminate or confront the defendant when they first
spoke. it makes sense that the police would want to confirm the identity of the
occupants before confronting them with information that could cause the driver
to flee or become aggressive. the police check would possibly provide the
officer with information about outstanding charges, warrants, or other cautions
(“armed and dangerous”) so that he could determine a strategy to best investigate
his concerns.

despite the defendant’s evidence that he was
fearful from the moment the police approached, i am not satisfied that it is
proven that the initial interaction created a detention. police are entitled to
interact with motorists for a variety of reasons (check sobriety, vehicle
registration, insurance, roadworthiness, and license status). not every
interaction with the police is a detention. in
r.
v. suberu, the
supreme court makes this clear:
…not every interaction between the police and members of the
public, even for investigative purposes, constitutes a detention within the
meaning of the
charter. section 9 of the
charter
does
not dictate that police abstain from interacting with members of the public
until they have specific grounds to connect the individual to the commission of
a crime. likewise, not every police encounter, even with a suspect, will
trigger an individual's right to counsel under s. 10(
b
). as
iacobucci j. aptly observed, "[t]he person who is stopped will in all
cases be 'detained' in the sense of 'delayed', or 'kept waiting'. but the
constitutional rights recognized by ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
are
not engaged by delays that involve no significant physical or psychological
restraint" (para. 19).


i do not find that there was a detention until
cst. satino advised that he would be searching the vehicle and occupants
pursuant to the
cca, less than five minutes into the police
interaction.

i find that there was nothing arbitrary or otherwise
improper in the decision of the police to approach and speak to the defendant that
morning.

the demeanor of cst. satino during his recorded
interactions with the defendant support his testimony that if he had not seen
the unsealed container of cannabis, he would have discontinued the interaction
and left the car’s occupants after checking their names.

constable satino testified that he saw the unsealed
blue cannabis container very soon after he began his interaction with the
defendant. if true, this observation, coupled with the prior detection of burnt
cannabis and the observation of the driver holding a lit cigarette, would
provide ample grounds as required in s. 12(3) of the
cca
for a search of
the vehicle and occupants.

it is hardly surprising that cst. satino said
that he saw the blue container (the colour alone attracts attention). constable
sandhu also saw it, in plain view, in the area above the glove box. both
officers used their flashlights to illuminate the vehicle’s interior. both
officer’s would have been watching the defendant as he reached into the glove
box. the beam of cst. sandhu’s flashlight is seen pausing in the area where the
cannabis container was found. i have no difficulty relying on cst. satino’s
testimony in this area. the bwc footage of both officer’s support his
testimony. similarly, i reject the submission that it would not have been
obvious that the container was the type used to sell legal cannabis or that the
seal was broken. constable satino was looking inside the vehicle. he had a
suspicion that the driver had been smoking cannabis. constable sandhu used his
flashlight to communicate what he had found, inches from where he was standing.
also, before there was any opportunity for the two officers to speak, upon his
return to the toyota after checking his police computer, cst. satino said “there
is open cannabis in here from what i can see with that container,” at 06:39:00.
this provided ample reasonable grounds to believe that there was cannabis in
the vehicle, which gave authority for the search that took place.

at all times, this officer seemed knowledgeable
of his authority and the limits of the law. for example, his search incident to
arrest was considerably more thorough than his search for cannabis during his
cca
search. indeed, the officer testified that the search incident to arrest also
involved the search for evidence, items that could be used as weapons, or
implements for use to escape. moreover, the search for cannabis was restricted
to the areas that were readily accessible to the driver (the driver’s compartment,
around his seat, his door, and the centre console areas). there was nothing
excessive or unreasonable about either the
cca
search or the search
incident to arrest. the written complaint that search of the passenger’s
pockets exceeded the scope of the statutory authority is misplaced. section
12(3) of the
cca
clearly provides authority to search “any person” not
just the driver.
there were
violations of s. 10(b) of the charter

the defendant argued that his s. 10(b)
charter
right was violated in two ways: there was a failure to provide the required
information, and the police did not facilitate the defendant’s request to speak
to counsel.

upon detention, cst. satino provided the rights
to counsel, informally. he did not read the rights from his notebook. rather,
he explained the following:
i.
the occupants had the right to speak to any
lawyer they wished, to understand their detention;
ii.
the occupants did not have to say anything;
iii.
if the occupants wanted free advice from a legal
aid lawyer that was available and he provided (from memory) the telephone
number; and
iv.
he reiterated that they did not have to say
anything to police during the search.

during this provision of s. 10(b) information,
the defendant asked about refusing the search. constable satino explained that
it was a lawful demand and he could be arrested.

the defendant submitted that the informational
component was deficient because the officer failed to ask the most important
questions: do you understand and do you wish to call a lawyer now.

i am not troubled by the failure to ask if the
defendant understood the information he had just received. he was asked if he
would cooperate with the search and he did. he had asked about refusing the search
and that was explained to him.

the failure to ask if the defendant wanted to
exercise his right is a breach of s. 10(b).

the defendant also claimed that the
implementational component of s. 10(b) was frustrated after the defendant’s
arrest, when he clearly asked how he might speak with counsel while he sat in
the back of the police car. constable satino explained that if they went back
to the police station, there would be an opportunity to call a lawyer or duty
counsel from there.

the parties agree that the defendant was
released at approximately 7:30 a.m., some 56 minutes after the police
interaction began and 45 minutes after his arrest. constable satino explained
that he could not facilitate a private call with a lawyer because he did not
have a phone he could use for that purpose and he was unwilling to permit the
defendant to use his personal phone to speak with a lawyer.


i am satisfied that there was no phone that was
available for the defendant to call a lawyer. i accept the officer’s
explanation that it would be inappropriate to allow the defendant to use one of
his phone’s which had been seized as evidence, incident to his arrest, to call
counsel. allowing someone in custody to have access to one of their phones would
be to permit a detainee to have access to a possible source of evidence. it was
not unreasonable to seize the defendant’s two cell phones as possibly
containing evidence of the offence. cell phones are a recognized tool of drug
traffickers. it would be equally inappropriate to permit the defendant to
access the suspected cocaine.

i also find that the law does not compel the
police to use their personal cell phone to permit access to counsel. counsel
for the defendant could not point the court to any contrary authority in law.

the fact remains, the defendant wanted to access
counsel. he could have been taken back to the police station. there is no doubt
it would not have taken 45 minutes to travel to the police station, although it
is unknown how long it may have taken to put the defendant in touch with a
lawyer. it is also not lost on the court that the defendant was released at the
scene. he was free to return to his vehicle and continue on his way. had he
been taken to the station, he may have completed a call to counsel before 7:30
a.m., he may not have been searched, lodged, and released before 7:30 a.m.

charter
rights
are non-negotiable. the defendant asserted his right to speak to a lawyer at
06:54:03. rather than bringing the defendant to the police station to
facilitate the right to counsel, cst. satino kept the defendant handcuffed in
the police car until he was eventually released from the scene.

constable satino had options. he could have
asked cst. nicholson to search the toyota while officers sandhu and satino
brought the defendant to the police station.
section 24(2)
of the charter


section 24(2) recognizes that if evidence gained by constitutional
infringements is regularly admitted in criminal trials this may weaken public
confidence and bring the administration of justice into disrepute. this
subsection seeks to mitigate the negative effects of inappropriate state
conduct by requiring a qualitative analysis of the long-term effect that
tainted evidence could have upon public confidence in the justice system.

to perform the balancing exercise required by s. 24(2) of the
charter,
i must consider:
i.
the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
state conduct;
ii.
the impact of the breach(es) on the
charter
-protected
interests of the applicant; and
iii.
society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits.

the first two factors serve to mitigate the loss
of civil liberties by requiring exclusion of evidence when the
charter
-infringing
conduct is serious and the impact upon
charter
-protected interests is
significant. the third factor “pulls in the opposite direction toward the
inclusion of evidence. that pull is particularly strong where the evidence is
reliable and critical to the crown’s case.”


it is also the case that the third factor can
also pull in the opposite direction, requiring evidential exclusion, when the
state conduct is so subversive of protected freedoms that the only way to
protect public confidence in the administration of justice is to have the
evidence excluded from the trial process.
the seriousness of the charter-infringing state conduct

as our court of appeal has remarked:
…the
evaluation of the seriousness or gravity of the offending state conduct –
focuses upon the level of fault of the breaching officers in the
circumstances…the more serious the offending conduct, the more pressing the
need for the court to dissociate itself from the fruits of that conduct.


further, the seriousness of any breach is
aggravated where the evidence establishes a systemic problem or a pattern of
charter
non-compliance.


courts must view the matter holistically to
determine if there circumstances that mitigate or exacerbate the offending
state conduct and the level of state culpability.


the failure to ask the defendant if he wished to
call a lawyer before or during the
cca
search is moot. at paragraph 47
of his factum, the defendant concedes that the common law permits the
suspension of s. 10(b) during
cca
searches. i find that this violation
is technical and it had no discernable impact upon the defendant, in the
circumstances.

the failure to facilitate the right to counsel
is more serious. it is somewhat mitigated because it was impractical to
facilitate the right to counsel at the scene and it was also impractical to
take the defendant away from his vehicle without any clear idea if he would be
released from the scene before he could realistically receive access to legal
advise.

the defendant had no personal lawyer of his
choice. there would have been some delay to drive to the police station and
book the defendant. there may have been a delay in connecting duty counsel to
the defendant.

if police had left the toyota unattended, the
police would be responsible to safeguard the vehicle and it’s contents. it was parked
on private property in a publicly accessible commercial plaza. this may have
required an inventory search of the vehicle’s contents and/or a tow to the
police station.

i have taken into account that cst. satino did
not try to elicit incriminating information from the defendant. i am equally
cognizant that the defendant made incriminating statements in order to assume
all liability and exculpate e.l.

after a careful weighing of all of the
circumstances, i find that the s. 10(b) violation was of modest significance
given the further loss of autonomy the transport to the police station would
have entailed. constable satino made a decision. he learned after speaking with
a detective that he would be releasing the defendant from the scene. he knew
this would permit the defendant an opportunity to access any lawyer he wished.
he had twice given the defendant the telephone number for access to “free legal
advice.”
the impact of the charter-infringing state conduct

there are a number of factors that bear upon the
impact of the
charter
violation upon the defendant’s fair trial rights:
evidence discoverability, the absence of a causal link between the
charter
breach and the evidence to be excluded, and the nature of the evidence itself.
these considerations do not move the needle even incrementally toward excluding
evidence in this case.

by holding the defendant at the scene, until his
release, the defendant was able to maintain visual contact with his vehicle and
he did not suffer any further loss of his liberty or mobility. moreover, the
defendant did not have to undergo lodging, questioning by the booking sergeant,
the inventory of his personal property, or having to attend inside a cell if
duty counsel was not immediately available.

nonetheless, the decision not to facilitate the
right to counsel had a modest impact upon the defendant. he was kept in the
dark about his legal jeopardy and he did make utterances that were somewhat inculpatory.

balancing whether
a remedy is required

our court of appeal has confirmed, “[t]he more
important the evidence is to the crown’s case, the greater the risk of
disrepute from it’s exclusion.”


it must be remembered, however, that the third
line of inquiry can cut both ways:
while the public has a heightened interest in a determination on the
merits where the offence is serious, it also has a vital interest in
maintaining a justice system that is above reproach.


in this case, the cocaine and other items seized
are objective, reliable pieces of evidence that are critical to proving the alleged
offence. if the results are excluded, the case for the prosecution will
disintegrate.

in the end, i do not believe that this factor
requires exclusion in order to protect the integrity of the justice system and
public confidence.

the balance of convenience favoured the route
chosen by cst. satino, even if this meant that he breached the defendant’s s.
10(b) right to counsel.

all things considered, i would not exclude from
admissibility the reliable evidence, properly seized in these circumstances. i
find that both officers, and especially cst. satino, were professional,
courteous, respectful, aware of the limits of their lawful authority while
attempting to protect the public and discharge their duties.

after careful deliberation and a weighing of all
considerations, and mindful that the cumulative effect of the first two
grant
factors does not strongly pull toward exclusion of the evidence, i am satisfied
that the long-term effect of admitting the contraband into evidence in the
circumstances of this case would not bring the administration of justice into
disrepute, whereas exclusion of this reliable evidence would have the opposite
effect.
conclusion

although i have found two modest breaches of the
defendant’s s. 10(b)
charter
right, i do not find it appropriate to
exclude any evidence from the defendant’s trial.

this decision does not condone inattention or
deliberate police conduct that violates clear constitutional requirements. had
i found that there was even a hint of over-reach or intentional police
misconduct, the seriousness of the
charter
breaches would have increased
exponentially, and i would not have hesitated to exclude the evidence sought to
be used to prove the charge before the court. here, the police conduct was
exemplary in many respects. constable satino is not very experienced but he
demonstrated a superior understanding of his role and the law. his choices were
understandable and not entirely unreasonable.

for these reasons, the application fails.
released: 02 may
2025
justice
g. paul renwick

the police witnesses authenticated the time and date stamped onto
the bwc videos.

r.
v. h.c.,
2009 onca 56
at para.
41.

r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7
at para.
81.

kruk, supra, at paras.
71 and 75.

ibid.

kruk, supra, at para.
72.

r.
v. suberu,
2009 scc 33
at para.
3.

initially, the officer also testified about the lack of privacy given that the
vehicle has a camera that records what happens inside the police cruiser.
however, the officer also admitted that he could turn the interior camera off.

for the origins of this analysis, see
r.
v. grant,
2009 scc 32.

r.
v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 365
at para.
62.

r.
v. o’brien,
2023 onca 197
at para.
24.

o’brien, supra, at para.
25.

r.
v. mccolman,
2023 scc 8
at paras.
57, 58, and 64.

this
deserves little weight given their unprompted origins and the timing of these
utterances, which was likely before the defendant would have accessed counsel
even if he had been taken to the police station immediately after receiving s.
10(b) information.

o’brien, supra, at para.
53.

mccolman, supra, at para.
70.