source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj235/2025oncj235.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. davis, 2025 oncj 235
date: 2025 04 22
court file no.: windsor
22-170
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
lawrence
davis
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 23
october, 3 november 2023, 2 august, 11, 28 october 2024, 13 march 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 22 april 2025
iain skelton........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
patricia brown............................................................................ 
 counsel for the defendant
reasons
for sentence
contents
facts.
2
positions of the parties.
3
the presentence reports.
3
the principles of sentencing.
6
caselaw..
9
aggravating factors.
11
mitigating factors.
13
analysis.
20
result
21
pratt j.:

on
29 december 2021, lawrence davis went to a meeting. that meeting was in the
back of an suv in a residential neighbourhood in windsor. the business of the
meeting was to sell illegal firearms. in the course of that transaction, a
dispute arose. that dispute turned into a gunfight. the front seat passenger
was shot and killed. mr. davis was shot in the shoulder.

following
a police investigation, mr. davis was charged with several offences. on 23
october 2023, he entered guilty pleas to the following counts:
(1)
breaching
a release order by possessing weapons;
(2)
possessing
a firearm while prohibited;
(3)
transferring
a firearm without authorization; and
(4)
possessing 
a loaded, prohibited firearm.

over
the course of the following 18 months, i received extensive sentencing
submissions and supplemental materials. these are my reasons for sentence.
facts

the
parties filed an agreed statement of facts in this matter. it was marked as
exhibit 1.

the
offender mr. davis met with two people on the night of 29 december. he got
into their vehicle, a bmw suv in a parking lot near the intersection of
tecumseh road east and forest glade drive. he sat in the back driver’s side
seat. philip archer was in the driver’s seat and patrick vincente sandy was in
the front passenger seat.

archer
drove from tecumseh road onto forest glade drive. the offender handed a shoe
box to vincente sandy. inside were three handguns: a taurus 9mm, an sccy 9mm,
and a glock.40 caliber. the glock was loaded with 15 rounds of ammunition.

a
dispute erupted between the parties. this led to vincente sandy pointing the
glock at the offender and the offender producing and pointing his own 9mm
pistol at him. within the confines of the vehicle, they fired at each other. 
vincente sandy fired three rounds, one of which struck the offender in the
shoulder. the offender fired four rounds, three of which struck vincente
sandy. one struck him in the back, one in his arm and chest, and one in his
head.

archer
stopped the vehicle and fled. davis also left the vehicle, having to crawl
into the front seat to do so as the child locks had been activated and the rear
doors could not be opened. he left the scene.

archer
returned and resumed driving. he called 911 for help. he met with ems near
the corner of forest glade drive and wildwood drive. vincente sandy was taken
to hospital but died from his injuries.

in
the vehicle, police found the three handguns and a large quantity of money in
the front of the vehicle. they also found a cell phone in the rear of the
vehicle. attached to this phone was a prescription bearing the offender’s
name. police went to the offender’s residence and placed him under arrest. he
was himself taken to hospital for treatment of his shoulder wound.

it
is important to note the crown’s concession that they are not able to disprove
a claim of self-defence in this case. as a result, the offender is sentenced
today only for his role in the transaction and related breaches. he is not
being sentenced for causing the death of patrick vincente sandy.
positions of the parties

the
crown seeks a global sentence of ten years with credit for presentence custody,
together with various ancillary orders. that sentence would be broken down as
follows: five years for firearm trafficking, three years for possessing a
loaded prohibited firearm, 18 months for possessing a firearm while prohibited,
and 6 months for breaching a release order. all sentences, the crown submits,
should be consecutive. counsel for the offender argues the presentence custody
of 1,065 days, enhanced to 1,598 days, is sufficient for all but the possession
while prohibited. on that count, counsel seeks a further 120 days. the
ancillary orders are not disputed.
the presentence reports

i
have been provided with two presentence reports. one was a tradition report
prepared by probation officer kristen merritt (hereinafter “the psr”). the
other is an enhanced presentence report prepared by leah kay of the sentencing
and parole project (hereinafter “the epsr”). this report is focused on the
offender’s racial heritage and background. together, the reports provide
valuable detail and insight into the offender’s past, present, and future.
the psr

the
offender was primarily raised by his mother as his american father left the
family and returned to the united states when the offender was 12 years old. 
he and his half-sister remained with their mother. the offender said he hated
his father for years afterwards but has since reestablished contact with him.

his
upbringing was largely positive. he said his mother excelled at being a single
parent and took good care of him and his sister. he became “the man of the
house” after his father left but soon had a good relationship with his mother’s
new partner. his education was also successful, with the offender completing
grade school and high school up to grade 11. his studies were disrupted in
2015 and while he has tried since then to complete high school, he has not yet
obtained his diploma.

as
a teen, the offender worked in retail, in landscaping, and in a factory. he
was also an avid football player. the psr noted he changed high schools at one
point to pursue a better football program.

his
education and athletic pursuits were derailed on 1 november 2015. on that day,
the offender was attacked by multiple assailants. he said they shouted racial
slurs at him and that after the assault, they ran him over with a car. this
caused numerous injuries, including a brain injury and two pelvic fractures. 
he was hospitalized for a week and used a wheelchair for a month. he missed a
significant amount of school following the attack and could no longer play
football. his attackers were never found.

beyond
the physical injuries the offender suffered, he also endured psychological
trauma from the attack. he was diagnosed and medicated for post-traumatic
stress disorder and major depressive disorder. he also stopped socializing
with other members of the black community. his mother and sister observed that
this event changed the offender’s personality. his mother said he experienced
anger issues and was fearful of others. the lack of closure from his attackers
never being found has added to the emotional and mental fallout he has
experienced.

in
2021, his dog was shot and killed by police. no other details were provided
about this incident, but the offender did tell ms. merritt that he was suicidal
after this event and that he’d been off his medications at the time.

on
the issue of substance use, the psr disclosed some concerns. he experimented
with alcohol and cannabis marijuana in high school and was a daily user of
marijuana prior to his incarceration. he also admitted times where he abused
his prescription medication. fortunately, the offender has never used harder
drugs like crystal methamphetamine or fentanyl. he has, however, struggled
with a gambling addiction. he would like to receive counselling for this
issue. in the psr, his mother noted that the settlement money he received
following his attack has all been spent.

overall,
i find the psr to reveal significant challenges, but also a desire by the
offender to deal with those challenges. he has the support of his family, and
if his willingness to get the help he needs is sincere, he will be
well-positioned to forge a new, positive path when he is released from custody.

following
the preparation of the psr, ms. merritt provided an addendum. she wrote that
after completion of the report she’d been contacted by psychiatrist dr. sean
prabhu. dr. prabhu confirmed the offender had been his patient but that he
hadn’t been “for a few years now”. in fairness to the offender, it’s not clear
if he ceased being dr. prabhu’s patient of his own volition or if it was simply
a consequence of his arrest in december 2021.
the epsr

in
addition to the subject matter covered in the psr, the epsr provided further
detail on the offender’s history. it emphasized the impact his father’s
departure had on him. he relied on his father for support and guidance as a
child. his closeness with his father is demonstrated by his decision, at 10
years old, to change his name from tyler scott davis to lawrence davis. 
lawrence is his father’s name, and he wanted to honour him. when his father
left to live with his other family in detroit (of whom the offender had no
prior knowledge), the change was, in the words of his aunt, “beyond difficult”.

it
also noted that the offender’s maternal grandfather was of indigenous descent. 
no other details on this point were provided.

the
epsr discussed the 2015 attack and its aftermath. the offender told ms. kay
that he became hostile and did not trust others following his assault. his
family confirmed that information, noting how abusive he would be with his
mother when he misused his medication or combined it with alcohol.

after
the attack, the offender said he lost trust in the black community because he
felt they should have known who attacked him. he began spending time with
other individuals who were involved in criminal activity. in the report, he
acknowledged these new friends were a bad influence.

regarding
substance use, the epsr does not reveal any ongoing concerns. the offender
said he does not consume alcohol regularly, in part because he has seen its
effects on his mother. his aunt and sister agree his mother is a functional
alcoholic who now has significant health issues related to her liver.

following
the assault, the offender received a large financial settlement in 2019. 
looking back, he does not see this as a positive event as he ended up
squandering his money. he began gambling, as noted in the psr. while he
identifies gambling as a problem in his life, he also told ms. kay he was not
concerned about it and could stop if it became a problem. this is in contrast
to his words in the psr, where he admitted he had an addiction and that feeding
that addiction had sometimes led to criminal activity. he also told ms.
merritt he wanted to address the problem and was open to counselling for it.

he
recounted his educational history to ms. kay. he began his high school career
at riverside secondary school and moved to w.f. herman academy in grade 11. it
appears the offender was placed in the “applied” stream of courses at riverside
without being told of the potential limitations that stream could impose on his
future plans. still, he said he was well-liked and did well academically.

the
offender feels that racism was to blame for no one being arrested following his
assault. he said police did not believe him and assumed he was withholding
information so as not to be a “snitch”. since the attack, the offender said he
has been the subject of numerous arbitrary traffic stops and illegal searches. 
he said police have an aggressive attitude when dealing with him. he understands
police have his file noted with, “dangerous person, suicide by cop”, which
impacts how they deal with him. he did not explain how he knows of this
notation.

his
concerns about racism and its effect on the investigation are echoed by his
friend cheyenne emond. she also expressed that police do not take the
offender’s mental health or brain injury into account when interacting with
him.

regarding
the offences, the offender admitted he should not have left his residence that
night. the epsr notes at page 9, “
lawrence disclosed that his restrictive
bail conditions and criminal record prevented him from gaining legitimate
employment; therefore, he engaged in the trafficking of firearms for financial
gain.”
he
believed his depression and brain injury impacted his judgment when he decided
to commit the offences.

while
in custody, the offender said he has experienced “blatant racism (and) indirect
racism” from inmates and staff. he also noted spending significant time in
lockdowns and 22 days in segregation. he has attended several programs while
in custody, and while he signed up for the african canadian excellence program,
he said it was never actually implemented.

the
epsr noted the offender was “straightforward, respectful, and confident” in
discussing his circumstances. he said he wanted to relocate outside ontario
following his release from custody. ms. kay referred to various academic
studies in suggesting he may have difficulty finding employment as a black man
with a criminal record and a disability. she recommended employment supports,
counselling, and mentorship on the offender’s release to maximize his chances
of success.
the principles of sentencing

the
criminal code, together with appellate caselaw, has set out several factors a
court must consider when imposing a sentence for the offences before me.

section
718
of the
criminal code
states the following:
718
the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a)
to denounce unlawful conduct and
the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful
conduct;
(b)
to deter the offender and other
persons from committing offences;
(c)
to separate offenders from
society, where necessary;
(d)
to assist in rehabilitating
offenders;
(e)
to provide reparations for harm
done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or
to the community.

in
crafting this section, parliament has clearly set out the protection of society,
respect for the law, and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society
as the core purposes of sentencing. these goals are achieved with sanctions
that follow the list of named objectives.

further,
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender. it must also be similar to sentences
imposed in similar circumstances, and must not be unduly harsh or long when
multiple consecutive sentences are imposed.

when
sentencing offenders for crimes related to handguns,
the supreme court of
canada in
r.
v.
nur
2011 onsc 4874 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 3878
referred with approval
to
the decision of justice molloy in
r.
v.
ferrigon
2007 canlii 16828 (on sc),
 o.j.
no. 1883 (s.c.j.). at paragraphs 25 – 27 of that decision, justice molly
stated:
25
guns
are dangerous. handguns are particularly dangerous. loaded, concealed handguns
are even more dangerous. a person who loads a handgun with bullets and then
carries that handgun, concealed on his person, into a public place is by
definition a dangerous person. handguns are used to shoot people. a person who
carries a loaded handgun in public has demonstrated his willingness to shoot
another human being with it. otherwise there would be no need to have loaded
it. that person is dangerous. he is dangerous to those with whom he associates;
he is dangerous to the police and other law enforcement personnel; he is
dangerous to the members of his community; he is dangerous to innocent
bystanders, including children, who may be killed or maimed by stray bullets.
and equally importantly, he is dangerous to a way of life that is treasured in
canada and to which all residents of toronto are equally entitled - a way of
life that respects the rule of law to ensure the peace and safety of those who
live here.
26
it
is because of the extreme danger of handguns and the senseless carnage and loss
of life occasioned by their use that our courts have repeatedly emphasized the
importance of denunciation and deterrence in sentencing for weapons offences.
in
r. v. danvers,
2005 canlii 30044 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 3532
(c.a.),
armstrong j.a. stated (at para 78):
there is no question that our courts have to address the
principles of denunciation and deterrence for gun related crimes in the
strongest possible terms. the possession and use of illegal handguns in the
greater toronto area is a cause of major concern in the community and must be
addressed.
27
also,
in
danvers
(at
para
77
), the court of appeal endorsed and adopted the comments of the trial
judge, ewaschuk j., as follows:
it is my view that the circumstances of this murder and this
offender bring into play the principles of deterrence, both general, and more
especially individual, the principles of denunciation and the protection of
society.
death by firearms in public places in toronto plague this city
and must be deterred, denounced and stopped. only the imposition of exemplary
sentences will serve to deter criminals from arming themselves with handguns.
in
particular, the use of handguns in public places cries out for lengthy
increased periods of parole eligibility.
society must be protected from
criminals armed with deadly handguns.
(emphasis added)

to
these guiding principles, i would add the words of justice green
in
r.
v.
spicher
2020 oncj 340 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 3251 (c.j.)
at paragraph
75:
this sentence may
seem harsh to mr. spicher and his family, but it is nowhere near as harsh as
the death, harm and suffering that could have been caused to innocent victims
of gun violence. individuals who choose to put their own personal gain above
the lives and safety of members of our community have to pay a heavy price so
that the message is clear. our courts will not countenance trafficking in these
deadly weapons and the public will be protected by sentencing these offenders
in a manner that reinforces this unwavering message.

the
parties are in agreement that the sentence for possessing a firearm while
prohibited should be served consecutively to any other sentence i impose. this
is consistent with the approach of the british columbia court of appeal in
r.
v.
ball
 b.c.j. no. 545 (c.a.)
and many courts since, including
r.
v.
kabanga-muanza
2019 onsc 1161, a case provided by the crown.
caselaw

both
parties provided case briefs in this matter. as is generally the situation
when dealing with sentencing, few cases are directly applicable. all, however,
can provide guidance and general principles relevant to the issues at hand. 
whether i refer to a specific case in my analysis or not, i have considered all
cases filed by both counsel.
•
crown
cases

in
r.
v.
elvira
2018 onsc 7008, the offender was convicted under s.
95(1) of illegally possessing a loaded firearm. in executing a search warrant
on the offender’s residence, they discovered a loaded.38 calibre revolver and
quantities of heroin and cocaine. the gun was in plain view and therefore
accessible to anyone in the residence. in finding this case to be at the “true
crime” end of the spectrum of s. 95 offences, justice schreck noted the general
range of sentence to be three to five years. his honour sentenced the offender
to three years on the gun charge, noting that it was the first sentence of
imprisonment and so should be kept as short as reasonably possible.

r.
v.
friesen
2016 bcsc 1679
dealt with an offender engaged in the possession and export of
various firearms, ammunition, and related devices. these devices included
suppressors, and switches that could turn a semi-automatic firearm into a fully
automatic firearm. over the course of his business, friesen sold items to
agents of the u.s. government. on arrest, he was found at a family campsite
with multiple automatic firearms, ammunition, magazines, suppressors, and
switches. notably, he was at the campsite with his partner and five-year-old
son. regarding the possession offences, the court found seven years to be
appropriate, with two years consecutive on related breach charges. all
totalled, the court imposed a ten-year sentence.

in
r.
v.
harutyunyan
2012 onsc 58, justice benotto (as she then was)
sentenced an offender who was stopped in a vehicle the police suspected was
stolen. when he exited the vehicle at the side of a busy highway, a loaded
firearm fell from his pants. noting the grave danger to the public of a loaded
firearm in a vehicle, her honour sentenced the offender to 4 years in custody.

in
kabanga-muanza,
supra, the offender was convicted of several
possession offences related to a loaded handgun found in his vehicle. he had
endured a very unstable upbringing and was left with his brother to effectively
fend for themselves when he was just 14. he fell into crime to support their
basic needs. in sentencing the offender, justice spies noted at paragraph 101:
i do conclude however, that mr. kabanga
had a loaded firearm out in the public in a vehicle that was being driven in
the community, notwithstanding that he was subject to three court orders
prohibiting him from possessing one. there was only one reason for having a
firearm in his vehicle and that was to be prepared for violent action.

in
the end, her honour sentenced the offender to 3 ½ years for the possession
offences and 1 year consecutive for a breach under s. 117.01.

the
spicher
case,
supra, saw justice green of this court sentence an
offender for four counts of unlawfully transferring firearms. he sold several
weapons to an undercover police officer. he had a lengthy criminal record and
minimized his responsibility. following a detailed review of the sentencing
caselaw related to weapons trafficking, justice green found the range of
sentence for that offence to be 3-9 years’ custody. the global sentence
imposed on
spicher
was 6 years minus credit for presentence custody. i note
these were otherwise legal firearms purchased legitimately by the offender. it
was his subsequent sale of those firearms that led to his prosecution.

finally,
the case of
r.
v.
ward-jackson
2018 onsc 178
underlines the
danger and potential tragedy inherent in firearms trafficking. in that case,
the offender sold three handguns to dellen millard. two of those guns were
subsequently used in the notorious murders of millard’s father wayne, and the
innocent stranger tim bosma. further, there was evidence the offender knew at
least one of the guns would be used in a crime as millard told him it would be
“dirty” when he was done with it. the offender told him not to worry as he
could change “her print” to mask the gun’s use. taking the principle of totality
into consideration together with credit for presentence custody conditions, the
court sentenced the offender to 11 years in jail.
•
defence
cases

the
defence cases, provided but not referred to in argument, included
r.
v.
hussain
2018 onca 147
where the court of appeal for ontario affirmed a 4 ½ year
sentence for the illegal transfer of a firearm. in the trial decision, the
offender challenged the constitutionality of the mandatory minimum sentence for
offences under s. 99(1).

that
section was also successfully challenged
in
r.
v.
ball
2019 onsc
7162
and
in
r.
v.
shobway
2015 oncj 457. finally, in
r.
v.
c.l.
2012 oncj 413, the offender was convicted of firearms
trafficking for offering to sell an undercover officer a handgun, despite that
sale never actually taking place. again, the mandatory minimum sentence was successfully
challenged.

on
the issue of constitutionality of s. 99(2) (the sentencing provision), the
parties are in agreement that the caselaw is consistent that the mandatory
minimum sentence set out therein violates
s. 12
of the
charter of rights
and
freedoms and is not saved by s. 1. both agree that it should not affect my
decision in this case. on the basis of counsels’ submissions and pursuant to
the principle of judicial comity that encourages consistency among courts, i
agree that the mandatory minimum sentence of three years’ custody for an
offence under s. 99(1) is unconstitutional and of no force or effect in the
present case.

the
remainder of the cases filed by the defence relate to the sentencing of black
offenders. while
r.
v.
morris
2021 onca 680
has garnered the
bulk of the attention on this point, it is not the only case to address the
effect of racism in the criminal justice system. counsel also points to
r.
v.
jackson
2018 onsc 2527
and
r.
v.
steed
2021 nssc 71. 
the overarching ratio in these cases is that courts must do a better job of
recognizing and accounting for racism in criminal law and society in general. 
we do this by looking not only at the person and the offence before the court,
but also at how they came to be in court in the first place. as justice
nakatsuru told the offender
in
jackson,
supra, at paragraph
170:
i see the path that have lead you here.
the road you took was not helped by being black in a white world.

in
short, courts cannot ignore that we are all products of our environment. in
some cases, that environment has provided nurture and advantage. in others, it
has most certainly not. in appropriate cases, that difference must form part
of the sentencing equation.

that
said,
the principles in
morris
and other cases do not mandate a judicial
discount based on race. the more serious an offence, the more pressing is the
need to protect society and impose meaningful sentences regardless of an
offender’s background. i note that even
in
jackson,
supra, for the
possession of one handgun with one round in it, justice nakatsuru still imposed
a five-year sentence, with another year consecutive for breaching a weapons
prohibition.
aggravating factors

the
aggravating factors in this case are obvious.

it
would be hard to understate the danger of the offender’s actions. the danger
he created is a significant aggravating factor.

i
remind myself not to use an element of the offence as an aggravating factor. 
while some level of public danger is inherent in the illegal sale of firearms,
that danger is not an element of the offence of weapons trafficking. that is,
the crown does not need to prove the public’s safety was put at risk to obtain
a conviction. i can, therefore, consider the danger created by these specific
circumstances as aggravating.

the
danger is obvious and chilling. this transaction was not set for an empty
industrial area in the middle of the night. it took place in a residential
neighbourhood. the parties met at 7pm on a night shortly after christmas, when
families are out visiting and enjoying the holidays. it took place steps away
from the offender’s own residence. in the psr he confirmed forest glade is “a
good community”. in this good community, on a december evening, the offender
and other parties were driving around with multiple loaded handguns. the
offender’s plan was to sell three such guns to vincente sandy for financial
gain. he placed not only himself and the other occupants of the vehicle in
danger, but also every other person in that neighbourhood.

another
layer of aggravation comes from the offender being on bail at the time of the
offences. he made the choice to meet with the others to sell these handguns
while he was governed not just by any release order, but by an order that
placed him under house arrest. he was not to leave his residence at any time
unless he met certain narrow exceptions. none of those exceptions allowed him
to meet with customers to sell guns. the order also prohibited him from
possessing weapons.

the
public expects that when a person is released on bail they will follow the
rules they are given. the court expects the same. a defendant is presumed
innocent while on bail, but when they are released from custody on conditions,
that means the crown has shown cause to the releasing court why restrictions on
their liberty are necessary. before a defendant is released, they are required
to confirm they will abide by those conditions. failing to do so disrespects
the authority of the court.

as
well, bail is granted on a ladder system. defendants should be released first
on the least onerous conditions available. as the allegations against them
become more serious, the conditions may become more demanding. likewise, if
they have a record of criminal activity, the conditions of release may be more
strict. in the present case, the offender had been released on house arrest. 
he was on the most restrictive form of bail there is. the releasing court
considered his circumstances and found it necessary to impose a near-absolute
restriction on his liberty. that restriction held for one week.

when
the offender chose to sell handguns, aside from being on bail, he was also
bound by a weapons prohibition. this is another court order designed to
prevent him from possessing weapons. these orders are not imposed randomly. 
according to the psr, on 16 december 2020 the offender was convicted of an
offence under
s. 88(1)
of the
criminal code. this offence relates to the
possession of a weapon for a purpose dangerous to the public peace. as part of
his sentence, a weapons prohibition under s. 109 was imposed. this is a
mandatory weapons prohibition put in place by parliament. it was entirely
disregarded by the offender.

to
be clear, the offender being on bail and bound by a weapons prohibition are
aggravating only on the charges of firearm possession and weapons trafficking. 
in this case, the possession of weapons is an element of the breach offences,
and so cannot be considered aggravating features on those counts.

i
do, however, consider the fact that the offender was in possession of multiple
weapons, and that those weapons included loaded handguns, as aggravating
features on all counts. his conduct goes above and beyond meeting the elements
of any charged offence and is most certainly aggravating.

the
trafficking count is further aggravated by the fact that not only were they in
a vehicle in public at the time of the transaction, but that vehicle was
moving. as the offender handed over the box of guns, as the dispute arose and
the bullets started flying, the vehicle was driving through the neighbourhood. 
this expanded the risk to the public and endangered every person unlucky enough
to be on their route. in submissions, counsel for the offender argued that the
crown could not say if the vehicle was moving or stationary at the relevant
time, but the agreed statement of facts is clear:
upon hearing the
shots being fired, mr. archer immediately stopped the bmw, and ran out of the
driver’s door.

it
was agreed by all parties that at the time of the shooting, the vehicle was
moving.

while
bound by two separate court orders not to possess weapons, the offender tried
to sell three handguns in a residential neighbourhood. the sale turned into a
violent shootout in a moving vehicle that ended with the death of the buyer. 
it is hard to imagine a more aggravated example of these offences.
mitigating factors

that
is not to say the offender is entirely without mitigating features.

without
question, the offender has had a difficult experience since his assault in
2015. it is not an excuse for his subsequent behaviour, but the assault and
the physical and emotional toll it has taken on him provides important
context. he suffers from the effects of a traumatic brain injury and mental
health challenges. his life has moved in a direction he would likely have never
expected before the attack.

he
enjoys strong support from his family. this will be crucial in the offender
rebuilding his life on his release from custody. their support will help keep
him on a positive path that does not lead to further offences. it impacts my
assessment of the offender’s risk to the public in the future and his risk of
recidivism.

his
guilty pleas are also a mitigating feature in this case. he gave up his right
to a trial on these matters and admitted responsibility. i recognize the plea
agreement removed the most serious charge he was facing, and so in that sense
was a favourable arrangement, but he has still admitted gravely serious
charges. his acceptance of responsibility, both through his pleas and through
his words spoken in court, provide mitigation.
morris features

i
have also considered the impact of racism on the offender. i have the benefit
of the epsr and the submissions of counsel on this point. the caselaw provided
is also helpful.

the
morris
decision
states that there must be some connection between racism
and mitigating circumstances. at paragraph 97 and onward, the court stated:
there must, however, be some connection
between the overt and systemic racism identified in the community and the
circumstances or events that are said to explain or mitigate the criminal
conduct in issue. racism may have impacted on the offender in a way that bears
on the offender's moral culpability for the crime, or it may be relevant in
some other way to a determination of the appropriate sentence. absent some
connection, mitigation of sentence based simply on the existence of overt or
[page 667] institutional racism in the community becomes a discount based on
the offender's colour. everyone agrees there can be no such discount: see,
e.g., l. (f.h.), at paras. 45-49;
r. v. elvira,
 o.j. no. 6185,
2018 onsc
7008 (s.c.j.), at paras.
21-25; r. v. ferguson,
 b.c.j. no. 3133,
2018
bcsc 1523,
420 c.r.r. (2d) 22, at paras.
126-129; and r. v. biya,
 o.j.
no. 6711,
2018 onsc 6887 (s.c.j.), at para.
36, revd on other grounds

o.j. no. 1407,
2021 onca 171.
borde and hamilton both
described the connection between anti-black racism and factors relevant to the
determination of a fit sentence in broad terms. similar language appears
in gladue and ipeelee in respect of the relevance of
"background and systemic factors". the evidence may be relevant to
sentencing in more than one way.
the social context evidence may offer an
explanation for the commission of the offence which mitigates the offender's
personal responsibility and culpability for the offence. mr. morris's strong
and ever-present fear of many people around him in his community, including the
police, was offered as an explanation for his possession of a loaded gun. the
information in both reports supported the inference that mr. morris's fears
were real, justified and existed, in part, as a result of systemic racism that
played a role in shaping his perception of his community, his relationship with
others in the community, and his relationship with the police.

in
the present case, the offender grew up in a predominantly white neighbourhood. 
he had several friends in the black community who were pro-social and focused
on athletics, just as the offender was. he said he experienced a degree of
racism, including times when neighbours would call the police to report him
when he was walking around at night. police would arrive and question him. he
told ms. kay he took that racism “with a grain of salt”.

the
most impactful encounter with anti-black racism came after his attack in 2015. 
he told ms. kay the assault was not investigated as police did not believe him
when he said he had no memory of the incident or any idea why he was
victimized. he said the police assumed he was withholding information. he
remarked to ms. kay, “maybe the police would have believed me and done a better
investigation if i was white.” their response to his assault led to his
mistrust of police.

he
also recalled being tasered by police while hospitalized, though his memory of
those events was blurry and he could provide no context for it.

as
i set out earlier, the offender advised he has also been stopped by police
numerous times while driving. he has been the subject of searches. all of
this has led him to have a very negative view of police, who he says see him as
dangerous.

i
am left with the difficult task of determining what connection, if any, exists
between the racism experienced by the offender and his moral blameworthiness
for the offences before me. it is not necessary to show that the racism he has
experienced
caused
the offences; it is the level of connection between
that racism and his personal responsibility that matters.

in
the epsr, the offender spoke in some detail about his motivation for the
offences. this is from page 9:
lawrence reported
that on december 22, 2021, he was released on house arrest for charges
unrelated to the index offences. his bail conditions prohibited him from
leaving his residence without his surety and possessing any weapons. one week
later, lawrence was involved in the index offences.
lawrence reported
that he understood the conditions of his release order and regretted his decision
to leave his house on the evening to engage in the index offences. lawrence
disclosed that his restrictive bail conditions and criminal record prevented
him from gaining legitimate employment; therefore, he engaged in the
trafficking of firearms for financial gain. he did not consider the risks
associated with firearms or their sale. he reflected: “in my eyes, i didn’t
think anything could go wrong. i was only thinking about the outcome, which
was money.” lawrence recognizes that he acted in self-interest without
foresight and regrets leaving his residence that evening.
lawrence disclosed
that his ongoing depression influenced his decision-making skills and
contributed to his interactions with the criminal justice system. he believes
that his judgment and cognitive processing are adversely impacted by his brain
injury, which contributed to his involvement in the index offences.

i
take from his words to ms. kay that the offender knew in advance that what he
was doing was wrong. he was motivated by money. he said his bail and record
prevented him from obtaining employment, but i note he’d only been on the bail
order for a week at the time of these offences. he also spoke in the report of
“witnessing the death of mr. sandy firsthand”. as the facts were presented,
the offender did not witness the death; he caused it. it is concerning that
the offender seems to be minimizing and externalizing responsibility for the
offences.

the
offender sees his mental health and cognitive difficulties as driving forces
behind his offending. i have no difficulty accepting that. it is clear that
after his attack, the offender’s view of the world changed drastically. more
than that, in addition to the effects of the attack, his experience of racism
in the ensuing investigation added to the damage. in the years following, he
has continued to experience random stops and searches he blames only on his
race. his entire criminal record post-dates his attack and subsequent
treatment by authorities. in my view, there is a connection to be drawn
between the offender’s experience of racism and his moral blameworthiness for
the offences. it will be considered a mitigating factor on sentence.

i
will address another potentially mitigating factor, which is the delay in the
preparation of the epsr. the chronology of proceedings as they relate to the
report are as follows:
(1)
23
october 2023: pleas entered.
(2)
3
november 2023: funding for epsr confirmed.
(3)
26
february 2024: intended writer of epsr has left the office. the case needs to
be re-assigned. counsel told report will now be “expedited”.
(4)
28
march 2024: counsel told epsr will now take 12 months. counsel advises they no
longer want the report given the delay.
(5)
2
august 2024: submissions made on mandatory minimum sentence, evidence taken
related to duncan credit.
(6)
11
october 2024: further evidence on duncan credit. counsel advised epsr would
now be available in january 2025 as the offender is “up next”.
(7)
13
march 2025: the epsr was filed as an exhibit.

from
the time that funding for the epsr was secured to its production to the court,
a total of 16 months elapsed. while other events took place in the interim,
they did not impact the preparation of the report. regardless of any
submissions on mandatory minimum sentences or presentence credit, the report
would still have taken nearly a year and a half. the final product is a
15-page report (though two pages are an appendix mostly related to a
bibliography). it references the information in the psr eight times, and the
fitness assessment conducted on the offender twice. by no means do i detract
from the work of ms. kay, but i am drawn to the words of justice crerar in the
case of
r.
v.
cade
 b.c.j. no. 528 (s.c.). referring to
an epsr as an irca (“impact of race and culture assessment”), his honour stated
at paragraphs 94-96:
94 a final note
on the irca itself. while the irca provides a comprehensive and useful overview
of mr cade's experiences of prejudicial treatment, as well as literature on the
experience of black individuals in canada, its contents do not justify the
eight month sentencing delay (it is granted that part of that delay can be
attributed to the difficulty in coordinating the calendars of defence counsel).
that delay runs contrary to the supreme court's criticism
in r. v. jordan,
2016
scc 27
at para.
40
of the "culture of complacency towards delay" in
the criminal justice system.
95 messrs cade
and ceal were convicted on june 21, 2023. their sentencing was set down for
november 14, 2023. mr ceal obtained and delivered his gladue report early
enough to retain that date. ultimately, the november sentencing date had to be
adjourned because of the irca delay. we are holding a special sitting during
the designated reading week break of the court, on my insistence, with special
accommodations by the prince george courthouse staff, in order to hold the
sentencing hearing within a year of the conviction of these two offenders. in
proceedings where defence counsel brought not one but two jordan applications
based on delay, the delay inflicted by the irca was both ironic and
unfortunate. in this, i share other courts' observations about the utility of a
irca in proportion to its delay, where social context information could be
satisfactorily obtained from other sources, as expressed in
cases such as r. v.
smith,
2019 bcsc 1152
at paras.
2-11
and r. v. riley,
2019 nssc 92
at para.
3.
96 the irca
insights could largely have been provided by a properly qualified pre-sentence
report author, read in combination with discussions of overt and systemic
anti-black racism discussed in such authorities as ellis; morris; r. v.
handule,
2023 bcsc 1031; r. v. le,
2019 scc 34
at paras.
89-97; r. v.
theriault,
2021 onca 517
at para.
212, leave to appeal to scc ref'd, 
s.c.c.a. no. 362 (16 december 2021); r. v. anderson,
2021 nsca 62; and r. v.
parks
(1993),
1993 canlii 3383 (on ca),
15 or (3d) 324 (ca)
at 342,
leave to appeal to scc ref'd, 
scca no 481, all in combination with the liberality granted to defence
counsel's submissions at a sentencing hearing.

i
agree with justice crerar’s comments and concerns. requiring a black offender
to stay in custody for nearly a year and a half while waiting for a report
meant to address the over-incarceration of black offenders is darkly ironic and
entirely unacceptable. this is all the more concerning when the information
provided by the epsr could just as easily (and far more quickly) have been
provided by other sources.

if
these reports are going to be available to offenders and publicly funded, they
need to be prepared in a timely manner. when they are not, as was the case
here, the delay will be considered a mitigating factor on sentence.
duncan credit

evidence
was called on the issue of presentence custody conditions. to that end, i
heard from staff sergeant jeremy mortley of the central north correctional
centre, staff sergeant peter spourdalakis of the southwest detention centre
(swdc), and mohamad dakhlallah of the elgin-middlesex detention centre (emdc). 
i also received several exhibits outlining the nature of the offender’s
presentence custody related to cell assignments and lockdowns.

courts
routinely give 1.5:1 credit for time spent in presentence custody. this
reflects the often-harsh conditions borne by inmates who still enjoy the
presumption of innocence. they receive less programming, and the time spent in
custody does not count towards earned remission on sentence. this credit,
provided for in
s. 719(3)
and
(3.1)
of the
criminal code, is commonly called
“summers credit” after the supreme court of canada’s
decision in
r.
v.
summers
(2014)
2014 scc 26 (canlii),
308 c.c.c. (3d) 471.

there
will be times, however, when presentence conditions warrant more than summers
compensation. when these conditions are particularly difficult to endure,
additional mitigation can be given. support for this notion comes from the
court of appeal for ontario’s endorsement
in
r.
v.
duncan
2016 onca 754 (canlii),

o.j. no. 5255 (c.a.). what has become known as duncan credit should not be set
at a defined number of days or months. it is a mitigating factor. quantifying
it risks overemphasizing it in relation to other mitigating factors, like
remorse or rehabilitative prospects (
see:
r.
v.
marshall
2021 onca 344 (canlii),

o.j. no. 2757 (c.a.)
). it is a feature that, together with all aggravating and
mitigating factors, can impact a sentencing court’s ultimate determination.

some
of the considerations courts can take into account in assessing duncan credit
are the number and duration of lockdowns at a given facility, or the number of
times an inmate is “triple bunked”, i.e. where three inmates are housed in a
cell meant for two, leading to one inmate sleeping on a mattress on the floor.

staff
sergeant mortley testified that while the offender was housed at central north
correctional centre, at no point was he triple bunked or placed in
segregation. he did not have any records related to lockdowns. his
examination was paused for him to retrieve those documents, but he was never
recalled to the witness stand and no documents were provided.

staff
sergeant spourdalakis confirmed the information found in the documents filed in
relation to the swdc. the offender was housed at that facility for a total of
803 days. for 523 of those days, he was triple bunked. according to the
records, the offender was assigned the floor mattress on some of these days. 
staff sgt. spourdalakis testified, however, that inmates would often reach
their own arrangement in the cell and the assignment on paper wasn’t
necessarily what took place in reality.

while
at the swdc, the offender experienced a total of 109 lockdowns. this is in
addition to the usual lockdowns from 10pm to 7am, and from 12pm to 1pm. these
additional lockdowns could arise from staffing shortages, the discovery of
contraband, or the need to move prisoners to court or within the facility. 
they could be facility-wide or only related to a single unit. here, the
offender experienced 45 institutional lockdowns and 64 unit lockdowns. according
to the records, the majority (77) were related to insufficient staffing. staff
sgt. spourdalakis testified that while inmates are confined to their cells
during a lockdown, it would be rare for the swdc to cancel access to showers,
or to family or lawyer visits.

finally,
he confirmed the offender spent a total of 22 days in segregation. he was
unable to advise the reason for this but noted segregation could be used as a
punitive measure, for health reasons, or to address other concerns. the
summary provided by counsel concedes that inmates in segregation are offered
showers, time out of cell which could include recreation, movies, and time in
the yard, and phone calls.

mohamad
dakhlallah referred to the contents of the letter from nicole van dooren,
deputy superintendent of security and compliance of the emdc. the letter, made
an exhibit, states the offender spent no time in segregation at emdc, and that
from 17 february 2023 to 2 august 2024, the offender spent just one night
triple bunked.

i
note that the records i have extend only to 2 august 2024. nothing was
provided and no evidence was called regarding his presentence custody
conditions after that date. obviously, i can only consider credit on the basis
of information i have been given. i cannot presume unusually harsh conditions
from august 2024 to present.

when
the offender first went into custody in december 2021, the swdc was still
dealing with the covid-19 pandemic. on entry to the facility, it appears the
offender spent from 31 december to 7 january in a single bed. from 8-22
january 2022, he was in segregation. i would expect at least some of that was
related to the policy of quarantining new arrivals to the facility. i can take
judicial notice of the fact that custody during the pandemic was often even
more difficult than usual, and that inmates were subject to more frequent
disruptions of their daily activities.

overall,
i find i can consider the offender’s experience in presentence custody as a
mitigating factor. i decline to assess a given number of days or months
attributable to it, but it will be weighed alongside the other mitigating
factors present in this case.
analysis

this
is not an easy sentence to determine. the offences are gravely serious and
must be denounced and deterred in the strongest possible terms. conversely,
the offender is a young man who seems now to understand the mistake he made. 
it is tragic that he learned this lesson at the cost of a human life.

gun
crime is nothing less than a plague on canadian society. according to
statistics canada, police reported 14,000 incidents of firearm-related violent
crime in 2022. that represented at 10% increase over 2021. since 2016,
firearms have been the most common tool of homicide, and in 2023 handguns were
used in 56% of firearm homicides. further, the use of handguns in violent
crime in general is up 50% since 2013 (see:
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/241211/dq241211a-eng.htm and https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/85-002-x/2024001/article/00001-eng.htm).

in the
present case, while on bail and a weapons prohibition, the offender chose not
only to carry a loaded firearm but to sell three others. he told the psr
author that his bail was too restrictive for him to find work. respectfully,
he’d been on bail for a week, and that week was over christmas. there’s no
evidence he even tried to find legal employment. instead, within a week of his
release from custody, he had inventory, a willing customer, and an $8.000 deal
in place. the illegal sale of handguns was not the only business he had
available to him. it was a business he chose in violation of two court orders
and of the trust of his aunt and surety.

the
caselaw is clear and consistent on the potential danger posed by the illegal
possession and transfer of firearms. in this case, however, the danger ceased
to be potential. the worry seen in other cases came to fruition in this case. 
over the course of illegally dealing with handguns, shots were fired in a
suburban neighbourhood and a person was killed. a criminal enterprise quickly
became a violent shootout. this incident strikes at the very heart of public
safety and the security of our communities. i must impose an exemplary
sentence. as
stated by justice green in
spicher,
supra
at
paragraph
34:
the only
guaranteed way to prevent gun violence is to cut off the supply of guns. one of
the means to accomplish this worthy goal is to consistently sentence gun
traffickers to exemplary custodial sentences so that the potential profit from
selling guns is greatly outweighed by the personal assumption of risk for the
traffickers of losing their liberty for substantial periods of time.

i
cannot, and do not, ignore the mitigating features present in this case. i
have set them out in detail, and they inform my decision. the sentence i
impose must not be crushing, and it must take into account the potential for
rehabilitation the offender has shown.

nevertheless,
my primary focus must be on the protection of society. gun traffickers need to
know that their business comes with the risk of lengthy penitentiary sentences. 
rehabilitation and reintegration must be subordinate to denunciation and
deterrence.

the
actions of the offender attack public safety from multiple angles. he did not
hesitate to violate court orders, disrespecting the authority of the justice
system. he armed himself with a handgun when he left his residence on 29 december,
endangering anyone who may have crossed his path. he carried with him a box
containing three more handguns, one loaded with 15 rounds of ammunition. they
were not being transported in a gun safe or with trigger locks; they were in a
shoe box. he got in a vehicle for a pre-arranged meeting where he planned to
sell the shoe box of guns for $8,000. as they drove through a quiet
residential neighbourhood, a dispute arose and a shootout took place. that
shootout ended when one of the shooters was dead.
result

the
offender has been in custody for a total of 1,065 days. enhancing that custody
at a rate of 1.5:1 leads to effective presentence custody of 1,598 days. this
translates to 4 years, four months, and 15 days.

applying
the principles set out in the
criminal code
and the relevant caselaw, and
balancing the protection of society with the rehabilitation and cultural
background of the offender, i have determined that a total sentence of 7 years
is appropriate. presentence custody will be deducted from that period, leaving
2 years, 7 months, 15 days left to serve.

the
offender will be sentenced as follows:
(1)
count
6, transferring firearms: six years
(2)
count
16, possessing loaded firearm: 3 years concurrent
(3)
count
5, possession while prohibited: 1 year consecutive to count 6
(4)
count
3, breach of a release order: 6 months concurrent to count 5

presentence
custody as noted above will be deducted from counts 6 and 16. this credit will
satisfy ct. 16. the offender will therefore have one year, seven months, and 15
days left to serve on count 6, and one year consecutive to that on counts 3 and
5.

in
addition, there will be a s. 109 weapons prohibition on counts 6 and 16 for
life.

as the
offender is already on the national dna databank, i will decline to make a dna
order in this case.

all
firearms recovered in this matter will be forfeited to his majesty the king. i
will sign an appropriate order when it is provided by the crown.

given
the custodial sentence, i will waive the victim surcharges that would otherwise
be payable.

i do
not impose this sentence lightly. i wish the offender every success in the
future. when asked if he had anything to say to me directly, he said he deeply
regretted his actions and that he is committed to making real changes. he
wants to see this event as a turning point in his life. i hope that it is.
released:
22
april 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt