source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj565/2025oncj565.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
by court order made
under
subsection
278.95(1)(d)
of the
criminal code, these reasons
may be published, broadcasted, or transmitted, despite the restriction on
publication set out in section
278.95
of the
code.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. younkman, 2025 oncj 565
date: 
2025 10 29
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 48127538 00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
christopher younkman
before
justice christine mainville
section
278.92 application – step 2, heard on october 6, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 29, 2025
alexander merenda............................................................................ counsel
for the crown
jody berkes.................................................................................... counsel
for the applicant
ashley dresser………………………………………………counsel
for the complainant
mainville j.:

the complainant and the applicant met online. a
few days later, they arranged for the complainant to attend the applicant’s
home on september 24, 2020.

at that meeting, they engaged in some consensual
sexual activity. however, the complainant alleges that he did not consent to
the anal sex that took place. this constitutes the subject of the sexual
assault charge against mr. younkman.

though the defence has not conceded identity, it
has identified the central issue at trial as being consent.

the applicant and complainant exchanged some
signal messages ahead of the meeting and some shortly thereafter. this ruling
relates to whether the applicant can make use of some of these messages at
trial.

after initially taking the position that no
records application was required, the defence brought
an application under
s. 278.92
of the
criminal code
to use four separate
documents at trial (exhibits 1-4 to the application). these documents formed
part of the crown disclosure. they were produced to the defence with the complainant’s
consent, but no written waiver was initially obtained.

aside from the
s. 278.92
application, i ruled
that s. 276 was engaged by two of the documents, pursuant to the reasoning in
r.
v. reimer,
2024 onca 519, at paras.
45-49. that is, i ruled that they
constituted “prior sexual activity” that does not form the subject-matter of
the charge. these documents were identified for the purpose of these
proceedings as exhibits 1 and 2 to the defence application.

the crown conceded stage 1 in respect of these
exhibits – i.e., that the records sought to be adduced
were “capable of being admissible” under s. 276(2): see s. 278.93(4) of the
code. the defence has since indicated that it is no longer pursuing any
application as it relates to exhibit 2.

in the interim, the complainant retained counsel
and the applicability of the
s. 278.92
regime to all records was deferred to
the stage 2 hearing, given the possibility of obtaining clearer waivers from
the complainant following independent legal advice.

the complainant takes no issue with the
admissibility and use at trial of exhibit 4. he does however object to the
admissibility of exhibits 1 and 3 – messages sent before and after his meeting
with the applicant.

i have already ruled that s. 276 is not engaged
by exhibit 3, but i must consider its admissibility at trial under
s. 278.92.

as for exhibit 1, i must address its
admissibility and use at trial as it relates to both the s. 276 and
278.92
regimes. the defence also asks me to reconsider my earlier ruling that this
exhibit is subject to the s. 276 regime, based on more detailed submissions
that its content relates to the subject-matter of the charge.

the complainant also provided a written waiver
setting out the parameters of what he waives as it relates to the
s. 278.92
regime. this waiver is tantamount to a partial waiver and its effect as it
relates to use of the records at trial was the subject of dispute.
legislative framework
section 278.92: records relating to
the complainant

section 278.92(2)(b) provides that a record as
defined in s. 278.1 of the
code
is inadmissible unless the judge
determines, in accordance with the procedures set out in ss. 278.93 and 278.94,
“that the evidence is relevant to an issue at trial and has significant
probative value that is not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice
to the proper administration of justice.”

section 278.1 provides the following definition
of “record”:
for the purposes
of sections 278.2 to
278.92, record means any form of record that contains
personal information for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy and
includes medical, psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education, employment,
child welfare, adoption and social services records, personal journals and
diaries, and records containing personal information the production or
disclosure of which is protected by any other act of parliament or a provincial
legislature, but does not include records made by persons responsible for the
investigation or prosecution of the offence.

this definition sets out a non-exhaustive list
of records that generally contain personal information for which there is a
reasonable expectation of privacy. as for non-enumerated records, the supreme
court in
r. v. j.j.,
2022 scc 28, at para.
42, explained what might
constitute such a record for the purpose of this statutory regime:
ultimately, we
conclude that a non-enumerated record will only be captured by s. 278.1, in the
context of the record screening regime, if the record contains information of
an intimate or highly personal nature that is integral to the complainant’s
overall physical, psychological or emotional well-being. such information will
have implications for the complainant’s dignity.

the court also made clear, at para. 46, that its
interpretation of what constitutes a reasonable expectation of privacy in the
context of s. 278.1 is specific to that section and is distinct from how the
concept applies in the s. 8
charter
jurisprudence. it did accept two
principles from the s. 8 jurisprudence, namely:
(1) the person
claiming a privacy right must have a subjective expectation of privacy that is
objectively reasonable in the circumstances …; and (2) a reasonable expectation
of privacy only engages legally recognized privacy interests… both of these
principles establish that the privacy interests at issue must meet a high threshold.
(
j.j., at para.
47
)

however, the court did not accept the
content-neutral nature of the analysis, which is a feature of the s. 8
reasonable expectation of privacy jurisprudence:
j.j., at para.
48.
accordingly, it found that “[r]ecords do not attract a reasonable expectation
of privacy simply because of the medium used to convey them. the more important
consideration is the sensitivity of the information contained in the record.”:
j.j.,
at para.
49.

on this point, the court at para. 45 described
when “legally recognized privacy interests” will be engaged:
complainants
have privacy interests in highly sensitive information about themselves, the
disclosure of which can impact on their dignity. as this court has observed in
the past, the “dissemination of highly sensitive personal information” can
result “not just in discomfort or embarrassment, but in an affront to the
affected person’s dignity” (
sherman estate v. donovan,
2021 scc 25, at
para.
7
). to reach the level of an impact on dignity, an intrusion on
informational privacy must “transcen[d] personal inconvenience by reason of the
highly sensitive nature of the information that might be revealed” …

finally, the court observed that “the privacy
interests in a record being
produced
to the accused are different from
the privacy interests at play when the accused seeks to have the record
admitted
as evidence in court”:
j.j., at para.
50
(emphasis in original).

section 278.92(3) provides that the following
factors must be considered in determining whether such records are admissible:
(a)
the
interests of justice, including the right of the accused to make a full answer
and defence;
(b)
society’s
interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual assault offences;
(c)
society’s
interest in encouraging the obtaining of treatment by complainants of sexual
offences;
(d)
whether
there is a reasonable prospect that the evidence will assist in arriving at a
just determination in the case;
(e)
the
need to remove from the fact-finding process any discriminatory belief or bias;
(f)
the
risk that the evidence may unduly arouse sentiments of prejudice, sympathy or
hostility in the jury;
(g)
the
potential prejudice to the complainant’s personal dignity and right of privacy;
(h)
the
right of the complainant and of every individual to personal security and to
the full protection and benefit of the law; and
(i)
any
other factor that the judge, provincial court judge or justice considers
relevant.
section 276: prior sexual history

section 276(2) provides that “evidence
shall not be adduced by or on behalf of the accused that the complainant has
engaged in sexual activity other than the sexual activity that forms the
subject-matter of the charge, whether with the accused or with any other
person”, unless the judge determines that the evidence:
(a)
is
not being adduced for the purpose of supporting an inference described in
subsection (1);
(b)
is
relevant to an issue at trial; and
(c)
is
of specific instances of sexual activity; and
(d)
has
significant probative value that is not substantially outweighed by the danger
of prejudice to the proper administration of justice.

the prohibited purposes described in subsection
(1) are to support
an inference that, by
reason of the sexual nature of that activity, the complainant:
(a)
is
more likely to have consented to the sexual activity that forms the
subject-matter of the charge; or
(b)
is
less worthy of belief.

under s. 276(3), the judge must consider factors
that are nearly identical to those enumerated in s. 278.92(3).

relevant to our purposes, subsection (4)
provides that sexual activity “includes any communication made for a
sexual purpose or whose content is of a sexual nature”.

the procedure to be followed is the same as that provided for by the
s. 278.92 admissibility regime: s. 278.93(4).

as indicated above, the only records that remain
in issue are exhibits 1 and 3 to the defence application. the crown and
complainant oppose their admissibility. they argue that the probative value of
the records does not outweigh the prejudice that would be occasioned by
admitting them.
the subject records

exhibit 1 to the defence application is one page
of signal messages exchanged between the applicant and the complainant shortly
before meeting that same day. the applicant writes that he knows the
complainant is nervous but not to worry, they will go slow; he wants the
complainant to be comfortable and he can “say stop any time”. he adds that the
complainant should just come, and they’ll have lunch, adding “and if you want
to i’ll uber you home any time.”

the day after the encounter, further messages
were exchanged. the defence seeks to make use of an excerpted portion of the
messages, identified as exhibit 3 to the application.

these include a message from the applicant to
the complainant that states: “ok, i’m sorry. we set up the green, yellow, red;
do you want to try something different?”. the complainant responds that he
doesn’t know if he wants to meet. the applicant goes on to state that he would
like to spend time together, “dress you up and explore what you want to. but i
want you to be happy, and in control. so i’ll do whatever you want to feel that
way.” he asks the complainant what he thinks and goes on to indicate that he
doesn’t want to pressure him.

given the fact that the bulk of the messages – and
certainly the ones of import to the defence – are the applicant’s own words, one
might question whether the complainant can have a reasonable expectation of
privacy in those words. i do not however deem it necessary to address this
point here and will treat these words as part of a broader conversation between
the complainant and the applicant that may well engage the complainant’s
privacy interest, given my ultimate conclusion that these messages can be used
at trial.

the applicant submits that these messages are
relevant to the issue of consent. he relies on the complainant’s initial
statement that does not have the complainant telling the applicant to stop when
the applicant would try to penetrate him anally, even though he did say stop in
respect of other sexual activity (at which time the applicant proceeded to
stop). the complainant in his initial statement does describe saying it hurt on
various occasions and pushing the applicant’s penis out. but he also describes initially
saying nothing and asking whether the applicant had any std and whether he
should wear a condom. he also indicates that he asked the applicant whether
they can move to a more comfortable spot, that he conveyed he was not sure
about the position, and that they “went at it” for a bit.

the applicant seeks to put the subject messages
to the complainant to establish that they discussed how the complainant might
communicate that he was not comfortable participating in certain sexual acts –
i.e. how he might withdraw consent, stop the activity, and leave at any time. as
stated in the application, the messages would show that the parties
specifically discussed “safe words to stop” or the “language that would be used
to indicate a lack of consent”. the applicant would argue that the complainant
did not use this language and chose not to leave “because he was consenting to
the activities that took place in the apartment, including anal sex”: defence
application dated september 15, 2025, at paras. 1, 2 and 5.

but the applicant’s primary position in respect
of exhibit 1 is that it does not engage s. 276, given that the messages are
part and parcel of “the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the
charge”. though i heard from the parties before issuing an earlier oral ruling
on this point, i will address this preliminary issue here given that defence
counsel asked that it be reconsidered in light of more thorough submissions and
additional context for the messages.

i also address a further preliminary issue
relating to the complainant’s waiver, which applies to both records under
adjudication.
preliminary issue #1: section 276’s application
to exhibit 1

exhibit 2, which is no longer a subject of the
defence’s application, were messages that related more directly to the applicant
and complainant’s sexual preferences for their planned encounter. though the
messages in exhibit 1 relate more specifically to comfort and stopping the
sexual activity being discussed, as opposed to sexual preferences, they formed
part and parcel of this discussion relating to the parameters of the upcoming
meeting.

based on justice paciocco’s reasoning in
reimer,
at paras.
45 to 49, i ruled that these did not form part of the subject matter
of the charge. as such, an application under s. 276 was required for them to be
adduced at trial.

the records at issue in
reimer
were also messages
exchanged by the accused and complainant prior to the sexual encounter that was
the subject of the charge. there, the complainant described or agreed with
descriptions by mr. reimer of the sexual activity they intended to engage in:
para. 20. the court of appeal considered whether proximate sexual activity that
is not the immediate subject of the prosecution will fall outside the purview
of s. 276: para. 45.

it concluded that although the “subject matter
of the charge” will encompass “the entire specific factual event in which the
allegedly criminal act occurred” and not only “the isolated and immediate
sexualized physical act of the accused that is being prosecuted”, it “must be
part of the specific factual events of which the offence is a component”: para.
45. in
reimer, the earlier text messages were not part of “the specific
factual events” that included the offending conduct.

here, for instance, the specific factual events
would capture the entire sexual encounter that unfolded at the applicant’s
residence on september 24, 2020, not merely the anal sex that is the subject of
the charge. but does it capture messages sent shortly before the complainant
attended the applicant’s home that same day?

paciocco j.a. explained that “it is not enough
for the uncharged sexual activity to be proximate in time and place to the
allegedly criminal act of the accused… nor is it enough that the uncharged
sexual conduct is relevant to the charged event”: para. 46. in order “to
bypass screening under s. 276, the uncharged sexual activity must be so ‘integrally
connected, intertwined or directly linked to’ that activity – the
actus
reus
of the specific charge – that it is effectively part of the
transaction or event that is being prosecuted”: para. 46. see also
r. v. choudhary,
2023 onca 467, at paras.
29-33.

the messages in
reimer
were found to be subject to the s.
276 regime, on the basis that “the sexualized messages were exchanged before
the parties came together. those texts speak about the motel visit as a future
event. … [they] are simply too remote in time and too distinct in nature from
the charged events to avoid s. 276 scrutiny”: para. 49.

exhibit 2 in the present case fell more clearly
within these parameters. there is an argument to be made that, on its own,
exhibit 1 could be distinguished from
reimer
on the basis that the
messages do not constitute “other sexual activity” but rather form part of the
subject-matter of the charge. the connection between this series of messages
and the ensuing events, a very short while later, is indeed greater than in
reimer.
it also appears that what was discussed is not as distinct in nature
from the charged events than was the case in
reimer, though it is
difficult to fully appreciate this at this stage of the proceedings.

and though the exhibit 1 messages are
about
the anticipated sexual encounter that soon followed, unlike in
reimer, they
are not sexualized in nature. but s. 276 applies to “any communication
made for a sexual purpose”. and limits placed on sexual
activity still engages the s. 276 regime, based on the reasoning in
r. v.
kinamore,
2025 scc 19. at para. 64 of that case, wagner c.j. found that
“evidence that the complainant has not previously engaged in, or prefers not to
engage in, any sexual activity, certain types of sexual activity, or sexual activity
under particular circumstances” forms part of a complainant’s sexual history
and is thus presumptively inadmissible.

in any event, i am not prepared to revisit my
earlier ruling based on the arguments advanced and the withdrawal of exhibit 2.
justice paciocco made clear that “[p]revious sexual activity that is not
the immediate subject of the prosecution should be characterized as other
sexual conduct and vetted for admission under s. 276 unless it is clearly
integrally connected, intertwined, or directly linked to the event being
prosecuted. … ‘[i]f a judge harbours some reservations [about this] they should
act with caution and proceed with a s. 276 analysis’”: para. 48. see also
choudhary,
at para.
33.

having heard submissions on the merits of the s.
276 application and given the parallels between exhibit 1 and the messages at
issue in
reimer, i will err on the side of caution and consider the
application on its merits.
preliminary issue #2: the
complainant’s waiver in relation to the section 278.92 regime

several decisions of the ontario superior court
of justice have found that the defence is entitled to assume, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, that the crown obtained waivers before disclosing any
documents to which a privacy interest could attach: see
r. v. mcfarlane,
2020 onsc 5194
(per stribopoulos j.);
r. v. j.k.,
2021 onsc 7604
(per
schreck j.);
r. v. martiuk,
2022 onsc 5577
(per goldstein j.).

a waiver was indeed obtained in this case,
though it was not initially in writing and its parameters were unclear. the
written waiver that was subsequently obtained for the purpose of these
proceedings states that the complainant is only waiving his privacy rights in
respect of disclosure to the accused, not use at trial, but he understands
that some judges have interpreted a more limited waiver as being all
encompassing, such that the document can be used without the need for an application.

the above cases stand for the proposition that where
there is a waiver, or it can be presumed based on disclosure and the absence of
evidence to the contrary, no application under s. 278.92 of the
code
is
required. that is because the privacy interest in the documents is no longer
such that they constitute a record under s. 278.1.

justice macfarlane however took a different
position in
r. v. gallan,
2024 onsc 5338, based on the fact that
mcfarlane
and
j.k.
had been rendered prior to the supreme court’s decision in
j.j.,
and that
martiuk
had merely followed these earlier decisions.
gallan
found that there must be an express waiver not merely as it relates to
disclosure to the accused, but “of the specific protections of the
code
pertaining
to the admissibility of records”: para. 15. the crown urges me to follow
gallan.

i do not need to resolve which of these two
lines of cases i should follow. given the principles set out in
r. v.
pringle #7,
2024 onsc 4084, the result in my view would be the same.

in that case, molloy j. deemed herself bound by
the decisions in
mcfarlane,
j.k.
and
martiuk:
pringle
#7, at paras.
9 and 53. however, in that case, the written waiver signed by
the complainant specifically referenced disclosure to the accused and stated
that the complainant’s privacy rights remained protected by s. 278.92, and that
the accused would need to apply to the court before making use of the records
at trial: para. 13. though the defence was therefore initially entitled to
assume, based on the disclosure, that no application was required, molloy j.
deemed the wording of the waiver to be “evidence to the contrary”, such that an
application was required: paras. 53 and 66.

in the present case, apparently accounting for
molloy j.’s comments in
pringle #7, the written waiver also states that
the complainant is only waiving his privacy rights in respect of disclosure to
the accused, but effectively notes that this may be interpreted as a broader
waiver despite the indication that the complainant maintains his privacy
interest as it relates to use of the document at trial.

this language allows for a more informed waiver
than was the case in
pringle, but it is questionable whether it conforms
to the crown’s duty under s. 278.2(2). it is also not particularly helpful in
resolving the issue flagged by molloy j. at para. 66 of her decision. there, molloy
j. found that the waiver was not fully informed because the crown advised the
complainant that they were “waiving their privacy rights under s. 278.2(2) (not
278.1) and that this [did] not mean the material
disclosed [would] be admissible at trial without an admissibility hearing.”
molloy j. questioned why the crown would continue to advise the complainants in
this manner after
j.k.
and
martiuk.

in this case, the complainant is at least aware
that disclosure of the document to the accused may mean that use can be made of
it at trial. while it would certainly have been preferable to canvass a full
waiver with the complainant, i am inclined to view the waiver obtained as significantly
diminishing if not extinguishing any expectation of privacy the complainant may
still have in the communications.

in
r. v. mcknight,
2019 abqb 755, at
paras.
39-44, the alberta queen’s bench found that a complainant maintains a
reasonable expectation of privacy in written communications turned over to the
crown where the crown subsequently decides to disclose them to the accused
(without any waiver). however, the court also held, at para. 43, that there is
no such expectation of privacy where the complainant discloses them to both the
crown and the accused – in that context, at the preliminary inquiry:
fairness must require that if a
complainant is willing to release information in order to further a criminal
prosecution, then the accused should be entitled to use the information in the
preparation of his defence:
mills
at para
106. therefore, i find that a
complainant no longer has any reasonable expectation of privacy in the
electronic communications which she turned over at the preliminary inquiry.

here, the messages were voluntarily provided to
the police, with the expectation and agreement that they be turned over to the
accused. this is unlike a circumstance where the complainant disclosed the
documents to the police or the crown, with no clear understanding that that
would mean disclosure to the accused, and potentially admission at trial.

still, what was provided is not a full waiver. like
in
pringle, it is explicit that the complainant is not waiving his
rights as it relates to the use of the messages at trial. there, this constituted
“evidence to the contrary” requiring an admissibility hearing under s. 278.92.

on that basis and given the line of cases that find
that the admissibility provisions must be explicitly waived for no hearing to
be held, i take the partial waiver as constituting “evidence to the contrary”
such that an application under s. 278.92 is required.

the defence argues that this waiver was not
provided along with disclosure of the messages and other documents provided by
the complainant to the police. as such, it was entitled to assume that there
was a waiver and no application was required.

just as was the case in
pringle, i agree
that the defence was entitled to assume, based on the disclosure, that no application
was required. as stated by molloy j., the defence should certainly be informed
of any waiver and the scope of any waiver at the time disclosure is made: para.
66. that would enable defence counsel to assess its scope, whether there is any
“evidence to the contrary”, and accordingly, whether an application should be
brought. without this information, the defence is entitled to assume waiver. this
would avoid later delays and wasted expense should that assumption turn out to
be inaccurate.

however, this does not mean that the waiver
presumption cannot be rebutted. in
pringle #7, the written waiver was
also not disclosed earlier to the defence – it was only provided to the defence
during the records proceedings: see paras. 7, 9 and 66. despite that being the
case, molloy j. found that this established “evidence to the contrary”, such
that an application was required.

the same scenario arises here. although the
waiver is phrased differently, and the complainant here was put on notice that
the evidence may be deemed admissible even though he did not consent to
admissibility at trial, ultimately, he explicitly does not purport to waive the
application of the regime on this point. i will therefore turn to address the
application on its merits.
exhibit 1: admissibility under ss.
276 and 278.92

the defence relies on the reasoning in
reimer
to submit that the signal chats filed as exhibit 1 are relevant to the issue of
consent. it argues that their relevance does not derive from any prohibited
reasoning or the sexual nature of the texts. in its submission, the messages
“specifically provide for the complainant to withdraw consent, stop any
activity (sexual or otherwise), and leave the premises at any time he desires”,
yet “[d]espite being advised that all he had to do was ask for the activity to
stop, [the complainant] never asked”, thereby making
them relevant to cross-examination on the issue of consent: defence application
dated september 15, 2025, at paras. 6 and 8; defence application dated
september 22, 2025, at para. 10.

in other words, the applicant would use the
messages to show that he had specifically conveyed to the complainant that he
could take any of these avenues should he not feel comfortable or not wish to
take part in any of the sexual activity. if the complainant did not resort to
any of these avenues that he had specifically provided for, the defence would argue
that that is because the complainant was in fact consenting to the activity at
the relevant time. or, at least, that the crown will not have proved lack of
consent beyond a reasonable doubt.

the complainant acknowledges that he has a reduced
expectation of privacy in the messages given that he voluntarily gave them to
the police and preserved them over the years, with the express purpose of
supporting his claim of sexual assault. he also acknowledges that the prejudice
to his personal dignity is minimal given that the specific text exchange is not
salacious and does not discuss specific sexual acts: complainant’s response, at
paras. 27-28.

however, the complainant argues that “the
probative value in resolving the issue at trial (consent) and the potential
misuse of the proposed evidence in encouraging bias and reasoning prejudice …
results in an out-sized danger to the proper administration of justice”:
complainant’s response, at para. 29.

in particular, the complainant argues that “[t]he
admission of the text exchange could result in the trier of fact improperly
thinking that the applicant would have acted in the way he said he was going to
act in the text exchange, without the benefit of hearing his version of events
subject to the rigors of cross-examination” should the applicant not testify, which
might be expected given that he has not conceded identity: complainant’s
response, at para. 25.

if the applicant does testify, the complainant further argues
that the admission of the text messages would run afoul of the evidentiary rule
against oath helping or prior consistent statements: complainant’s
response, at para. 24.

but my understanding of the use to which the applicant seeks to
put the messages is not, as counsel to the complainant contends, “as evidence
that in the moment he was prepared to stop if the complainant indicated a lack
of consent”: complainant’s response, at para. 22. it is
to put to the complainant that, considering this exchange, if he did not
consent to the sexual activity in the moment, he would have availed himself of one
of the “outs” that the applicant had expressly laid out for him.

of course, it is always open to a person to stop or refuse sexual
activity at any time – this does not have to be expressed by the accused to
make it an available option. and despite these options being available, victims
of sexual assault do not always resort to them, be it because of shock,
intimidation, incapacity, or any number of reasons. the complainant may well fully
explain why he did not resort to these avenues, if he in fact did not.

but the issue here is the
relevance
of the fact that the applicant had, just prior to the encounter, indicated that the
sexual activity could cease at any time should the complainant make it known
that this is what he wished, by means of certain avenues being made readily
available to him. the tenor of the complainant’s initial statement, which was
filed as part of this application, is that although he initially communicated
to the applicant that he was not comfortable with a particular sexual act or
wanted it to stop, he did not feel comfortable doing so and did not do so once
the applicant began engaging in anal sex.

in this context, the signal messages can serve
to challenge the complainant on whether he consented to this sexual activity. the
applicant may use them to suggest to the complainant that he knew the applicant
was receptive to stopping the sexual activity at any time, that he could simply
state as much, or ask to leave at any time, and he would be free to go, and
that the fact that he did not do so is because he consented to that sexual
activity. i deem the evidence relevant for this purpose, which goes to the
central issue at trial: whether the complainant consented to anal sex.

this purpose does not engage twin myth
reasoning. it is not being adduced to support
an
inference that,
by reason of the sexual nature of that activity
(the earlier
communications), the complainant
is more likely to have consented
to the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge (the anal
sex), or is less worthy of belief: see, in that regard,
reimer, at para.
75.

nor does it rest on any discriminatory
belief or bias. i also do not see a risk that the
evidence may unduly arouse sentiments of prejudice, sympathy or hostility even
if this were a jury trial, which it is not. and as acknowledged by the
complainant, the potential prejudice to his personal dignity and right of
privacy is minimal. i note again that most of the exchange in question
comprises the applicant’s own words, not the complainant’s. i therefore do not
believe that permitting the use of this evidence undermines society’s interest
in encouraging the reporting of sexual assault offences.

on the other hand, there is a reasonable prospect that the
evidence will assist in arriving at a just determination in the case. the
interests of justice, including the right of the accused to make a full answer
and defence, weighs in favour of permitting the evidence to be used.

the tests set out in ss. 276(2) and 278.92(2)
are met. the evidence in my view has significant probative value that is
not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper
administration of justice.

counsel for the complainant says that there was
a further discussion, following this message exchange, where he made clear that
he did not want anal sex. this would certainly be relevant to any defence of
mistaken belief in consent. and it is relevant to whether he did in fact
consent to this activity or not. but it is not decisive of the issue of whether
he subjectively consented in the moment and does not take away from the
relevance of the messages. naturally, the determination of relevance cannot
presuppose which version of events the trier of fact will accept.

of course, the messages – or the fact that the
complainant would not have said stop or tried to leave – are similarly not determinative
of the issue of consent. but that is not the test. they need only be relevant
to an issue at trial:
reimer, at paras.
69 and 71.

the messages in exhibit 1 can therefore be put
to the complainant to suggest actual consent at the relevant time.

counsel to the complainant points to the fact
that the applicant has taken one portion of the messages out of the context of
the larger text exchange. given the purpose of the regime which incentivizes
the narrow admission of evidence of prior sexual activity, i do not think
counsel can be faulted for excerpting only those portions that are of clear
relevance to the defence. certainly, if they are out of context, the
complainant can state as much in response to any questions asked in relation to
the messages. and additional messages can be reviewed and deemed relevant to
enable the complainant to respond. but this does not undermine the adjudication
of the admissibility of the select messages that i have before me.
exhibit 3: admissibility under s.
278.92

exhibit 3 relates to signal messages exchanged
between the applicant and the complainant the day after the alleged sexual
assault. they include an apology and reference by the applicant to a system of
“green, yellow, red” that they would have set up. there are further expressions
by the applicant of the fact that he wants the complainant to be “happy, and in
control”, and that he will “do whatever [the complainant wants] to feel that
way”. the only message from the complainant is one where he expresses that he
doesn’t know if he wants to meet.

the defence takes the
position that these messages do not constitute a “record” under s. 278.1 such
that the s. 278.92 regime is not engaged. as indicated above, this issue was initially
left for later determination, once the position of the complainant was
obtained.

the complainant and crown take the position that exhibit 3 is a
record, and that it does not meet the test for admission given that its prejudice
exceeds its probative value.

the court in
j.j.
provided a framework for assessing whether
material qualifies as a non-enumerated record that must be vetted under the
record screening regime. i should consider both the content and context of the
record:
j.j., at para.
55.

j.j.
directs judges, when assessing context, to “apply a
normative and common-sense approach. whether a communication or document is a
‘record that contains personal information for which there is a reasonable
expectation of privacy’ must reflect societal understandings about the
fundamental right to be free from unwanted intrusion into our personal lives”:
para. 57.

pursuant to
j.j., at paras.
58-60, three non-exhaustive
factors should be considered in assessing context:
(1)
the reason why the complainant shared the private information in
question;
(2)
the relationship between the complainant and the person with whom the
information was shared; and
(3)
where the record was shared and how it was created or obtained.

as explained in
j.j., at para.
76, “[w]hether a person
reasonably expects privacy is necessarily a normative question that is to be
answered in light of the norms of conduct in our society”. ultimately,
“[e]xpectations of privacy are contextual and must be assessed in light of the
“totality of the circumstances”:
j.j., at para.
76. information that is
not highly sensitive or highly personal will attract a lesser degree of
privacy:
j.j., at paras.
45, 53.

the messages here are one-on-one communications between the
complainant and the applicant. they were created in the private domain. the fact of an adversarial relationship between them, as reflected by
these criminal proceedings, does not serve to undermine any reasonable
expectation of privacy in the records:
j.j., at para.
62;
r. v. t.a.,
2020 onsc 2613, at paras.
26-31.

still, as set out above, the complainant
acknowledges that he has a reduced expectation of privacy in the messages given
that he preserved them and voluntarily provided them to the police, for the
purpose of supporting his claim of sexual assault. he also waived disclosure of
the messages to the applicant for this purpose. like exhibit 1, the exchange is
not salacious and the prejudice to the complainant’s personal dignity is
minimal.

moreover, all but one of the messages in the
single page of the signal chat relied on are from the applicant. they largely
bear on the applicant’s own preferences and wishes, and do not contain personal
information about the complainant. the only message from the complainant is about
not being sure he wants to meet. this is not information of a personal nature.
as stated in
j.j., at para.
53, “the scheme is not intended to catch
more mundane information, even if such information is communicated privately.”

in my assessment, based on both context and
content, exhibit 3 does not “contain information of an
intimate or highly personal nature that is integral to the complainant’s
overall physical, psychological or emotional well-being” or that “will have
implications for the complainant’s dignity”. as such, it does not constitute a record under s. 278.1 of the
code. no application under s. 278.92 was therefore required and the
defence is permitted to make use of exhibit 3 at trial.

in any event, and should i be mistaken about
exhibit 3 not being a record, the message that i understand the applicant
wishes to rely on is the one relating to the “green, yellow, red” system. the
relevance of this message is the same as those in exhibit 1. while this message
post-dates the events at issue, it is written in the past tense. clearly, the
implication is that this system was discussed in advance of the alleged sexual
assault. i understand that the defence intends to put this to the complainant
for the same purpose as described above. i would
therefore have found, based on the reasoning above related to exhibit 1, that
its probative value is also sufficiently significant to outweigh any prejudice
that may result from its use.

in some contexts, evidence relating to the
subject-matter of the allegation will constitute a record under s. 278.1.
indeed, as set out in
j.j., at paras.
65-67, 71, explicit communications
that relate to the subject matter of the charge will often attract a reasonable
expectation of privacy. but this communication is not, as acknowledged by the
complainant, explicitly sexual or salacious in nature.

again, if the complainant requires additional
messages to place these in context, that will not offend the provision. the
defence seeks to rely on the messages for a particular purpose. if the complainant
would benefit from surrounding messages, that would not change the defence’s
purpose, and it can certainly be accommodated.
conclusion

the applicant may make use of exhibit 3 to its application.
it may also make use of exhibit 1 for the purpose described above.
released: october 29, 2025
signed:
justice mainville