source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj629/2025oncj629.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. abu laban, 2025 oncj 629
date: 
2025 12 02
court
file no.: central west (peel) region 998 23 311 03761
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
muayyad abu laban
before
justice r. tomovski
ruling
on s. 11(b)
charter
application
heard
on november 28, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 2, 2025
jonathan ng........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
gurbir singh gill.................................. counsel
for the defendant muayyad abu laban
tomovski j.:
i. introduction

it is alleged that the applicant stole a bag
containing cash and jewelry from the complainant. the alleged theft, i am
advised, is captured on video surveillance. the procedural history of this
matter has been protracted. there were several avoidable delays which occurred
resulting in two cancelled trial dates and the currently scheduled one being nearly
three years after the incident.

the applicant brings an application pursuant to
s. 11(b) of the
charter, alleging a breach of his right to be tried
within a reasonable time. he seeks a stay of proceedings as the appropriate
remedy for the alleged breach.

this application arises from the failure of the
trial to proceed on the first two scheduled trial dates. the applicant and the
crown disagree on who is ultimately responsible for the delay in reaching the
currently scheduled trial date. the applicant argues that delayed disclosure
at the beginning of the proceedings and new disclosure received just prior to
the second trial date caused significant delays in the completion of the case. 
conversely, the crown argues that the applicant unreasonably delayed conducting
a crown and judicial pretrial and obtaining trial dates. further, the crown
argues that the applicant solely caused the first two trial dates to be
cancelled.

after having assessed and deducted the relevant
periods of delay, the net delay is below the
jordan
presumptive ceiling. 
although the case took markedly longer than it reasonably should have, the
applicant did not take sustained steps to expedite the proceedings. my reasons
below explain in detail why i dismiss the application.
ii. background

the applicant is charged with one count of theft
over $5000. the incident date is march 7, 2023, at which time the applicant is
alleged to have stolen a bag containing $50,000 in cash and approximately
$30,000 in jewelry from the alleged victim. video surveillance footage
allegedly captures the theft. the applicant was charged and released on an
undertaking with a first court date of april 25.

the information was sworn on april 6, 2023. the
anticipated end of trial is february 4, 2026, the third day of a three-day
trial. as a result, the total delay is 1037 days or 34 months, which is well
over the
jordan
presumptive ceiling for unreasonable delay of 18 months
for a trial in the ontario court of justice, when the crown has elected to
proceed summarily, which it has in this case.

for analytical clarity, the history of the
proceedings can be divided into seven phases, as will become apparent in these
reasons: (1) the disclosure phase, (2) the crown and judicial pretrial phase,
(3) the original trial-scheduling phase, (4) the adjournment of the first trial
date, (5) the first trial-rescheduling phase, (6) the adjournment of the second
trial date, and (7) the second trial-rescheduling phase.
1.
the disclosure phase

starting with the disclosure phase, the
applicable period is from the date the information was sworn (april 6, 2023)
and the date the applicant finally received core disclosure consisting of video
surveillance of the alleged theft (october 3, 2023), a period of 190 days or 6
months. this phase can be delineated as follows.

the first court date was april 25, 2023.
initial disclosure was not available. 
the applicant requested disclosure at the first appearance and followed up the
same day with a written request. initial disclosure was provided on may 10. 
however, it omitted key items, including officer notes, search warrant-related
materials, the 911 call, as well as video surveillance of the alleged theft.
the applicant wrote to the crown
requesting the outstanding items.

despite multiple written and oral requests
between april and september 2023, core disclosure – including the video
surveillance – was delayed. it was not provided until october 3, 2023. the 911
call was not disclosed until three days before the second trial date (september
17, 2025).

as referenced above, core disclosure was not
provided until october 3, 6 months after the applicant was arrested and
charged. as i noted in
r. v. van meeteren,
2025 oncj 546, at para.
10,
concerns in this jurisdiction regarding disclosure delays persist:
i wish to
address what i find is far too common an approach by the crown that contributes
to a culture of complacency that must change to ensure the re-occurrence of
this type of delay is prevented. the supreme court in
jordan
at paras.
4, 29 and 40 referenced a culture of complacency and a tolerance for excessive
delay and identified insufficient practices as one contributing factor to that
culture. that recognition was nearly 10 years ago. neither in its written materials
on this application nor during its oral submissions did the crown provide an
explanation, or satisfactorily attempt to provide one, for why it took nearly
seven months for the applicant [6 months in mr. abu laban’s case] to be
provided a copy of the alleged victim’s statement to police [video surveillance
of the alleged theft in mr. abu laban’s case], despite numerous requests by the
applicant for it. the statement was recorded on video and obtained prior to
the applicant’s arrest [obtained around the time of arrest in mr. abu laban’s
case]. many justice system participants – including the accused…and the public
– deserve and should expect the crown to seek out an
answer to avoid re-occurrence of this kind in future cases. this approach
would align with the framework’s prospective approach in taking proactive
measures to remedy delay:
jordan
at para. 108. while i may not be the
first to raise these concerns, as a justice system participant, i share in the
responsibility of helping to resolve an apparent crown and police indifference
to remedying the repeated failure to provide timely core disclosure: see
r.
v. scott-wolf,
2024 oncj 502
at paras.
57-59;
r. v. stefan, v.
2024
oncj 565
at para.
52;
r. v. smith,
2023 oncj 222
at para.
49; and
r.
v. hotaki,
2023 oncj 261
at paras.
29-33.
2. the crown and
judicial pretrial phase

turning to the crown and judicial pretrial phase,
the applicant advised at the september 26 court appearance that he would
schedule and conduct a crown pretrial once core disclosure was received. core
disclosure, including video surveillance of the alleged theft, was provided to
the applicant by october 3. at the next three court appearances of october 31,
december 5, 2023, and january 23, 2024, the applicant advised that he still had
not conducted either a crown or judicial pretrial. the latter was held on
february 26, even though many earlier dates for a crown and judicial pretrial
were available.
3. the
original trial-scheduling phase

turning to the original trial-scheduling phase,
a 3-day trial estimate was agreed to at
the judicial pretrial held on february 26. despite having the trial estimate
form since that date, the applicant attended the following two court
appearances of march 19 and april 2 without having scheduled a meeting with the
trial coordinator. the matter was adjourned to april 12 to permit scheduling
of a meeting in the interim.
that meeting was held some time between april 2 and 12 (the exact
date is unknown, as neither party included a copy of the trial scheduling form
in their application record).

at the trial scheduling meeting, the parties
secured a 3-day trial for april 14-16, 2025, a date 24 months after the
information was sworn (no evidence was presented on this application of whether
any earlier dates were offered by the court). the applicant advised that he
would be advancing a s. 11(b)
charter
application.

as part of the court’s effort to reduce the
backlog of cases in the region at that time, the applicant’s case was one of
many cases brought forward from their respective trial dates to offer earlier
trial dates. this court appearance occurred on june 20, 2024. the court
offered dates as early as july 2024, 15 months after the information was sworn
and below the
jordan
presumptive ceiling, but neither the applicant nor
the crown were available. however, an earlier 3-day trial of october 9-11, 2024,
was secured, 18 months from the date the information was sworn.

at the july 12, 2024, court appearance, the
applicant advised that a s. 11(b)
charter
application will not be
brought.
4. the
adjournment of the first trial date

turning to the adjournment of the first trial
date, the applicant brought the matter forward to october 4, 2024, to seek an
adjournment of the october 9-11 trial date. the applicant’s counsel cited unanticipated
personal reasons that necessitated an adjournment of the trial. the crown
consented to, and the presiding justice granted, the adjournment. counsel’s
personal reasons need not be disclosed in these reasons as the applicant and
the crown agreed in submissions that the delay caused by the adjournment of the
trial is to be deducted from the total delay regardless of how the delay is
labelled (the applicant argued it was a discrete event whereas the crown argued
it was defence delay).
5. the
first trial-rescheduling phase

turning to the first trial-rescheduling phase, after
the original trial date was vacated, the matter was adjourned for the applicant
to obtain new trial dates. the applicant appeared in court on october 11 and
november 1 and advised that he had not yet obtained a new trial date. the case
was adjourned to november 14 for the applicant to secure a new trial date in
the interim. a meeting was confirmed with the trial coordinator for november
8. a new trial date of september 17-19, 2025, was secured at that time. this
was the earliest date offered by the court.
6. the
adjournment of the second trial date

turning to the adjournment of the second trial
date, the applicant brought an application on the first day of trial (september
17) due to receipt of new disclosure in the days leading up to and including
the first day of trial. the items included the 911 call, notes related to
receipts and appraisals of the alleged stolen property, a video statement from
a new witness, notes of a forensic analyst and a 3359-page forensic report of the
hardware device associated to the video surveillance camera from the location
where the alleged theft occurred. the presiding judge granted the adjournment,
finding that the applicant did not have sufficient time to review the new
disclosure to be able to proceed with the trial as scheduled. the judge,
however, did not determine fault or attribute delay based on the applicant and
crown having provided differing explanations for the untimely disclosure.
7. the
second trial-rescheduling phase

turning finally to the second trial-rescheduling
phase, after the second trial date was adjourned, a meeting was held with the
trial coordinator on september 19 at which time a new trial date was secured
for february 2-4, 2026. the court offered several earlier dates starting on
october 20-22, 2025, and each month thereafter. the crown was available for
the first date offered. the applicant’s first available date was january 5-7,
2025.

once the current trial date was secured, the
applicant indicated an intention to advance a s. 11(b)
charter
application. 
a date for the application was confirmed for november 28, 2025. the
application was heard at that time. i reserved my decision until today’s date.
iii. analysis
a. the
jordan
framework

the supreme court of canada in
jordan
outlined the framework by which delay is to be assessed under s. 11(b) of the
charter. 
the framework as it applies to the ontario court of justice is summarized as
follows.

there is a presumptive ceiling of 18 months:
jordan
at paras. 5, 46, 49, and 105. delay above that mark is presumptively
unreasonable, whereas delay below it is presumptively reasonable:
jordan
at paras. 47-48, 68, 82 and 105.

delay is considered and calculated in different
ways at different stages of the framework. at the outset, the total delay must
be calculated. this period is calculated from the date of the charge to the
end of the trial:
jordan
at para. 60. the former equates with the date
the information is sworn: see
r. v. allison,
2022 onca 329
at paras.
35-43;
r. v. kalanj,
1989 canlii 63 (scc).

defence delay is subtracted from the total
delay:
jordan
at paras. 49, 60, and 66.

defence delay can result from an explicit or
implicit waiver or delay caused solely or directly by the defence’s conduct:
jordan
at paras. 61, 63 and 66. an example of the latter is when the crown and court
are ready to proceed but the defence is not:
jordan
at para. 64. 
however, legitimate defence conduct is not defence delay:
jordan
at
para. 65.

when the delay is above the presumptive ceiling,
the onus is on the crown to establish the presence of exceptional circumstances
that justify the delay:
jordan
at paras. 47, 68, 81 and 105. exceptional
circumstances are circumstances that are reasonably unforeseen or reasonably
unavoidable and the ensuing delay emanating from those circumstances cannot
reasonably be remedied by the crown:
jordan
at para. 69. the crown must
show that it took reasonable steps to avoid the delay before the presumptive
ceiling was surpassed:
jordan
at para. 70. those steps need not be
successful in preventing the delay:
jordan
at para. 70.

generally, exceptional circumstances fall into
two groups: discrete events or particularly complex cases:
jordan
at
para. 71. the former includes medical emergencies or unexpected illnesses,
whereas the latter includes cases with novel or complicated legal issues,
voluminous disclosure or many witnesses requiring a lengthy trial:
jordan
at paras. 77-78.

like defence delay, delay caused by exceptional
circumstances is subtracted from the total delay:
jordan
at para. 75.

when the delay is below the presumptive ceiling,
the onus is on the applicant to show that the delay is otherwise unreasonable
by establishing that it “took meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained
effort to expedite the proceedings” and the case took “markedly longer than it
reasonably should have”:
jordan
at paras. 48, 82 and 105.

meaningful and sustained steps include seeking
and setting the earliest available trial dates and giving notice when delay is
becoming a problem:
jordan
at para. 85.

whether a case took markedly longer considers
multiple factors including the case’s complexity, local considerations, and
whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the proceedings:
jordan
at para. 87.

stays beneath the presumptive ceiling will be
granted only in clear cases:
jordan
at para. 83.
b. the
hanan
principle

i have substantially reproduced below from
van
meeteren, supra at paras.
36-39, in which i summarized the principle in
r. v.
hanan,
2023 scc 12
and subsequent cases that have interpreted
the principle.

in
hanan
at para.
9, the supreme court
rejected a bright-line rule of attributing the entirety of ensuing delay to the
defence after the rejection of an initial date because of unavailability. 
instead, a contextual analysis was emphasized in which all relevant
circumstances are to be considered to determine if and how the ensuing delay
should be apportioned.

in
r. v. jones,
2025 onca 103
at para.
32, the court of appeal noted that
hanan
did not “adopt an inverse
bright-line rule apportioning the defence with none of the delay”. the court
at para. 33 reiterated that all relevant circumstances must be assessed to
decide how to apportion the delay among the parties: see also
r. v.
jacques-taylor,
2024 onca 458
at paras.
5-7;
r. v. shaporov,
2025
onca 281
at para.
33; and
r. v. m.e.,
2025 onca 729
at paras.
17-18 and
26.

in
r. v. k.d.,
2025 onca 639, the court
of appeal further clarified the principle in
hanan. the court at para.
46 noted, “it is not that the apportionment of delay is warranted in every
case, but rather that the circumstances of every case must be considered to
determine whether apportionment is warranted”.

in
r. v. bowen-wright,
2024 onsc 293
at
paras.
38-48, the summary conviction appeal court identified several factors
that would inform any contextual analysis in the apportionment of ensuing delay
after the rejection of an initial date. those factors include the reason for
the need to reschedule and whether it was caused by the defence; the extent to
which the defence was available; and the reasons for the defence
unavailability.

in
m.e., supra, in which it applied the
principle in
hanan
differently to two separate periods of delay. first,
in setting an initial trial date, although the defence was unavailable for
several earlier dates the court offered and the crown was available, subsequent
dates offered by the court that the defence was available, but the crown was
not, was held to be a relevant factor. the court of appeal at para. 16 stated,
“all relevant circumstances, including the fact that on some proposed dates the
defence was not available and on others, the crown was not available, should be
considered”. the court of appeal apportioned the delay, with the initial
period as defence delay and the subsequent period as crown delay.

second, in the setting of a trial continuation,
although the defence was unavailable for earlier dates offered, there were no
further dates offered from the defence’s unavailability to the date chosen. 
the court of appeal at para. 24, referenced its decision in
k.d., supra,
at para.
45, which noted “the defence cannot fairly and reasonably be held
wholly responsible for a span of time largely comprising a period where the
court was unavailable”. the court of appeal added “this is so even if the
period of delay began because the defence was not available on the first date
offered”. the court of appeal at para. 25 further added that both the defence
and the crown failed to take steps to seek intervening dates from the court,
which led to this period of delay being apportioned equally between the defence
and the crown.
c.
jordan
and
hanan
applied

the total delay in the applicant’s case is from
april 6, 2023 (the date the information was sworn) to february 4, 2026 (the
anticipated end of trial). the total delay is 1035 days or 34 months.

there are three periods of delay that are
exclusively defence delay that are to be deducted from the total delay.

first, after the applicant obtained core
disclosure, aside from an acceptable amount of time to review disclosure and
take necessary next steps (e.g., get updated instructions), which i find to be
14 days, the applicant then unreasonably delayed scheduling and conducting a crown
and judicial pretrial. the applicant obtained core disclosure on october 3,
2023, yet waited 4.5 months to conduct a crown and judicial pretrial, the
latter having been held on february 26, 2024. he first indicated his intention
at the september 26 and october 31 court appearances to schedule and conduct a
crown and judicial pretrial but returned subsequently on multiple occasions
having failed not only to conduct but even schedule either pretrial. this 146-day
period, minus 14 days for review, leaves 132 days. this entire remaining
period is defence delay.

subtracting this 132-day period from the total
delay of 1035 days leaves a net delay of 903 days.

second, after the applicant conducted a judicial
pretrial on february 26 and obtained a trial estimate form, the applicant
unreasonably delayed waiting to set a trial scheduling meeting. the meeting
was held some time between the april 2 and april 12 court appearances. i calculate
the applicable date as april 8, the midpoint between the two dates. this is a
period of 42 days is defence delay.

subtracting this 42-day period from the net
delay of 903 days leaves a remaining net delay of 861 days.

third, after the original trial date of october
9 was adjourned at the request of the applicant, he did not attempt to secure a
new trial date in a timely manner. it took until november 8 to schedule and
conduct a trial scheduling meeting. this entire period of 30 days is defence
delay.

subtracting this 30-day period from the net
delay of 861 days leaves a remaining net delay of 831 days.

i will next address other periods of delay.

i begin with the crown and judicial pretrial
phase.

contrary to the crown’s submissions, the
applicant’s actions were entirely appropriate in insisting on core disclosure
before conducting a crown or judicial pretrial, especially when the items included
video surveillance of the alleged theft which is perhaps the most important
item of disclosure in a theft prosecution where it is alleged there is video
footage of the actual offence being committed. this core disclosure is
necessary to allow for a meaningful pretrial. as i previously referenced in
r.
v. narang,
2025 oncj 564
at para.
54, “requiring the applicant to schedule
a pretrial simply to remind the crown, yet again, this time in a different
forum, of its constitutional obligation to provide meaningful disclosure is a
practice not worth endorsing.”. accordingly, i do not count this period, in
awaiting core disclosure to have a pretrial, as defence delay, when, as
occurred in this case, the applicant was diligent in making multiple requests
for disclosure.

i next address the adjournment of the first
trial date.

in applying the principle in
hanan
to
this period, i am to consider all relevant circumstances in deciding whether,
and how, to apportion the delay. relevant factors include the reason for the
need to adjourn and whether it was caused by the defence and court availability
in rescheduling the trial.

although the applicant’s counsel’s unanticipated
personal reasons necessitated an adjournment of the original trial date, in
applying the principle in
hanan, i do not find the applicant is
responsible for the entire delay in rescheduling the trial as suggested by the
crown.

the crown’s submission attributing the entire
delay to the defence reflects the bright-line approach rejected in
hanan. 
the crown’s position fails to account for the crown’s and court’s ongoing role
in ensuring any delay is mitigated.

the trial scheduling meeting occurred on
november 8, 2024, and a new trial date of september 17-19, 2025, was obtained. 
this is a period of 315 days. the applicant is responsible for a significant
portion of the ensuing delay since he was the sole cause of the adjournment of
the trial. however, the only date offered by the court was 10 months away. on
november 8, the total delay was already at 19 months at this stage in the
proceedings. the crown effectively accepted a single trial date offered 10
months away, even though the delay at that point was already over the
presumptive ceiling. the crown and court have any ongoing responsibility to
ensure delay is minimized, regardless of who initially caused the delay. the
crown did not take any steps to prioritize the applicant’s case including
seeking an earlier date. i apportion the 315-day period as follows: 220 days (equivalent
to approximately 70%) to the applicant and 95 days (equivalent to approximately
30%) to the crown (and court).

subtracting the 220-day period from the net
delay of 831 days leaves a remaining net delay of 611 days.

i next address the adjournment of the second
trial date.

in applying the principle in
hanan, the
actions of both parties necessitated an adjournment of the second trial and,
therefore, it is appropriate to apportion the ensuing delay.

for example, the crown inexplicably disclosed not
one but two 911 calls of 7 minutes each in duration three juridical days before
the second trial despite the applicant’s multiple requests for the 911 call starting
from may 10, 2023, nearly 2.5 years earlier. further, the crown’s submission that
the calls are largely inaudible does not diminish their relevance. one of the
calls was made by the alleged victim. the applicant is entitled to listen to
the calls to try to discern what is being said or consider retaining an expert
to assist in ascertaining what is being said. a single word or phrase in either
call may assist the applicant in making full answer and defence.

similarly, even though the crown only intended
on tendering into evidence at trial the two extracted clips of the alleged
theft, the crown ultimately chose to disclose a 3359-page forensic report and
related notes from the forensic analyst after the trial was scheduled to start. 
the applicant was entitled to review the report and notes and determine whether
and how they would be utilized. the applicant may have wanted to retain his
own forensic expert to see if additional clips could have been extracted from
the hard drive despite the crown’s expert not being able to do so. the
untimely disclosure made it extremely difficult for the applicant to be able to
proceed with the trial as scheduled.

the applicant, however, shares responsibility
for the adjournment of the second trial date.

for example, several of the new disclosure items
(e.g., notes related to receipts and appraisals; the new witness video
statement) were the result of specific inquires made by the applicant less than
a month from the start of the second trial, which the crown worked diligently
to get the applicant.

the applicant was silent in his pursuit of some
of the outstanding items (e.g., 911 call) from the time of the adjournment of
the first trial leading to the second trial, a period of nearly a year.

the applicant would have been aware of the
existence of the “new” witness from the initial disclosure and that the witness
had not initially provided a statement. the crown only sought out a statement
from the witness due to discussions the applicant initiated with the crown less
than a month from the start of the second trial. the statement is only 5
minutes in length.

the applicant was not proactive in pursuing the contents
of the video surveillance hard drive. police examined the hard drive and were
only able to extract two clips, which captured the alleged theft. those clips
were disclosed to the applicant on october 3, 2023. the hard drive, which
belonged to the applicant, was then returned to him. the applicant waited
until september 13, 2024, less than a month before the first trial requesting
“any and all videos to be relied upon by the crown”. no further footage was
provided because the crown intended to rely only on the two clips. the crown
did not believe any more clips existed on the hard drive. the applicant did
not follow up on this request leading up to the second trial. on august 22,
2025, the applicant wrote to the crown and requested several items, which he
prefaced with “there were some small bits of disclosure outstanding”. none of
the items related to the video surveillance or hard drive.

the 3359-page forensic report consists of the
hard drive’s contents which are largely indiscernible and concluded that no
further clips of the alleged theft beyond the two that were disclosed to the
applicant on october 3, 2023, existed on the drive. the report is essentially
a raw data dump of likely irrelevant and indiscernible content.

like the adjournment of the first trial date, in
applying the principle in
hanan, i find both parties are responsible for
the delay caused by the need to reschedule the second trial date. as a result,
it is appropriate to apportion the ensuing delay and based on the availability
of the parties when setting the current trial date.

the trial scheduling meeting occurred on september
19, 2025, and the current trial date of february 2-4, 2026, was obtained. this
is a period of 140 days.

the crown and court were first available on
october 20-22, 2025, a period of 33 days from the trial scheduling meeting. 
this period is non-defence delay and will not be subtracted from the net delay. 
the applicant was first available on january 5-7, 2026, 77 days later. this
period is properly defence delay and will be subtracted from the net delay.

the applicant was available for each successive
date offered from january 5-7, 2026, up to the current trial date, which is
when the crown was next available after october 20-22, 2025. this is a period
of 30 days. this period is non-defence delay and will not be subtracted from
the net delay.

subtracting the 77-day period from the net delay
of 611 days leaves a remaining net delay of 534 days or 17.5 months: see
r.
v. shaikh,
2019 onca 895
at footnote 2 for the conversion of actual days to
months.
d. below
the ceiling findings

the net delay in the applicant’s case is below
the
jordan
presumptive ceiling of 18 months. the onus, therefore, is on
the applicant to show that the delay is otherwise unreasonable by establishing
that he took meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained effort to expedite
the proceedings and that the case took markedly longer than it reasonably
should have. the applicant has not met his burden.

with respect to the latter, and after having
balanced the various factors referenced below, the case took markedly longer
than it reasonably should have.

the applicant’s case is not complex. it is a
simple and straightforward case involving a single allegation of a theft
captured on video surveillance. there is no novelty or legal complexity to the
prosecution. aside from the surveillance (two clips only), the main
prosecution witness is the alleged victim. the three-day trial estimate is, in
my assessment, an overestimation.

regarding local considerations, a case like the
applicant’s should not take 17.5 months to be completed. the court in
jordan
noted the presumptive ceiling is not an aspirational target and “there is
little reason to be satisfied with a presumptive ceiling on trial delay set at
18 months[.] this is a long time to wait for justice.”: at paras. 56 and 57.

in peel region, recent cases with a net delay in
the range of 16-17 months have been stayed, in part, due to the case taking
markedly longer than required: see, for example,
r. v. sawh,
2022 oncj 15
at paras.
23-27
(17.2 months delay);
r. v. dhaliwal,
2019 oncj 761
at
paras.
22, 35-39 (17 months, 20 days delay);
r. v. stefan,
2024 oncj 565
at paras.
21, 55
(17.1 months delay);
r. v. fonseca,
2022 oncj 119
at
paras.
49 and 64
(16 months, 23 days delay); and
r. v. r.m.,
2024 oncj
491
(16.5 months delay).

there are times when the crown took reasonable
steps to expedite the proceedings and other times it did not. the crown
brought the applicant’s matter forward after the first trial date was set to
secure an earlier
jordan
-compliant date. the crown also made itself
available for the earliest date, a month away, when scheduling the current
trial date. however, the crown failed to provide core disclosure in a timely
manner and failed to take any steps to prioritize the applicant’s case
including seeking an earlier date when scheduling the second trial date. in
the circumstances, the crown did not take reasonable steps to expedite the
proceedings throughout. however, this factor does not outweigh other factors
such as the non-complexity of the case and local considerations that lead me to
conclude that the case still took markedly longer than it reasonably should
have.

with respect to meaningful and sustained steps, the
applicant did not take sustained steps to expedite the proceedings.
there are times when the applicant took
meaningful steps to expedite the proceedings. he attended the
jordan
backlog court to reschedule the first trial date for an earlier date. he advised
the crown of his intention to bring a s. 11(b)
charter
application,
which initiated the backlog appearance. however, the applicant’s steps were
not sustained.

the applicant unreasonably delayed setting the
first two trial dates. regarding the first trial date, after having received
core disclosure (october 3, 2023), the applicant waited more than 6 months
(april 8, 2024) before securing the first trial date. this period included having
attended multiple court appearances expected to have scheduled and conducted a
crown pretrial, judicial pretrial and trial scheduling meeting but needing to adjourn
the case after having failed to do so. this period also included an unexplained
missed court appearance which resulted in an adjournment of 7 weeks.

similarly, on october 4, 2024, after the
applicant sought and was granted an adjournment of the second trial date of
october 9-11, 2024, the case was adjourned to allow the applicant to secure a
new trial date. the applicant attended court on october 11 and november 1 expected
to have scheduled and conducted a meeting with the trial coordinator but needed
to adjourn the case after having failed to do so. it was not until november 8
that the second trial date was secured.

after the second trial date (september 17, 2025)
was adjourned, the applicant did not set the earliest trial date. the trial
scheduling meeting was on september 19. the court offered dates each month from
october to the current trial date of february 2-4, 2026. the crown was
available in october. the applicant’s first available date was not until
january 5-7, 2026, nearly 4 months after the second trial date. based on the history
of the proceedings to that point, including the applicant’s request to adjourn
the first trial, not accepting (or being available for) an earlier date did not
expedite the proceedings.

the applicant appeared content at times with the
pace at which some items of disclosure were disclosed. i reference the 911
call. after the applicant’s written request on september 26, 2023, the applicant
did not follow up for the 911 call until approximately august 2025, shortly
before the second trial (september 17-19, 2025). this included an apparent
willingness to proceed with the first trial (october 9-11, 2024) without the
911 call as no follow up in advance of the trial was made by the applicant
either at any of the intervening court appearances or in writing. it was only due
to the applicant’s counsel’s unanticipated personal reasons that the trial did
not proceed as scheduled.

as stated in
jordan, stays beneath the
presumptive ceiling will be granted only in clear cases. for the reasons
above, i do not find the applicant’s case is such a case.
iv. conclusion

the net delay is 17.5 months and below the
jordan
presumptive ceiling. the applicant has failed to meet his onus and demonstrate
that he took sustained steps to expedite the proceedings.

for these reasons, the application for a stay of
proceedings is dismissed.
released: december 2, 2025
signed:
justice tomovski