source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj633/2025oncj633.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. canali, 2025 oncj 633
date: 
2025 12 03
court
file no.: toronto region
25-50000529
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
adam joseph canali
before
justice cidalia c. g. faria
heard
on october 22, 23, 2025
oral
judgement december 2, 2025
written
reasons december 3, 2025

varda anwar........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
craig zeeh........................................... 
counsel for the accused adam joseph canali
faria j.:
i.
overview

adam joseph canali is charged with 9 criminal
offences, namely disguise with intent to commit a criminal offence, two counts
of threatening death, robbery, two counts of assault with a weapon, aggravated assault,
and two counts of failing to comply with a probation order contrary to the
criminal
code.

the crown called the two complainants, the
arresting officer, and the first officer on scene as witnesses. she also filed 3
surveillance videos, 2 body-worn-camera (bwc) clips, medical records, and
photos as exhibits. the defence filed a google maps photo. mr. canali did not
testify.

at the end of the crown’s case, the crown
invited the court to dismiss the threat count against mr. singh as no evidence
was called on that count, and on the second fail to comply count as no
documents for that second probation order were filed. both count 1 and 8 were
dismissed.
ii.
issues & position of the parties

the issue is whether every element of every
offence has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt, specifically:
a.
whether the words spoken amount to a threat to mr. kalathiya.
b.
whether the injuries mr. singh sustained amount to an aggravated
assault.
c.
whether the identity of the perpetrator of the offences was proven
to be mr. canali.

the crown submits that mr. kalathiya recognized
mr. canali from a previous arrest and identified him to police immediately upon
their arrival. she submits this evidence is credible and reliable and should be
accepted. she further submits that the injuries sustained fit within the definition
of an aggravated assault. all elements of all charges have been proven and mr.
canali should be found guilty.

mr. zeeh for the defence submits mr. kalathiya’s
ability to identify mr. canali as the man with whom he interacted on december
30, 2024, is unreliable as it is based on a fleeting glance of the culprit as
he fled. he challenges whether the impression of what the suspect said to mr. kalathiya
constitutes a threat. he also submits mr. singh was not wounded, maimed, or
disfigured, and that his life was not endangered; thus, an aggravated assault
has not been proven. mr. zeeh concedes that if identity is proven, then the probation
breach count has been proven.

both counsel relied on case law in support of
their position.

iii.
legal principles

as in every criminal case, the onus rests on the crown to prove guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, which is inextricably linked to the presumption of
innocence. the onus rests with the prosecution throughout the trial and never
shifts. reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense which must
be logically based upon the evidence or lack of evidence.


credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the truth as
she/he/they believe it to be. reliability relates to the actual accuracy of the
testimony. a credible witness may give unreliable evidence.

accordingly, there is a distinction between a finding of credibility and proof
beyond a reasonable doubt.

the
credibility and reliability of a witness must be, “tested in the light of all
the other evidence presented.”


the
criminal code
states:
268
(1)
every one commits an aggravated assault who wounds, maims,
disfigures or endangers the life of the complainant.
iv.
summary of evidence

the evidence heard over 2 days was straight-forward.

on december 30, 2024, a man wearing a mask went
into an lcbo store on avenue rd. in toronto and took numerous bottles of
alcohol from a shelf and put them into a box and a bag underneath a staircase
in the store. he was attempting to steal the alcohol. two loss prevention
officers, sajandeep singh and ronak kalathiya, confronted him. a struggle
between the three men ensued as the officers tried to take control and arrest the
robber.

the suspect fled, grabbed a bottle of alcohol
and waved it at both officers when he exited the store. mr. singh and mr. kalathiya
followed the suspect outside the store. as the suspect got to the exit, he
waved the bottle in his hand at mr. singh and mr. kalathiya. once outside the
store, he threw a full bottle alcohol over mr. kalathiya’s head and the bottle hit
mr. singh in the forehead. mr. singh was seriously injured. he collapsed
shortly thereafter, experienced a seizure, sustained a brain bleed, and a two facial
fractures.

as mr. kalathiya followed the suspect out of the
store, he saw the man without his mask and identified him to be adam canali. 
mr. canali was on two probation orders at the time.

the surveillance videos depict what mr. singh
and mr. kalathiya testified to. they show:
i.
on december 24, 2024, a male, with light or white
skin, wearing a black ski mask, dark pants, a dark t-shirt, and a dark
multi-green coloured army-print jacket, was at the lcbo store. he is seen taking
bottles of alcohol off a shelf and putting them in a bag and in a box under a
staircase.
ii.
mr. singh and mr. kalathiya approach the male.
there is a moment before the three men become involved in a struggle. the box
and bag with bottles of alcohol drop and the bottles break on the floor. the
three men slip, slide and grapple with each other. punches are thrown. mr.
singh and mr. kalathiya were unable to get control of the male.
iii.
as the male gets away, he leaves behind his
jacket. he grabs a bottle of alcohol from a display case and continues to flee.
iv.
the second lcbo video depicts the male at the
exit of the lcbo store. as he is about to leave, he turns around and waves the
bottle of alcohol in his hand at mr. singh and mr. kalathiya.
v.
the third surveillance video, taken from a
camera around the corner from the lcbo exit doors, captures the male, now without
his mask, empty-handed, and fleeing the scene. mr. kalathiya is directly
behind him in pursuit.

mr. singh, who was 22 years old at the time of
the robbery, testified as to what happened in much of the same way as the video
of the event depicted it happened. he added that he identified himself as store
security when he and his co-worker approached the masked male. he believed the
male reached for his pant pocket and thought he might be reaching for a weapon,
but there was no weapon. the video confirms this evidence. mr. singh did not
recall anything the male said throughout the event. mr. singh testified that outside
the store, the male threw the bottle in his hand at him. the bottle hit the
left side of his head and broke. he recalls he fell to the ground, and staff
helped him inside the store.

once back inside the store, mr. singh testified he
remembers being light-headed, dizzy, and in pain. he recalls the police asking
him for his name. he does not recall responding. he remembers his nose bleeding,
the sound of sirens, paramedics attending, and a few “flashbacks” of being in
an ambulance with an officer. he remembers re-gaining consciousness in the
hospital. he recalls his supervisor and two friends were there. he underwent testing.

mr. singh collapsed inside the lcbo store as
depicted in p.c. alessandro muia’s bwc and had a full body seizure. mr. singh
was medically treated, including undergoing several brain ct scans that showed
he sustained intercranial bleeding caused by the trauma to his head. he has
experienced memory loss of the event. he was released from hospital with medication
to minimize repeat seizures and instructions how to minimize his pain. mr.
singh’s medical records were filed, and they are not disputed.

mr. singh sustained a left frontal bone non-displaced
fracture, a right sphenoid sinus superior wall non-displaced fracture, and an
underlying left frontal small epidural hematoma. that is a brain bleed.

mr. kalathiya testified in much the same manner
as the video evidence and mr. singh. he added the following to the narrative:
i.
after the male exited the lcbo, his mask was no
longer on. he does not recall when the mask came off. he saw the male’s face.
ii.
he recognized the male to be a man he had
arrested a year before in december 2023 at the lcbo for assault.
iii.
he also then recognized male’s accent when he
said threatening words to the effect that he knew mr. kalathiya and would find
him. he believed the accent to be russian or ukrainian but was unsure.
iv.
when the male ran across the street, mr.
kalathiya stopped giving chase and called 911.
v.
the male continued to flee to a parking lot.
vi.
when police arrived, mr. kalathiya looked
through his phone and found mr. canali’s name and photo. he provided both the
name and the photo to the officer.
vii.
he estimated he observed mr. canali’s face for
less than 30 seconds.

in cross-examination, mr. kalathiya testified
that his interaction with the male in december 2024 was shorter than his
interaction with mr. canali in december 2023. how long he interacted with mr.
canali in 2023 was not put into evidence. he had mr. canali’s photo in his
phone because of that previous arrest, but no other details about that fact
were elicited.

mr. kalathiya conceded mr. canali had facial
hair in the photo on his phone, but the fleeing suspect did not. he also
conceded that his recognition and identification of mr. canali was at the time
of the event, and not at the time of trial.

there is no dispute the accused, adam canali, is
the adam canali that mr. kalathiya identified to pc mohammed zourob on december
30, 2024, from the photo on his phone. pc allessandro muia arrested mr. canali on
the outstanding warrant on january 27, 2025.

pc zourob attended the robbery 911 call at the
lcbo, and when he arrived on scene, mr. kalathiya told him the suspect had fled
into a parking lot across the street. pc zourob’s bwc video shows the officer
going into the parking lot and using his flashlight to briefly and
unsuccessfully search for the suspect.

also, on pc zourob’s bwc is mr. kalathiya
looking through his cell phone, finding mr. canali’s photo, and providing it to
the officer identifying this male to be the one he had been chasing.

pc zourob returned to the lcbo and interacted
with mr. singh. mr. singh’s slow responses, collapse, and seizure are all
captured on the officer’s bwc.
v.
findings of fact

the credibility of all four witnesses was
unchallenged. each witness was internally consistent, and testified in a clear,
straight-forward manner. i find all 4 witnesses, mr. singh, mr. kalathiya, pc
muia, and pc zourob, to be credible.

there was also no challenge to the reliability
of mr. singh, pc zourob, and pc muia’s evidence. the surveillance videos, bwc
clips and medical records demonstrate the reliability of their evidence.

although the video evidence demonstrates the
male inside the lcbo wearing a mask while he takes alcohol from shelves and
puts them in the box under the stairs, then takes off the mask as he flees in
late december, nonetheless, the crown did not pursue the count of disguise with
intent to commit an offence.

the crown also did not pursue the robbery charge
as the waving of the bottle at mr. singh and mr. kalathiya and stealing it also
constituted the assault with the weapon.

both counts were dismissed on october 23, 2025.
threat

mr. kalathiya’s description of what the suspect
said to him gave him the impression that the suspect was threatening him. mr.
kalathiya testified the male stated something to the effect that he now knew
who mr. kalathiya was and meant him harm.

although i accept mr. kalathiya’s impression
that the suspect’s words seemed threatening, and indeed mr. kalathiya is likely
correct given the circumstances, mr. kalathiya’s evidence is insufficiently
clear on this point to be reliable. this element is not proven beyond a
reasonable doubt.
aggravated assault

in addition to experiencing a full body seizure as
captured on pc zourob’s bwc which required an immediate response by the officer
to ensure mr. singh’s head did not continue to pound the floor while his nose bled
and causing him to sustain two serious facial fractures. mr. singh sustained an
epidural hematoma.

that means that he had a brain bleed. a brain
bleed requires immediate medical attention, which mr. singh was fortunate to
obtain. a brain bleed, by its very definition,
endangers
life. i find this injury is captured by the
criminal code
definition of
aggravated assault.
identity

justice hill in
thind
quotes numerous
cases when he stated:

the inherent frailties
of identification evidence are well known and have been the subject of
considerable judicial comment and review in the social science literature.

he specifically addressed recognition evidence
when he wrote:

[
a] subset of eyewitness identification
evidence, in which the eyewitness’ identification is based on prior experience”
(
m.b., at para.
33;
olliffe, at para.
39
), generally engages the eyewitness describing, as a
foundation for his or her opinion/conclusion, prior familiarity with the
subject preceding the relevant date of observation. the eyewitness’ degree or
level of familiarity with the identified person may, given the specific circumstances
of a case, serve to enhance the accuracy of an eyewitness’
identification:
r. v. benson,
2015 onca 827, at para.
25;
r.
v. smith,
2011 bcca 362, at
para.
31. be that as it may, the same
caution and concerns applying generally to identification evidence are relevant
as well to assessment of recognition evidence:
olliffe, at
paras.
39-40.

in this case, mr. kalathiya’s recognition
identification was barely explored.

mr. kalathiya was not asked exactly where he was
when he previously arrested mr. canali, nor what role he played in that arrest.
he was not asked how long he had spent with mr. canali during that arrest and
whether he had ever provided a description of mr. canali to police at the time
of that arrest. he was not asked how he came to know mr. canali’s name. he was
not asked how he got mr. canali’s photo on his phone or why it was there. he
was not asked how many people he had arrested before, and whether he had photos
of some or all the people he previously arrested on his phone. he was not asked
why he picked mr. canali’s photo from his phone. he was not asked if he had
encountered mr. canali since he had arrested mr. canali the previous december,
and if so, where and for how long. mr. kalathiya was not asked exactly why he was
sure at the time of the event that he recognized mr. canali.

although there are circumstantial factors that
strengthen mr. kalathiya’s identification, such as the immediacy of his
recognition of mr. canali, the accent he heard, and the specific reference to
where from and why he recognized the suspect, i must consider this evidence in
the context of a fleeting observation under stressful circumstances as the
suspect was running away from mr. kalathiya.

in essence, there is little evidence to assess
the reliability of mr. kalathiya’s recognition eyewitness identification of mr.
canali on the totality of the evidence called.

as a result, i cannot find mr. kalathiya’s recognition
identification of mr. canali as the man who committed these offences to be
reliable beyond a reasonable doubt.
vi.
conclusion

mr. canali, i find you not guilty on all counts.
released: december 3, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria

oral reasons were read on december 2, 2025, corrections are made in these
written reasons, and these are the reasons that govern.

sections 351(2), 264.1(1)(a), 343(a), 267(a), 268(2), and
733.1(1)

r. v. walters-cambronne,
2024 onsc 5885,
r. v. thind,
2018 onsc
1607,
r. v. harrison,
2023 abca 151,
r. v. a.a.
2022 onca 639,
r.
v. caster,
2016 oncj 232,
r. v. brown,
2021 onca 678,
r. v. m.d.
2010 oncj 197.

r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320 at para.
39.

r.
v.
morrissey,
1995 canlii 3498 (on ca), o.j. no. 639 (c.a.) at para.
33;
r.
v.
h.c.,
2009 onca 56 (canlii), o.j. no. 214 (c.a.) at para.
41

r.
v.
j.j.r.d.,
2006 canlii 40088 (on ca), o.j. no. 4749 (c.a.) at para.
47;
r.
v.
j.w.,
 o.j. no. 1979 (c.a.) at para. 26.

r.
v.
stewart,
1994 canlii 7208 (on ca), o.j. no. 811 (c.a.) at para.
27

r. v. thind,
2018 onsc 1607
at para.
86

supra
at para. 91.