source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj88/2025oncj88.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. rose, 2025 oncj 88
date: 
2025 02 18
court
file no.: central east - newmarket – 24-91101889
between:
his majesty
the king
— and
—
denrick
rose
before
justice a. a. ghosh
heard
on december 19, 2024, and february 3, 2025
reasons
for judgment
released
on february 18, 2025
s. doyle and m. caramanna............................................................ counsel
for the crown
n. debellefeuille......................................................................... 
 counsel for denrick rose
ghosh j.:
i.
overview:

denrick rose pleaded guilty to “dangerous
driving causing death”, “dangerous driving causing bodily harm” (x3) and to breaching
the curfew of a release order.

the offender drove over 200 kilometres an hour
on highway 400, before continuing to drive at frightening speeds on king road,
in king city. he had five passengers in his vehicle, at least two of whom had
asked him to slow down. he lost control of the vehicle and crashed into a
light standard. most of the occupants were seriously injured. ms. amelia bal
died from her injuries.

the crown sought a global sentence of 5 years,
along with a 7-year driving prohibition to follow. the defence, primarily given
quantified mitigation for harsh presentence custody conditions, submitted for a
2-year sentence with a 5-year driving prohibition. given the tremendous
interest this hearing had garnered from the community, i provided summary oral
reasons supporting a 4.5-year global sentence some hours after receiving
submissions. these are my final sentencing reasons.
ii.
summary of the evidence:

in the early morning hours of february 18
th,
2024, denrick rose was at a valentine’s day celebration in caledon. by doing
so, he was violating the curfew condition of a judicial release for an
unrelated allegation in peel. he was 18 years old at the time.

before 5:00 a.m., mr. rose drove five others to
denny’s restaurant in vaughan in his sister’s infinity g37. rishika bal was in
the rear passenger seat. dale foote was beside her. brianna brown beside him.
savanna dueck was seated behind the driver. terrel odoom was the front seat
passenger. everyone in the car was 18 years old, except for savanna who was 19.

on the way to denny’s, mr. rose drove east on
king road at speeds ranging from 99-151 km/h (in a 70 km/hr zone). then on
highway 400, which has a posted limit of 100 km/hr, he drove at speeds ranging
from 174 km/hr to 230 km/hr. between king road and king-vaughan sideroad, the
speed limit on highway 400 dropped to 80 km/hr an hour due to construction.

mr. rose drove more than 200 km/hr for most of
the trip south on the 400. at some point during this part of the drive, brianna
brown told ms. dueck that she was scared and that the offender was driving too fast.

they arrived at denny’s at 5:24 a.m. ms. brown
told mr. rose at the restaurant that he needed to slow down as it was unsafe. he
would either ignore or defy these comments. they left the restaurant at 6:38
a.m.

mr. rose resumed travelling at more than 200
km/hr for most of the drive northbound, ranging from 174 to 237 km/hr. the posted
speed limit was 100 km/hr, with the same dip to 80 km/hr between king/vaughan
side roade and king road for construction.

mr. rose exited highway 400 at king road, and
drove west at speeds ranging from 129-210 km/hr. the posted speed limit in this
area is 70 km/hr. during this part of the trip, ms. bal told mr. rose to slow
down because she was scared. he did not comply.

at about 6:47 a.m. as the vehicle travelled west
on king road towards a slight bend before 8
th
concession road, mr. rose
lost control of the vehicle. it left the roadway on the north side, rotated counterclockwise
and struck a light standard on the passenger rear door. after the collision,
the vehicle moved up a grassy hill and came to rest on the north shoulder about
10 metres from the point of impact.

at this intersection, king road is a two-lane highway,
with a modest incline and a slight curve for westbound traffic; the surface is
paved with asphalt. the road was wet and in good repair.

about 184 metres prior to the collision site and
on the trajectory of the vehicle, the posted speed limit dropped from 70 to 50
km/hr. the vehicle’s speed immediately prior to impact was recorded by the
airbag control module as follows:
seven seconds
prior to impact 160 km/hr
six seconds
prior to impact 151 km/hr
five seconds
prior to impact 144 km/hr
four seconds
prior to impact 134 km/hr
three seconds
prior to impact 122 km/hr
two seconds
prior to impact 100 km/hr
one second
prior to impact 75 km/hr

the vehicle struck the light standard travelling
sideways at about 75 km/hr. the roads were wet, it was -5c, overcast with a
light dusting of snow. no braking skid marks detected.

ms. bal was seated closest to the point of
impact, was unconscious and without vital signs when first responders arrived. she
succumbed to her injuries and was pronounced dead at cortellucci vaughan
hospital. ms. bal suffered multiple lethal blunt-force injuries to her head, chest,
and pelvis, resulting in her death.

ms. brown sustained a broken neck, broken pelvis
and broken ribs and a bruised lung. ms. dueck sustained a broken back and
broken shoulder. mr. foote was in critical condition with a broken pelvis,
skull fracture, and a brain bleed. mr. odoom, the front seat passenger,
received a minor laceration to his right elbow and swelling to his right eye. mr.
rose was not physically injured.

the expert collision reconstructionist
determined that the roadway design did not create hazards for drivers
approaching the collision scene. the expert also opined that the age of the
tires and the improper installation of two of them may have affected the
braking ability of the vehicle. however, it was also determined that these
factors would not have contributed to the vehicle leaving the roadway but would
have been significant after the vehicle left the roadway and traversed the
snow-covered gravel shoulder and grassy area.
iii.
victim impact evidence

over the course of almost an entire court day, i
received devastating victim impact evidence from the loved ones of amelia bal,
lovingly called “milly” by many. parents, siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins, dear
friends, and extended members of the community, all shared the impact of her
loss. their individual and collective grief is palpable.

each loved one shared their deep connection to
the victim, and their feelings of sustained anguish at the senseless, avoidable
tragedy. there is also understandable anger, helplessness and despair animating
their representations. in aggregate, the impact of amelia’s death has been
crushing to an entire community of family and friends.

her dear friends remain in intense and active
grief almost a year later. close friends, tensae, david, keith, nia, and eric, all
poignantly shared this sentiment in different ways.

amelia’s sprawling extended family is as close
and integrated as any immediate family can be. alana and oma mohamed (cousin
and aunt respectively) shared that their consequent grief is as intense as
anyone in the life of the deceased. these feelings were echoed by aunts,
summattee, savi, meena and camo, and cousins, shazara, anoushka, maya and
dillon.

amelia’s siblings are utterly heartbroken by her
loss. rishana bal is haunted by the loss of her younger sister. they were so
close, and rishana recounts the day of the tragedy so vividly that she feels it
as if it just happened. she cries every day and constantly tries to navigate
this grief that has taken over so many aspects of her life.

amelia’s younger sister rishelle remains “so
sad, worried and fearful” from her sister’s death. she lovingly recalled all
the joyful times she spent with her sister. she sees how everyone around her is
so saddened by the tragedy, and this deepens her pain.

rishi bal, amelia’s father, painfully shared how
“amelia was undoubtedly the light in every room.” he discussed her positive and
vivacious nature and how her loss has left him “shattered”. mr. bal has been
struggling to carry on and grief has become the constant and animating feature
of his life. he feels helpless and despondent and worries constantly about the
rest of his family.

christine bal, the victim’s mother, viscerally
shared the shock and devastation she experienced when she heard the news. she
shared about their deep bond, and her daughter’s loving, charitable and driven
nature. amelia had ambitions and worked very hard to achieve her dreams. she
was principled and just.
“as
the days go by, i’ve learned a mother’s love never diminishes. in fact, my love
for my daughter has grown, just as it would have if she was still alive. i am
still her mother. no child dies without a legacy and a purpose for those that
are left behind. it’s up to me, her mother to honor my child by healing. amelia
wouldn’t want it any other way.”
iv.
circumstances of the offender:

denrick rose is a 19-year-old young black man
and a first-time offender. a presentence report was generated, where i
recommended that the author explore whether anti-black racism played a role in
the young man’s lived experience and engagement with the justice system.

he is the youngest of six siblings and resided
with his parents and three of his siblings at the time of his arrest. he comes
from a loving, closeknit family, and they are deeply involved in their church.

mr. rose graduated high school and had excellent
relationships with teachers and classmates. earlier though, he experienced
serious instances of violent bullying from older students that informed a
change of school. he is an exceptional basketball player and volunteered his
time to coach in the sport.

on that front, he also extensively volunteered
for the non-profit church that has been organized by his parents, which also
provides food and clothing to those in need. mr. rose has been central to those
volunteering endeavours and won awards from the city for his volunteer work.

mr. rose has other prosocial interests, like
cooking and sports, and was actively motivated to explore his religion and
spirituality. he is very close with his family. his mother describes him as a
warm, loving, and mild-mannered person and that this offence was shockingly out
of character. that was a theme in many of the representations made about
denrick rose in the numerous, glowing support letters submitted – that this was
out of character.

at the time of his arrest, mr. rose was
completing a college program for construction techniques. he hopes to complete
the program after serving his sentence. mr. rose also engaged in a related
apprenticeship with an hvac company, which he found rewarding and instructive.

while in custody, he has asked to complete
valuable coursework, such as the “thoughts to action” and “anger management”
programs. however, due to the notorious challenges at the cecc, this was not
possible initially. he completed a “gospel echoes” program through an external
agency and eventually completed the other referenced programs.

as requested, mr. rose was asked about his
experiences with racism. part of his response included a comment that racism
“has taken a toll on who i am as a black male.” this realization has made him
more alert and aware of his surroundings than he feels may otherwise be
warranted. he has sensed from his time in pretrial detention that black
detainees are treated worse by the authorities. through counsel, he cited a
specific and powerful example.

when invited to address the court, mr. rose had
prepared handwritten remarks that he tearfully read to the packed courtroom. he
mourned the loss of his “revered” friend, amelia bal, and took full
responsibility for recklessly causing her death. he deeply and repeatedly
apologized to the family of ms. bal.

mr. rose acknowledged that his own pain, remorse,
and regret over his choices that night paled in comparison to the immense grief
experienced by the loved ones of ms. bal. mr. rose also shared his deep
contrition over the pain of the other passengers who were badly injured and
hospitalized. he thanked his family and his church for their unyielding support
and love and shared that he was ready to accept the consequences of his
actions.
v.
applicable principles of sentencing:

the principles of sentencing are codified in
section 718
of the
criminal code. for criminal driving cases involving
death and bodily harm, deterrence and denunciation are important sentencing
principles engaged. all agree that a custodial term is necessary here.

for youthful first-time offenders like mr. rose,
rehabilitation, reintegration, and restraint must be considered and central in
determining a fit custodial term.

in that regard, i am dutybound to impose the shortest possible term of custody
to satisfy the governing sentencing principles and objectives.

section 718.1
of the
criminal code
directs that the sentence imposed must be proportionate, by balancing the gravity
of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
proportionality is the umbrella and overarching principle of sentencing. while
being young and black cannot inform the gravity of the offence, it can
certainly impact the moral responsibility of the offender.

the principle of parity codified in s. 718.2(b)
must also be considered, which directs that similar offenders committing
similar offences must be similarly sentenced. for that reason, i am reluctant
to embrace that line of authority conflating or equating death cases for dangerous
driving with impaired driving. among other concerns, the
mens rea
is
different for both offences and, more generally, offences with the same maximum
sentences often attract distinct ranges of sentence.
vi.
sentencing case law:

dangerous driving causing death may cover a wide
spectrum of conduct, and thereby attracts a broad range of sentence.

like manslaughter, the scope
of potential culpability is expansive, ranging from the near accidental to the more
deliberate and protracted. as a result, there is no provincial or national
range of sentence set by appellate courts for this offence. i must consider
similar cases involving reasonably analogous facts and offenders to help guide the
fit sentence for mr. rose.

i have considered all the submitted cases. the
following were instructive:
r.
v. trivedi,
2024 onsc 3936: he received a 5-year sentence
for “dangerous driving causing death”, and a three-year concurrent sentence for
“dangerous driving causing bodily harm”. the offender pleaded guilty on the eve
of trial. mr. trivedi was speeding on highway 427 and the gardiner expressway
at speeds of 150-200 km/hr in a posted 100 km/hr zone. he slammed into the
victim’s car, killing the passenger, and causing life-altering injuries to the
driver. the offender was 31-years old, had no criminal record, but he had a
horrendous driving record that included multiple convictions for speeding.
r.
v singh,
2018 onsc 4598: mr. singh received a
3-year sentence for dangerous driving causing death. he made two dangerous
driving manoeuvres in snowy conditions several minutes apart while driving a
tractor-trailer combination. first, he passed a line of southbound cars by
entering the northbound lane, where he caused an oncoming tractor-trailer to
take evasive action into the shoulder of the road as the accused cut back
sharply just in front of the line of cars he was passing. he made a similar manoeuvre
minutes later as he tried to pass a pickup truck he had caught up to. this time,
he struck the victim’s truck head-on, killing the other driver.
r.
v. chrisjohn,
2023 onsc 6299: ms. chrisjohn received
a global sentence of four (4) years, having pleaded guilty to “dangerous
driving causing death” and for “failing to remain” at the scene of a collision.
the offender was an 18-year-old indigenous woman. she was unlicensed and
intentionally racing against her cousin. the cousin moved into the oncoming
lane to pass ms. chrisjohn, but the speed of her car prevented him from moving
back into the proper lane. as a result, the cousin drove head-on into the
victim’s vehicle, killing the driver.
r.
v. rea,
2024 o.j. no. 4893: mr. rea was sentenced
to 2 years less-a-day for “dangerous driving causing death”. the 19-year-old offender
was speeding up to 150 kilometres an hour in a posted 80 kilometre-an-hour
zone. at these speeds, he made a dangerous attempt to overtake a vehicle in
front of him, despite a solid line restricting such a move on a roadway with a
single lane going each way. moments later, he failed to observe stop sign at a
notorious intersection and collided with another vehicle that had the right of
way, killing the driver and seriously injuring her passenger. importantly,
there had been 15 collisions at this intersection in the preceding years. the
crown submitted for a 2-year term of incarceration, and successfully opposed a
conditional sentence.
vii.
aggravating factors:

the aggravating factors are obvious. mr. rose
was driving at unconscionable speeds for a protracted period of time. on highway
400, he was driving over 200 km/hour at various points in posted speed limits
of 100 or 80 km/hr.

he had time to pause and reflect, as the group
stopped at a restaurant. ms. brown, one of the victims, even told him at that
time to slow down when driving as it was unsafe. when they left the restaurant,
undeterred, mr. rose resumed driving at dangerous and shocking speeds. again,
he travelled over 200 km/hour on highway 400.

as he exited onto king road, mr. rose sped at
speeds between 129 and 210 km/hr in a posted 70 km/hr zone. poignantly, amelia
bal implored mr. rose to slow down as she was scared. immediately preceding the
collision, the airbag control module of the vehicle confirmed that mr. rose was
decelerating from a speed of 160km/hr, as the posted speed limit changed from
70 to 50 km/hr.

moments later, the tragic collision happened,
ending ms. bal’s life. ms. bal’s death is central to the offence and informs
the determination of the fit sentence. when there are also multiple victims who
suffered bodily harm, that may have a compounding effect on the overall
sentence.

the crown has established the statutorily
aggravating fact that the offence has had a devastating and significant impact
on the loved ones of ms. bal. the family is clearly shattered and remains in
active grief with little to no respite. as almost every victim impact statement
recounted, the pain and grief of the loss of ms. bal feels interminable and
unyielding.

the victim impact evidence had powerful
emotional effect. so did the thoughtful, anguished and genuinely remorseful
words of apology by young mr. rose to the court, the community, and the family
of amelia bal. i cautioned myself to the large audience, and in my reasons here,
that highly emotionally charged evidence from victims or offenders, while
important and valued, cannot overwhelm the sentencing analysis.

as another aggravating factor, contrary to the
restrictions of his g-2 licence, mr. rose allowed four rear-seated passengers
with only 3 available seatbelts. he was violating a release order to observe
a curfew. if he had only complied with that order, this tragedy would never
have happened.
viii. mitigating factors:

in mitigation, mr. rose expressed through
counsel early on a desire to plead guilty and accept responsibility for the
offence. i accept his deeply expressed remorse as sincere, heartfelt, and
genuine.

mr. rose is a very youthful first-time offender,
and just 19-years-old. he is a young black man, inviting the application of
judicial notice of systemic factors and consideration of social context
evidence regarding his lived experiences. i accept that there is a sufficient
connection between his related experiences and his engagement in the criminal
justice system. i will expand on this.

mr. rose has been very prosocial for many years,
and he has incredibly high prospects of rehabilitation. indeed, the crown’s
concession that he may not need to be specifically deterred is an illustration
of demonstratable good character and his considerable volunteer contributions
to uplift and support others. the letters of support are a testament to the otherwise
exceptional character of mr. rose. he has tremendous support from his family, friends,
and church.

mr. rose has spent almost a year in presentence
custody. i accept there is a sufficient evidentiary record that the time mr.
rose has spent in presentence custody has been unduly harsh, and this has
detrimentally impacted his health.
ix.
impact of race and cultural assessments (irca):
young, black male

mr. rose is a 19-year-old black man, facing a
custodial term as a first-time offender. this is one of several important
considerations in this case. as our court of appeal shared in its landmark
decision of
r. v. morris
of 2021:
it is beyond doubt that anti-black racism, including both
overt and systemic anti-black racism, has been, and continues to be, a reality
in canadian society, and in particular in the greater toronto area. that reality
is reflected in many social institutions, most notably the criminal justice
system. it is equally clear that anti-black racism can have a profound and
insidious impact on those who must endure it on a daily basis... anti-black racism must be acknowledged, confronted, mitigated and
ultimately, erased.


being black can be a relevant factor in
determining his moral responsibility for the offence, although great care is
required when the connection between race and offending is not easily discerned.
mr. rose comes from a stable and prosocial, suburban family environment, and
church and community service has animated his family life. i will apply a
“generous gateway” for the receipt of social context evidence and the
application of related judicial notice.

direct causation is not required to tether a black
offender’s experience with racism to the offence committed. however, there must
be some connection between the racism identified and the circumstances or
events that may explain or mitigate the criminal conduct in issue.


i have already referenced that such a connection
exists between mr. rose’s lived experience as a black man and his engagement in
this offence. he had been violently bullied at school, necessitating a
voluntary transfer. importantly, he had been shot at in the year or more
preceding this tragic driving offence. it is noteworthy that he then completed
an anger management course while in detention.

young black men are over-represented in all
aspects of the criminal justice system, including being victims of gun
violence. i find this satisfies the “sufficient connection” between race and
offending to warrant applicable mitigation of sentence.
x.
harsh presentence custody conditions:

mr. rose has spent almost all his pretrial
detention at the central east correctional centre, now notorious for fomenting harsh
presentence custody conditions. regular full or partial lockdowns are almost
presumptive with frequent triple-bunking and more difficulties to endure. the
head crown attorney, accordingly and properly, declined to cross-examine mr.
rose on his affidavit confirming the harsh conditions of detention and their
impact on him. i accept his detention negatively and unduly impacted his
physical and mental health.

our court of appeal in
r. v. duncan
observed that “…particularly
harsh incarceration conditions can provide mitigation apart from and beyond the
1.5 credit referred to in s.719(3.1). in considering whether any enhanced
credit should be given, the court will consider both the conditions of the
presentence incarceration and the impact of those conditions on the accused.”


years later in
r. v. marshall,
the court of appeal
clarified: “unlike
summers
(1.5:1) credit, “
duncan
credit” is not
a deduction from the otherwise appropriate sentence but is one of the factors
to be taken into account in determining the appropriate sentence. particularly
punitive pretrial incarceration can be a mitigating factor.”


importantly, while quantifying this factor as a deduction is
common, doing so should not, “skew the calculation of the ultimate sentence.” again,
i accept that mr. rose experienced particularly harsh presentence custody
conditions for about a year preceding sentence. while i will not quantify the
related mitigation, it is an important factor that will qualitatively inform
the ultimate sentence.
xi.
final
discussion:

dangerous driving where death and bodily harm
ensues must attract a lengthy custodial term, even for a youthful first-time
offender. our appellate courts have repeatedly directed that denunciation and
deterrence are the important sentencing principles in such cases, which are often
only satisfied by a lengthy custodial term.

in 2018, parliament increased the maximum
sentence for “dangerous driving causing death” from 14 years to life in
imprisonment. increases in maximum sentences signal parliament’s intention that
sentences must increase. cases predating this change in 2018 must be cautiously
considered. comparable cases in our province from the past few years support a
penitentiary sentence of some length.

on the one hand, the powerful, inexhaustive
aggravating factors here are the highly deliberate and protracted dangerous
driving, while breaching bail, that resulted in ms. bal’s death and grievous
injuries to several other passengers. this must be balanced against the early
guilty plea by a very young, black, first-offender with strong rehabilitative
prospects. his difficult time in presentence custody must further mitigate
sentence.

mr. rose does not need to be specifically
deterred. he has a significant background of prosocial, community-oriented activity.
he has professional goals that he has been working towards. he is demonstrably
remorseful and has shown introspection and insight into the offence he has
committed. he has very high prospects to be completely rehabilitated.

as the law referenced, criminal driving offences
are often committed by prosocial people who would not otherwise come into
contact with the law. mr. rose falls into that category. this is one of the
reasons why the law focuses on general deterrence and denunciation of the
conduct.

the number of victims here has a compounding
effect and must inform the length of the overall sentence. ms. bal’s tragic
death was accompanied by significant injuries to three other passengers. ms.
brown sustained a broken neck, broken pelvis and broken ribs and a bruised
lung. ms. dueck sustained a broken back and broken shoulder. mr. foote was in
critical condition with a broken pelvis, skull fracture, and a brain bleed.

the fact that the driver deliberately engaged in
risky driving is a cogent aggravating factor in criminal driving cases
involving death or bodily harm.

this principle is powerfully and uniquely expressed in the facts of this case
and bear repeating.

mr. rose drove five passengers at shocking speeds
and stopped at a restaurant. one of his passengers told him to slow down during
this break. he callously ignored this request and again began driving at
egregious speeds. tragically, a final desperate plea for him to slow down came from
the deceased victim, ms. bal. still, mr. rose persisted and moments later, he
lost control and caused the catastrophic collision.

this confluence of deliberate and protracted
dangerous driving is among the most serious to be found in the contemporary
case law. it places the dangerous driving of young mr. rose at the higher end
of moral responsibility. as our court of appeal recently and aptly observed
for a “dangerous driving causing death” sentence: “the loss of life and serious
injuries caused by the appellant were preventable and devastating… and tragic
in the extreme.”

xii.
conclusion:

i have determined a fit and restrained global
sentence is 4.5 years, less standard “
summers
” credit of a 1.5-to-1
deduction for each day spent in presentence custody. the sentence attribution
by charge is to be broken down as follows:
(1)
4.5 years for “dangerous driving causing death”;
(2)
3 years, concurrent, for the “bodily harm”
offences;
(3)
1 year concurrent for the breach of release
order;
(4)
dna - secondary designated, imposed for eligible
offences;
(5)
10-year driving prohibition (or 5.5 years
post-custody: s.320.24(5)(a));
(6)
victim fine surcharges waived as an undue
hardship.

my thanks to counsel.
released: february 18, 2025
signed:
justice a. a. ghosh


r. v. habib,
2024 onca 830, para.
31

r. v. sharma,
2022 scc 39, paras.
165-6;
r. v. phillips,
2005 canlii 1043 (on ca), o.j. no. 155 (c.a.), para.
21

r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680, para.
1

morris,
para.
97

r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754, para.
6

r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344, para.
52.

r. v. currie,
 o.j. no. 5196 (c.a.), para. 5;
r. v. bhangal,
2016
onca 857, para.
13;
r. v. singh,
2018 onsc 4598, para.
25

r. v. tabaneo,
2024 onca 85, para.
104

r. v. hutchinson,
2024 onca para. 5-7