source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj395/2025oncj395.html

a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made
under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 
order restricting publication — sexual offences.
(1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the complainant or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(a) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160,
162, 163.1, 170, 171, 172, 172.1, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272, 273,
279.01, 279.02, 279.03, 346 or 347,
(ii) an offence under section 144 (rape), 145 (attempt to commit
rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156 (indecent assault on male) or 245
(common assault) or subsection 246(1) (assault with intent) of the
criminal
code,
chapter c-34
of the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it read
immediately before january 4, 1983, or
(iii) an offence under subsection 146(1)
(sexual intercourse with a female under 14) or (2) (sexual intercourse with a
female between 14 and 16) or section 151 (seduction of a female between 16 and
18), 153 (sexual intercourse with step-daughter), 155 (buggery or bestiality),
157 (gross indecency), 166 (parent or guardian procuring defilement) or 167
(householder permitting defilement) of the
criminal code,
chapter c-34
of the
revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it read immediately before january 1,
1988; or
(b) two or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding,
at least one of which is an offence referred to in any of subparagraphs (a)(i)
to (iii).
(2)
mandatory
order on application.
in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b), the presiding judge or justice shall
(a) at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under
the age of eighteen years and the complainant of the right to make an
application for the order; and
(b) on application made by the complainant, the prosecutor or any
such witness, make the order....
486.6 
offence -
(1) every person who fails to comply
with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. waddling-leeson,
2025 oncj 395
date: 
2025 07 24
court
file no.: toronto
#22-70005649
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
charles waddling-leeson
dangerous
offender application
before
justice brock jones
heard
on march 3-7, april 2, july 2 and 9, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on july 24, 2025
p. garcia............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
a. goldkind....................................................................................................................... amicus
c. waddling-leeson………..…………………………..…………………..self-represented
jones j.:
i.
introduction

after a trial, on august 22, 2023, i found
charles waddling-leeson guilty of six charges:
•
sexual assault while threatening to use a
weapon: namely, a knife (
criminal code
section 272(1)(a));
•
sexual assault causing bodily harm (
criminal
code
section 272(1)(c));
•
sexual assault while choking (
criminal code
section 272(1)(c.1));
•
robbery (
criminal code
section 343(b));
•
possession of property obtained by crime under
$5000 (
criminal code
section 354(1)); and
•
failing to comply with a probation order (
criminal
code
section 733.1(1)).

following the convictions, the crown applied to have mr.
waddling-leeson assessed to determine whether he met the criteria for a
dangerous offender designation under
section 752.1
of the
criminal code.
i granted the application on november 22, 2023.

this is my decision regarding the crown’s application to have the
court designate mr. waddling-leeson as a dangerous offender and to impose an
indeterminate sentence of incarceration.
ii.
the index offences

i reviewed the evidence and my findings of fact in detail in my trial
judgment: see
r. v. waddling-leeson,
2023 oncj 350. the following is a
summary of those findings.

ms. a.a. was 24 years old on march 24, 2022. she was employed as
a teaching assistant at what was then known as ryerson university. during a
scheduled class break, at approximately 5 p.m., she entered a women’s washroom.

mr. waddling-leeson entered the washroom after her. no one else
was present. he confronted ms. a.a. he pulled her iphone from her pocket,
throwing it across the room. he placed his hands on her, using one hand to
restrain her arms. he pushed her, causing her to fall to the ground.

she began to scream. he put one hand over her mouth to muffle her
voice. he forced his penis into her mouth and said, “suck on it, suck on it
sexy.” she could not remember exactly how long this lasted. he then unbuttoned
her pants and pulled them down along with her underwear. he performed oral sex
on her.

ms. a.a. was unable to move. she was scared that he might hurt
her further if she resisted.

mr. waddling-leeson next digitally penetrated her vagina and anus
with his fingers. he warned her that he had a knife and if she made another
sound, he would stab her. he touched her elsewhere on her body, including on
her left breast. when she wouldn’t follow his instructions to open her mouth,
he pressed his hands into her neck, and she felt his fingers gripping her skin.
he pressed down so hard she felt like she couldn’t breathe and wondered if she
would pass out.

the assault ended when another woman entered the washroom and
witnessed what was happening. she quickly left to call for help. mr.
waddling-leeson instructed ms. a.a. not to move before exiting the washroom.

ms. a.a. was able to get help by contacting the authorities.
iii.
victim impact statement

the offences changed ms. a.a.’s life. a simple trip to the
washroom became a “catastrophic experience,” which has affected her physically,
emotionally, and psychologically. she described her world as being “shattered.”

she suffered from a concussion, had to take hiv prevention
medication, has experienced severe insomnia, and has musculoskeletal injuries
to her head, neck, and back. her daily life has become “hard to bear.” a
psychologist diagnosed her with post-traumatic stress disorder, panic disorder,
heightened anxiety, and depression.

she experienced severe side effects from the hiv prevention
medication and had to put her education on hold. for two months, she hardly
slept, and even years later, she continues to struggle with sleeping normally.
she has lost control over her body and is in constant pain, requiring regular treatment
from a physiotherapist.

it is challenging for ms. a.a. even to accept casual touching
from others, such as hugs or handshakes. she is a “much more fearful person”
than she could have imagined before the attack.

while she was able to complete her teaching degree and is now
employed as a teacher, she does not feel comfortable in her workplace. tragically,
she also no longer views schools as safe places for learning, given her
terrible experience.
iv.
procedural history

on the first day of the sentencing hearing, march 3, 2025, mr.
goldkind informed me that his relationship with his client had deteriorated,
and he no longer felt comfortable representing him as defence counsel. however,
he was willing to remain as
amicus
and had no concerns about his ability
to continue advocating on mr. waddling-leeson’s behalf ethically, should i
permit him to take on a particularly adversarial role for the sentencing
hearing.

mr. waddling-leeson consented to this procedure. i informed him
of his right to obtain new counsel. i connected him with a representative from
legal aid ontario to discuss his options, including a potential
rowbotham
application and any concerns that might arise regarding mr. goldkind's role as
amicus.
after some time to reflect, he informed me that he did not wish to adjourn the
proceedings to obtain a new lawyer. he was content to represent himself with
the assistance of
amicus.

after the first five days of the sentencing hearing concluded on
march 7, 2025, i adjourned the matter for further evidence and submissions. the
case recommenced on march 21, 2025. mr. waddling-leeson maintained that he
wished to proceed without a new lawyer and with mr. goldkind acting as
amicus.

in
r. v. kahsai,
2023 scc 20, at para.
33, the supreme
court of canada held that a trial judge has a “broad discretion to appoint
amicus
and determine the scope of their mandate”: see para. 50. the appointment of
amicus
can be appropriate where “complex issues or serious criminal charges made an
adversarial perspective necessary for trial balance and fairness”: see para.
60.

a dangerous offender hearing is a legally complex process, and
the stakes for the accused person could not be higher. at the same time, an
accused person has the fundamental right to represent themselves: see
r. v.
swain,
1991 canlii 104 (scc), 1 scr 933, per lamer c.j., at p. 972.
mr. waddling-leeson made an informed decision to proceed in this manner.

mr. goldkind was instructed to adopt an entirely adversarial stance
towards the crown and to raise any legal questions that would assist the court
or help advance mr. waddling-leeson’s position for a different sentence than
that sought by the crown. he made it clear that he would not encounter any
conflict of interest that would prevent him from continuing in this role.
v.
background of the offender

mr. waddling-leeson has had a troubled life.

he is currently 30 years old. he was born in
ajax, ontario. his mother, crystal swatridge, raised him and his siblings, and
he had a good relationship with her. he never knew his biological father,
roger, but described his stepfather, roy, as supportive, although he felt that
roy preferred his biological children within the family.

mr. waddling-leeson self-reported that he did
not witness or experience physical violence as a child. however, the children’s
aid society became involved with his family when he was only three years old
due to allegations that his father was physically abusing him. there were also
reports of neglect during the time he was in the care of his mother and stepfather.
ms. swatridge reached out for assistance because she felt she could not cope
with raising him alone, especially given his frequent tantrums.

as a young child, mr. waddling-leeson was
prescribed medication for depression and to manage his mood. he often
experienced multiple tantrums each day. ms. swatridge grew concerned that he
might have been sexually abused by an adult male when he was only 9. however,
mr. waddling-leeson denied ever being sexually abused.

the cas remained involved following an
allegation that he was sexually assaulting other children. the victims reported
inappropriate touching and claimed he threatened them if they told anyone. they
were frightened of him. ms. swatridge described him as “uncontrollable” at this
time. mr. waddling-leeson was referred to the shoniker clinic for care and
treatment.

he was also prone to fits of rage and violence.
he put his fist through a wall and physically fought with his brother. his
mother and stepfather reported to the cas that he was physically aggressive,
stating that he “hated women.” ms. swatridge described him attempting to burn
down the house when he was 9 or 10 and using scissors against his brother.

when he was 12, his mother had “lost all control
of him.” when he was 13 or 14, he sexually abused a younger family member. the
family eventually made the difficult decision to have him removed from the
home.

as a young person, mr. waddling-leeson began
interacting with the criminal justice system. he was arrested for assaulting
his mother in 2010 and was subsequently charged with contacting her in
violation of his release order. he accepted a voluntary placement with a local
cas.

later that year, the cas had difficulty placing
him in a group home due to his challenging behavioural issues. while at one
group home, he engaged in sexualized conduct and was generally disobedient. as
a result, he was soon placed on a youth probation order as well. he expressed
dissatisfaction with having to follow the rules imposed by both the cas and
youth probation.

he achieved brief success while residing at
youth connections, a residential group home for youth with special needs,
starting in february 2011. he attended school, followed the house rules, and
appeared amenable to his living arrangements. unfortunately, this did not last.
by the end of 2011, he was implicated in selling and using drugs, as well as
skipping school. on april 19, 2012, he was arrested for drug-related offences
due to materials found in his closet. he was evicted from youth connections,
and the same year, he was made a crown ward.
0f

he
received counselling for anger issues and sexual misbehaviour.

eventually, mr. waddling-leeson returned to live
with his family for a brief period while still a teenager. ms. swatridge
reported that he frequently stole and was consistently using drugs. his
attendance at high school was poor.
vi.
criminal history

mr. waddling-leeson turned 18 on december 8,
2012. as an adult, he amassed a concerning number of criminal convictions for
various offences. he has spent the majority of his adult life under a bail
order, a probation order, or in custody. his criminal record was submitted as
an exhibit in this hearing. for this judgment, i wish to emphasize some entries
on that record that involve violence against women.

as a young person, he was found guilty on
november 18, 2010, of assaulting his mother. he forced his way into her
residence and shoved her chest with two hands. he then struck her a second time
with such force that she required immediate medical attention. after he was
arrested and released, he was placed on an undertaking. one of the conditions
of that undertaking prohibited him from attending at his mother’s home. he did
so anyway and was arrested for failing to comply with that order. he was
sentenced to 18 months’ probation.

on march 1, 2017, following a trial, he was
convicted of sexual assault, forcible confinement, and failing to comply with a
probation order. he was at a house party and touched the 17-year-old victim’s
vagina in a small bathroom without her consent. during the assault, he pushed her
against a bathroom wall and put his hands over her mouth. he then pulled her
pants and underwear down. she cried for him to stop. he was 21 years of age.
javed j. sentenced him to nine months in jail and two years' probation.

after he was sentenced, mr. waddling-leeson
uttered a threat that he would “beat the living shit out of [the victim.]” this
was about the victim who had just testified against him in the trial. he was
convicted of that offence and sentenced to 45 days' jail.

on june 21, 2015, mr. waddling-leeson was
convicted of threatening a woman and her son following a dispute he had with
them at an apartment complex where he had been residing. he believed they had
wronged him. he threatened to “come upstairs and kill” them. he was sentenced
to the equivalent of 30 days in jail and 18 months' probation.

on september 18, 2020, mr. waddling-leeson
pleaded guilty to one count of sexual assault. he had been residing at the
victim’s house while visiting. while she was cleaning her washroom, he came at
her from behind, and rubbed her rear end and breasts on top of her clothing.
she told him to stop. later, he groped her again and attempted to pull down her
shorts. he was sentenced to 54 days served and placed on probation for two
years.

following his convictions for the index offences
by this court, mr. waddling-leeson pleaded guilty to several other outstanding
charges before north j., including breaking and entering into a hotel in
toronto and assaulting a woman who worked there. on march 24, 2022, he
unlawfully gained access to 100 king street west in toronto. on the 65th floor,
he encountered the victim, who was cleaning the area. she was vulnerable and
alone. he pulled out a pair of scissors and pointed them at her, demanding keys
to the offices. fearing for her life, she fled. for these offences, and others,
he received a global sentence of 21 months in jail.

in total, mr. waddling-leeson has been convicted
or found guilty of more than 40 violent crimes (including the index offences)
and 15 offences for failing to comply with court orders. this is in addition to
drug-related offences and property crimes, such as breaking and entering and
theft.

his reporting habits while on probation have
been poor. he was deemed non-compliant with probation and community
supervision. he did not complete the requirement to participate in counselling
(including for substance abuse, mental health, pro-criminal behaviours, or
sexual offending) due to his non-attendance.

his conduct while in custody has been troubling.
he has been charged with institutional misconduct over two hundred times. some
of these incidents resulted in criminal charges being filed. for example, he
was found guilty of over twenty criminal counts on december 10, 2024. he
admitted to various acts of misconduct, including insulting staff, destroying
jail property, and assaulting correctional officers, sometimes with his feces
or urine.

on july 9, 2025, he pleaded guilty to one count of assault and
one count of mischief before me. both charges related to criminal activity
while he was held in custody at the toronto south detention centre (“tsdc”). the
facts of the offences were that on june 6, 2025, he intentionally damaged the
fire sprinkler system in his cell. this triggered the fire alarm and prompted
correctional officers to respond to a potential emergency. water poured out of
the sprinkler. the total damage was approximately $1000.

on june 8, 2025, he threw a cup of his urine at the face of a
nurse who was delivering medication to him. the liquid splashed down the right
side of the victim, including her face, neck and shoulder. he said,
"that's for always checking if i take my medication." the assault
interrupted the scheduled delivery of medication to other inmates on his unit.

i sentenced him to two years and three months in
custody for these offences, consecutive to any other sentence he was already
serving.
vii.
dr. klassen’s testimony / section 752.1 report

dr. klassen was qualified as an expert witness
in forensic psychiatry. he examined mr. waddling-leeson to prepare a
criminal
code
section 752.1 assessment and testified over several days.

while he generally found mr. waddling-leeson to
be pleasant and forthcoming, he was not fully cooperative. dr. klassen asked
mr. waddling-leeson to participate in phallometric testing, but he declined.

mr. waddling-leeson had little to no insight
into his criminal tendencies. he stated that he is not a “sexual predator” and
has no “unusual sexual desires.” he denied being impulsive. he claimed he was
not aggressive as a child or teenager. he only took responsibility for his
actions “sometimes.” when asked if he had any regrets about his prior actions,
he stated, “not really.” he described himself as “not a real violent man.”

he has never held a “regular job” apart from
some seasonal work for tradespeople. instead, he has supported himself through
ontario works and the sex trade. he described it as a source of “good money”
and mused that he would like to be an actor in pornographic films upon his
release from custody.

he acknowledged a history of mental health
concerns and some efforts at treatment. dr. klassen reviewed mr.
waddling-leeson’s prior medical records from various service providers. as a
child, mr. waddling-leeson was examined by dr. khattak at the kids’ clinic in
2010, who diagnosed him with adhd, oppositional defiant disorder, conduct
disorder, and cannabis misuse. as a young adult, mr. waddling-leeson was
examined by dr. zakaria from lakeridge health in 2014, when he was 19 years old.
dr. zakaria reported that mr. waddling-leeson experienced depression and anger
and had a history of defiance, aggression, vandalism, and duplicity.

while in custody as an adult, mr.
waddling-leeson repeatedly violated the institutional code of conduct. he
regularly assaulted correctional officers. he was assessed by a psychiatrist in
2017, who concluded there was no evidence of psychosis or distress. dr. wesley
arrived at the same conclusion in 2020. in 2021, while in custody, mr. waddling-leeson
was seen by dr. glancy from camh but declined psychiatric care. during the
interview, he threatened to stab dr. glancy.

dr. klassen interviewed mr. waddling-leeson
about his prior convictions. he took little to no responsibility for his crimes
and offered no insight into the harm he caused his victims. for example,
regarding the 2017 sexual assault, he denied there was any assault yet stated
he just “took a plea.” that is false; he was convicted after a trial. he
further described the victim as a “liar” to his probation officer. he had no
memory of subsequently threatening the victim after the trial, despite his
conviction for doing so. regarding the 2020 conviction for sexual assault, he
said he had a “playful” relationship with the victim and, after using cannabis,
both thought they could “have a little fun.” she “blew it all out of
proportion.”

regarding the index offences, he acknowledged
that he did not know the victim beforehand, but told the police that he did. he
blamed intoxication for his behaviour. he “couldn’t recall” if his offending
behaviour was “impulsive.” he could not recall the assaults as he “blacked
out," which directly contradicted his trial testimony that the sexual
contact was purportedly consensual and he remembered the events. he also
admitted he “made a story up.” he said he just “needed to use the
washroom." when pushed by dr. klassen to explain why the offences would
have occurred, he stated he could not tell him.

ms. swatridge informed dr. klassen that her son
has “never” expressed any guilt or remorse for his actions. in her assessment,
he does not want “a normal life” and has “no intention” of changing his
behaviour. he has not acknowledged any mental health difficulties and does not
wish to receive any programming. instead, he hopes to lead a life free from
accountability.

dr. klassen diagnosed mr. waddling-leeson with
antisocial personality disorder. individuals with antisocial personality
disorder fail to conform to social norms regarding lawful behaviour. they
exhibit a pattern of disregarding and violating the rights of others. they may
be deceitful and manipulative, making decisions without considering the
consequences for themselves and others, for the sake of short-term personal
gain. this diagnosis was partly based on his history of conduct-disordered
behaviour exhibited since childhood. troublingly, he has also demonstrated
narcissistic personality traits, including a lack of empathy.

dr. klassen assessed mr. waddling-leeson using
various actuarial methods for risk evaluation. he scored 29 out of 40 on the
psychopathy checklist-revised (pcl-r), which places him in the 80th percentile.
this score indicates challenges with treatment responsiveness and community
supervision. mr. waddling-leeson's score on the static-99r was 10, positioning
him in the 99.99th percentile regarding re-offending. additionally, he scored
37 on the violence risk appraisal guide-revised (vrag-r), corresponding to the
98th percentile for re-offending.

considering all available evidence, dr. klassen
concluded that mr. waddling-leeson was at a very high risk of future sexual and
violent recidivism.

dr. klassen emphasized that certain dynamic
variables related to mr. waddling-leeson’s offending behaviour could be
targeted for treatment and supervision. these include his antisocial values and
attitudes, his willingness to comply with community-based supervision, his lack
of involvement in structured prosocial activities, and the establishment of
realistic future goals. however, his willingness to change was, at best,
uncertain, in dr. klassen’s opinion.
viii.
efforts at rehabilitative programming

while detained at the tsdc after his most recent
arrest, mr. waddling-leeson completed twelve one-hour programs. he did not
complete any programs longer than an hour. longer programs are available to
offenders in pre-sentence custody, but he did not participate in any of them.
additionally, he did not complete any in-custody programs during his previous periods
of pre-trial incarceration for prior criminal charges or sentences that were
imposed prior to his commission of the index offences.

regarding community-based supervision, he told
dr. klassen that he found probation “painful” in the past and struggled to work
with his probation officers. in 2017, he informed his probation officer that he
didn’t want counselling. he failed to report several times while under
probation. his poor reporting habits hindered efforts to address any of the
criminogenic factors that increased the likelihood of his re-offending. he
never completed any counselling for substance abuse, mental health, or sexual
offending. while on probation, he continued to re-offend. ultimately, he was
deemed unsuitable for future periods of community supervision.

he was convicted nine times for failing to
comply with a probation order. mr. waddling-leeson also neglected to report
after being placed on the national sex offender registry. he received two
convictions for this offence.

nevertheless, he told dr. klassen that he would
“do his best” to manage a long-term supervision order (“ltso”) if one were
imposed at the end of this hearing, rather than an indeterminate sentence of
incarceration. on july 9, 2025, in court, during his right of allocution, mr.
waddling-leeson, however, expressed great frustration at the idea of being on a
form of state-mandated supervision after he served any additional prison
sentence i imposed, if that would result in him serving a sentence until he was
50 or older.

he informed dr. klassen that he was open to sex offender
treatment, including options that would involve medication and various
psychotherapies. dr. klassen noted that “it is difficult to know whether these
sentiments are sincere and genuine… and durable.” mr. waddling-leeson has not
demonstrated a history of following through or remaining committed to rehabilitative
programming. he is prone to mood changes. in the past, he had made comments to
his probation officer indicating that he did not like to take medication and
preferred to “self-medicate” with marijuana.

of particular concern to dr. klassen was mr. waddling-leeson's
apparent lack of distress or concern regarding the course his life had taken.
this included his numerous interactions with the criminal justice system and
the time spent in custody. consequently, his attitude could influence his
commitment to making the necessary changes to prevent re-offending in the
future.

on august 3, 2023, mr. waddling-leeson was
sentenced to 11 months' jail by moore j. on january 4, 2024, he was sentenced
to 21 months, to be served consecutively to any other sentence he was currently
serving, by north j. this resulted in mr. waddling-leeson being transferred to
a federal penitentiary. records provided from the correctional service of
canada (“csc”) when mr. waddling-leeson was completing this recent aggregate federal
sentence of over two years indicate that mr. waddling-leeson has been assessed
as requiring a high level of intervention based on a variety of factors.
1f

however, mr. waddling-leeson is noted to have expressed an interest
in engaging with the required integrated correctional program model for sexual
offenders and an associated high-intensity program for those offenders. mr.
waddling-leeson’s behaviour was also noted to have improved while in federal
custody.
2f

i will comment on this in greater detail later in this judgment.
ix.
institutional misconduct and demeanour in court

mr. waddling-leeson has accumulated an astonishing number of
infractions while in custody. these include formal criminal convictions as well
as institutional findings that were documented but did not result in criminal
charges. his institutional behaviour in provincial jails was described as
“abysmal” by the correctional service of canada.
3f

however, it did acknowledge that he improved while serving a sentence in a
maximum-security penitentiary from 2024 to the first half of 2025.

the documented incidents of misconduct include destroying
property, being disobedient, and assaulting staff and correctional officers. on
one occasion, he also threatened a nurse who was administering medication to
inmates. this behaviour predates his incarceration for the index offences and
has occurred in multiple provincial jails. it began at least as early as 2015.

many of these assaults involve gratuitous and degrading behaviour
intended to humiliate victims. mr. waddling-leeson routinely threw feces,
urine, and garbage at correctional staff. he would damage the sprinkler systems
or sinks in his cells, causing flooding.

when asked about these acts of misconduct, mr. waddling-leeson
did not express remorse. more than once, he expressed pride regarding this
conduct.
4f


on july 2, 2025, mr. waddling-leeson appeared
before me on zoom. he was charged with new offences relating to his behaviour
while in custody at the toronto south detention centre. those offences included
an assault due to an incident on june 8, 2025. they had not been properly
adjudicated, and he was presumed innocent of the allegations, although, as
previously noted, he ultimately pleaded guilty to these offences on july 9,
2025.

mr. waddling-leeson immediately referred to the
court in profane and demeaning language. he expressed a desire to plead guilty
to these new offences. when the assistant crown attorney put his position on
the record for a six-month jail sentence, he became angry. he wanted to be
sentenced to at least two years in prison. he used a highly derogatory term to
describe the assistant crown attorney and asked rhetorically if he wanted to
give “breaks to criminals” and added that he “wished he could piss on [the
assistant crown attorney.]” he explained that he had recently served a sentence
at a federal correctional institution but was transferred back to a provincial
jail when he became eligible for statutory release. he told me he “threw piss”
at a nurse and would keep “committing more charges” until he was transferred
back to a penitentiary. he bragged that he had already assaulted more staff
members. he showed no compassion for any of these victims.
x.
desire to transition into a female person

during the sentencing hearing, mr. waddling-leeson explained that
he identifies as transgender and is in the process of transitioning to become a
female person. he has requested the use of female pronouns while in custody. he
has begun treatment to change his hormone levels, which includes using
testosterone blockers and introducing increased levels of estrogen and
progesterone. additionally, he has started seeking funding for sex reassignment
surgery.
5f


dr. klassen was asked about the significance of mr. waddling-leeson’s
desire to transition from a risk-based perspective. dr. klassen testified that
lowering mr. waddling-leeson’s testosterone levels would diminish his sex
drive. dr. klassen explained that he has worked at a gender clinic for many
years, and the outcome of male-to-female transition usually involves surgical
interventions, including castration.

dr. klassen explained that the impact of feminizing hormones on
aggression is not a well-studied topic. while there is generally a link between
a person becoming more feminine and exhibiting less aggressive behaviour, each
case is unique. the potential impact on mr. waddling-leeson’s libido is also challenging
to determine. the changes associated with chemical-based treatments could be
reversed if mr. waddling-leeson does not remain committed to taking them.

for example, chemical castration, which involves administering
certain drugs to reduce sexual arousal, is generally reversible, meaning that
the effects typically cease or subside when the treatment is stopped. this
contrasts with physical or surgical castration, which is a permanent procedure.
if physical castration is performed, it is expected to affect his risk level of
re-offending. however, no evidence was presented that mr. waddling-leeson
intended to undergo such a procedure.

throughout his interview with mr. waddling-leeson, dr. klassen
found him to be “vague and contemplative” about his desire to transition. not
everyone who begins the process of transitioning continues down that path.
given that mr. waddling-leeson’s expressed intention to transition is
relatively recent, dr. klassen would not change his opinion regarding mr.
waddling-leeson’s risk level at this time.

dr. klassen was clear that while he felt qualified to answer these
questions, there were limits to his expertise in this area. a physician specializing
in treatments associated with transitioning would be better suited to provide
expert opinion evidence in this regard.

correctional records further highlight mr. waddling-leeson’s
struggles with gender identity. after his arrest, he was housed mainly in male
facilities during his detention for the index offences. however, he was
transferred to vanier, a women’s detention centre, on september 3, 2024. while
held at maplehurst correctional complex, he informed authorities that he
identified as a woman and requested a transfer. he was then removed from vanier
on october 7, 2024, after breaching the behavioural contract required of all
inmates there. during oral submissions on july 9, 2025, ms. garcia stated she
was advised mr. waddling-leeson was involved in a relationship with another
inmate at vanier. federal correctional records indicate that mr.
waddling-leeson stated he met his “girlfriend” while staying at vanier.
6f


in 2024, mr. waddling-leeson was placed in a penitentiary due to sentences
imposed on him by other courts for different offences. he was assessed as
requiring a high level of intervention. he downplayed his sexual assault
convictions, describing them as only involving “touching and stuff”, and felt
the way the criminal justice system had treated him was “ridiculous.”
7f

he had a limited understanding of consent and personal boundaries. nevertheless,
he agreed to participate in the correctional plan developed for him, which
included sexual behaviour programming. he explained that he considered himself
a trans-female, and was prescribed medication for hormone therapy while in
federal custody. his preferred name was lolita, and he requested the use of
female pronouns.
xi.
positions of the parties and submissions of
amicus

on behalf of the crown, ms. garcia submits that
mr. waddling-leeson should be designated a dangerous offender and sentenced to
an indeterminate period of incarceration. he has a lengthy criminal record for
crimes of violence, including sexual violence against women. the index offences
were horrifying and will have a life-long impact on ms. a.a.

she asks me to find that despite spending nearly
all his adult life in jail or subject to a form of state supervision, no
sentence thus far has succeeded in controlling him or deterring him from
re-offending. his risk of violent recidivism cannot be managed in the community
or even governed while in custody. he has shown no meaningful commitment to
treatment in the past and shows outright contempt for authority figures. he can
experience outbursts of anger and lacks empathy for his victims. he is defiant
and manipulative.

his disorders should be deemed insurmountable.
no treatment can overcome them. where a determination that an offender’s risk
may be safely controlled in the community is contingent on adequate community
supervision as opposed to treatment, the resources necessary to implement the
supervision must be available, capable of performance, and reasonable at the
time of the dangerous offender hearing. the evidence at this hearing was that
they are not resources capable of controlling mr. waddling-leeson in the
community. therefore, nothing less than an indeterminate sentence is sufficient,
and i cannot be satisfied that a lesser sentence will adequately protect the
public.

mr. waddling-leeson agreed to being designated a
dangerous offender. he requested a fixed sentence of 7 to 10 years.
8f


mr. goldkind, as
amicus,
recommended a
sentence of 8 – 12 years in custody followed by a 10-year ltso. he submits that
mr. waddling-leeson was abused himself as a child. his ongoing unlawful
behaviour is almost certainly a result of the trauma he likely experienced. while
that does not excuse any of his criminal actions, it does help to explain what
has gone wrong in his life. unquestionably, he needs significant treatment and
programming to reduce his risk of reoffending. and while the treatment he has
been engaged with thus far has not succeeded, it has also not been sufficient
to meet his needs.

mr. waddling-leeson’s conduct in custody,
according to mr. goldkind, is unquestionably deplorable. however, provincial
jails are not equipped to address his needs. when he was placed in a
penitentiary, he did better. that explains his recent outbursts, in which he
expressed his desire to return to that setting. at a federal prison, he will be
able to complete the high-intensity programming necessary to address the
underlying causes of his crimes of violence. the evidence further demonstrates
that mr. waddling-leeson does far better in a penitentiary on a day-to-day
basis. his infractions for misconduct in provincial jails are not truly a
reflection of mr. waddling-leeson’s intractable violent behaviour, but rather a
reflection of the reality of the conditions he experienced in those
institutions.

if mr. waddling-leeson were sentenced to a lengthy
prison term, he would have years to engage with the counselling and programming
available to offenders of his nature. the environment where he would serve that
sentence would be different from where he had been incarcerated for the vast
majority of his prior time in provincial custody. there is a realistic
possibility he might do far better there and demonstrate a capacity for change.
he should be allowed to engage with this programming, which he has never been
offered previously. mr. waddling-leeson will also be subject to stringent
supervision in the community by the csc when placed on an ltso following his
time in a penitentiary. he will face the serious risk of additional punishment
if he violates the terms of such an order. that deterrent effect will also
serve as a check on any possible desire to reoffend.

mr. goldkind further submits that mr.
waddling-leeson is now nearly 31 years of age. after serving a fixed sentence
of up to 12 years, followed by a 10-year ltso, mr. waddling-leeson will be over
50 years old when he is finally released from correctional supervision. by that
age, offenders are generally expected to have a dramatically reduced risk of
re-offending. i should exercise extreme caution before assuming that at such a
young age, mr. waddling-leeson is beyond hope and that an indeterminate
sentence is truly necessary.
xii.
dangerous offender sentencing law

a dangerous offender proceeding is a two-stage process. first,
there is the designation phase; second, there is the penalty phase: see
boutilier
at paras. 13-15. the designation phase “is concerned with assessing the future
threat posed by an offender,” while the penalty phase “is concerned with
imposing the appropriate sentence to manage the established threat”: see para.
31.

in
r. v. currie,
1997 canlii 347 (scc), the supreme court
held that the sentencing court must “be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of
the likelihood of future danger than offender presents to society before he or
she can impose the dangerous offender designation and an indeterminate
sentence”: see para. 25. in
boutilier,
the supreme court held that a
finding of dangerousness requires the crown to prove a “high likelihood of
harmful recidivism and the intractability of the violent pattern of conduct”:
see para. 46.

in
boutiler, côté j. noted that four criteria were
established for a dangerous offender designation under the older (pre-2008) legislation,
and that these criteria remain relevant under the current provisions: see para.
46. at paras. 26-27 côté j. wrote:
in
lyons, justice
la forest read the objective element of the designation — the
requirement that the predicate offence be a “serious personal injury
offence” — together with the subjective element — the
“threat” assessment — and concluded that four criteria were
“explicit” from the language of s. 753(1): (1) the offender has been
convicted of, and has to be sentenced for, a “serious personal injury offence”;
(2) this predicate offence is part of a broader pattern of violence; (3) there
is a high likelihood of harmful recidivism; and (4) the violent conduct is
intractable (p. 338). the last three criteria are part of the assessment
of the “threat” posed by the offender. the last two of these are
future-oriented, and justice la forest explained them as follows:
thirdly, it must be
established that the pattern of conduct
is very likely to continue
and
to result in the kind of suffering against which the section seeks to protect,
namely, conduct endangering the life, safety or physical well-being of others
or, in the case of sexual offences, conduct causing injury, pain or other evil
to other persons. also
explicit
in one form or another in each
subparagraph of s. [688, now 753] is the requirement
that the court
must be satisfied that the pattern of conduct is substantially or
pathologically intractable. [emphasis added; p. 338.]

justice côté further commented on the requirement that the
offender’s pattern of conduct is “substantially or pathologically intractable”:
see
boutilier
at paras. 26-27. intractable conduct refers to “behaviour
that the offender is unable to surmount.”

treatability of the offender must be considered at both stages.
during the designation stage, treatability is crucial when the court assesses
the threat posed by the offender. in the penalty phase, treatability aids in
determining the appropriate sentence to manage the threat posed by the
offender:
boutilier
at para. 45.

in
r. v. broadfoot,
2018 oncj 215, justice greene
explained, at para. 77, how courts should analyze intractability at both the
designation and sentencing stages:
at the designation stage,
intractability relates to whether or not the conduct can be treated. at the
sentencing stage, the court has found that the conduct cannot be treated so the
question becomes can the conduct be managed. for example, in
boutilier,
in looking at the issue of intractability at the designation stage, the court
considered the depth of mr. boutilier’s addiction (as it was his addiction that
made him dangerous). the trial judge concluded that the treatment prospects
did not rise beyond an expression of hope. in looking at the issue of
intractability at the sentencing stage, the court commented on mr. boutilier’s
consistent failure to comply with conditions of his release which therefore led
the court to conclude that supervision in the community would not adequately
protect the public.

at the penalty stage, the sentencing court must consider whether
a lesser sentence than indeterminate detention would sufficiently protect the
public:
boutilier
at para. 63;
johnson
at para. 44. in
r. v.
straub,
2022 onca 47, the ontario court
of appeal held that the sentencing judge must “impose the least intrusive
sentence required to reduce the public threat posed by the offender to the
level statutorily required”: see para. 61. the judge must determine whether
“the risk arising from the offender’s behaviour can be adequately managed
outside of an indeterminate sentence”: see
boutilier
at para. 31;
r.
v. dadmand,
2022 bcca 162, at para.
17.
designation phase: is mr. waddling-leeson a
dangerous offender?
analysis – sections 753(1)(b)

to achieve a dangerous offender designation under section
753(1)(b), the crown must establish beyond a reasonable doubt:
i.
that the offender has been convicted of
a “serious personal injury offence”;
ii.
that the offender, by his conduct in
any sexual manner, including that involved in a predicate offence, has shown a
failure to control his sexual impulses; and
iii.
that such conduct has shown a
likelihood of the offender causing injury, pain or other evil to other persons
through failure in the future to control his sexual impulses.
see:
r. v.
ahmed,
2023 onca 676,
at para.
20.

in
r.
v. sipos,
2014 scc 47, the supreme court noted that the elements required
for the designation are both retrospective and prospective in nature. notably,
the crown must prove that the
offender
has failed in the past “to control his or her sexual impulses” and, that there
is “a likelihood of causing injury, pain or other evil to other persons through
failure in the future to control his or her sexual impulses”: see
para. 20.
serious personal injury offence

sexual assault with a weapon and sexual assault causing bodily
harm constitute serious personal injury offences for an application made under
section 753(1)(b): see section 752(b).
conduct in “any sexual
manner”

the term “any sexual matter” has been interpreted broadly by the
courts. in
r. v. currie,
1997 canlii 347 (scc),
the supreme court
determined that the term could refer to the predicate offence, although this
was not essential. provided the offender was involved in any sexual matter that
demonstrated a likelihood of inflicting future harm, a dangerous offender
application can succeed under (b). the court noted that a trial judge is not
required to focus on the objective severity of a predicate offence to conclude
that a dangerous offender designation is warranted. at para. 22, the supreme
court wrote:
first, the language of s. 753(b)
explicitly states that there is no requirement to focus on the specific nature
of the predicate offence. section 753(b) provides that the prospective
dangerousness of the offender is measured by reference to “
his conduct in
any sexual matter including that involved in the commission of the offence for
which he has been convicted
” (emphasis added). “[a]ny sexual matter”
can
refer to the predicate offence, but it
need not. as long as the
offender’s past conduct, whatever conduct that might be, demonstrates a present
likelihood of inflicting future harm upon others, the designation is justified.”

unlike sections 753(1)(a)(i) and (ii),
the word “pattern” is not used in s. 753(1)(b). however, the crown
must
prove a “pattern of offending in the past showing a failure to control sexual
impulses”: see
r. v. lynch,
2022 onca 136, at para.
50. the crown may
point to past harmful conduct of a particular kind, rooted in
behaviour so intractable that it can safely be concluded that the
same type of conduct is likely to manifest itself in the future”: see
r. v.
patel,
2020 bcca 92,
at
para.
212.

two
incidents may constitute a pattern, provided they demonstrate a sufficient
degree of similarity:
r. v. hogg,
2011 onca 840, at paras.
40, 43;
r.
v. byers,
2017 onca 639, at paras.
20-23. the pattern requirement is not
based solely on the number of offences. it is also rooted in the elements of
similarity in the offender's behaviour:
r. v. langevin
(1984),
1984 canlii 1914 (on ca), 11 c.c.c.
(3d) 336 (ont. c.a.), at pp. 348-49. see also
r. v. knife,
2015 skca 82,
at para.
67, leave to appeal refused, s.c.c.a. no. 382.
failure to control sexual impulses

a
trial judge can conduct their analysis with the facts surrounding the offences,
alongside a psychiatric expert opinion, to support a finding that the offender
has failed to control their sexual impulses. in
r. v. sullivan,
1987
canlii 6853
(ont. c.a.),
the court of appeal upheld a dangerous offender
designation. it noted that it was acceptable for the trial judge to rely on
“her [own] analysis on the facts underlying the two prior offences and the
predicate offence,” in addition to psychiatric evidence, to demonstrate that
the individual had and continues to demonstrate a failure to control his sexual
impulses: see paras. 21, 30 – 34.

the
court of appeal in
lynch, supra,
at para.
51, noted that:
in many of the reported cases of
dangerous offender designations under s. 753(1)(b) or its equivalent,
there was no dispute about whether the offender’s past conduct reflected a
failure to control sexual impulses, and there was clear evidence of a
pattern of such conduct.

importantly,
an offender cannot initiate a sexual assault and then claim that evidence
showing he terminated the assault before forcing intercourse on his victim
demonstrates an ability to control his sexual impulses: see
r. v. sullivan,
1987 canlii 6853
(ont. c.a.).

in
r. v. gibson,
2013 onsc 589,
(appeal dismissed:
2021
onca 530
), justice code cited
sullivan
and highlighted that the offender’s history of criminal behaviour and violence
supported a “common sense inference” that there was an apparent failure to
control the offender’s sexual impulses: see para. 15.
likelihood of causing
pain, injury or other evil

in interpreting the term “likelihood” under section
753(1)(b), justice bell in
r. v. c.g.,
2019 onsc 2406, concluded
that “likelihood” connotes a degree of risk
rising to at least a “probability” — that is, a risk that is more likely than
not. the “likelihood” of future conduct occurring, as used in s. 753(1)(b),
connotes a higher degree of certainty than the “substantial risk” requirement
for a long-term offender designation in s. 753.1(1)(b). the court,
applying
boutilier, emphasized that the criterion is
future-oriented and considers the offender's future treatment prospects.
analysis – section
753(1)(b)

mr. waddling-leeson has been convicted of sexual offences three
times, in 2017, 2020, and 2023 (the index offences). these convictions
establish a pattern of non-consensual behaviour with adult females.
additionally, he has exhibited aggressive and sexualized misconduct from a very
young age. he has sexually assaulted family members, acquaintances, and
strangers.

he
has also acted violently against women in a non-sexual manner. in 2015, he was
convicted of uttering threats to a woman and her son over a minor dispute in
his apartment building. in 2017, following his conviction for sexual assault
before javed j., he threatened the victim who had testified against him. in
2024, he was convicted by north j. of various crimes, including assaulting a female
cleaning employee in a downtown office building with scissors. while in custody
for the index offences in 2022, he threatened a nurse who was simply
administering medication to other inmates.

his
potential victim pool is virtually limitless. he has chosen to sexually and/or
violently assault family members, acquaintances, and even strangers without any
provocation.

dr.
klassen’s expert opinion was that mr. waddling-leeson is at a very high risk of
future sexual (and violent) recidivism. i accept dr. klassen’s opinion evidence.
he is an experienced psychiatrist with a long history of working with violent
offenders. he interviewed mr. waddling-leeson in person and reviewed a
substantial amount of secondary source material. he has been declared an expert
in forensic psychiatry by the ontario court of justice and the superior court
of justice on countless occasions.

mr.
waddling-leeson has not shown any meaningful insight into his offences or the
harm he has inflicted on his victims. since he was 16 years old, he has almost
always been subject to a release order, probation supervision, or custody. yet
mr. waddling-leeson has not been deterred by bail orders, probation orders, or
incarceration. his behaviour has only deteriorated, with the index offences
comprising the most serious entries on his extensive criminal record: see
r.
v. cook,
2020 onca 809, at para.
24.

he is easily irritable and has threatened innocent members of the
public with violence when frustrated or seeking to fulfill his own desires. he
has engaged in little to no treatment, despite numerous court orders mandating
it. while in custody, he has not completed any significant rehabilitative
programming. he has previously refused treatment, including medication, and has
not consented to undergo phallometric testing, which was suggested by dr.
klassen. the significance of phallometric testing is that it can help determine
whether mr. waddling-leeson suffers from a paraphilic disorder that would
require appropriate treatment in the future.

treatability must be considered when the court assesses the threat
posed by the offender at the designation phase. i conclude that mr.
waddling-leeson does not accept the need for change, and his criminal history
as a violent and sexual offender demonstrates that he is unable to control his
impulses. worryingly, as dr. klassen noted, he does not seem troubled by how
his life choices have affected him and led to his ongoing interactions with the
criminal justice and correctional systems. he believes there is nothing wrong
with him.

dr.
klassen diagnosed mr. waddling-leeson with anti-social personality disorder.
since his teenage years, he has shown a consistent pattern of disregard for and
violation of his victims' personal autonomy. there is nothing in his past to
indicate that he will adhere to treatment, whether in custody or not, and there
is virtually no evidence that he will respond successfully to treatment even if
he decides to cooperate. his attitude has been one of nearly constant defiance
towards authority figures. he has also shown deceit to avoid
accountability for his actions. by way of one very telling example, he admitted
to dr. klassen that he “made up a story” about the index offences.

this demonstrates, at the very least, avoidance, if not outright
hostility to change, which must be considered at the designation phase: see
r.
v. s.m.j,
2023 onca 157, at paras.
27-29. as justice code noted in
gibson,
the existence of denial by sex offenders is a significant factor when
assessing the likelihood test in section 753 regarding future re-offending. an
unwillingness to undergo treatment is also relevant: see para. 45.

in
certain circumstances, mr. waddling-leeson has demonstrated that he can control
himself and collaborate with a medical professional. dr. klassen noted that he
had no difficulty during his interview with mr. waddling-leeson and suggested
that it was possible for him to develop a positive relationship with future
program or treatment providers.

i further appreciate that mr. waddling-leeson is still a relatively
young man. nevertheless, the evidence of his prior success with rehabilitative
treatment is very thin, and i conclude that he is not meaningfully interested
in his own rehabilitation. mr. waddling-leeson has committed violent crimes
repeatedly since he was a teenager. he resorts to violence when it suits him,
despite the harm he causes to his victims.

mr. waddling-leeson has used force and threats to commit three
sexual assaults against women. his anti-social personality disorder, lack of
empathy, and refusal to engage with treatment or respect authority figures all
contribute to the conclusion that he is likely to cause serious injury to
others in the future due to his failure to restrain his sexual impulses: see,
for example:
r. v. ahmed,
2023 onca 676, at para.
123.

i find that his offending behaviour is intractable. mr.
waddling-leeson is unable to overcome his impulses. he is neither treatable nor
amenable to control. in
r. v. j.c.,
2025 onca 331, at paras.
14-15, the
ontario court of appeal recently clarified how a sentencing court should assess
intractability at the designation phase:
9f

boutilier
establishes that
before designating a dangerous offender, a sentencing judge must be satisfied
that the offender poses a high likelihood of harmful recidivism and that his or
her conduct is “intractable”. the court defined intractable conduct as
“behaviour that the offender is unable to surmount”:
boutilier, at
para. 27. this requires the sentencing judge to conduct a prospective
assessment of dangerousness, so that only offenders who pose a future risk are
designated as dangerous and face the possibility of being sentenced to
indeterminate detention.
the court in
boutilier
further
clarified that the prospective assessment of dangerousness necessarily involves
the consideration of future treatment prospects: at para. 43. offenders will
not be designated as dangerous if their treatment prospects “
are so
compelling
that the sentencing judge cannot conclude beyond a
reasonable doubt that they present a high likelihood of harmful recidivism or
that their violent pattern is intractable”:
boutilier, at para. 45.

there are simply no compelling treatment prospects for mr.
waddling-leeson. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr.
waddling-leeson has a very high likelihood of reoffending sexually in the
future. i am also satisfied that his offences will likely cause “injury, pain
or other evil to other persons through failure in the future to control his
sexual impulses.”

to clarify, while he has participated in a very limited amount of
rehabilitative programming to date, the evidence presented at the hearing does
not establish a reasonable doubt concerning the issue of intractability or his
high likelihood of reoffending: see
r. v. bird,
2023 skca 40, at paras.
53-56.
analysis – sections 753(1)(a)(i) and (ii)

sections
753(1)(a)(i) and (ii) state that an offender may be designated a dangerous
offender when the crown proves the offender constitutes “a threat to the life,
safety or physical or mental well-being of other persons based on evidence
establishing
(i)
a pattern of repetitive behaviour by the offender,
of which the offence for which he or she has been convicted forms a part,
showing a failure to restrain his or her behaviour and a likelihood of causing
death or injury to other persons, or inflicting severe psychological damage on
other persons, through failure in the future to restrain his or her behaviour,
(ii)
a pattern of persistent aggressive behaviour by
the offender, of which the offence for which he or she has been convicted forms
a part, showing a substantial degree of indifference on the part of the
offender respecting the reasonably foreseeable consequences to other persons of
his or her behaviour…

ms.
garcia alternatively submits that mr. waddling-leeson’s index offences, along
with his criminal record for prior crimes of violence, constitute a “pattern of
repetitive behaviour” and a “pattern of persistent aggressive behaviour” under
these subsections.

in
r. v. hogg,
2011 onca 840, the ontario court of appeal held pursuant to subsection
753(1)(a)(i) that the pattern of repetitive behaviour, which includes the
predicate offence, “
has to contain enough of the same
elements of unrestrained dangerous conduct to be able to predict that the
offender will likely offend in the same way in the future”: see para.
40.

the
second element required for a designation under this subsection is the
likelihood of the offender causing “death or injury to other persons, or
inflicting severe psychological damage on other persons” through a failure to “restrain
his behaviour” in the future. this is a very high standard that should, at a
minimum, be equated with a probability, and may constitute something even
greater: see
r. v. connell,
2022 onsc 4703, at para.
27.

in
r. v. villeneuve,
2022 onsc 2188, justice aitken held that the
“persistence” required for the crown to establish a pattern under subsection
753(1)(a)(ii) necessitates proof of behaviour that is “enduring, continuous,
obstinately persevering, interminable or sustained”: see para. 103; see
also
r. v. smith,
2023 onca 575, at para.
56;
r. v. williams,
2018
onsc 2030,
at para.
252.

in
r. v.
smith,
2023
onca 575,
the ontario court of appeal held at para.
37
that the court must be satisfied that:
(i)
there is a pattern of
behaviour
(ii)
involving persistent acts of
aggression causing serious harm and demonstrating a substantial degree of
indifference to the consequences of the offender’s actions that
(iii)
creates a serious risk of
ongoing harm to the public.

regarding
the requirement that the crown prove a “substantial degree of indifference,” in
williams, hill j. equated “indifference” with “disregard, lack of
sympathy or empathy, callousness and coldness, and lack of concern or
sensitivity.” that “indifference” must be examined through the lens of
whether the offender has demonstrated any concern about how his actions “will
impact others, are impacting others, or have impacted others”: see
villeneuve
at para.
105.
the crown has established the pattern under both
subsections

i am satisfied that the crown has also proven the required pattern
of behaviour under both sections 735(1)(a)(i) and (ii) beyond a reasonable
doubt. in addition to my analysis in the previous subsection, i add the
following.

mr.
waddling-leeson has a continuous record of committing violent offences that
dates back to his teenage years. some of these offences resulted in serious
harm to their victims, including assaults (against both civilians and
officers), threats, and sexual assaults. he has assaulted individuals both in
and out of custody. nothing deters him.

regarding
735(1)(a)(i), the behaviour is repetitive and demonstrates
a failure to restrain himself. it is highly likely mr.
waddling-leeson will offend violently in the future and therefore cause serious
bodily harm to another victim, either physically or psychologically.

mr. waddling-leeson’s behaviour also satisfies the test in section
753(1)(a)(ii). his crimes of violence have been continuous and show a pattern
of persistent aggressive behaviour. there is a substantial degree of
indifference to his victims.

he does not show remorse, nor does he acknowledge the serious harm
his crimes of violence and sexual violence have caused to his victims. he
offends whether in the community or in custody. he has been informed of the
devastating harm done to his previous victims by prior courts. he has been told
of the need to change his behaviour. yet, he has not stopped offending,
downplays or disregards the terrible harm he causes, and at times, has mocked
his victims or questioned their character and honesty.

for
example, he referred to the 2017 sexual assault victim as a “liar” (dr.
klassen’s report on page 27), referred to prior sexual partners as “sluts” (
ibid
),
stated the victim of the 2020 sexual assault “blew it all out of proportion,”
and generally takes pride in his conduct towards correctional officers while in
custody (dr. klassen’s report on page 19; his statements in court before me on
july 2 and 9, 2025).
xiii.
conclusion on designation

in summary, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that:
1)
mr. waddling-leeson has been convicted of a serious personal injury
offence;
2)
the index offences are part of a broader pattern of violent and sexually
violent behaviour;
3)
considering his history of offending, including the index offences, he
has furthermore shown a failure to control his sexual impulses as contemplated
by
criminal code
section 753(1)(b);
4)
there is a high likelihood that mr. waddling-leeson will violently
and/or sexually re-offend;
5)
this reoffending will cause “injury, pain or other evil” through a
failure to control his sexual impulses, and/or “injury” or “severe
psychological damage” to other persons through failure in the future to restrain
his behaviour;
6)
mr. waddling-leeson shows substantial indifference to the harm he causes
his victims; and
7)
mr. waddling-leeson’s violent and sexual offending behaviour is
intractable.

i
therefore find that mr. waddling-leeson has shown a failure to control his
sexual impulses, and there is a likelihood that he will cause injury, pain or
other evil to other persons through failure in the future to control those
sexual impulses. i designate him a dangerous offender pursuant to
section
753(1)
(b). i also find that mr. waddling-leeson constitutes a threat to the
life, safety or physical and mental well-being of other persons and designate
him a dangerous offender pursuant to
sections 753(1)
(a)(i) and (ii).
xiv.
penalty phase: what is the appropriate sentence?

there
are three sentencing options for an individual designated as a dangerous
offender. they may receive a standard sentence, a determinate sentence of
incarceration of at least two years followed by an ltso of up to 10 years, or a
sentence of an indeterminate period of incarceration: see
criminal code
section 753(4).

as previously noted,
criminal code
section 753(4.1)
requires that the court sentence the offender to an indeterminate period of
imprisonment “unless it is satisfied by the evidence adduced during the hearing
of the application that there is a reasonable expectation that a lesser
measure… will adequately protect the public against the commission by the
offender of murder or a serious personal injury offence.” however, there is no
presumption in law of an indeterminate sentence for someone designated as a
dangerous offender.

the
requirement that indeterminate detention must be imposed where the judge is not
satisfied there is a “reasonable expectation” that a lesser sentence will
adequately protect the public against the commission of murder or a serious
personal injury offence was upheld as a “rational means to achieve the public
protection objective” inherent to the dangerous offender regime: see
boutilier
at para. 76. the term “reasonable expectation” should be interpreted as a
“likelihood”, “a belief that something would happen”, or “a confident belief
for good and sufficient reasons”: see
straub
at para.
30. it is a more
stringent requirement than a “reasonable possibility”: see
straub, supra,
citing
r. v. groves,
2020 onca 86, at para.
15.

when
determining whether the dangerous offender’s behaviour is manageable, a court
should consider:
(1)
evidence that the offender
avoided treatment;
(2)
failed to respond to or
terminated treatment;
(3)
breached court orders;
(4)
lacked motivation;
(5)
continued to be involved in
high-risk conduct;
(6)
remains afflicted by a serious
personality disorder; and
(7)
demonstrates a high risk to
engage in violent recidivism.
see
straub
at para.
64;
r. v. k.p.,
2020
onca 534,
at para.
13.

i
may only consider an indeterminate sentence if i rule out the appropriateness
of lesser sentencing options. if i am satisfied that a conventional
sentence will adequately protect the public from the commission of a subsequent
serious personal injury offence, then i must impose such a sentence. second, if
i find that a conventional sentence would not meet this standard, i must
consider whether i am satisfied that a conventional sentence of a minimum of
two years in jail, followed by an ltso for a period of up to 10 years, will
sufficiently protect the public from the same concern.

given
the parties' positions, the primary issue for me to decide is whether a fixed
sentence of at least seven years followed by a 10-year ltso will adequately
protect the public, or whether mr. waddling-leeson must be sentenced to an
indeterminate period of incarceration.
likelihood of control in the community

an
assessment of whether an offender’s risk can be safely managed in the community
must consider the available community supervision options. in
r. v.
bitternose,
2013 abca 220, the alberta court of appeal stated that a
sentencing court must determine “if there is evidence that facilities to
provide the necessary degree and type of supervision are available, and that
such supervision is reasonable”: see paras. 11-13;
r. v. napope,
2023
skca 1, at para.
35.

the
evidence presented at this hearing indicated that a long-term supervision order
cannot adequately replicate the equivalent of 24-hour supervision available in
a prison, regardless of the offender's place of residence. the primary purpose
of the dangerous offender provisions in the
criminal code
is to protect
the public, and resource limitations must be taken into account in my decision.
if an offender cannot be managed in the community except under essentially
24-hour, 7-day-a-week “jail like” conditions, they must receive an
indeterminate sentence: see
r. v. d.v.b.,
2010 onca 291, at paras.
59-60.

in
dr. klassen’s opinion, while mr. waddling-leeson has shown some openness to
treatment, it is difficult to determine if this is sincere and sustainable. his
attitude fluctuates. he has never previously demonstrated an ability or
willingness to engage with treatment in the medium or long term. my
observations of mr. waddling-leeson in court indicate that he is volatile and
prone to unpredictability. some days, he would refuse to come to court; other
days, he would attend and actively listen. occasionally, he would express anger
and frustration, acting out and making it difficult or impossible for the court
to continue with his case. on multiple occasions, he disparaged
amicus
or the court.

as
dr. klassen noted, there is a genuine fear that mr. waddling-leeson might
entirely abandon any willingness to comply with a community-based supervision
plan, even with the threat of a breach charge hanging over him. prior
experience with the criminal justice system, including incarceration, has not
deterred him from disobeying court orders, failing to report, or re-offending.
if he were released into the community, even under an ltso and placed in a
residential facility supervised by the csc, he might eventually leave or refuse
to follow the conditions imposed on him. this is a very valid concern, as he
has shown little attachment to anyone or any place in the past. if he were to
evade state supervision, there is a high likelihood of his violently or
sexually reoffending. indeed, without prolonged and effective treatment, it is
nearly certain.

mr.
waddling-leeson’s repeated victimization of women remains highly concerning.
despite multiple convictions for sexual assault, he has shown no insight into
mistreating women or improving his understanding of the importance of obtaining
informed consent before engaging in sexual activity. he regards his treatment
by the justice system for these offences as “ridiculous”. that he could hold
such a view of his horrific abuse of ms. a.a. in particular is frightening.
based on his criminal convictions alone, his lack of insight into his
behaviour, and his inability to be deterred, i find he cannot be safely controlled
in the community.

in
addition, even while in custody, his predatory behaviour has persisted. he was
transferred to vanier by the provincial correctional authorities despite his
criminal record for sexual and physical violence against women. setting aside
the propriety of this decision, which was outside the jurisdiction of the court,
i feel compelled to note that i was alarmed when counsel first brought this
development to my attention. at vanier, mr. waddling-leeson was able to pursue an
inappropriate relationship with a female inmate. as ms. garcia correctly noted
during final submissions, this kind of behaviour within an institution is
strictly forbidden, as inmates are often vulnerable. they may have mental
health issues or have experienced trauma in their lives. their rehabilitation
process can be complex. allowing another inmate to influence them emotionally in
this manner could expose them to duress or other forms of intimidation. it can
set a vulnerable inmate back and cause re-traumatization. additionally, the
risk of physical or sexual abuse is always present.

i
have limited evidence of what happened between mr. waddling-leeson and this
other inmate. i can only conclude that he broke the code of conduct expected of
inmates at vanier and referred to this other person as his “girlfriend” to
federal correctional authorities, which suggests he viewed the relationship as
romantic or intimate in nature. it is another example of how he will violate any
rules placed upon him to satisfy his desires.

evidence
of treatability must demonstrate that the offender can be treated within a
defined timeframe. it must establish something more than mere “speculative
hope”: see
r. v.
a.r.,
2022 onca 553, at para.
33;
straub
at
para.
63.

dr.
klassen testified that there is nothing in mr. waddling-leeson’s history to
suggest that mr. waddling-leeson will respond positively to a community-based
plan. while it is not impossible to imagine he might comply, in my assessment,
it is entirely speculative to conclude he would do so beyond the very short
term. he has not shown that he responds to treatment in custody or within the
community; in fact, his track record indicates the opposite. he does not
respond well to any form of supervision or authority figure and does not
acknowledge that he is violent, dangerous, and needs to change.

mr.
waddling-leeson requires a level of structure and supervision that can only be
provided in a carceral setting. the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that there is no “reasonable expectation” that a lesser measure will adequately
protect the public from the commission of another serious personal injury
offence.

it
bears emphasizing that mr. waddling-leeson’s conduct in court is another factor
that demonstrates he is not yet committed to his rehabilitation. he was
regularly defiant and disrespectful. notably, on july 2, 2025, he was explicit
that he would continue committing offences while in custody at a provincial
jail to achieve his goal: a longer sentence and a transfer to a federal
institution. this is yet another example of how he has no difficulty using
violence to obtain what he wants and demonstrates little to no empathy for his
victims. he openly told me that it was his intention to continue with his
assaultive behaviour as he believed that would inevitably result in him
receiving a sentence greater than two years. he also showed utter contempt for
the integrity of the proceedings and the authority of the court. an offender’s
conduct in court is a factor to consider when assessing his level of risk and
whether he can be realistically and effectively controlled in the community:
see
straub
at para.
78;
r. v. erstikaitis,
2019 onsc 6863, at
para.
44;
r. v. heaton,
2018 bcpc 136,
at para.
188.

mr. goldkind noted that mr. waddling-leeson has not yet been
offered, nor has he been able to participate in, the high-intensity supervision
or treatment provided by the csc. i do not find this persuasive. in
r. v.
bennett,
2013 onca 471, the ontario court of appeal held that a sentencing
court cannot find a reasonable expectation of control in the community based
solely on the fact that the offender has not yet tried (and failed) to comply
with certain programs. an “indication of potential” is not sufficient: see
para. 8.

a
similar argument was presented in
r. v. s.r.,
2025 onsc 929. the
offender’s prior record primarily included short reformatory sentences and one
penitentiary sentence from 20 years ago. justice barrett cautioned that
sentencing courts must not erroneously treat a fixed sentence with an ltso as
“a test run for any expression of hope that might exist”: see para. 168. when
the evidence does not demonstrate a reasonable expectation that the offender
could be controlled in the community, an indeterminate sentence is required.

similarly,
mr. waddling-leeson’s intention to transition to a female identity does not alter
my conclusion. i have no doubt this is a difficult process for him to endure
and brings deep emotional challenges. he may face significant hardships in the
future as a result of this decision, especially while in custody. even if i
could conclude that his desire to transition is genuine, i cannot speculate on
what effect, if any, it would have on his future level of dangerousness. ms.
garcia described the limits a sentencing court can impose on a new, untried
treatment well in her written submissions:
the possibility of engaging in
a new, yet untried treatment option does not render the offender manageable in
the community. neither is not having previously failed or refused treatments.
these aspects are relevant, but in no way determinative of the final
assessment, which is based on the evidence as a whole. dangerous offenders
often have a wide range of mental health and addiction challenges. there are a
vast number of treatments, be that psychological, behavioural, pharmacological,
or otherwise, that they may engage with throughout their lives. no individual
will try all forms of treatment.
10f


in
r. v williams,
2025 onca 327, the appellant argued that the trial judge
should have found he could have been adequately supervised in the community
based on “the availability of new and improved medications and other treatment
modalities that would more effectively treat him.” the court of appeal found no
error in the trial judge’s conclusion that “mere hope that treatment will be
successful or some optimism that an offender could be rehabilitated is not a
sufficient basis to impose a determinate sentence”: see paras. 11-12. the trial
judge’s decision to impose an indeterminate sentence was upheld.

i
recognize that i am not required to conclude that treatment can eliminate risk
or cure underlying causes of criminal conduct. what is proposed needs only to realistically
reduce the risk posed by the offender to a manageable level. the focus at this
stage of the proceeding is on risk management, and a court should not require a
plan that would offer complete elimination of risk:
straub
at para.
48.

nevertheless,
the extraordinary public safety concerns presented by mr. waddling-leeson
cannot be dismissed by placing blind faith in an untested form of treatment.
furthermore, after considering all the evidence presented at this hearing, i
conclude that mr. waddling-leeson is not motivated to meaningfully engage with
any form of treatment or to accept and confront the causes of his offending
behaviour: see
a.r. at para.
28;
r. v. wielgosz,
2023 onca 550,
at para.
7.
conclusion on penalty

i
am satisfied that the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that there is
not a reasonable expectation that a lesser measure than an order for
indeterminate detention will adequately protect the public from a future
serious personal injury offence.

mr.
waddling-leeson will be sentenced to an indeterminate term of imprisonment.
xv.
ancillary orders

the
following ancillary orders are also made. first, an order pursuant to
criminal
code
section 760 to produce to correctional services canada:
(i)
dr. klassen’s report and a
transcript of his testimony;
(ii)
a copy of my reasons for
conviction and sentencing;
(iii)
a transcript of the entirety
of the trial and sentencing proceedings; and
(iv)
any other sentencing materials
filed on this hearing.

mr.
waddling-leeson is prohibited from having any contact, directly or indirectly,
with ms. a.a., the victim of the index offences, pursuant to section 743.21.

a
dna order pursuant to s. 487.051 (the index offences are primary designated
offences).

an
order that mr. waddling-leeson comply with the
sex offender registration
act,
s.c. 2004, c. 10, for life, pursuant to section 490.013(6).

a
weapons prohibition order for life pursuant to s. 109.

the
victim fine surcharges are waived.
released: july 24, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

the correct terminology now is a child in extended society care, due to the
enactment of the
child, youth and family services act,
s.o. 2017, c. 14.
as the older term was used in the documents that were provided to me for this
hearing, i have relied upon that language accordingly.

on august 3, 2023, mr. waddling-leeson was sentenced to 11 months. on january
4, 2024, he was sentenced to 21 months, to be served consecutively to any other
sentence being served. on may 13, 2025, mr. waddling-leeson was transferred
back to a provincial jail, where he had been held pending the completion of
these proceedings.

updated csc records, exhibit 21, page 50.

letter from the parole board of canada, dated may 2, 2025, located in exhibit
21, at page 82.

for example, he referred to one incident and justified his conduct by stating
he “wanted to send the nerd co home”: see
summary of misconducts,
vol.
2., tab 18 mhcc records, p. 5.

i have referred to the offender as mr. waddling-leeson in this judgment and
have used male pronouns as he was charged under that name.

updated csc records, exhibit 21, page 72.

updated csc records, exhibit 21, page 23.

despite mr. waddling-leeson’s concession that he be designated a dangerous
offender, i have held the crown to its burden of proof.

my emphasis added.

crown’s written submissions, page 85, para. 220.