source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj356/2025oncj356.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. harun, 2025 oncj 356
date: 2025 06 27
court file no.: windsor
23-81100123
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
abdalaazim
malik harun
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 9, 30
october, 7 november 2024, 6 january, 14, march, 23 april, 5 june 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 27 june 2025
mitchell witteveen.............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
adetayo akinyemi...................................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

on
9 october 2024, the trial of this matter began. on 23 april 2025, the offender
abdalaazim malik harun changed his pleas on counts 2 and 3. these counts
alleged the possession of methamphetamine and fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking. i ordered a pre-sentence report and heard sentencing submissions
on 5 june 2025. these are my reasons for sentence.
facts

the
facts of this case are as disclosed in the trial and in the statement read into
the record by the crown. this is a brief summary of the allegations against
the offender.

in
december 2022, the ontario provincial police began investigating the offender
as a potential drug trafficker in the town of kingsville. police were
concerned he was selling cocaine, fentanyl, and methamphetamine.

in
january 2023, a search warrant was executed at 1038 maple avenue. in a bedroom
of the residence, police found a bag. inside the bag was:
(1)
40.27g
of fentanyl;
(2)
21.46g
of powdered cocaine;
(3)
12.7g
of crack cocaine; and
(4)
345.27g
of crystal methamphetamine.

police
also seized $915 in canadian currency, two digital scales, and a quantity of
ziploc plastic bags. one of the scales tested positive for cocaine, crystal
methamphetamine, and fentanyl.

it
is acknowledged through his plea that the offender had the requisite knowledge
and control of the drugs found in the residence, and that he possessed them for
the purpose of trafficking.
positions of the parties

for
the crown, counsel seeks a sentence of 7 years on count 3 and 5 years
concurrent on count 2. counsel also seeks a dna order on each count and a
mandatory s. 109 weapons prohibition.

for
the offender, counsel seeks a sentence of 5 years concurrent on each count. 
the ancillary orders were not disputed.

both
counsel agree the offender should receive credit for his pre-sentence custody. 
i was advised this custody totalled 498 actual days as of the date of
sentencing submissions. as of today’s date, that is now 520 days. applying
the standard 1.5:1 credit for pre-sentence custody results in an enhanced total
of 780 days. this will be deducted from the sentence i impose.
the pre-sentence report

the
pre-sentence report (psr) prepared for the offender was filed as an exhibit. 
it describes the offender’s upbringing and family history. it is very helpful
to me in determining an appropriate sentence.

the
offender was born in sudan. his family moved to kenya when he was an infant to
escape a war. they remained in kenya for ten years, at which point the entire
family, except for the offender, moved to canada. the offender remained in
kenya for five more years, residing with his uncle. he then joined his family
in saskatchewan, where they remained for four years. they then moved to
leamington.

the
offender completed high school with no difficulties. he was involved in
extracurricular activities in saskatchewan but not in leamington. he told the
psr author he always had a close relationship with his family, though that
relationship has become strained given his criminal activity.

he
has held jobs in the fast-food industry and in food processing. he also drove
a taxi. he is currently unemployed but will seek employment on his release
from custody.

regarding
substance use, the offender told the author he does not drink alcohol. while
he began smoking marijuana at 16 years old, and continued to do so until his
incarceration, he said he does not use any other substances. he is not,
therefore, engaging in drug trafficking to support his own addiction. he says
he fell in with the wrong group, and was attracted to illegal activity for the
financial potential it offered.

his
mother told the author her son is a nice person who helps out family members. 
she said the charges did not reflect who he really is. she said he would be
welcome to live with the family on his release so long as he followed the
household rules.

overall,
the psr is generally positive. the offender and his family fled war in their
native sudan, living for several years in kenya and then in canada afterwards. 
the offender’s childhood was largely positive. he completed high school and
has been in the work force. he has no ongoing physical or mental health
challenges. all of this bodes well for his future. he is before the court
having chosen to pursue the allegedly easy money to be found in drug
trafficking.
principles of sentencing

the
trafficking of schedule i substances is a gravely serious offence. so too is
possessing those substances for the purpose of trafficking. it is difficult to
turn on the news or open a newspaper without seeing the crushing societal
effects of addiction. thousands of canadians are killed every year by the very
substances the offender possessed. the currency, the scales, and the ziploc
bags show he was clearly intending to sell them. i must emphasize denunciation
of his conduct, and deterrence of future similar conduct in fashioning a fit
sentence. i cannot ignore the offender’s rehabilitative prospects, but they
must be subordinate to these objectives.

i
note that
s. 718
of the
criminal code
begins by stating the fundamental purpose
of sentencing. that purpose is to protect society and contribute to respect
for the law. sentences must be imposed that help maintain a just, peaceful,
and safe society. when a person chooses to sell poison for financial gain, the
sentence imposed must keep these fundamental purposes top of mind.
caselaw

the
crown filed several cases in support of its position. i have considered all of
them, even if i do not mention them specifically in these reasons.

several
cases relate to the inherent danger of fentanyl and to the approach courts
should take when sentencing offenders in relation to it.

the
case of
r.
v.
loor
2017 onca 696
stands for the proposition that
traffickers of significant amounts of fentanyl, even with no prior criminal
records, should expect penitentiary sentences. i would find the same assertion
applies to convictions for possession for the purpose of trafficking. without
question, the trafficking of fentanyl is exceptionally serious criminal
behaviour. so too is possessing it in advance of sale. on this point, the
parties agree a penitentiary sentence is required.

in
the case of
r.
v.
cinelli
2018 onsc 4983, justice bawden reviewed
the grim statistics that show the deadly effect opioids have on society. i
accept his honour’s analysis on this point but note that the case is from
several years ago. i have no reason to believe the situation has gotten
anything but worse in the seven years since.

his
honour also noted the special danger that powdered fentanyl poses, not only to
users but to first responders who must be vigilant in handling the substance or
any items potentially contaminated by it.

the
case of
r.
v.
lynch
2022 onca 109
was a decision by justice
nordheimer that required the analysis of fit sentencing ranges for fentanyl
trafficking. at paragraph 15, his honour stated:
it is a well-established principle that
drugs vary in the degree of danger that they represent to those who consume
them. consequently, the more dangerous the drug being trafficked, the higher
the penalty that will be imposed. fentanyl is now known to be a much more
dangerous drug than almost any other. that reality directs that a sentence
imposed for trafficking in fentanyl should be as long or longer than a
corresponding sentence for trafficking in cocaine: r. v. olvedi,
2021 onca 518,
157 o.r. (3d) 583, at para.
56, leave to appeal to s.c.c. requested, 39854.

the
application for leave
in
olvedi, noted above, was dismissed.

in
cinelli, the offender pleaded guilty to possessing 63g of heroin and 20g
of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. he received a sentence of 7 years
on each, to be served concurrently. that offender had just under half the
amount of fentanyl that the offender before me possessed.

in
r.
v.
gagnon
2017 onsc 7470, the offender was convicted of
possessing 43.76g of methamphetamine and 12.34g of fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking. justice conlan
noted that
gagnon
possessed “not one but two very
dangerous substances, each not in an insignificant quantity”. in the result,
gagnon was sentenced to four years on the fentanyl count and 581 days
(approximately 19 months) on the methamphetamine count. in the present case,
the offender possessed approximately eight times more methamphetamine than
gagnon did, and more than three times the amount of fentanyl.

returning
to the
lynch
decision,
there the offender pleaded guilty and took
responsibility for 965.01g of cocaine, 149.28g of mdma, and 41.37g of
fentanyl. at the trial level he was sentenced to four years in jail. on
appeal the sentence was increased to six years.

finally,
in
r.
v.
davison
 o.j. no. 4930 (c.j.), another more recent
case, justice wendl sentenced an offender who possessed 20.41g of fentanyl for
the purpose of trafficking. his honour imposed a 6-year sentence.

in
addition to the fentanyl in his possession, the offender has also taken
responsibility for 345.27g of methamphetamine. the significance of that
possession should not be lost in the court’s concern over fentanyl. that is a
substantial amount of another very dangerous and addictive drug.

the
case of
r.
v.
griffith
2020 onsc 1387
is relied on by the crown
not for its direct applicability but by analogy. in that case, a mid-level cocaine
trafficker, in possession of 424g of powdered cocaine and 28g of crack cocaine,
received a sentence after trial of 3 ½ years jail. the crown argues that
methamphetamine is effectively equal to cocaine in its seriousness and that
therefore a mid-level methamphetamine sentence should be in the same 2-5 year
range.

i
have been provided with no cases that equate methamphetamine and cocaine in
terms of their seriousness, but i accept the general principle. to the extent
that there is a hierarchy among schedule i substances, i agree that
methamphetamine is at least as serious as cocaine. it is an addictive,
damaging drug that can destroy users’ lives. its possession and intended sale
must be denounced harshly.

in
the case of
r.
v.
hillier
 o.j. no. 6681 (c.j.), justice
javed sentenced an offender to 12 months jail for the possession of 19.7g of
methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking. this was concurrent to a
sentence for the same offence regarding fentanyl.

r.
v.
vicare

n.b.j. no. 166 (p.c.)
saw an indigenous offender sentenced to two years jail
for possessing 24.91g of methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking.

the
caselaw certainly includes many other examples of lengthy sentences for s. 5(2)
offences involving much smaller quantities of methamphetamine than was
possessed by the offender. i remind myself that counsel are essentially joint
on the submission of a five-year sentence in the present case. i agree such a
sentence would reflect the seriousness of the drug as well as the alarming
amount of it the offender possessed.
mitigating
and aggravating factors

in
my view, the chief mitigating factor in the offender’s favour is his stable
family support. this will be invaluable to him on his release from custody and
will go a long way in ensuring he does not come back before the courts. my
hope is that he recognizes what an asset their support is.

i
also acknowledge the offender’s guilty plea. while any guilty plea is a
mitigating factor and a sign of remorse, i find it is less compelling in this
case than it might have been under different circumstances. the offender only
changed his pleas to guilty after an unsuccessful charter application where he
sought the exclusion of the drugs that form the basis of the charges. if there
is a spectrum of mitigation for guilty pleas, where at one end are pleas
entered in the face of a weak crown case and a strong chance of acquittal, and
at the other end are pleas entered in acceptance of the inevitable, i find the
pleas in this case land closer to the latter end. there is, however, still
some mitigation to be found.

counsel
for the offender has argued for additional credit on the offender’s
pre-sentence custody. this credit has become known as duncan credit, after the
court of appeal for ontario’s endorsement
in
r.
v.
duncan
2016
onca 754. inmates are already given enhanced credit for pre-sentence custody,
but duncan credit allows a sentencing court to go beyond that and award
additional credit when pre-sentence conditions are “particularly harsh” (
see
duncan
at paragraph
6
).

the
issue to be determined in this case is to what extent i can take judicial
notice of particularly harsh conditions at the southwest detention centre, as
counsel has provided no evidence in support of this claim. i do not have
lockdown records or cell assignments, or any documents setting out time spent
by the offender in segregation. i am asked simply to accept as notorious that
conditions at the swdc merit duncan credit.

crown
counsel disagrees with this submission. without evidence on how the conditions
might have impacted this offender directly, he argues i cannot make the
requested leap and grant additional mitigation.

there
have been instances where courts have indeed taken judicial notice of
particularly harsh pre-sentence conditions. justice schreck did so
in
r.
v.
donison
2022 onsc 741
with regard to the toronto south detention
centre (but see
r.
v.
grieg
 o.j. no. 5723 (c.j.), where
justice felix refused to take judicial notice of conditions at toronto south). 
the bulk of such cases relate to conditions experienced during the covid-19
pandemic (
see:
r.
v.
morgan
2020 onca 279;
r.
v.
batchelor
2022 onsc 2392
). without question, conditions were known to be extraordinarily
difficult in custodial facilities at that time in history. since then,
however, courts have been reluctant to extend judicial notice as counsel
requests here.

i
have no evidence on the offender’s experience of pre-sentence custody. to
grant him additional mitigation without any such evidence but instead based
solely on conditions that are allegedly well-known, would create a new baseline
of enhanced mitigation available to all inmates at swdc, above and beyond the
usual credit. i am not prepared to do that.

counsel
also seeks mitigation for time spent on strict bail conditions. this is
referred to as downes credit, after the court of appeal
decision in
r.
v.
downes
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 555. at paragraph 33 of that decision,
justice rosenberg said:
accordingly, i conclude that time spent
under stringent bail conditions, especially under house arrest, must be taken
into account as a relevant mitigating circumstance. however, like any potential
mitigating circumstance, there will be variations in its potential impact on
the sentence and the circumstances may dictate that little or no credit should
be given for pre-sentence house arrest.

and
at paragraph 34:
i also agree with ms. paine, and to a
large extent with mr. doucette, that it is inappropriate to adopt a rigid
formula because there can be such a wide variation in bail conditions and even
house arrest conditions. in some cases, the terms of the house arrest may
impinge very little on the offender's liberty. some accused may be allowed to
work as usual, take care of their family obligations as usual and in general,
see little serious impact on their pre-bail way of life. for others, house
arrest may be very difficult. the accused may find themselves essentially
confined to a very small space, cut off from family and friends and unable to
obtain employment.

i
have reviewed the release order made by justice howard of the superior court of
justice. among other conditions, it includes 24-hour house arrest with very
limited exceptions. he could be outside his residence between 8am – 8pm but
only if in the immediate company of one of his two sureties. there was also a
narrow exception related to medical emergencies. notably, the order required
the offender to “[b]e in the company of a least one of the applicant’s two
sureties at all times, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.” i take this to mean
that even when in his residence, the offender needed to be in the company of a
surety.

he
was also not permitted to leave essex county and was ordered to report to the
essex county opp once a week.

i
agree this was a very restrictive bail order. house arrest was nearly
absolute, and even when in the residence the offender had to be in the company
of a surety. there was no real opportunity for him to attend school or seek
employment. his movements were significantly restricted.

i
do note, however, that this order related not only to the information before
me, but also to two other informations as well. in addition to the present
charges, the offender was facing allegations of sexual assault and
interference, mischief, and failing to stop. surely these other charges
played a role in the determination of appropriate release conditions.

further,
i was told the offender breached this bail order in september 2024. he
therefore spent approximately 13 months bound by the order before returning to
custody.

i
find there is some mitigation to be assessed for downes credit. the offender
lived for 13 months under very strict conditions. that fact will be included
in my analysis and will mitigate the sentence i ultimately impose.

finally,
counsel asks me to consider the immigration consequences the offender will face
as a result of this matter. as a permanent resident in canada, he will be
subject to a possible removal order. as it is agreed the sentence will be more
than six months custody, he will not have the ability to appeal that order if
it is made (though he will still have the ability to seek judicial review of
it). counsel asks that i include this consequence in determining a fit
sentence, but candidly, i don’t really see how it should or even could impact
the sentence i impose. the consequences will be the same whether i accede to
counsel’s request for a five-year sentence or to the crown’s request for a
seven-year sentence. in these circumstances, i do not see how immigration
consequences play a role in sentencing.

finally,
i will address the offender’s motivation for the offences. in the psr, the
offender said he had no addictions of his own. he was not, therefore, an
“addict trafficker”, but was engaged in the sale of drugs for profit. in
drug
offences in canada
(4
th
edition, macfarlane, frater, michaelson)
the authors state in
chapter 35:
as a general rule, the courts have drawn a
distinction between those persons who engage in the business of trafficking
purely for financial gain and those who traffic in drugs primarily for the
purpose of securing sufficient funds to satisfy their own drug dependence;
greed
is a much less sympathetic characteristic than the throes of addiction. see
in this regard: r. v. draper
(2010),
253 c.c.c. (3d) 351,
 8 w.w.r. 609,
478 w.a.c. 267,
251 man. r. (2d) 267,
87 w.c.b. (2d) 448,
 m.j. no. 94,
2010 mbca 35,
2010 carswellman 98(man. c.a.), at para.
24;r. v.
mcculloch
(2011),
94 w.c.b. (2d) 339,
 a.j. no. 448,
2011 abca 124,
2011
carswellalta 666(c.a.).
(emphasis added)

the
sale of drugs purely for profit may not be an aggravating factor, but it
certainly removes any mitigation the offender may have received had he been
selling only to support his own addiction.

in
aggravation, i note the significant quantities of the drugs involved. over 40g
of fentanyl is enough, to be blunt, to kill thousands of people. it is hard to
understate the lethality of fentanyl, and the offender had a large amount ready
for sale.

likewise,
the amount of methamphetamine is considerable and far in excess of what would
have been needed to show possession for the purpose of trafficking. i remind
myself not to use an element of the offence as an aggravating factor, but in
this case, the amounts seized go beyond satisfying an element of the offence
and show the scope of the offender’s business. the presence of currency,
plastic bags, and a scale that itself had fentanyl, methamphetamine, and
cocaine on it show the offender was actively involved in the drug trade. there
is no other reasonable inference available on these accepted facts.

i
also return again to the
lynch
decision,
supra. at paragraphs 16
and 17, justice nordheimer considered the moral blameworthiness of offenders
who sell especially deadly drugs like fentanyl. his honour disagreed with the
trial judge, who equated fentanyl traffickers with sellers of other drugs, and
said:
even if true, the fact that fentanyl
traffickers may be the same people that traffic in other drugs has no bearing
on their moral blameworthiness for choosing to traffic in fentanyl, a
particularly dangerous drug. as the majority recognized in parranto, at para.
70, moral culpability rises with the risk of serious harm the trafficker is
prepared to expose others to.
there is good reason for this. the
problems that dangerous drugs pose for our society are well known. they involve
drug addiction, adverse health consequences and, unfortunately all too often,
death. further, drugs are often sold to already vulnerable people thereby
exacerbating their difficult circumstances. still further, there are the
indirect costs to society through increased health care expense, increased
demands on the health care system, increases in robberies or other forms of
criminal activity, and increases in violence. simply put, the greater those
risks are when a particular drug is being trafficked, the greater the
offender’s culpability or moral blameworthiness for choosing to traffic in that
drug.

those
who would possess potentially deadly drugs for the purpose of sale to others
must bear the responsibility of their decision. their moral blameworthiness is
great. rehabilitative prospects and plans for the future do not take away from
the gravity of their actions. the seriousness of the offences and their impact
on society are why denunciation and deterrence must be given paramount
importance.
analysis

as
i said, crown counsel seeks a sentence of seven years jail on the fentanyl
count and five years concurrent on the methamphetamine count. the offender’s
counsel seeks a five-year sentence on each, to be served concurrently.

the
offender’s counsel concedes the range for the fentanyl count starts at 6
years. his argument for a sentence below that level essentially comes down to
the suggestion that if six years would be a fit sentence, five years would not
be demonstrably unfit. he submits, effectively, that if six years is reasonable,
five years is close enough.

i
cannot accept that argument. it would require me to disregard binding and
persuasive caselaw and would neuter any notion of a sentence starting point,
which remains an available tool for sentencing judges after
r.
v
parranto
2021 scc 46 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 46. that is not to say there will never be a case where a
sentence below the accepted sentencing range will be appropriate. sentencing
courts must retain the freedom and discretion to sentence based on the offence
and the offender before them, and not be constrained by ranges that are
tantamount to straitjackets (
see:
parranto
at par.
37
). to preserve the
important principles of parity and predictability, however, there must be some
valid reason for the departure. “close enough” is not such a reason.

in
the present case, the offender possessed large quantities of fentanyl and
methamphetamine, together with paraphernalia that showed he was intending to
sell it. he also possessed smaller quantities of powder and crack cocaine. he
has admitted to entering the drug trade purely for profit. for the sake of
easy money, he possessed deadly drugs he intended to sell to vulnerable users. 
his moral blameworthiness is extremely high.

he
is a young man with a future as bright as he wants it to be. i must keep in
mind that he is not beyond the scope of redemption. i cannot impose a sentence
that is crushing or out of line with other similar cases.

that
said, i must emphasize the protection of society, denunciation, and
deterrence. like-minded individuals must know that crimes like these will
involve long jail sentences, even for first-offenders. the offender will be
sentenced as follows:
(1)
on
count 3, 6 ½ years or 2,372 days jail, minus credit for 520 actual days of
pre-sentence custody enhanced to 780 days. this results in a further 1,592
days to be served.
(2)
on
count 2, five years or 1,825 days jail, concurrent to count 3, minus 780 days
of enhanced pre-sentence credit. this results in a further 1,045 days to be
served concurrent to count 3.
(3)
there
will be an order that the offender provide a sample of his dna to the ontario
provincial police for inclusion in the national dna databank, forthwith, on
both counts.
(4)
there
will be weapons prohibitions pursuant to s. 109 for ten years, on both counts.
(5)
the
items seized by police will be subject to forfeiture to his majesty the king in
right of canada.

given
the custodial sentences, i will waive the victim surcharges.

the
offender is a young man with a future. my hope for him is that he takes
advantage of the support his family is giving him, and that we never see him
back in these courts again.
released: 
27 june 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt