source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj271/2025oncj271.html

citation:
r. v. nazeer, 2025 oncj 271
court file no.: 998-23-61100623
date:
may 15, 2025
ontario
court of justice
central
west region
between:
his
 majesty the king
—
 and —
aaron nazeer
application
heard before mr. justice richard h.k. schwarzl on april 29, 2025
reasons released on may 15, 2025
mr.
robert levan............................................................................. 
for the crown/respondent
mr.
ruaridh mccartney................................................................. 
for the defendant/applicant
schwarzl,
j.:
reasons for 11(b)
charter
ruling
1.0: introduction
[
1.]
the
defendant, aaron nazeer, was charged with two driving-related offences. a
trial was held before me resulting in verdicts of guilty on the impaired
driving charge (count #1) and not guilty on the charge of failing to provide a
breath sample (count #2).
[
2.]
he made
an application alleging that his right to be tried within a reasonable time as
guaranteed by
section 11(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
has been violated.
[
3.]
what
follows are my reasons for allowing this application and staying the
proceedings.
2.0: applicable legal principles
[
4.]
applications
made under
section 11(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
are
to be decided using the principles set out by
the supreme court of canada in
r.
v. jordan,
2016 scc 27
and its progeny.
jordan
established
that in provincial
court, a trial must be completed within 18 months to avoid a stay of
proceedings for want of prosecution.
[
5.]
in
r.
v. coulter,
2016 onca 704, the ontario court of appeal the following
helpful step-by-step analytical framework:
step
action
1.
calculate
 the total delay, being the time between the laying of the information and the
 scheduled last trial date.
2.
from
 the total delay, subtract defence delay, which includes both defence waivers
 and defence-caused delay. the result of this arithmetic is known as net
 delay.
3.
compare
 the net delay to the presumptive ceiling (in this case, 18 months).
4.
if
 the net delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the crown must establish the
 presence of any exceptional circumstances (either discrete events or a
 particularly complex case) to avoid a stay.
5.
subtract
 any exceptional circumstances from the net delay, leaving remaining delay.
6.
if
 the remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the court must consider
 if the case was particularly complex to justify the delay.
7.
if
 the remaining delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is on the
 applicant to show the delay is unreasonable.
3.0: principles applied
3.1: what is the total delay?
[
6.]
the total
delay for this two-day matter is 743 days or 24.4 months because the information
was sworn on april 27, 2023, and was finished on april 29, 2025.
3.2: what is the net delay?
3.2.1: positions of the parties
[
7.]
both
sides agree that time must be subtracted from the total delay to account for defence
caused delay. however, each made different calculations of that delay.
[
8.]
the
applicant submits that there is 9 days of defence delay, resulting in a net
delay of 734 days, or 24 months.
[
9.]
the
respondent crown submits that there is 406 days, as set out in appendix a of
their response, which they say yields a net delay of 337 days, or 11 months.
[
10.]
i will
explain why i find the net delay in this case is 661 days or 21¾ months.
3.2.2: analysis re net delay
3.2.2.1: defence caused delay for the
period between december 6, 2023 (first day one side was available), and august
8, 2024 (last day of the trial) = 27 days
[
11.]
a trial
scheduling form (tsf) was completed on october 11, 2023, after the parties had finished
usual the judicial pretrial conference (jpt) phase.
[
12.]
part 6 of
the october 11, 2023, tsf

reads as follows:
dates
 suggested
crown
 available
defence
 available
comments

november
 21, 23 2023
no,
 no
no,
 no
december
 6
yes
no
july
 4, 22, 24 2024
yes,
 yes, yes
no,
 no, no
july
 31
yes
yes
august
 8
yes
yes
[
13.]
the trial
coordinator offered the parties eight days spread over a span of eight-and-a-half
months. no dates were offered in the seven months between december 6, 2023,
and july 4, 2024. as local administrative judge i know that this gap was because
the calendar of the assigned judge (mr. justice g.r. wakefield) was already
full between december to july.

[
14.]
the court
was not available on all dates offered between december 2023 and july 4, 2024. 
the defence cannot be held responsible for any delay in this seven-month period.
[
15.]
i therefore
find that the defence bears responsibility for the delay between july 4 july 31,
2024, being 27 days.
3.2.2.2: defence caused delay for the period between august
8, 2024, and october 1, 2024 (the new second day of trial) = 0 days
[
16.]
on
october 27, 2023, the trial dates of july 31 and august 8, 2024, were placed on
the record.
[
17.]
tragically,
on november 30, 2023, justice wakefield died unexpectedly. consequently, i was
assigned to conduct this trial. i was available on august 8, 2024 (day two of
the trial) but was not available on july 31 (day one of the trial).
[
18.]
on march
25, 2024,
the trial coordinator corresponded with the parties advising them that due to
his honour’s passing, the first trial date (july 31) had to be rescheduled to
my unavailability.
[
19.]
on march
28, 2024, a second tsf was created by the trial coordinator. part 6 of this
tsf states:
dates
 suggested
crown available
defence available
comments
may
 27, 2024
yes
no
june
 11
yes
no
october
 1
yes
yes
[
20.]
the trial
coordinator was only able to offer three dates over a four-and-a-half-month
period because my calendar was otherwise fully occupied. of the three dates
offered, two were earlier than the date being replaced. had either of the may
or june dates been accepted, the trial could have taken place with the time
frame originally set. whether it could have been completed in that time is
another matter and is subject to consideration later in these reasons.
[
21.]
given
that the trial needed to be rescheduled because of the unexpected death of the
original trial judge, i find that none of the time between august 8 and october
1, 2004, should be described as defence delay as they bore no responsibility
for the rescheduling and they should not have been expected to pivot on short
notice.
[
22.]
on april
9, 2024, the parties put the replacement date on the record. the august 8 date
now became day one of the trial and october 1, 2024 was set as day two.
[
23.]
the trial
commenced on august 8, 2024. due to directives originating beyond orangeville, the list for that court (like
all recent trial courts in orangeville) was stacked with other matters even
though this case was estimated to consume the entire day. two relevant things
happened on august 8. first, the crown prioritized other cases. second, i
closed court early so that i could attend the swearings-in of new judges, an
event that had not been known of when this date was set.
[
24.]
consequently,
this matter received less than half-a-day on the first full day of trial. 
through no fault of the applicant, he did not get the attention he was
promised, and the matter was remanded to the second scheduled full day of
october 1 with a view to completing it then.
3.2.2.3: 
defence caused delay for the period between october 1 and december 11, 2024 = 7
days
[
25.]
on
october 1, 2024, the trial list was overloaded yet again. a continuing
attempted murder preliminary inquiry and other matters that took prosecutorial priority.
as a result, this case only received about one-half day of court time on day
two.
[
26.]
by the
end of the second scheduled full day, this trial received the equivalent of one
day of time, or half of what was promised. to no one’s surprise, and again
with no fault of the applicant, a continuation date had to be set in the
circumstances. prior to adjourning for the day, the parties attended upon the
trial coordinator who prepared a third tsf. part 6 of this tsf states:
dates suggested
crown available
defence available
comments
december
 4, 2024
yes
no
december
 11
yes
yes
[
27.]
the trial
coordinator could only offer two dates within two months because of my other
commitments. the crown was available on both dates, but the applicant was only
available on the second date offered. in the circumstances, i find defence
caused delay in this period is seven days, being the time between the two dates
offered (december 4 and december 11).
defence
caused delay in the period between december 11, 2024, and april 29, 2025 = 48
days
[
28.]
this
trial limped along on december 11, 2024, being day three of a two-day trial. as
usual, the list was overloaded. this case was relegated by the crown and was only
reached at 4:10 p.m., leaving a mere twenty minutes to cram in a fully day’s
work. the decision by the crown to prioritize other matters necessitated yet
another continuation date.
[
29.]
on december
19, 2024, the parties met with the trial coordinator (again) at which time the fourth
tsf was created. part 6 of that tsf reads:
dates suggested
crown available
defence available
comments
january
 20, 22 2025
yes,
 yes
no,
 no
march
 12
yes
no
april
 23, 29
yes,
 yes
no,
yes
[
30.]
the trial
coordinator was only able to offer five dates across a period exceeding four
months. such meager crumbs of dates was because my schedule was already spoken
for on all other days.
[
31.]
on
december 31, 2024, the continuation date of april 29, 2025, was placed on the
record.
[
32.]
it is not
reasonable that the defence should be expected to accept the january dates
given how close they were to the scheduling meeting. as a result, i conclude
that the defence caused the delay between march 12 and april 29, 2025, being 48
days.
[
33.]
when this
case continued on april 29, being day four of a two day trial, there was finally
sufficient time to complete it and reach verdicts. i found the applicant
guilty of count #1. i found him not guilty of count #2 and dismissed that
charge.
3.2.3: conclusions re net delay
[
34.]
for all
the reasons outlined above, i find that defence caused delay in this case amounted
to 82 days. as a result, the net delay is 661 days or 21¾ months.
3.3: has the crown established any
exceptional circumstances to avoid a stay of proceedings?
[
35.]
the
sudden death of justice wakefield was an exceptional circumstance. the consequence
of this tragedy was that the trial needed to be rescheduled by moving the last
day for trial from august 8 to october 1, 2024, being 54 days. there are no
other exceptional circumstances to consider.
[
36.]
therefore,
i reduce the net delay by 54 days, resulting in a remaining delay (net delay – exceptional
circumstances) of 607 days or 20 months.
3.4 is the
complexity of this case sufficient to bring the remaining delay below the
presumptive ceiling?
[
37.]
this is a
straightforward drink/drive case without any legal or factual complexity to
justify bringing the remaining delay below the presumptive ceiling.
[
38.]
since the
remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the applicant is entitled to
the remedy of a stay of proceedings.
3.3: assuming
that the remaining delay is under the presumptive ceiling, has the applicant
established that this trial should be stayed?
[
39.]
if i am
wrong and the remaining delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, it is
incumbent upon me to assess whether the applicant has met his burden in such a
situation.
[
40.]
to
succeed in a stay application where the remaining delay is under the
presumptive ceiling, the applicant must establish both of two conditions.
first, that he made a sustained effort to expedite the proceedings to trial.
second, that the case took markedly longer than it should have. a stay of
proceedings in cases falling beneath the presumptive ceiling will be granted
only in the clearest of cases.
3.3.1: did the applicant make “sustained
efforts to expedite the trial”?
[
41.]
for
reasons i will explain, i find the applicant made sustained efforts to expedite
the trial.
[
42.]
in the
context of an application of this nature, “sustained” does not mean that the
efforts by the defendant need be heroic, herculean, or blind to the needs of
other clients of the defendant’s lawyer. instead, the efforts must satisfy the
court that the defendant was not perpetuating a “culture of complacency” by
being either languid or evading his obligations to attentively move the case
forward. in other words, an analysis of whether the defendant’s efforts were
sustained necessarily requires consideration not only to the acts or omissions
of the defence, but also to the motivation behind them.
[
43.]
i make the
following observations about the conduct of the applicant.
[
44.]
first, he
diligently pursued disclosure.
[
45.]
second,
he conducted both a crown pre-trial meeting and a jpt without delay.
[
46.]
third, the
court was unable to offer any dates between december 2023 and july 2024. no one
can suggest, let alone claim, that he was slacking in his duties when he was
not given any dates to turn down or accept.
[
47.]
fourth, on
each day that the trial was on the docket, the applicant was ready to proceed. 
the respondent crown submitted that by not wanting to bifurcate the
cross-examination of a witness on day two, the applicant faltered in his efforts
to move the matter forward. with respect, i disagree. there was not much time
on that day to get very far with the cross-examination. even if there was some
time, counsel for the applicant fairly took the position that splitting the
evidence can be difficult for all involved. rather than being complacent i
find the applicant was pursuing a reasonable tactic in the circumstances to
ensure the most efficient conduct of the trial.
[
48.]
there is nothing
the applicant did, or failed to do, to frustrate the timely scheduling and
completion of this case. he appeared to consistently motivated to move the case
along expeditiously. the true cause of delay was the lack of judicial
resources that led to a severe impoverishment of scheduling opportunities.
[
49.]
i find
that when it comes to scheduling trials and continuations, one cannot ignore
the reality that at all material times, orangeville provincial court was, and
is, suffering from malnutrition of judicial resources. as local administrative
judge, i take judicial notice of the following facts. first, since 2005
orangeville has been a two-judge criminal court. second, since then we have
received no additional judicial resources despite (a) substantial population
increases

which are proportionally higher than elsewhere in our region, (b) an increase
in caseload of over 25% since 2019, and (c) general rising complexity of all
trials, including drink/drive cases like this. the consequence of these facts
is that for years, including the time spanned by this case, the ability to
offer to trial dates within a reasonable time is becoming more and more
difficult. this situation regarding the scheduling of continuations is even
worse.
[
50.]
the truth
about starved judicial resources in orangeville is laid bare by the scheduling
process in this case. when it was first scheduled, the trial coordinator could
not offer any dates to the parties between december 6, 2023, and july 4, 2024. 
it was unreasonable to fail to provide the parties dates within seven months. 
the same applies to rescheduling the continuation dates. for the first
continuation, the trial coordinator could only offer three dates for my
availability over a four-and-a-half-month period, meaning there was less than
one day a month for me to continue this trial. in scheduling the second
continuation date, the trial coordinator could only offer five dates in four
months. all of this demonstrates that our present complement of judicial
resources is stretched paper thin and this in turn is prolonging matters
unjustly.
[
51.]
over a 15-month
period, the trial coordinator was only able to offer 19 judge days to the
parties. the applicant, the prosecution, and the public all deserve to have
enough judges to be able to offer more dates over such a period.
[
52.]
looking
at the situation as a whole, i find the applicant was never dodging his duty to
move the case along in a timely way. nor do i find that any delay for which he
was responsible demonstrated complacency or a mindset inconsistent with
the
principles set out in
jordan.
as a result, i find that the applicant
made sustained efforts to expedite the trial within the impoverished availability
of judges to finish the case sooner than it was.
3.3.2: did this trial “take markedly longer” than it
should have?
[
53.]
this was
a two-day trial that was supposed to start and finish inside a two-month
window. instead, it took parts four calendar days spread over nearly nine
months to complete. this is markedly longer than it should have for the
following reasons.
[
54.]
first,
each day the trial was on the list, the applicant was ready and willing to
proceed but his efforts were thwarted by forces beyond his control. none of
the adjournments were caused by him.
[
55.]
second,
there is nothing complex or unusual about this case: it is a routine
drink/drive matter that would very likely have been completed by october 1 had
there not been overloaded trial lists.
[
56.]
third, it
took the trial coordinator three months to notify the parties that the trial
had to be rescheduled after the death of justice wakefield. notification
within four weeks would have been reasonable if we had sufficient trial
coordination resources.

if the parties were notified sooner, it is likely that earlier dates could have
been offered.
[
57.]
fourth,
and echoing my findings regarding the sustained efforts of the applicant, the
trial took unacceptably long to complete because we do not have adequate judicial
resources in the orangeville provincial court. given pressures on the court, (too
few judges and a mandate to overload trial lists) judicial calendars possess
scant clear days to offer trial times for new cases and even fewer days for
continuations.
[
58.]
two
judges for orangeville are not enough for this rapidly growing community. at least
three judges are needed to meet current demands. future needs will likely
require even more to respect the rights of defendants and to meet the public
interest. put plainly, demand for trial time in orangeville exceeds current judicial
capacity to complete them within a reasonable time.
[
59.]
stacking
lists with three trials is a counterproductive measure that exacerbates the
situation in orangeville for three reasons. first, defendants are not as
likely to resolve matters in advance knowing that they have a two in three
chance of not being reached on the trial date. this, in turn, leads to more
trials be set in the first place. second, stacking lists in orangeville without
sufficient judicial complement creates a meaningful likelihood that even if
commenced, a trial will probably need a continuation because we cannot start
the trial on time and must clear out the other matters before starting it. third,
when trial continuations are required (which is all too often at the moment)
the lack of judicial resources means longer wait times for the parties,
whatever their schedules might be. when matters are scheduled for
continuation, they are met with both measly availability for the judge and overloaded
lists on the return date. unlike larger courts, orangeville has no “assist
courts” to handle the overflow caused by too many trials on one list.
[
60.]
for years
now, orangeville provincial court has been “pouring a quart into a pint jar.” 
we are unable to (a) offer a reasonable array of potential trial dates over any
given period, (b) reach or complete trials on the days that have been scheduled,
and (c) provide suitable continuation dates. the case at hand is a perfect
illustration of this situation which is denying justice to those who are
entitled to receive it in a timely way.
[
61.]
orangeville
provincial court suffers from a chronic deficiency of judicial resources which is
getting worse over time. a central justice stakeholder, the office of the
crown attorney, has done its best to manage the logjam caused by the lack of
judges. within the province, dufferin county has one of the highest resolution
rates prior to setting a trial in large measure because of the care and
attention given by the local prosecutors, who are also under resourced. i do
not ascribe any blame to their office in this case: each day they are faced
with a sophie’s choice, meaning that they must choose between equally deserving
alternatives. some cases get timely justice, some don’t. this is wrong because
all cases deserve equal access to timely justice.
[
62.]
applying
these realities to this case, i find that the trial took markedly longer to
complete than it should have assuming the remaining delay is below the
presumptive ceiling because too few trial dates were offered by the court. a
system that forces a simple two-day trial to take chunks of four days to complete
over nearly nine months is patently unacceptable.
[
63.]
the main
cause delay in this case was too few judges with too many cases and too little
time to start and finish matters within a reasonable time. there many other
cases in the system likely to be negatively impacted by this state of affairs
until the systemic under resourcing is remedied.
[
64.]
taking a
“bird’s eye view” of the matter, i am well satisfied that if the remaining delay
is under the presumptive ceiling, the applicant made sustained efforts to
expedite the case and that the matter took markedly longer than it should have.
[
65.]
i am
further satisfied that is one of those “clearest of cases” that require the
remedy of a stay of proceedings as it exposes deep systemic problems in
providing timely and fair access to justice in orangeville.
4.0: conclusion
[
66.]
for the
reasons set out above, the applicant has satisfied me that his right to be
tried within a reasonable time has been violated. therefore, his application
is granted.
[
67.]
since
count #2 was dismissed, no relief is necessary.
[
68.]
the
charge for which the applicant was found guilty (count #1) shall be stayed.
[
69.]
the
return date is vacated.
richard
h.k. schwarzl,
justice
of the ontario court of justice

i have marked days accepted by
either party in bold.

“comments” refers to any notations
made by the trial coordinator during the scheduling meeting.

this gap is important later in
these reasons.

there is no evidence
why it took the trial coordinator three months to reschedule the first day of
trial. however, as local administrative judge for orangeville, i can say that
our trial coordinator resources are often stretched to, and beyond, the
breaking point as they have insufficient capacity to cope with our
ever-expanding caseload.

months before this trial was
scheduled, provincial courts of small to medium size (such as orangeville) were
directed by the chief justice to put the equivalent of three one-day trials on
every trial list. a “one-day trial” is defined as four hours, meaning that
twelve hours of work is to be placed in a trial court that opens at 10:00 a.m.
and closes at 4:30 p.m., or 6.5 hours. the actual time to hear trials is only 5.0
hours when one deducts time for scheduled lunch and other breaks.

over the past two censuses, the
population of our service grew by nearly 20%.

for example, we are the only courthouse
in the region that requires the trial coordinator to handle both provincial
court and superior court. this obligation to serve two masters results in
neither being served well.