source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj671/2025oncj671.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a non-publication
and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication — sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2),
the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(a)
any of the following
offences:
(i)
an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1,
163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01,
279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)
any offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day
on which this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an
offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(b)
two or more offences being
dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred
to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on
application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in
paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(a)
at the first reasonable
opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim
of the right to make an application for the order; and
(b)
on application made by the
victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every
person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
this hearing is governed by
section 278.95
of the
criminal code:
278.95 … publication prohibited. –
(1) a person
shall not publish in any document, or broadcast or transmit in any way, any of
the following:
(a)
the contents of an application made under subsection 278.93;
(b) any evidence
taken, the information given and the representations made at an application
under section 278.93 or at a hearing under section 278.94;
(c) the decision
of a judge or justice under subsection 278.93(4), unless the judge or justice,
after taking into account the complainant’s right to privacy and the interests
of justice, orders that the decision may be published, broadcast or
transmitted; and,
(d) the
determination made and the reasons provided under subsection 278.94, unless,
(i)
that determination is that evidence is admissible, or
(ii) the judge or
justice, after taking into account the complainant’s right of privacy and the
interests of justice, orders that the determination and reasons may be
published, broadcast or transmitted.
(2) every person
who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary
conviction.
approved for publication:
s.
278.95(1)
(c) of the
criminal code
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. m.t.,
2025 oncj 671
date: 
december 31, 2025
court
file no.: 24-38104207
between:
his majesty the king
respondent
— and —
m.t.
applicant
before
justice c.a. brannagan
heard
on 27 november 2025
reasons
for ruling on stage 1 – sections 276(2), 278.92(2) & 278.93
approved
for publication:
s. 278.95(1)
(c) of the
criminal code
mr. c. penney................................................................................. counsel
for the applicant
ms. k. smyth........................................................................... 
counsel for the respondent
c.a. brannagan
j.:
i. overview
1.
the
applicant, m.t., is charged with sexual assault, assault, and failing
to comply with a probation order:
sections 271,
266, and
733.1(1)
of the
criminal
code.
2.
the
charges arise from a
sexual encounter involving alleged non-consensual anal sex with a female party,
z.m. (“complainant”), on december 26
th, 2024, at a hotel room in
barrie.
3.
m.t. had initially brought a motion for directions & particulars
that was heard on october 23
rd, 2025. that motion is described
below.
4.
the applicant then brought this application pursuant to sections
276(2), 278.92(2), 278.93 and 278.94. it was heard on november 27
th,
2025.
5.
this is my ruling on the application, which determines whether the
evidence sought to be adduced by the applicant is capable of being admissible,
pursuant to s. 278.93(1), or what has come to be known as the “stage one” hearing.
6.
this ruling also resolves issues raised by the applicant at the
motion.
ii. the
motion for directions & particulars
7.
at the motion, the applicant sought direction from the court as to
whether the following evidentiary items constituted “subject-matter of the
charge” evidence:

a)
electronic communications (i.e., text messages) of correspondence
made between m.t. and the complainant on december 25
th
and 26
th,
2024.
b)
eight “live” photos

taken by the applicant of the complainant, using his iphone, while m.t. and
z.m. were in the hotel room on the alleged offence date. these live photos
depict the complainant in circumstances that are explicitly sexual in nature.
c)
other allegedly consensual sexual activity that
occurred between m.t. and z.m. inside the barrie hotel room on december 26
th,
2024.
8.
the applicant additionally sought an order from the court, pursuant
to
s. 587(1)
(f) of the
criminal code, directing the crown to provide
detailed particulars relating to both the sexual assault and the breach of
probation charges.
one of the concerns raised at the motion related to
the question of
what
sexual conduct was being prosecuted. at that time,
the crown declined to specify the
actus reus
of the sexual assault
charge.
9.
the litigants were ultimately able to come to some agreement and
narrow the issues at the motion. the court was not asked to deliver a ruling at
that time.
iii. the
276 / 278.92 / 278.93 application
10.
the issue to be determined at the stage one
hearing is whether the evidence sought to be adduced is
capable of being
admissible
at the trial proper. the admissibility issue itself is addressed
at the stage two hearing which, in this case, is scheduled to be heard on january
5
th, 2026.
the applicant’s position:
(i)
the evidence sought to be adduced
(detailed particulars)
11.
in addition to the three items identified at the motion and as described
above at paragraph 7(i)-(iii), m.t. applies to have the following four items adduced
into evidence at his trial:
iv.
that z.m. and the applicant had previously
engaged in anal sex on september 19
th, 20
th, and on
december 19
th, 2024, despite z.m. having reported to police that she
had never engaged in anal sex with m.t. or with anyone else before.
v.
the commercial/transactional nature of the
relationship between z.m. and the applicant, including the fact that z.m. had
identified herself as an escort to m.t. when they first met.
vi.
habit evidence of m.t. always paying cash to
z.m. in amounts of $150 or $200 after they had sex.
vii.
that just before z.m. made her complaint on
december 26
th, 2024, z.m. demanded money for sexual services
performed on that date and that m.t. refused to pay her.
précis
of the proposed evidence sought to be adduced
12.
item #(i), the text messages, can be summarized as follows:
on december 25
th, 2024, the
complainant sent a text message to the applicant, asking him if they could see
each other the next day. the applicant responded “ok”. m.t. initiated the text
conversation the following morning, december 26
th, 2024. he suggested
they “do an overnight” and that z.m. bring a bathing suit. he suggested that “a
room would be nice.” he asked z.m. if “mushrooms would be fun”. z.m. did not
directly respond to m.t.’s suggestions about either a room or an overnight but stated
“i’m ready” and conveyed that she’d “love to do mushrooms.” m.t. told z.m. to “[b]ring
your blind fold.” z.m. responded “kk”.
13.
item #(ii), the “live” photos, were submitted to the court on a
secure usb, which was made a sealed exhibit on the proceeding. i have viewed
the images, in chambers, and without describing their contents here can confirm
that they depict the complainant in sexually explicit circumstances. the
metadata accompanying the images supports that they were taken on the alleged
offence date during the period when the parties were at the hotel.
14.
item #(iii), the other allegedly consensual sexual activity that
occurred in the hotel room, is set out in detail within the applicant’s
affidavit, part of the application record – part ii.
15.
the applicant’s affidavit also describes in detail the evidence
concerning items #(iv), (v), (vi), and (vii).
16.
for the purpose of conducting the evidentiary screening analysis
that follows, i note that items #(i), (ii), and (iii) all relate to the same
transaction that occurred leading up to and within the hotel room and therefore
may
form part of the “subject-matter of the charge”.
17.
items #(iv), (v), and (vi) are clearly evidence of “other sexual
activity”. although item #(vii) is said to have occurred inside the hotel room,
for the purpose of conducting this analysis i include it in the “other sexual
activity” category because it is directly tied to the categories of evidence
represented by items #(iv)-(vi).
(ii)
the proposed relevance of the
evidence to issues at trial
18.
the applicant seeks the admission of the above-described evidence
for reasons of best positioning the court to assess z.m.’s credibility and
reliability at trial: application record – part ii, at p. 50, para. 7.1.
19.
m.t. submits that adducing this evidence will show inconsistencies
on material aspects of z.m.’s evidence, will provide evidence of context, and will
present as evidence tending to show a motive to fabricate: application record –
part ii, at p. 50, para. 7.2.
20.
m.t. sets out the detailed particulars of the specific evidence
sought to be adduced to show inconsistencies in z.m.’s evidence at paragraph
7.3 (a) through (i) of his application record – part ii. none of the evidence
as particularized touches on the “twin myths” prohibited by s. 276(2), except
perhaps the alleged prior anal sex.
21.
the “habit” evidence sought to be adduced relates to the relationship
between m.t. and z.m. as being commercial/transactional in nature and is said
to provide the circumstantial context that both parties acted in a certain way
on the occasion in issue because of the nature of their relationship:
application record – part ii, p. 52, paras. 7.4-7.7. as the application is
drafted, this evidence would not be adduced for either of the discriminating
purposes prohibited under s. 276(2).
22.
the context evidence is said to capture the entirety of the
transaction within the hotel room itself, including the commercial/transactional
nature of the parties’ relationship: “without evidence of the transactional
nature of their relationship and the payment history, [the applicant’s] refusal
to pay may present as incomplete, implausible, or even bizarre”: application
record – part ii, p. 52, paras. 7.8-7.18.
23.
the motive to fabricate evidence also ties into the habit and
context evidence, insofar as the applicant claims that the nature of the
relationship between the two was commercial/transactional, that he had paid her
money for sex in the past, and that because he refused to pay her money for sex
in this case, she had a motive to fabricate the sexual assault allegation: application
record – part ii, p. 55, paras. 7.19-7.25. again, the stated purpose for seeking
to adduce this evidence would be for a reason other than one that offends the
“twin myths”.
the respondent crown’s position:
24.
during the stage one hearing, the crown confirmed that the anal sex
was the
actus reus
at issue in this case, and the subject matter of the
sexual assault being prosecuted. this addressed one of the outstanding issues from
the motion.
25.
the crown maintains that all the text messages sought to be adduced,
item #(i), with one exception, relate to the subject matter of the charge and
are admissible. the excepted text, claims the crown, is the reference to the
blindfold, which should be subject to the s. 276 regime, since z.m. did not
mention this in her police statement. the crown submits that item #(i) should
proceed to the stage two hearing: respondent’s factum, p. 1, para. 2.
26.
the eight live photos, item #(ii), are subject to both the 276 and
278.1 regimes. the crown maintains that because the complainant made no mention
of consensual sex of any kind, that these images do not form the subject matter
of the charge: respondent’s factum, p. 1, para. 2. nevertheless, the crown
submits that item #(ii) should proceed to stage two.
27.
the other sexual activity that occurred within the hotel room, item
#(iii), is subject to s. 276 and should not be permitted to advance to stage
two, as it is not capable of being admitted: respondent’s factum, p. 2, para.
2.
28.
the crown takes the view that item #(iv) – the alleged prior
instances of anal sex – is not capable of being admitted and should not proceed
to stage two: respondent’s factum, p. 1, para. 2.
29.
with respect to the balance of the items sought to be adduced, #(v)-(vii)
– that z.m. was an escort, that m.t. habitually paid her $150 or $200 after sex,
and that in this case he refused to pay her after sex – the crown submits that
these items should proceed to stage two: respondent’s factum, p. 2, para. 2.
30.
notwithstanding the crown’s position, it is always for the trial
judge to exercise their gatekeeping function in respect of these kinds of
applications:
r. v. reimer,
2024 onca 519, at para.
43.
iv. the
legal framework
a.
the section 278.93 regime
31.
the defendant must bring an application, pursuant to s. 278.93,
where they seek to admit evidence of the sexual conduct of the complainant
(other than the sexual activity which forms the subject matter of the charge)
or to admit records relating to a complainant that are in the possession or
control of the defendant: s. 278.93(1).
32.
there are four criteria that must be met to satisfy the formal
requirements of the application: (i) it must be made in writing; (ii) it must
set out the detailed particulars of the evidence that the accused seeks to
adduce; (iii) it must set out the relevance of that evidence to an issue at
trial; and (iv) a copy of the application must be given to the prosecutor and
to the clerk of the court: s. 278.93(2).
33.
the hearing of the stage one proceeding is to be held
in camera:
s. 278.93(3).
34.
if the formal requirements of the application are met under s.
278.93(2), and only if the court finds that “the evidence sought to be adduced
is capable of being admissible under s. 276(2)”, the court “shall grant the
application and hold a hearing under s. 278.94 to determine whether the
evidence is admissible under subsection 276(2) or 278.92(2)”: s. 278.93(4).
35.
the formal requirements under s. 278.93(2) have been met in this
case. the only determination that needs be made is whether the evidence sought
to be adduced by m.t. in his trial is “capable of being admissible under s.
276(2)”, or s. 278.92(2).
b.
the section 276 regime
36.
subsection 276 provides:
(1)
in proceedings in
respect of an offence under section … 271 … evidence that the complainant has
engaged in sexual activity, whether with the accused or with any other person,
is not admissible to support an inference that, by reason of the sexual nature
of that activity, the complainant
(a)
is more likely to have
consented to the sexual activity that forms the subject matter of the charge;
or
(b)
is less worthy of
belief.
(2)
in proceedings in
respect of an offence referred to in subsection (1), evidence shall not be
adduced by or on behalf of the accused that the complainant has engaged in
sexual activity other than the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of
the charge, whether with the accused or with any other person, unless the judge,
provincial court judge or justice determines, in accordance with the procedures
set out in sections 278.93 and 278.94, that the evidence
(a) is not being adduced for the purpose of supporting an inference
described in subsection (1);
(b) is relevant to an issue at trial; and
(c) is of specific instances of sexual activity; and,
(d) has significant probative value that is not substantially
outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper administration
of justice.
[…]
(4)
for the purpose of this
section, “sexual activity” includes any communication made for a sexual purpose
or whose content is of a sexual nature.
37.
section 276 was enacted following the supreme court of canada’s
decision in
r. v. seaboyer,
1991 canlii 76 (scc), 2 s.c.r 577. the purpose and
rationale for s. 276 is “to protect the integrity of the trial by excluding
irrelevant and misleading evidence, protect the accused’s right to a fair
trial, and encourage the reporting of sexual offences by protecting the
security and privacy of complainants”:
r. v. barton,
2019 scc 33, at
para.
58.
38.
subsection 276(1) seeks to exclude from trial evidence relied upon
to support discriminatory inferences wrought by the “twin myths” – namely, that
having engaged in other sexual activity makes a complainant more likely to
consent or less worthy of belief:
barton, at para.
55;
r. v. j.j.,
2022 scc 28, at para.
5.
39.
subsection 276(1) applies to both consensual and non-consensual
sexual activity involving the complainant:
r. v. darrach,
2000 scc 46,
at para.
33.
40.
its reach is broad, and it applies to sexual activity both preceding
and following the alleged offence, with its purpose being to prohibit all
discriminatory generalizations about a complainant’s credibility and
disposition to consent:
r. v. goldfinch,
2019 scc 38, at para.
111;
r.
v. d.k.,
2020 onca 79, at para.
52;
r. v. l.s.,
2017 onca 685, at
paras.
77-81;
darrach, at para.
34.
41.
with that said, s. 276 does not bar absolutely the use of sexual
activity evidence:
indeed, nowhere does it suggest that sexual activity evidence is
prohibited in all cases on the issue of consent or credibility. section 276(1)
prohibits using sexual activity evidence to advance only certain kinds of
inferences relating to consent and credibility, namely, those that arise “by
reason of the sexual nature of that activity”. not all inferences that arise
from events involving sexual activity derive from the “sexual nature of [the]
activity”, including on the issue of consent and credibility.
reimer, at para.
78.
42.
the only “other” sexual activity that is exempt from screening under
s. 276 is evidence that forms the “subject-matter of the charge”: s. 276(2).
(i)
the subject-matter of the charge
43.
as stated, the evidentiary screening function under s. 276 does not
apply to “sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge”. for s.
276 to be engaged, the complainant’s sexual activity must be “other sexual
activity”:
reimer, at para.
30.
44.
to bypass screening under s. 276, the contours of the “subject-matter
of the charge” must be determined:
reimer, at para.
45.
45.
in
j.j., the supreme court of canada defined the “subject
matter of the charge” as referring to “the components of the
actus reus
of the specific charge that the crown must prove at trial”: at para. 66.
46.
this definition, however, cannot be narrowly construed to mean
simply the
actus reus
of the charged offence itself. the meaning
includes something more than simply “the
isolated
and
immediate
sexualized physical act of the accused
that is being prosecuted”:
reimer,
at para.
45
(emphases in original).
47.
rather, the “subject-matter of the charge” includes “the factual
conditions that must exist for the offence to be complete”, including “all of
the physical acts that constitute a specified charged offence”, encompassing
“the entire specific factual event in which the allegedly criminal act
occurred”:
reimer, at para.
45.
48.
the fact that the uncharged sexual activity is proximate in time and
place, however, is insufficient to meet the standard. nor is the uncharged
sexual activity’s relevance to the charged event sufficient:
reimer, at
para.
46.
49.
as the court of appeal for ontario has held in
r. v. choudhary,
2023 onca 467, for “other sexual activity” evidence to bypass the s. 276
screening mechanism, it must be “integrally connected, intertwined or directly
linked to the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge”: at
para. 29.
50.
such an assessment is a fact-driven exercise:
choudhary, at
para.
28.
51.
to meet the threshold described in
choudhary, the sexual
activity in question must be part of the “transaction” that is captured by the
charge, though it need not be an element of the charged offence itself:
r.
v. x.c.,
2020 onsc 410, at para.
38.
52.
the phrase “subject-matter of the
charge
” in s. 276(2)
cannot be construed to read “subject-matter of the
offence
”. the
two terms are conceptually distinct. as justice dawe (as he then was) described
it in
x.c., at para.
37:
in this regard, it [is] important to note that the
“charge” in an indictment is somewhat different conceptually from the “offence”
that is charged in a count. the
criminal code
provides that indictments
shall be divided into “counts” or “charges” [see “count” at
s. 2
of the
criminal
code
], each of which “appl[ies] to a single transaction” [see
s. 581(1)
of
the
criminal code
]. a “transaction” in this context is understood to
mean “a series of interconnected acts extending over a period of time” or “a
series of connected occurrences”. although the charge must allege that the
defendant “committed an offence” […] it is “most important … that ‘transaction’
be distinguished from ‘offence’”.
53.
it is in that light that justice dawe concluded that “‘sexual
activity’ … can properly be considered to ‘form the subject matter of the
charge’ if it is part of the ‘transaction’ that is captured by the charge, even
if the ‘sexual activity’ in question is not in itself an element of the charged
offence”:
x.c., at para.
38.
54.
judicial statements on the ‘single transaction rule’ set out in
s.
581
of the
criminal code
provide support for justice dawe’s dovetailing
of the “subject matter of the charge” with the “transaction” in which the
offence is allegedly committed.
(ii)
the single transaction rule
55.
in
r. v. manasseri,
2016 onca 703, the court of appeal
analyzed the term “transaction” and the phrase “a single transaction”, noting
that they were not synonymous with a single occurrence or event. the court said
of the term “transaction”:
 … a word of quite comprehensive import, evasive
of precise legal definition, “transaction” takes its meaning from the statutory
context in which it appears and as the justice of each case demands, rather
than by any abstract definition. …
 in its grammatical and ordinary sense, the noun
“transaction” refers to a physical operation, an action or process. …
 the term “transaction”, as well as the phrase
“same transaction”, are not indigenous to
s. 589
(a) of the
criminal code.
they dwell elsewhere. for example, “transaction” appears as part of the phrase
“a single transaction” in s. 581(1), one of several general provisions
prescribing the content of counts contained in an indictment. …
56.
in
r. v. c.k.,
 o.j. no. 4590 (c.a.), a case involving
sexual offences, the court found at paragraph 7 that the phrase “single
transaction” was “not synonymous with a single incident, occurrence or offence”.
57.
citing to its earlier decision in
r. v. hulan,
1969 canlii 306 (on ca), 2 o.r.
283 (c.a.) – also a sexual offences case – the court clarified that a single
count in an indictment may refer to several acts and, although each of them
could constitute a separate offence, that would not necessarily violate the
single transaction rule:
c.k., at para. 8.
58.
the question of whether evidence is admissible in respect of a
single transaction that is the subject of a count in an indictment, where
multiple acts are alleged across a period covered by the indictment, depends on
several factors. those factors include: the circumstances of the offending; the
relationship between the victim and defendant; the place where the offending
occurred; the patterns of conduct alleged; and the fact that the subsequent
acts could be seen as an extension, prolongation or continuation of the
defendant’s original intention:
c.k., at paras. 8-10.
59.
in
r. v. sandhu,
2009 onca 102
– another case involving
sexual offences – the court cited to s. 581 of the
code, and to its
decision in
hulan, confirming that a single transaction may encompass several
separate incidents over a lengthy period. in that case, the court cited the
relationship between the victim and the appellant, the place where the
offending occurred, the pattern of conduct alleged, and the prolonged period of
offending as rationale for including multiple acts in a single transaction: at
paras. 19-23.
60.
the various factors described above, as distilled from
hulan,
were made clear in
r. v. rocchetta,
2016 onca 577, at para.
44, where
the court identified those which could constitute a single transaction:
a series of acts that are sufficiently connected will make up a single
transaction for the purposes of s. 581(1). the sufficiency of the connection will
depend on the circumstances. the requisite connection may be established by the
proximity in time or place of the acts, the identity of the parties to the
acts, the similarities of the conduct involved in the acts, the ongoing
relationship of the parties to the acts, or other factors tending to show that
each act is properly viewed as part of the larger whole.
61.
similarly, the supreme court of canada in
r. v. sundman,
2022
scc 31, in resolving the issue of what a “single transaction” was in the
context of a constructive first-degree murder case involving unlawful
confinement, found that “[w]hen a single transaction is found, there will
necessarily be a temporal-causal connection. likewise, when a temporal-causal
connection is found, there will necessarily be a single transaction”: at para.
39.
62.
the court of appeal for ontario has addressed the question of
prejudice that may arise in respect of the single transaction rule, clarifying
that the rule’s purpose is “to ensure that an accused is aware of the charge
against him or her and is able to make full answer and defence. the validity of
a count is to be assessed in light of this purpose”:
r. v. kanagarajah,
2018 onca 121, at para.
23.
(iii)
the dovetailing of “subject matter
of the charge” and “single transaction” in sexual assault cases
63.
that the “subject-matter of the charge” should be construed as encompassing
the transaction-as-a-whole – that is, the “transaction” that relates to the subject
count on the indictment – finds support in the appellate courts’ analyses of
that term.
64.
in those decisions, the courts have emphasized as relevant the
following factors: proximity in time or place; the identities of the parties to
the acts; the nature of the parties’ relationship; and proper consideration of
the larger whole – that is, the series of interconnected acts extending over a
period of time, or the series of connected occurrences that constitute the
transaction itself.
65.
to repeat the point, the supreme court of canada put it simply: “when
a temporal-causal connection is found, there will necessarily be a single
transaction”.
66.
to view the phrase “subject-matter of the charge” narrowly as being
the
actus reus
of the charged offence only, to the exclusion of other potentially
relevant evidence arising from the same transaction, could both distort the
fact-finding process and unduly prejudice the defendant’s ability to mount a
full answer and defence.
67.
to narrowly define the “subject-matter of the charge” to the
actus
reus
of the offence only could result in the court engaging in an
artificial parsing of the evidence. as justice dawe cited with approval in
x.c.,
“at some point parsing each moment in a sequence of events and defining it as a
separate activity becomes ridiculous”: at para. 38.
68.
in my view, the legal analyses in
reimer,
choudhary, and
x.c.
pertaining to the “subject-matter of the charge” dovetail neatly with
the various analyses pertaining to the “single transaction” rule. both analyses
deal with questions concerning discrete occurrences/events, insofar as
proximity to and connectedness of time and place are concerned, and seek to
ensure that the offence in question is not dislocated from the broader factual
matrix within which it is situated.
69.
coroza j.a.’s statement in
choudhary
that the “other sexual
activity” must be “integrally connected, intertwined or directly linked to the
sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge” to bypass the s.
276 screening mechanism is similar to that of justice dawe’s where, in the
context of a sexual assault charge, the transaction to which the charge relates
is “understood to mean a ’series of interconnected acts extending over a period
of time’ or ‘a series of connected occurrences’.”
70.
the
choudhary
decision itself references “transactions” as
being relevant to the assessment, including questioning whether the activity
constitutes “one single unbroken transaction” or whether it forms part of “an
unbroken chain of events”: at paras. 35-37.
71.
although his honour does not use the word, justice akhtar stated the
test concisely in
r. v. kebede,
2023 onsc 1851
in what seems to refer to
the broader “transaction” in which the “subject-matter of the charge” arose:
 in my view, the [supreme] court’s pronouncement
[
in
j.j., at para.
67]
that evidence that forms the subject matter of
the charge is limited to “the components of the
actus reus
of the
offence” should be read as including any evidence forming the surrounding
circumstances, both before and after the incident, and/or that which directly
links to the
actus reus
of the offence. that evidence need not
immediately precede the allegations or, as per the court in
mcknight,
arise on the same day as the offence.
 as noted in
mcknight, the question of
whether the activity has a direct link to the
actus reus
must be
resolved in a contextual fashion. for example, if a complainant tells police
that she had no interest in the accused but he asserts that she told him that
she wanted to have sex with him the day prior to the assault and made specific
arrangements to meet up with him for that purpose, this would be exempt from
the requirements of s. 276.
72.
i agree with the view that what constitutes the “subject-matter of
the charge” should be resolved in this contextual, wholistic way.
c.
the 278.92 regime
73.
section
278.92(1) establishes the general prohibition against adducing into evidence
any “record” relating to a complainant that is in possession or control of the
accused in cases involving various enumerated sexual-related offences.
74.
section
278.1 provides the following definition of “record”:
for the purposes of sections 278.2 to
278.92, “record” means any form of record that contains personal information
for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy and includes medical,
psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education, employment, child welfare,
adoption and social services records, personal journals and diaries, and
records containing personal information the production or disclosure of which
is protected by any other act of parliament or a provincial legislature, but
does not include records made by persons responsible for the investigation or
prosecution of the offence.
75.
section
278.92(2) presumes the inadmissibility of the subject-evidence, unless the
court determines its admissibility in accordance with the procedures
established in ss. 278.93 and 278.94:
a.
if
admissibility is subject to s. 276, then that evidence must meet the
preconditions for admissibility as set out in s. 276(2), while taking into
account the factors set out in s. 276(3); or
b.
in any other
case [
i.e., s. 278.1 private "records" evidence
], that the
evidence is relevant to an issue at trial and has significant probative value
that is not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper
administration of justice.
76.
where there is overlap between s. 276 evidence
and private records under s. 278.1, the supreme court in
j.j
has clarified
that:
 … at some point in the process, the presiding
judge may determine that the proposed evidence is
both
s. 276 evidence
and a private record under s. 278.1 (e.g., an email containing an explicit
photo of a prior sexual interaction). if the judge determines that the evidence
falls under both categories, then it should be treated as s. 276 evidence.
77.
the text messages are
electronic communications relating to the complainant. they fall within the
definition of “record”, given that, as a whole, the body of communications
relates to m.t. and z.m. making plans to meet at a hotel to, according to m.t.,
have a sexual encounter. as such, the text messages contain “personal
information for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy”:
j.j.,
at para.
61. the text messages are therefore both “records”, pursuant to s.
278.1, and communications made for a sexual purpose, s. 276(4).
78.
the contents of the eight
“live” photos depict the complainant in explicitly sexual circumstances and are
non-enumerated private records under s. 278.1. their contents are of an
intimate and highly personal nature that is integral to z.m.’s overall physical,
psychological and emotional well-being:
j.j., at para.
42.
79.
in discussing non-enumerated
records of the sort at issue here, the court
in
j.j.
found that:
 one type of non-enumerated record that will often
engage a reasonable expectation of privacy is a record of an explicit sexual
nature that is not covered by s. 276 (for example, explicit communications,
videos or photographs of a sexual nature relating to the subject matter of the
charge). complainants may have a reasonable expectation of privacy in these
types of records, given the dignity concerns that can arise.
[…]
 accordingly, the only records of an explicit sexual nature that
could be subject to the record screening regime outside of the s. 276 context
would be records pertaining to the complainant, in the possession or control of
the accused, that relate to the sexual activity which forms the subject matter
of the charge.
v. application
of the law to the facts
80.
m.t. seeks to adduce at his trial text messages between z.m. and
m.t. leading up to their meeting at the hotel, eight “live” photos taken of
z.m. by m.t., and evidence that the two engaged in consensual sexual activity
during their time at the hotel - items #(i), (ii), and (iii), respectively.
81.
i find that each of these identified items is “integrally connected,
intertwined [and] directly linked to the sexual activity that forms the
subject-matter of the charge,” such that they form part of a single
transaction. i find that they do not need to be screened under s. 276.
82.
the text messages, item #(i), and the live photos, item #(ii), however,
require additional scrutiny. although i find that both are part of the subject
matter of the charge, i also find that the
contents of each attracts a reasonable expectation of
privacy. both items are records of a sexual nature, that are not subject to s.
276 screening, but which do remain in the possession or control of m.t., and
are therefore subject to s. 278.92.
83.
i find that the text messages are relevant
to an issue at trial and have potential significant probative value. the danger
of prejudice to the proper administration of justice is negligible. they are
capable of being admitted at the trial proper.
84.
the live photos are of an intimate and
highly personal nature that is integral to preserving z.m.’s dignity and well-being.
z.m. retains a very high reasonable expectation of
privacy in them.
85.
while the item #(ii) photographs may be relevant to an issue at
trial, i find at this stage that any probative value they may have is
substantially outweighed by the risk of prejudice to the proper administration
of justice. this finding is made on a without prejudice basis, and i invite the
applicant to revisit this should it become necessary to do so at a later date.
86.
item #(iii) is sexual activity that is said to have occurred inside
the hotel room. it is “integrally connected, intertwined or directly linked to
the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge” and forms part
of the transaction to which the charge relates.
87.
items #(iv) through (vi) are clearly evidence of “other sexual
activity”. although item #(vii) is said to have occurred inside the hotel room,
it is directly tied to the categories of evidence represented by items #(iv)
through (vi).
88.
item #(iv), the prior sexual activity including anal sex, in my view
comes perilously close to running afoul of the twin myths. by reason of the
sexual nature of that activity, m.t. seeks to rely on it to show that z.m. is
less worthy of belief as it relates to the charged offence before this court –
insofar as she is said to have told police in her statement that she has never
had anal sex before. it has the potential to undermine the integrity of the
trial as being misleading. in my view, that evidence is incapable of being
admissible on this record.
89.
item #(v), the commercial/transactional nature of the relationship
between m.t. and z.m. is central to understanding the reason why the parties
found themselves at the hotel where the alleged offence occurred. it is not
being adduced for a twin myth purpose. it is capable of being admissible and
can proceed to stage two.
90.
item #(vi), the habit evidence that m.t. would pay z.m. money in
exchange for sexual services, ties into the commercial/transactional nature of
the relationship. it is not being adduced for a twin myth purpose. it is
capable of being admissible and can proceed to stage two.
91.
item #(vii), m.t.’s refusal to pay money to z.m. for sexual services
rendered, is also directly connected to items #(v) and (vi) and speaks directly
to the alleged motive to fabricate. it is not being adduced for a twin myth
purpose. it is capable of being admissible and can proceed to stage two.
vi. disposition
92.
the s. 278.93 application is allowed in part, as follows:
a)
items #(i), (ii) and (iii) are “subject-matter
of the charge” evidence and do not require s. 276 screening.
b)
the application as it concerns item #(i) is
allowed. the text messages will proceed to the stage two hearing for argument
as to admissibility at trial.
c)
the application as it concerns item #(ii) is
dismissed without prejudice.
d)
the application as it concerns item #(iii) is “subject
matter of the charge” evidence.
e)
the application as it concerns item #(iv) is
dismissed.
f)
the application as it concerns items #(v), (vi)
and (vii) is allowed. these evidentiary items will proceed to the stage two
hearing for argument as to admissibility at trial.
released: 31 december 2025
______________________________
signed: justice c.a. brannagan
appendix – the evidence sought to be adduced
item #
description
purported use
(i)
text messages between the parties from december 25
th
and 26
th, 2024
z.m. contacted m.t., seemingly to ‘hook-up’. these
 text messages are the direct cause bringing z.m. and m.t. together on
 december 26
th, 2024
(ii)
the eight “live” photos of the complainant in
 sexually explicit circumstances
offered as compelling evidence of what was occurring
 in the hotel room. these images are said to contradict z.m.’s police
 statement that the only sexual activity that occurred in the hotel room was
 her being anally raped by m.t.
(iii)
other alleged consensual sexual activity that
 occurred inside the barrie hotel room on december 26
th, 2024
context evidence, insofar as this evidence goes to
 the heart of specific facts and issues relating to m.t.’s defence, which can
 only be resolved if reference can be
made to the commercial/transactional nature of
 m.t.’s and z.m.’s relationship
(iv)
alleged anal sex between m.t. and z.m. on september
 19
th, 20
th,
and december 19
th, 2024
z.m. told the police in her statement that she had
 never had anal sex before, with m.t. or with anyone else. the applicant
 wishes to testify to specific instances of anal sex they had before as a
 means to contradict her evidence and challenge her credibility on this point.
(v)
the commercial/transactional nature of the
 relationship between z.m. and m.t., including the fact that z.m. had
 identified herself as an escort when they first met
these were commercial sexual services, which are
 said to go to the heart of the applicant’s defence. for the court to assess
 what happened in this case, it must have the context of the relationship.
(vi)
habit evidence of
m.t. always paying cash to z.m. in amounts of $150
 or $200 after they had sex
because of m.t.’s
and z.m.’s commercial/transactional relationship, he
 would always pay her money after she provided him with sexual services. this
 is relevant to the failure to pay on this occasion and the alleged motive to
 fabricate.
(vii)
m.t.’s refusal to pay z.m. money for sexual services
 provided on december 26
th, 2024
motive to fabricate – m.t.’s refusal to pay z.m. led
 to her making this allegation, which is said to be false.

see “
appendix – the evidence sought to be adduced
”, at
the end of this ruling for an itemized list of evidentiary materials sought to
be adduced by the applicant, alongside their purported use at trial. for future
applications of this nature that involve a multiplicity of evidentiary items,
counsel is encouraged to prepare such a chart to facilitate these proceedings.

the applicant explains, at paragraph 6.8 of his application
record, that a “live” photo presents on an iphone as a moving picture.