source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj507/2025oncj507.html

citation:
r. v. freedland, 2025 oncj 507
date: 
october 1, 2025
metro
north toronto region
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
robert freedland
mr. mutton.............................................................................................
counsel for the crown
ms chowdhury.................................................................................................
for mr freedland
waby m:
overview
robert freedland is the respondent to an application
brought by the crown pursuant to 117.05 of the
criminal code.

the
crown seeks an order forfeiting certain firearms and ammunition seized from mr.
freedland, on january 20, 2017 and re-seized on november 3, 2023. the items
seized are: a mossberg shotgun, sks1 rifle, scorpio shotgun and magazines.

the
crown also seeks an order that the respondent be prohibited from possessing any
weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and
explosive substance, or of any such thing, for a period of five years. finally,
the crown seeks additional ancillary orders

mr
freedland brought an application before me alleging an abuse of process and
seeking a stay of proceedings with respect to this 117.05 hearing on 17
th
january, 2025

in
the alternative, mr freedland sought two orders from this court at that time;
i.
to
summons the jurors from his original trial in 2018 in order that he may cross
examine them at this disposition hearing regarding his allegation of
obstruction of justice
ii.
to
appoint an assistant crown attorney to the carriage of these proceedings who
was not assigned to the toronto region (an “out of town” crown).

on
17
th
january, 2025, i provided written reasons on mr freedland’s
applications,
r. v. freedland,
2025 oncj 29. i denied his application
for a stay of proceedings and denied his application for an order to summons
his jurors for the purpose of cross examination at this hearing.

i
did order that an “out of town” crown attorney be assigned carriage of these
proceedings and assistant crown attorney mr mutton was duly assigned. 
subsequently, mr freedland retained ms chowdhury as his counsel to represent him
on these proceedings.

on
consent, the crown’s 117.05 application record, comprising 1574 pages of varied
and extensive materials was entered as an exhibit in its entirety.

mr
freedland opposes all of the crown’s applications and seeks the return of his
firearms and ammunition.
summary

given
the particular history of this matter a brief summary is of assistance.
in january of 2017 police searched the respondent’s
residences and that of a mr. garvin james. in the latter search police found a
recently purchased mossberg shotgun. it was registered to the respondent. two
further firearms, a sks rifle and a scorpio tactical shotgun were found at the respondent’s
property in kaladar, ontario. these firearms were seized pending his trial and
then re-seized as part of this application on september, 26th 2023, by the
toronto police service. the crown seeks forfeiture of them.

mr. james and the respondent were subsequently charged with 10
counts of conspiracy to
commit the indictable offence of
kidnapping. the respondent’s preliminary hearing
took place in the summer of 2017. at some point during this hearing, the
parties came to resolution on what offences the respondent would be committed
to trial in the superior court of justice. a simplified three count indictment
was later placed before the court, it did not include any firearms offences.

during the respondent’s jury trial mr. james testified the
applicant purchased the mossberg shotgun and ammunition. they were then
allegedly given to mr. james to use in the kidnapping of 10 lawyers targeted by
the respondent. the respondent was found guilty of one count of counselling to
commit extortion.

on may 3rd, 2023, the court of appeal overturned the conviction
and ordered a new trial,
r. v. freedland,
2023
onca 386. on july 28, 2023, the crown stayed the proceedings. on september
22nd, 2023, the toronto police service commenced this proceeding. there is
presently no indictment before any court in the province of ontario and the respondent
is not currently charged with any
criminal code
offence.
legal framework
under section 117.05

it is important to emphasise that these 117.05 proceedings are not
intended to be a re-litigation of the merits, or lack thereof, of mr
freedland’s previous trial. these proceedings are not a criminal trial.

the
scc in
r v zeolkowski
 scc 20395 and the relevant statutes make it
clear that the firearm disposition process and its related regime do not equate
with a person being accused of a criminal offence. nor do the provisions affect
the respondent’s liberty interests. the 117.05 process is one focused
principally on issues of safety not punitive sanctions.

public safety
applications under s. 117.05 are brought where the police, with or without a
warrant, have seized firearms on the basis that it is not desirable in the
interests of public safety for a person to possess the firearms.

the
criminal
code
then directs the court to hold a hearing as to whether
it is desirable in the interests of public safety for the respondent to possess
“any weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition, prohibited ammunition
and explosive substance, or any such thing”.

if
the justice
hearing the application is satisfied that the respondent
possessing firearms or other weapons is not desirable in the interests of the
safety of the respondent, or any other person, the justice shall (a) order the
seized items be forfeited to the crown, and (b), where the circumstances
warrant, order that the respondent be prohibited from possessing any of the
above items for no more than five years.

at the hearing of the application, the justice shall hear all
relevant
evidence. all relevant evidence includes hearsay evidence. any frailties in
the evidence are a matter of weight, though when considering hearsay evidence
“the judge must scrutinize the evidence to ensure that it is credible and
trustworthy”
r v zeolkowski
1989 canlii 72 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 1378 (s.c.c.)

the onus of proof in a hearing under s. 117.05 lies with the
crown, on a balance of probabilities, not proof beyond a reasonable doubt. the
court must be satisfied on a balance of probabilities that it is not desirable
for the respondent to possess firearms. the question is about the sufficiency
of the evidence respecting the forfeiture and prohibition as of the date of the
forfeiture hearing, not the date that the forfeiture application was commenced,
r v kuleczka
2023 onsc 3876
at para
24.

the
purpose of s. 117.05 has been said to be “the protection of the public from the
destructive force of firearms in the hands of persons not equipped morally,
mentally, or emotionally to handle them”. criminal convictions are not
required for the court to assess dangerous conduct. section 117.05 is not
offence-based. rather it is aimed at preventing harm from the use of firearms
and other dangerous objects.

in
determining what constitutes not desirable, “an identifiable threat of serious
or significant harm likely to be caused by firearms and other dangerous objects
to the safety of specified individuals” would be sufficient, but it is not a
requirement that the crown prove the likelihood of whether the person will use
the firearm(s) in question,
r v kuleczka
supra.

the
test is “whether there are legitimate concerns the person lacks the
responsibility and discipline the law requires of gun owners”. the crown, therefore,
must prove on a
balance of probabilities that there is a
legitimate concern that the respondent lacks the responsibility and discipline
required of a gun owner.

the
courts have acknowledged, this is not an onerous standard.
r v kuleczka
supra
at para
24.
as expressed by
blacklock j. of the ontario court of justice, the basic question to be asked by
the application judge is:
[a]m i
satisfied, after reviewing the evidence in its totality, that it is more likely
than not that there are in fact legitimate concerns indicating that the
respondent currently lacks the responsibility and discipline required of a gun
owner?
r v
bokhari,
2009 oncj 691
at para 12,
r v davidson,
2011 onsc 249
at paras
32-35.

evidence and analysis

in addition to the crown’s written materials, which largely comprise
transcripts and documentary evidence
from the original trial, the crown also called
viva voce
evidence
from now retired staff sgt lori kranenberg who was the former oic of the trial
against the respondent. mr freedland also testified at these proceedings.

mr mutton submits that the applications sought from this court
should be granted for three reasons.
i.
the
respondent harbours long-standing and irrational grievances against the justice
system and its participants and these grievances have reached an unhealthy and obsessive
level;
ii.
both
the documentary evidence and the evidence of the respondent at these
proceedings discloses a reckless behaviour and a reckless attitude on the part
of mr freedland with respect to firearms and their responsible and safe
ownership and use;
iii.
given
the evidential threshold at a 117.05 hearing as distinct from that at a
criminal trial, the materials from the respondent’s trial are credible and
trustworthy and support an inference of criminality on the part of the
respondent and, the crown argues, at the very least support an inference that
the respondent’s criminal involvement was greater than he acknowledges.

ms chowdhury submits that the concerns that the respondent has
with respect to the integrity of the justice system and some of its
participants does not meet the relatively low threshold contemplated by 117.05.

ms chowdhury submits that an individual is entitled to possess views
that are critical or cynical of aspects of our justice system without being
penalised for them. on behalf of mr freedland, she argues that the respondent
has always adopted legal ways of communicating these views or frustrations.

in line with the clearly expressed views of mr freedland, she also
submits that these proceedings are essentially an attempt to relitigate the
respondent’s prior allegations of criminality. ms chowdhury particularly
urges this court to disregard or place negligible weight on any of the evidence
attributed to mr james in the crown’s materials given what she submits are
substantial credibility concerns.

it is also the submission of ms chowdhury that former staff sgt. kranenberg
has a long-standing animus towards the respondent and her
viva voce
testimony reinforced this hostility. i do not accept this characterisation of her
evidence. ms chowdhury submits that with the benefit of hindsight it is clear
that the respondent would not repeat his mistakes of the past and that his
possession of firearms does not give presently rise to a public safety concern.

it
is clear from the materials that i have reviewed that mr freedland has profound
concerns he is the victim of a conspiracy by a number of state actors. this
list includes crown attorneys from the toronto region as well as judges who
have presided over his matters and a number of police officers and court
clerks. he has similarly strong views with respect to lawyers involved in
previous real estate transaction with which he was involved.

as
mr mutton submitted, it is legitimate and reasonable for an individual to be
cynical of institutions. however, mr freedland appears to be unusually
unfortunate in his claims to have been with victim of conspiracies by both the
civil and criminal justice systems in unrelated proceedings.

i
accept that no medical evidence is before the court as to any diagnosis with
respect to the respondent and the court and counsel are not medical practitioners. 
no-one involved in these proceedings is qualified to attach any medical label
to the respondent. nevertheless, although he is clearly intelligent and
articulate, it is readily apparent that mr freedland has an unhealthy fixation
on his perceived injustices and the irrational basis for them. this is
manifest in the various materials that the respondent has filed before the
court in this, and other proceedings, as well as through his own testimony.

mr
freedland maintains these convictions to the present day. they include an
unwavering belief in criminal justice participants conspiring against him
through the manipulation and abuse of various legal and procedural processes. while
i am certain mr freedland will robustly disagree with my assessment, there is
no rational basis on any of the materials before me to support such claims. at
the very least, this alone raises obvious concerns about such person possessing
the emotional stability, perspective and responsibility required of a licensed
gun owner.

nevertheless,
i do appreciate the respondent’s concern at these proceedings being used as a
proxy for his discontinued criminal charges. while the evidential standards
applicable to a criminal trial and at proceedings under 117.05 are not the
same, it is neither necessary, nor in my view appropriate for this court to
draw inferences as to any criminal wrongdoing on the part of the respondent.

to
do so in my view would be to import into these proceedings considerations that
are not warranted. it is not the purpose of these proceedings to infer guilt
of criminal offences through the application of lower evidential thresholds.
while the evidence from the respondent’s trial is relevant
and admissible in these proceedings, using it for the purpose of inferring
guilt or a level of criminal responsibility regarding the original allegations
is not in my view appropriate.

despite
mr mutton’s submissions, i do not intend to draw any adverse inferences as to
alleged criminality on the part of the respondent based on the charges at his
criminal trial. mr freedland’s conviction was overturned and the crown elected
to stay those charges. i am of the view that it is not appropriate for some
form of double jeopardy to flow from these proceedings in that regard.

of
greater concern and more immediate relevance is the evidence before this court
with respect to the respondent’s approach to the handling and security of
firearms and his continuing perspective on that.

it is clear and uncontested that following his purchase of a
shotgun and ammunition, that the respondent was content to permit mr james
later that day to drive off with this newly purchased shotgun and ammunition in
the boot of his car. mr james was not licensed to possess firearms or
ammunition and the respondent’s shotgun was subsequently recovered by police
after mr james’ arrest, unsecured and lying under his bed at his home.

in his testimony at these proceedings, mr freedland consistently
sought to downplay the significance of him abandoning the firearm into the care
and control of mr james. this included his evidence that he wasn’t concerned
about mr james leaving with the shotgun since it was only intended to be for a
day and that he and mr james had planned to get together the following day. mr
freedland also sought to portray himself as helpless in the face of mr james
driving off with the weapon.

it is accepted that mr freedland did not know the actual address
of mr james and that they did not in fact meet up the next day but approximately
2 weeks passed before police recovered the firearm in an unrelated arrest of mr
james. it is also accepted that mr james was not licensed to possess firearms
and mr freedland reluctantly acknowledged this. however, the respondent frequently
sought to provide justifications for his baseless view that mr james’ prior self-reported
military and security sector experience provided some justification to conclude
mr james was qualified and entitled to handle firearms.

the respondent was very clear in his evidence at this disposition
hearing that while he regretted the consequences that flowed from leaving his
firearm in the care of mr james he did not, and still does not, believe he really
did anything unreasonable or unsafe. i do not share that view. at best the respondent
made a series of reckless assumptions based on unchallenged information he was
given.

the same day that he purchased a shotgun and ammunition mr
freedland allowed someone he knew, or should have known, was unlicensed to drive
off with them to an unknown address. it does not in any way mitigate this obvious
risk to claim that the ‘plan’ was to collect the shotgun the following day. at
no point should mr freedland have surrendered the firearm into the care of mr
james as he did.

this recklessness was then compounded by the fact that some two
weeks elapsed and at no point did mr freedland take any steps to ameliorate the
situation or recover the firearm. the respondent clearly remains of the view
that he did nothing wrong and is essentially a victim of circumstances and of
mr james.

despite his claim to the contrary, i have little faith that mr
freedland would act differently today in similar circumstances, and it is my
assessment of risk at the present time which must inform my assessment in these
proceedings.

in his evidence, the respondent testified to being a casual and
infrequent user of firearms since he originally acquired his licence yet in his
evidence he also spoke at some length and with some passion about his need to
possess firearms on his extensive rural property. it was the respondent’s
evidence he needed access to firearms not only to protect himself from wild
animals but also from concerns he expressed about encountering other armed
individuals.

these included those the respondent believes may be involved in
criminal activity on or near his property, namely the illegal cultivation of
drugs. the respondent seems to consider it both unremarkable and necessary that
he be allowed to arm himself against such a contingency. as the crown points
outs, among the profound concerns this evidence raises, canada is not its
southern neighbour, there is no right to bear arms in our country nor the right
to seek to possess firearms in order to speculatively defend oneself.

the right to possess firearms is a very considerable privilege and
one that is necessarily closely and appropriately regulated in our society. this
sense of responsibility was manifest in the evidence of staff sgt. kranenberg whose
evidence did not exhibit any
animus
to the respondent personally but
rather reflected her profound concern at the behaviour and attitude of mr
freedland being consistent with responsible gun ownership. that is a concern i
share.

statutory expectations around the storage, handling,
transportation, and use of firearms and ammunition place clear and reasonable obligations
on those given the privilege of possessing them. those in possession of a licence
to possess firearms, let alone firearms themselves are rightly expected to fully
understand and comply with all such obligations.

i am more than satisfied that the respondent exhibited and
continues to exhibit a dangerously cavalier attitude to the responsibilities of
licenced gun ownership. he continues to downplay his former actions with
respect to his shotgun and seeks to justify his conduct.

this approach is compounded by the fact that while the respondent
rejects that he can fairly be labelled an ‘obsessive” he
is
adamant that state actors conspired against him and he continues to hold this unjustifiable
view with considerable conviction.
unfortunately, i
anticipate the respondent will almost certainly add the conclusions of this
court to his list of imagined grievances.

the
test i am to apply in these proceedings is whether the crown has established on
a balance of probabilities that there is a legitimate concern that the respondent
lacks the responsibility and discipline required of a gun owner.

for the foregoing reasons, in answer to blacklock j’s question,
i am
amply satisfied, after reviewing the evidence in its totality, that it is more
likely than not that there are in fact very legitimate concerns indicating that
the respondent currently lacks the responsibility and discipline required of a
gun owner.

the
following orders sought by the crown are granted;
i.
pursuant
to
s. 117.05(4)
(a) of the
criminal code, the seized items will be forfeit to
the crown or be otherwise disposed of;
ii.
pursuant
to
s. 117.05(4)
(b) of the
criminal code, the respondent is prohibited from
possessing any weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition, prohibited
ammunition and explosive substance, for a period of five years;
iii.
pursuant
to
s. 114
of the
criminal code, the respondent will surrender to a peace officer,
firearms officer, or chief firearms officer within 7 days:
(a) any thing in
his possession which is now prohibited on the date of the commencement of this order,
and,
(b) every
authorization, licence and registration certificate relating to any thing the possession
of which is prohibited by this order that is held by the respondent on the
commencement of this order;
iv. pursuant
to
s. 115
of the
criminal code, that any such thing that is prohibited by this order
that is in the possession of the respondent be forfeited to the crown and disposed
of as the attorney general directs; and
iv.
pursuant
to
s. 116
of the
criminal code, any authorization, licence or registration
certificate relating to any thing the possession of which is prohibited by this
order, that is held by the respondent on the commencement of the order is revoked.
released: 1
st
october, 2025,
signed:
justice m waby