source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj250/2025oncj250.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. j.v.,
2025 oncj 250
date: 
2025 05 07
court
file no.: pembroke
21-1142
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jv
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on march 3, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on may 7, 2025
conor kyte........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
marni munsterman.......................................................................... counsel
for the accused
richardson j.:
introduction

the issue in this case is whether the offender, who would normally be
facing a upper reformatory or low penitentiary sentence for the crime of
luring, should receive a lower reformatory or conditional sentence due to:
a)
the inability of
the reformatory to accommodate his physical health problems, particularly his parkinson’s
disease;
b)
the fact that at
the time he committed the offence he was taking a drug for his parkinson’s
disease that reduced his inhibitions, thereby establishing “diminished moral
blameworthiness”;
c)
the fact that he
has a neurocognitive disability thereby establishing “diminished moral
blameworthiness.”
facts

on march 3, 2025, jv entered a plea before me to one count of
luring,
contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code.

at the time of the offence, the accused was 49 years of age. he was
residing in renfrew.

on the 13
th
of august, 2021, jv had a conversation with an
individual who he believed was a 14-year-old female. once he learned that the
person was 14, he discontinued the conversation.

on the 30
th
of august, 2021, jv re-engaged in the
conversation. he exchanged text messages and they discussed sexual related
topics. he sent the person a photo of his penis. he made arrangements to meet
the person for the purposes of engaging in sexual intercourse.

unknown to jv, the person he was conversing with was a private citizen
who poses as a female youth in order to catch child predators.

rather than call the police to report his findings, this person met jv
and confronted him about his intentions to have sex with a 14-year-old. this
resulted in a verbal altercation between jv and this person. police were then called.

when police attended, jv gave a cautioned statement. he was released
at the scene without charge. he was arrested and charged on september 21,
2021.

defence counsel, on jv’s behalf, agreed to those facts. she also
advised me of the following facts which the crown did not contest:
a)
jv was not
initially seeking out someone who was “under age”. he was looking for a female
who was 18 or 19 years old;
b)
jv had
difficulty deciding whether he should proceed with the meeting;
c)
the private
citizen posted videos of jv on social media. some of those videos remain on
social media today.

the
crown seeks a carceral sentence of nine months in the reformatory. defence
seeks a conditional sentence in the range of 12 to 15 months.
jv’s criminal record

jv
has a criminal record with one entry for dangerous driving from 2000 for which
he received a very modest fine. the record is so old and so unrelated that it
is of little use to the court in determining sentencing.
pre-trial discussions

i
originally became involved with this case in april 2022 as a judicial pretrial
judge. during the course of those discussions, i was advised that jv has
significant mental health issues and he also suffers from parkinson’s disease.

the
parties agreed that an assessment with respect to whether jv was criminally
responsible was appropriate and the court ordered this assessment. i have
discussed its contents below.

defence
counsel also intended to bring an application for a declaration of invalidity
with respect to the mandatory minimum sentence for
luring. once the mandatory
minimum sentence was struck down defence counsel abandoned that.

the
parties ultimately agreed that the accused would proceed to guilty plea before
me and there would be an argument as to the appropriate sentence.
dr. venema’s assessment

defence
filed an assessment completed by a psychologist, dr. henry venema, dated
december 6, 2019. this assessment has been referred to in later reports of dr.
gray and dr. de laplante, which i have discussed below.

this
assessment was directed to jv’s parents, which demonstrates that they were
primarily responsible for assisting jv up until they were no longer able to do
so. the results demonstrate:
a)
low average
score in verbal comprehension.
b)
average score in
perceptual reasoning.
c)
low average
score in full scale iq.
d)
scores in the
first percentile for general adaptives composite, practical skills (community
use, home living, self care).
e)
scores in the
third percentile for socialization.
f)
scores in
the first percentile for conceptual skills.

dr.
venema concluded that, “it is evident from these results that his adaptive
skills are limited and managing adult life independently presents some
challenges.”
the ncr report

on
consent, a report of dr. neil de laplante, a forensic psychiatrist with the
royal ottawa hospital, dated july 8, 2022 was filed as exhibit 4.

dr.
de laplante is known to this court to be a qualified forensic psychiatrist. 
neither party took issue with is qualifications to give an opinion.

the
report revealed that:
a)
jv has no
children and he has never married;
b)
he has lived in
the same apartment for 25 years;
c)
he has been
supported on odsp since he was diagnosed with learning difficulties at the age
of 18;
d)
he has
parkinson’s disease which affects his mobility;
e)
he has one
sister, who he does not have contact with;
f)
jv was
adopted as an infant. he did not know anything about his biological family,
other than he was the product of an incestuous relationship between his mother
and his grandfather. he told dr. de laplante that he was a “rape baby”;
g)
jv’s adoptive father
died in may 2022. his mother suffered from dementia. until his parents’ death
and incapacity, they managed jv’s affairs;
h)
jv stated that
his adoptive family raised him well. there was no abuse in the home;
i)
jv was
bullied through elementary school. he described himself as a loner;
j)
he had one
romantic relationship when he was in his twenties. it lasted two years. they
did not cohabit;
k)
jv had
difficulty in school. he had learning problems and he was placed in remedial classes
in both elementary school and high school. he stated that he was lucky to
graduate and reported that his grades were bad. he attempted post-secondary
education in hotel and restaurant management but decided it was not for him;
l)
he worked
in fast food and food delivery jobs through high school. he last worked at a
fast food restaurant in 2017;
m)
a psychological assessment
was completed in december 2019 which showed that jv was in the low average
range (10
th
percentile) of intelligence (this is dr. venema’s assessment
which i have discussed above);
n)
he recalled
having a concussion as a child after falling off his bike. he also had a fight
in high school where he lost consciousness;
o)
he was diagnosed
with parkinson’s disease when he was in his twenties. when dr. de laplante interviewed
him, he noted that he had a severe tremor, a shuffling gait and a tendency to
drag his left foot;
p)
he is on a
number of medications for parkinson’s disease as well as anti-depressants, sedatives,
medication for diabetes and medication to control cholesterol;
q)
given that he is
adopted, there is little information available about his family history;
r)
he does
not have any difficulties with alcohol or drugs;
s)
he is not
indigenous;
t)
he stated
that he had an episode of depression in his 30s after he was accused of
molesting a young boy. he was admitted to pembroke hospital for two weeks. records
with respect to this period of hospitalization were not available;
u)
there is a
possibility that he has sleep apnea. he is obese;
v)
he has had
periods where he has felt suicidal but has never acted on it. he does not
endorse panic attacks or symptoms consistent with mania, psychosis,
obsessive-compulsive disorder or post traumatic stress;
w)
he spends his days
playing video games;
x)
he has had body
image issues, particularly related to the size of his penis, since his 20s;
y)
he stated that
he has a high sex drive. he has never paid for sexual activities. he denied
looking at pornography except for one occasion when he was a teenager. he has
not attended a strip club since he was in college;
z)
he identifies as
heterosexual, with an interest in adult women who are physically fit. he
denies voyeurism, sado-masichism, killing or rape, transvestitism, frotteurism
or pedophilia. notwithstanding the nature of his charges, he denied a sexual
interest in children or adolescents.

a
full neuropsychological assessment was completed which revealed the following:
a)
low average (12
th
to 16
th
percentiles) scores for verbal comprehension, working memory
processing speed and full scale iq;
b)
he has average (45
th
percentile) scores for perceptual reasoning;
c)
his cognitive
ability is at the 14
th
percentile;
d)
he is in the
borderline range (between the 5
th
and 9
th
percentiles) for
mathematics, graphomotor processing speed, working memory;
e)
he is in the
impaired range (second percentile) for inhibition;
f)
he was
found to have given a genuine performance on the testing and may well have
over-represented his actual ability, giving earlier findings (the december 2019
assessment).

the
psychologist performing the assessment stated: “[jv] is considered as having
neurodevelopmental disorder based on low average iq and very low adaptive
functioning based on dr. venema’s assessment.”

the
psychologist also confirmed that jv has a developmental service worker, support
from cmha ottawa and a psw attends at his home twice a week to assist him. his
finances are managed by the public guardian and trustee.

dr.
de laplante diagnosed:
a)
neurodevelopmental
disorder;
b)
parkinson’s disease;
and
c)
persistent
depressive disorder.

dr.
de laplante found that jv did not meet the criteria for being not criminally
responsible. he suggested that jv would be suitable for placement at st.
lawrence valley correctional centre if sentenced to a period of incarceration. 
if released into the community, dr. de laplante recommended that jv follow the
recommendations of his physician and he be restrained from having contact
directly or indirectly with persons under the age of 16. dr. de laplante also
recommended a sexual behaviours assessment.
the sexual behaviours assessment

a
sexual behaviours assessment was completed by dr. jonathan gray of the royal
ottawa hospital. it is dated january 24, 2023 and filed as exhibit 2 in this
proceeding.

it
reveals the following additional information:
a)
dr. gray was
able to obtain information concerning jv’s admission to the pembroke hospital
in 2006. it revealed the following:
i)
he was admitted for depression symptoms related to being accused of
molesting a friend’s three-year-old son;
ii)
he was in hospital for ten days;
iii)
when he was released, his mood had improved but he continued to be
labile;
iv)
he was treated with anti-anxiety medication and sleep medication.
b)
jv has been
working with nora kasdorff for two years. ms kasdorff indicated that:
i)
he is “relatively high functioning” and can live independently. she
meets him every week or two;
ii)
it has been difficult to get him to be active outside the house. he
wants to stay home and play video games;
iii)
he has complained to her that he has met people online who want money
from him;
iv)
his finances are managed by the public guardian and trustee;
v)
it is difficult to find activities that will provide him with social
stimulation;
vi)
he has expressed an interest in moving to ottawa.
c)
dr. gray
assessed jv against various psychometric instruments and found that:
i)
jv is an average level of risk to reoffend on the static-99 risk
assessment tool, a tool that is well known for measuring static risk factors
for sex offenders;
ii)
jv is at a moderate level of risk to reoffend on the stable-2007 risk
assessment tool. this tool is well known for measuring dynamic risk factors
for sex offenders;
iii)
jv’s “composite” assessment involving both risk assessment tools is at
the average level.
d)
dr. gray
diagnosed jv as meeting the criteria for “neurodevelopmental disorder with
borderline intelligence.” he stated:
this condition affected his
judgment, and likely is one factor underlying his impulsivity. while not
impairing his cognitive functioning sufficiently to render him incapable of
making moral choices, it remains a significant factor facilitating his
offences.
e)
dr. gray
revealed the evidence in detail in relation to the man who confronted jv. he
noted that the man used the photo of a 24 year old woman on his profile and
indicated on his profile that he was 18. he told jv that he was 14. jv
discontinued the conversation at that point. he returned to the conversation
and agreed to meet the person. dr. gray opined:
the scenario above does not
demonstrate any evidence of a sexual interest specifically in pre-pubescent
females.
[jv] was initially drawn in
with a picture of a woman in her 20s. he then continued with the profile listing
her age as 18, an age at which the person certainly would have been
post-pubescent. the private citizen then said he is 14. given most females
are at least pubescent, if not post-pubescent, at age 14, and given that the
picture corresponding to the “14 year old” is a 24 year old woman, [jv] would have
in mind that he was interacting with a post-pubescent female, even if he
believed her to be 14 in her chronological age.
therefore, even if [jv] was
acting inappropriately towards what he thought was a minor female, his actions
were not motivated by a sexual interest towards pre-pubescent females. his
actions in the context of the index offences are not suggestive of pedophilic
disorder, but rather opportunistic on a background of low cognitive functioning
causing poor judgement.

dr.
gray made the following notable findings:
a)
jv was socially
isolated for many years. when the offence was committed, he did not have the professional
support that he now has (ms kasdorff);
b)
jv has no
significant experience with long-term relationships. his developmental delay contributed
to his lack of success in finding a suitable partner. he also has social
skills deficits and issues with self-esteem;
c)
at the time of
the offences, he was vulnerable to being exploited and subjected to negative
social influences among strangers using chat sites;
d)
he has high sex
drive;
e)
he has poor
cognitive problem-solving abilities, which hampers his “ability to “say no”” to
people who are exploiting him;
f)
his
conduct in the incident in question – refusing to have anything further to do
with the conversation, then going back to it, then agreeing to meet –
demonstrates impulsivity.

dr.
gray recommended that:
a)
jv needs to get
involved in more structured social activities outside his home. given his
reluctance to go outside his home with ms kasdorff, a condition reinforcing
this would be helpful;
b)
he would benefit
from counselling to address better problem-solving abilities and deal with
“life stressors”;
c)
time spent on
the internet is a risk factor for him;
d)
he should not
communicate with anyone under the age of 18 online;
e)
he should not work
or volunteer in a position that involves working directly and unsupervised with
females under 14. i note that although dr. gray stopped short of diagnosing jv
as a pedophile, he made this recommendation due to the nature of his index
offenses;
f)
if given a
reformatory sentence, he should be incarcerated at st. lawrence valley;
g)
he needs counselling
to assist him in working on problem-solving skills, develop better coping
mechanisms and deal with anxiety and boredom. general counselling with a “skilled
therapist” will suffice. he does not need sex offender specific counselling.
letter from dr. grimes

defence
counsel filed (exhibit 3, tabs 1 and 2) the clinical notes from dr. grimes who
practices at the parkinson’s disease and movement disorders clinic at the
ottawa civic hospital dating back to june 20, 2019. these notes reveal the following:
a)
it is clear that
jv’s parkinson’s disease symptoms have been gradually getting worse.
b)
during this
period of time, his father died and his mother was diagnosed with alzheimer’s
disease and also passed away.
c)
during this
period of time, he was largely living on his own but that has also become
increasingly difficult for him.
d)
he had some
difficulty swallowing. he had to attend at the renfrew hospital to have food
caught in his throat extracted. he also drinks coke to try to dissolve his
food and will frequently have to vomit it back up to clear any obstruction. these
episodes have become less common.
e)
he spends his
days at home playing video games.
f)
he has
consistently been gaining weight.
g)
he does not
exercise.
h)
he acknowledged
participating in online chat groups but denied any interest in child
pornography. he had stated in 2023 that he had lost money on pornography web
sites. in january 2025, he stated that his sexual urges are resolved but
indicated that he was using pornographic websites “rarely”. this is contrary
to information that jv provided in reports of both dr. de laplante and dr.
gray.
i)
dr. grimes
noted, however, that some drugs used to treat parkinson’s disease can drive and
aggravate impulse control behaviours.
j)
jv
expressed concern about not getting his medication if he were sentenced to a
period of incarceration.
k)
jv reported that
living in renfrew is a big source of stress and he wants to live in ottawa.
l)
in 2025, jv
reported having a new female friend that he wants to spend time with.
letter from nora kasdorff

nora
kasdorff is an adult protective worker with renfrew county family and children
services. she has been providing services to jv since 2021. she provided
some notes and a letter (which defence counsel filed as exhibit 3, tabs 4 and 5). 
these documents reveal the following about her involvement with jv:
a)
jv did not have
developmental services supports before june 2021 because his parents took care
of him. as of june 2021, they could no longer care for him which hastened her
involvement.
b)
due to his
parkinson’s disease, he requires mobility support and a barrier-free
environment.
c)
he walks slowly
and has one foot that drags.
d)
he has tremors
associated with parkinson’s disease that have worsened and make many areas of
daily living challenging.
e)
he has
swallowing issues that resulted in hospitalization and extraction of food from
his esophagus.
f)
he has
respiratory issues that result in difficulty sleeping. he often sleeps upright
in a chair.
g)
through a formal
capacity assessment, he has been found to be incompetent for managing his
finances and being vulnerable to financial exploitation by others. his
financial affairs are managed by the public guardian and trustee.
email chain from amber mahoney

amber
mahoney is a nurse employed at the ottawa carleton detention centre.

an
email chain from her was filed as exhibit 1. she advised that medications,
other than insulin, are administered in the ocdc twice a day. she also advised
that if jv were rendered into custody, the physicians servicing ocdc would be
responsible for ordering his medication.

attached
to this email chain was an email between jv and his counsel in which he expressed
concern that he takes medication four times a day.
crown submissions

crown
counsel advocated for a nine-month custodial sentence with a recommendation
that jv serve his sentence at the st. lawrence valley treatment centre. crown
counsel also seeks an order pursuant to the
sex offender information
registration act
for twenty years, an order for the taking of jv’s dna and
an order pursuant to section 161(a) through (d) of the
criminal code.

crown
counsel argued that the post-
friesen
range for offences of this nature
is three to five years in the penitentiary. he noted that if the offender engages
in luring with an undercover police officer, who is posing as a child, the
sentence range is between three and four years.

crown
counsel argued that the crown’s position involves a carceral sentence well
below these ranges which pays sufficient heed to the individual circumstances
of jv.

crown
counsel reminded the court that the fact that jv was communicating about a
“fictitious child” is not aggravating.

crown
counsel argued that jv’s physical and mental health problems can be
accommodated at st. lawrence valley.
defence submissions

defence
counsel advocated for a conditional sentence in the range of 12 to 15 months,
and three years probation.

defence
counsel argued that this case involves not only significant physical and mental
health problems that render a carceral sentence impractical, but mental
capacity issues that reduce his moral blameworthiness and bring jv into the
“exceptional circumstances” category.

defence
counsel cited the following mitigating factors:
a)
jv’s offence
came to the attention of the police because of the efforts of a private citizen.
b)
there is no
evidence of online trolling or grooming.
c)
this is more a
situation of loneliness and opportunity to commit the offence rather than a
case where the offender was seeking out the victim.
d)
although the
plea has come very late in the process, jv has always indicated that he wishes
to plead guilty and take responsibility for the offence.
e)
jv expresses
remorse for his crime.
f)
he
believed that he was speaking to someone who was at least 18 years of age for
most of the conversation. he discontinued the conversation when he found out
that the fictitious woman was 14. he then went back to it.
g)
the medication
that he was on to treat his parkinson’s disease can cause issues with impulse
control.
h)
he has
significant mental health and mental disability issues as evidenced by the
documents filed from dr. grimes, dr. de laplante, dr. gray, and ms kasdorff.
i)
the custodial
institution is not going to be able to accommodate jv’s specific medical
needs.
j)
jv has
been pre-screened by recovery science as someone who qualifies for electronic
monitoring (see exhibit 5).
jv’s address to the court

when
i gave jv an opportunity to address me before sentencing, he told me that he
felt “god-awful” for what he did. he expressed the opinion that there is no
excuse for his behaviour and that what happened bothers him.

he
also indicated that he had strong feelings that he was detected through the
efforts of the private citizen, as opposed to the police.
analysis
the
criminal
code
sentencing provisions

section 172.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
(luring) carries a
maximum sentence of 14 years. the minimum sentence of one year was struck down
by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. bertrand marchand
2023 scc 26.

section 718
of the
criminal code
states:
the fundamental
purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime
prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives:
a)
to denounce unlawful conduct in the harm done to victims or to the
community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
b)
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
and
f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community.

section 718.01 sets out the following sentencing objectives when
dealing with offences against children:
when a court
imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a child under the
age of eighteen years, it shall give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.

section 718.1
of the
criminal code
establishes the
fundamental principle of sentencing: “a sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”

section 718.2
of the
criminal code
sets out “other sentencing
principles”:
a
court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a)
a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(i)
evidence
that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race,
national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or
physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression, or
on any other similar factor,
(ii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of
eighteen years,
(ii.2)
evidence
that the offender involved a person under the age of 18 years in the commission
of the offence,
(iii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
(iii.2)
evidence
that the offence was committed against a person who, in the performance of
their duties and functions, was providing health services, including personal
care services,
(iv)
evidence
that the offence was committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in
association with a criminal organization,
(v)
evidence
that the offence was a terrorism offence,
(vi)
evidence
that the offence was committed while the offender was subject to a conditional
sentence order made under section 742.1 or released on parole, statutory
release or unescorted temporary absence under the
corrections and
conditional release act,
and
(vii)
evidence
that the commission of the offence had the effect of impeding
another person from obtaining health services, including
personal care services,
shall be
deemed to be aggravating circumstances;
(b)
a sentence should be
similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances;
(c)
where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d)
an offender should not be deprived of liberty,
if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all available sanctions, other than
imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the
harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
sentencing
is an individualized process

it is well developed in our law that sentencing is a delicate and
highly individualized process. as my colleague justice march has often said,
“no two offenders are alike”. see also
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
and
r.
v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64.
the
cardinal principle of sentencing is proportionality

in
r. v. lacasse,
supra, the supreme court of canada determined that the “cardinal
principle” of sentencing law is the principle of proportionality; that is, the
more serious the crime and the greater the degree of responsibility, the more
severe the sentence will be. this must be balanced against the moral
blameworthiness of the offender.
the
principles of sentencing in cases of sexual offences against children

following
the decision of the supreme court in
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9, it is
now well established that denunciation and deterrence are the primary
sentencing principles in cases of sexual crimes against children including
sexual assault, sexual interference, child pornography and luring. 
additionally,
friesen
called upon sentencing courts to increase
sentences for sexual offences against children, noting that penitentiary
sentences should not be unusual.

in
friesen
’s
wake, sentences for sexual offences against children have
indeed increased. penitentiary sentences are now the norm. reformatory
sentences are exceptional; conditional sentences are rare. pre-
friesen
cases
must be approached cautiously.

this
general trend was recognized by the court of appeal in
r. v. mm,
2022
onca 441, where, at paragraph 16, the court found as follows:
conditional
sentences for sexual offences against children will only rarely be appropriate.
their availability must be limited to exceptional circumstances that render
incarceration inappropriate – for example, where it gives rise to a medical
hardship that could not adequately be addressed within the correctional
facility. it would not be appropriate to enumerate exceptional circumstances
here and we make no attempt to do so.

recently,
in
r. v. pike,
2024 onca 608, chief justice tulloch discussed how
sentencing judges should interpret the term “exceptional circumstances” in
mm,
stating, at paragraphs
180 to 182:
i must reconcile the
“exceptional circumstances” term that
m.m.
used to express this point with the supreme
court’s decisions in
r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5, 1 s.c.r. 61,
and
parranto.
at first glance,
m.m.
’s use of this term might seem contrary to these
cases, which respectively hold that appellate courts can neither create presumptions
that conditional sentences are inappropriate for specific offences (
proulx, at
paras.
80-83
), nor require exceptional circumstances to depart from a
range (
parranto,
at para.
40
).
but in my respectful
view,
m.m.
did
not and could not have intended to depart from
proulx
by creating an
offence-specific presumption against conditional sentences. rather, it used the
“exceptional circumstances” term to convey that, since
proulx,
parliament has increased maximum sentences and prioritized denunciation and
deterrence for sexual offences against children and, further, that the courts’
understanding of the harmfulness and wrongfulness of these offences has
deepened:
friesen,
at paras.
109-110; see
m.m., at paras.
13-15. thus, while there is no
presumption against conditional sentences, these post-
proulx
changes
require more compelling personal circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the
absence of aggravating factors, to justify a conditional sentence than might
have been the case when
proulx
was decided more than two decades ago.
nor, in my view, did
m.m.
intend
to depart from
parranto
by
requiring exceptional circumstances to impose a conditional sentence.
rather,
m.m.
used
“exceptional circumstances” as shorthand for personal circumstances and
mitigating factors that are sufficiently compelling to make a conditional
sentence proportionate, as in
r. v. padda,
2019 bcca 351, at para.
36. not
only is there no closed list of such circumstances and factors (
m.m., at
para.
16
), but multiple seemingly non-exceptional factors taken together,
such as being a young first offender with family support who poses little risk
and takes responsibility for his actions, can collectively render a conditional
sentence proportionate:
r. v. faroughi,
2024 onca 178, 435 c.c.c. (3d) 1,
at para.
99. this is consistent with
parranto
’s holding that sentencing
must focus on proportionality, not pigeonholing cases into ill-defined
exceptional circumstance categories: at para. 40; see
r. v. ellis,
2022
bcca 278, 417 c.c.c. (3d) 102, at para.
118.
the
principles of sentencing in cases of luring

this
case involves communication between jv and a civilian individual posing as a
14-year-old girl.

until
friesen,
there was a tendency to view moral culpability of the offender
caught in an undercover police sting operation as somehow lessened by the
effect that there is no “real victim”.

at
paragraphs 93 and 94,
friesen
established the following principles with
respect to these cases:
a)
the absence of a
specific victim is relevant but it should not be overemphasized.
b)
the offender
cannot take credit for this fact.
c)
it does not
detract from the degree of responsibility of the offender for the offence.
d)
police sting
operations are an effective tool in combatting child luring.
e)
children cannot
be expected to police the internet. they need help.
f)
child
luring should never be viewed as a victimless crime.

in
r. v. bertrand marchand, supra,
at paragraphs
37 to 45, justice martin
established the following principles with respect to harm that can be caused by
child luring:
a)
even where the
interactions occur online, the offender’s conduct can constitute a form of
psychological sexual violence that has the potential to cause serious harm,
which is often more pervasive and permanent than physical harm. it is now well
established that sexual offences against children cause significant harm.
victims of luring often suffer negative sexual development, substance misuse
and depressive symptomology.
b)
online
communications allow the offender to “get in the victim’s head” and abuse the
victim remotely which can lead to serious long term psychological consequences.
c)
victims of
luring often feel that they actively participated in their own abuse which
increases self-blame, internalization and shame, which in turn, worsens
psychological harm.
d)
these effects on
victims have “harmful ripple effects” on their families, community and
society. it can destroy trust in friends, families and social institutions.
e)
it may be
helpful to differentiate between contact-driven luring and luring which occurs
entirely online.
i) contact-driven
luring requires the court to consider whether the online communication caused
psychological harm that is separate and apart from any “hands-on” offence.
ii)
luring
which occurs
entirely online arises in situations where the offender has no intention to
engage in hands on offending.
iii) there is also a
hybrid of the two where the aim of the luring is to commit a designated offence
which occurs entirely online. in this case, the offender uses technology to
build a relationship, assert control and psychologically manipulate young
persons. the offender then may also use that technology to carry out sexual acts.
f)
contact-driven
luring is not necessarily more or less harmful than luring that leads to sexual
abuse which occurs entirely online. the severity of the harm depends on the
goals of the offender, the characteristics of the victim and the dynamic
between the offender and the victim.

it
is open for a sentencing judge to infer the presence of harm, even in
situations where no victim impact statement has been filed. citing
friesen,
supra,
justice martin found that the potential for reasonably foreseeable
serious harm is present even if there is no actual harm, or to put it more
accurately, no evidence of actual harm. see paragraphs 75-76.

sentencing
judges must also consider whether there is evidence of grooming. justice
martin defined grooming this way at paragraph 51:
grooming is a
process which allows the offender to forge a close relationship with a victim
to gain trust, compliance and secrecy for the purpose of eventually engaging in
sexualization and abuse (
rayo, at para. 149). the jurisprudence has
yet to identify a universal definition of grooming. understandably, this is in
large part due to the difficulties in determining where the process begins and
ends, as well as the variety of behaviours that may be involved depending on
the offender, the victim, and the context. indeed, grooming can involve, but is
not limited to “rapport building, incentivization, disinhibition, and security
management” (i. a. elliott, “a self-regulation model of sexual
grooming” (2017), 18
trauma, violence, & abuse
83, at
p. 88). it is “a slow and gradual process of active engagement and a
desensitization of the child’s inhibitions — with an increasing gain in power
and control over the young person” (
rayo,
at para. 139,
quoting m. ospina, c. harstall and l. dennett,
sexual
exploitation of children and youth over the internet: a rapid review of the
scientific literature
(2010), at p. 7).

at paragraphs 52 to 63, justice martin instructed sentencing judges
to bear the following circumstances in mind with respect to grooming:
a)
grooming need not culminate in a sexual act to be harmful.
b)
judges must focus on the character, content and consequences of the
messages as well as whether the communication resulted in the psychological
manipulation of the child.
c)
the presence of grooming may be aggravating with respect to
sentence.
d)
the absence of grooming is not mitigating.

at paragraphs 72 to 73, justice martin set out the following
non-exhaustive list of mitigating factors:
a)
whether the offender pleaded guilty;
b)
whether the offender expressed genuine remorse or gained insight
into the offence;
c)
whether the offender has undertaken rehabilitative steps such as
counselling and treatment;
d)
whether the offender has a prior criminal record;
e)
whether the offender has been honest and cooperative throughout the
sentencing process;
f)
the offender’s age at the time of the offence;
g)
whether the offender had a stable family life;
h)
whether the offender had stable employment;
i)
the presence of addiction and mental health
concerns and evidence of the offenders progress in overcoming them.

at paragraphs 74 to 87, justice martin set out the following
aggravating factors to the sentence in the case of luring:
a)
the presence of grooming;
b)
the character of the communications between the offender and the
victim, including whether the duration and frequency of the communications were
long-term. it is noted that while a longer period of communications are
aggravating, shorter periods are not mitigating. sending a large volume of
messages or sending messages in a frequent or non-relenting way is
aggravating;
c)
whether the communications were sexually explicit and objectifying,
involved graphic sexual content, made use of manipulative communications such
as expressions of love and affection or made use of trickery and lies;
d)
whether the victim was encouraged to share images;
e)
whether the victim was sent explicit images;
f)
whether the offender used a false name, identity
or age;
g)
whether the offender used deceitful tactics such as
encouraging the victim to
erase the communications, discouraging the victim from telling her parents or
other family members, encouraging the use of a platform that erases
communications to avoid detection, or suggesting a more secure platform;
h)
whether
the offender abused a position or relationship of trust, including
parent-child, teacher-child and family friend-child or exploited the role of
confidante;
i)
the exploitation of younger children is aggravating. the
exploitation of adolescent children is not mitigating;
j)
whether the victim was particularly vulnerable, such as the case
of children in care of the children’s aid society;
k)
whether
there was a wide gap in ages between the victim and the offender.

the
court of appeal’s decision in
r. v. mv,
2023 onca 724
was released the
same day as
r. v. bertrand marchand.

in
mv,
justice paciocco, writing for himself and justice coroza,
found that the upper end of the sentencing range for luring offences should be
set at five years.

justice
paciocco noted the tension in the caselaw between a line of cases anchored by
justice code in
r. v. moolla,
2021 onsc 3702
on the one hand and
decisions such as justice mcarthur’s decision in
r. v. collier,
2021
onsc 6827
on the other.

in
moolla,
justice code found that the post-
friesen
range for
luring
was three to five years.

in
collier,
justice mcarthur declined to follow
moolla,
noting that the
supreme court’s reasoning in
friesen
was better suited to violence-based
sexual offences against children including sexual assault and sexual
interference.

in
mv,
the court of appeal adopted the five year upper limit in the range from
moolla
but found that there was no lower limit in the range for the
following reasons (see paragraphs 81 to 87):
a)
luring
is an
“inchoate offence”, or a “preparatory crime” that is designed to prevent
assault-based sexual offences against children before they are committed. typically
preparatory offences carry a lower penalty than “fully consummated offences”. 
luring therefore carries a range of sentence lower than assault-based sexual
offences against children.
b)
the comments at
paragraph 114 in
friesen
about the normal range of sentence for sexual
offences against children as being mid-single digit penitentiary sentences with
upper-single digit and double-digit penitentiary not being unusual or rare were
aimed at addressing violence-based offences. the general principles in
friesen
apply.
c)
luring
is “a
serious offence that will generally require incarceration”. it is however, a
“broad offence which can be committed by a wide range of offenders in varied
situations, some of which may not deserve elevated levels of punishment. thus,
the sentencing range “must not be narrow” or “have a harsh lower end.”

mv
continues to be good law. see
r. v. av,
2025 onca 6, which is the
most recent court of appeal decision upholding
mv.
principles of sentencing
with respect to medical conditions

in
r. v. rule,
2021 oncj 264, justice baxter dealt with an offender
convicted of child pornography offences. he was 70 years of age. he had
cancer which was in remission. as a result of his cancer, he wore and ostomy
bag which required regular care. he suffered from copd and had also suffered
from a pulmonary embolism. he needed regular exercise. justice baxter imposed
a custodial sentence. with respect to the offender’s health issues, she stated
at paragraph 51 that these issues “….
can be
addressed in a correctional facility as it is the state’s responsibility to
protect and provide proper medical care for those in its care or custody.”

this
finding was undisturbed on appeal. the court of appeal found that justice
baxter “appropriately considered” the offender’s health challenges, that some
of the health challenges had resolved between the sentencing and the appeal and
that “[t]
he evidence does not establish that his
medical conditions could not be treated in a custodial institution:
r. v.
rule,
2023 onca 31
at paragraph
8.

i
note that the finding in
rule
is in keeping with other appellate
authority, including
r. v. drabinsky,
2011 onca 582
at paragraphs
169 and 170. see also
r. v. insanally,
2024 onsc 722.
application of the
sentencing principles to jv’s case

jv
does not have a prior, relevant criminal record. this is mitigating.

jv
entered a guilty plea. this is mitigating.

jv
has expressed remorse. this is mitigating.

jv
has significant medical problems, in particular parkinson’s disease. he must
continue to see dr. grimes on a regular basis.

parkinson’s
disease is an irreversible medical condition. jv has a significant tremor as a
result of his parkinson’s. it has also affected his gait. he has had at least
one situation in the past where it has affected his ability to swallow.

he
must have prescription medication four times a day. based on the email chain
from nurse mahoney, his medication regime cannot be accommodated if he is
sentenced to custody in the reformatory.

i
also find that his parkinson’s disease makes him more vulnerable if he were
in-custody. i have serious reservations about whether he would receive
adequate care for his parkinson’s disease if he were sentenced to a carceral
sentence in the reformatory.

jv
has persistent depressive disorder.

jv
has a neurodevelopmental disorder. he functions at a low-average level. until
his parents recently passed away, they managed his affairs and provided for his
care. since his parents passed away, he receives assistance from an adult
protective worker. his ability to care for himself is tenuous. the public
guardian and trustee makes financial decisions on his behalf. his
neurodevelopmental disorder is life-long. it is not reversible with
treatment. i find it makes him even more vulnerable in a custodial setting. if
he is sentenced to a period of incarceration he will not have the assistance of
his adult protective worker.

in
my experience, if sentenced to a period of incarceration in the reformatory, jv
would likely be held at ottawa carleton detention centre until classification
and then transferred out. there is a strong likelihood, but not an absolute
certainty, that he could serve a reformatory sentence at the st. lawrence
valley treatment centre. otherwise, in my experience, he would be transferred
to the central east correctional facility.

for
reasons i have expressed in
r. v. kt,
2025 oncj 234
and
r. v. sl,
2025 oncj 105, i find that if incarcerated in reformatory, he will be more
likely to be subject to extremely harsh custodial conditions including
overcrowding and frequent lock-down. the only possible exception to this is
incarceration at st. lawrence valley.

one
issue which the parties did not provide me with any evidence about was whether jv’s
care would be better if he were sentenced to a period of custody in the
penitentiary. in my experience, conditions are generally better for offenders
in the penitentiary, who are classified to a lower security rating. given his
mobility issues and vulnerability, jv would likely be quickly classified to a
lower security rating.

i
understand that the parties did not turn their minds to this given the range of
sentence that they were proposing and their general agreement that jv met the
criteria for “diminished moral blameworthiness” which would reduce his sentence
outside the penitentiary range. i will discuss my findings with respect to
“diminished moral blameworthiness” below.

i
agree that it is the duty of the penal authorities to protect and provide
proper medical care to individuals in custody, but as i discussed in
kt
and
sl,
i have grave doubts that jv will receive that protection and care in
the reformatory.

i
agree that jv’s neurodevelopmental disorder and parkinson’s disease also
diminish his moral blameworthiness. there is some evidence that the medication
that he was taking at the time of the commission of the offences to help
control his parkinson’s disease may have increased his impulsivity level.

the interplay between intellectual disability and the commission of
crime, particularly sexual crime, surprisingly, is not well understood.
a 2022 swedish study found that offenders with intellectual
disability are much more likely to have a sexual crime as an index crime: 
edberg, h.; chen, q; andine, p; larsson, h. and hirvikoski, t., crimes and
sentences with individuals with intellectual disability in a forensic
psychiatric context: a register-based study: epidemiology and
psychiatric sciences
2022; 31: e2.

i
take heed with respect to the comments of justice martin in
bertrand marchand
regarding the various aggravating and mitigating factors that present
themselves in a luring case.

in
this case, i was not shown a copy of the communications between jv and the
citizen that he was dealing with. this presents the following issues as it
relates to the various sentencing factors identified by justice martin:
a)
i do not have an
evidentiary basis on which to find the presence or absence of behaviour indicative
of grooming. (see below where i discuss the fact that jv sent the person he
thought was 14 years old a photo of his penis.)
b)
i do not have an
evidentiary basis on which to make findings regarding the duration and
frequency of the online relationship. it would appear that the online
relationship was of short duration (less than a month) and there were only two
instances of communication.
c)
i do not have an
evidentiary basis on which to make findings with respect to the nature of the
communications, including whether they were sexually explicit and objectifying,
or made use of manipulative communications, trickery and lies. with respect to
“graphic sexual content”, jv did send the complainant a photo of his penis,
which, as discussed below, is aggravating.
d)
i do not have an evidentiary basis on which to rule whether the
other party to the communications was encouraged to share images. it would
stand to reason that by sending her a photo of his penis, however, he was
tacitly encouraging her to send him images of herself.
e)
i do not have any evidentiary basis on which to rule whether jv used
a false name, identity or age.
f)
i do not have an evidentiary basis on which to rule on whether the
offender used “deceitful tactics” to encourage the would-be victim to take
steps which would hinder detection.
g)
it is clear that jv was not in a position of trust or authority
towards the person that he was communicating with.
h)
jv was communicating with someone he believed to be 14. communicating
with a younger child would have been more aggravating.
i)
i do not have an evidentiary basis on which to rule on whether jv was
communicating with someone who was particularly vulnerable, such as a child in
the care of a children’s aid society.
j)
there is a wide gap in ages between jv and his would be victim. he
believed her to be 14. when the offence was committed, he was 49 – more than
three times her age.

three
things about the accused’s involvement in this case strike me as being
extremely aggravating:
a)
first, he considered
that the person posing as the young person specifically told him that she was
underage and he proceeded anyway.
i am not at all moved by the
fact that the accused first dismissed the conversation because he went back to
the conversation and pursued the person he understood to be a fourteen year old
girl. to suggest that his moral culpability is somehow reduced by the fact
that he ignored his initial instinct that this was wrong is not (but for the
findings of diminished moral blameworthiness as a result of the prescription
medication he was taking to combat his parkinson’s) mitigating.
a person who is accused of
murder is not rewarded because they thought about it, abandoned it, but then
thought about it some more and decided to proceed. if anything, it is ordinarily
indicative of a higher blameworthy state because it demonstrates that the
accused is unable to control his urges, considered the wrongfulness of his
intentions and proceeded anyway.
b)
secondly, there
is evidence that the accused sent the person he was in conversation with a
photograph of his penis. as i have set out, as per
bertrand marchand,
supra,
this is aggravating.
c)
thirdly, the
accused acted on the online discussions and meetings and went to meet the
complainant for the purpose of committing a hands-on offence. this makes the
case very different from a case where the offence occurs entirely online.

this
is very much a case where the online discussions and the meeting could have
resulted in significant harm to a child.

i
am also very troubled by the fact that since the offence was committed, jv’s
use of a computer remains unchecked and he may well be using a computer for the
purpose of looking at pornography, something that no doubt enhances his risk to
reoffend.
the sentence imposed

in
balancing the aggravating and mitigating factors, if i were dealing with an
individual who:
a)
did not suffer
from moderate parkinson’s disease symptoms that will only worsen with time and
which will make him extremely vulnerable in-custody;
b)
was at the time
of the offence, on medication for his parkinson’s disease that may have reduced
his inhibitions resulting in a finding of diminished moral blameworthiness; and
c)
have a
significant neurocognitive disability, which also results in a finding of
diminished moral blameworthiness,
i would have been inclined to
impose a sentence in the area of two years in the penitentiary or two years
less a day.

i
find that a carceral sentence in the reformatory, such as the ottawa carleton
detention centre, would expose jv to untenable conditions. only a placement at
an institution such as the st. lawrence valley treatment centre would mitigate
those conditions. such a placement is in no way guaranteed.

while
a carceral sentence in a penitentiary may well have alleviated some concerns
with respect to the quality of the health care that he would receive in
custody, it does not sufficiently account for his diminished moral
blameworthiness in committing the offence given the other factors i have identified. 
a penitentiary term of longer than two years, would also prevent me from making
a probation order. a probation order is attractive because it would allow for
a much longer period of supervision which would address his risk level.

with respect to
the suitability of a conditional sentence, i find that the preconditions for a
conditional sentence are met.

the only area i
have some difficulty with is the issue of the risk to the public. i accept,
however, that jv is largely a recluse, that he does not go out, and that it has
been a struggle for his worker to identify exercise opportunities for him.

any issue with
respect to jv committing another online offence will be attenuated by the order
that i intend to make as part of the conditional sentence, the probationary
disposition that will follow and an order that i intend to make under
section
161
of the
criminal code.

i therefore
impose the following sentence:

jv will receive
a conditional sentence of two years less a day. there will be a house arrest
component of twelve months.

jv will receive
a three year probation order.

jv will submit
to an order for the taking of his dna.
luring
is a primary designated
offence.

pursuant to
section 161
(a) of the
criminal code,
i make an order prohibiting jv from
attending any public park or swimming area where persons under the age of 16
years are present can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare
centre, schoolground, play ground or community centre unless he does so under
the supervision of an adult who is aware of his offending behaviour. this is a
lifetime order.

pursuant to
section 161
(b) of the
criminal code,
i make an order prohibiting jv from
seeking, obtaining or continuing in any employment, whether or not the
employment is remunerated, or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16
years. this is a lifetime order.

pursuant to
section 161
(c) of the
criminal code,
i make an order prohibiting jv from
having any contact, including communicating by any means, with persons who are
under the age of 16 years, unless he does so under the supervision of an adult
who is aware of his offending behaviour. this is a lifetime order.

pursuant to
section 161
(d) of the
criminal code, i make an order prohibiting jv from
using the internet or other digital network, unless he does so under the
supervision of an adult who is aware of his offending behaviour. this is a
lifetime order.

given that
luring
is a “primary offence” as defined by
section 490.011
of the
criminal
code
that is punishable by a maximum sentence of fourteen years, pursuant
to
section 490.012
and
490.013
of the
criminal code, i make an order
requiring jv to comply with the
sex offender information registration act
for a period of 20 years.

pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal code, i make an order prohibiting jv from
possessing any firearm, etc. for a period of ten years.

given that jv is
on social assistance, and given that his affairs are managed by the public
guardian and trustee, i find it would constitute an undue hardship for him to
pay the victim fine surcharge and i order it waived.
released: may
7, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson

justice huscroft dissented based on the final sentence that justice paciocco
imposed in the circumstances of mv’s case. he did not address justice paciocco’
s findings that the upper end of the range should be set at five years and
there is no lower end of the range.