source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj735/2025oncj735.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. bonsu, 2025 oncj 735
date: 
october 8, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 998 23 31111153
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
gideon bonsu
before
justice g.p. renwick
sentencing
submissions heard on 06 october 2025
reasons
for sentence released on 08 october 2025
k. holmes................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
c. levien.............................................................. counsel
for the offender gideon bonsu
reasons for sentence
renwick j.:
introduction

following a trial, i found the offender guilty of all six
firearms-related offences on the information:
i.
knowingly possessing a handgun while not licensed (s. 92);
ii.
having a firearm in a vehicle (s. 94);
iii.
possessing a loaded firearm (s. 95);
iv.
carrying a concealed weapon (s. 90);
v.
possessing a firearm with an obliterated serial number (s. 108); and
vi.
possessing a firearm contrary to a prohibition order (s. 117.01).

these offences arose from a traffic stop on october 9, 2023, during
which police observed a loaded handgun in the offender’s pants pocket. the
firearm was seized following a physical struggle, during which the offender was
tasered.

a
charter
application alleging breaches of ss. 9 and 10(b) was
dismissed, save for a minor s. 10(b) violation in terms of the timing of the
facilitation of the right to counsel. the firearm and ammunition were admitted
into evidence and a finding of guilty on all counts was conceded.

the prosecution seeks a global sentence of 8 years imprisonment,
emphasizing denunciation and deterrence. the prosecutor highlights the offender’s
prior record, including a weapons-related conviction following a home invasion,
and the penitentiary sentence served just 18 months prior to the current
offences. the prosecution argues that the offender’s conduct — possessing a
loaded firearm with an obliterated serial number, breaching a prohibition
order, and struggling with police during his arrest — warrants a significant
penitentiary sentence.

defence counsel proposes a sentence of 5 years imprisonment, less 9
months of credit for the time spent in pre-trial custody, the time spent while
on a restrictive bail, the trial concessions made, and the
charter
violation. the offender relies on mitigating factors including the offender’s
tumultuous upbringing, successful bail compliance, employment since 2022, and his
prospects for rehabilitation. lastly, the offender does not oppose any of the ancillary
orders sought.
discussion
of a fit sentence

it will be helpful to consider the circumstances of
these offences and those of this particular offender to situate the context for
this sentencing.
aggravating
and mitigating factors

the aggravating factors include:
i.
possession of a loaded firearm (10 live rounds of ammunition) in a
public setting. the offender was in a parking lot outside of a strip club where
alcohol is consumed, late at night;
ii.
concealed possession of a firearm. the handgun was concealed, and the
offender kept moving his jacket over his leg to further hide the firearm from
police;
iii.
possession of a firearm with an obliterated serial number. no firearm can
be legally possessed in canada without a registration certificate and pursuant
to the possession of a valid firearm licence (neither of which existed) and the
obliterated serial number made this firearm virtually untraceable by the
authorities. there is no innocent reason for the offender’s possession of a
loaded, illegally possessed handgun while recently prohibited from possessing
firearms. this is a true-crime firearm, the possession of which is beyond any
innocent explanation;
iv.
possession of a firearm soon after the completion of the equivalent of a
penitentiary sentence for a home invasion robbery where a firearm was used (two
shots were fired at a witness by the offender’s accomplice). the offender also
has an unrelated conviction for excess blood alcohol while driving in 2014; and
v.
the offender actively resisted the police and he had to be tasered and
physically controlled on the ground before the loaded firearm could be secured.
this increased the danger of an accidental discharge exponentially.

mitigating factors include:
i.
the offender is a black male living in canada; he has undoubtedly
experienced anti-black racism, possibly even at the hands of state actors, like
the police;
ii.
the offender has experienced the trauma of parental mental illness and
spent six months (according to the pre-sentence report) in the foster care system;
iii.
the offender graduated from college (police foundations) in 2018;
iv.
the police violated the offender’s s. 10(b)
charter
rights to a
limited extent;
v.
the offender has been on a strict form of bail without incident for 22
months;
vi.
the offender conceded much of the prosecution’s case, saving limited
prosecutorial and judicial resources;
vii.
the offender has the support of his family and his girlfriend;
viii.
the offender has been gainfully employed for three years where he is a
valued employee;
ix.
the offender’s allocution expressed genuine remorse and acknowledgment
of wrongdoing; and
x.
the offender wants to lead a pro-social life.
neutral factors

the following are neither aggravating nor mitigating
and have not factored into the calculus of an appropriate sentence in this
case:
i.
there is no suggestion that the offender had used
or fired the firearm prior to this event; and
ii.
there were no physical injuries suffered by the offender
or the police who recovered the firearm.
circumstances
of the offender

the
offender is not a young man. he is 32 years old. the offender has not led an
entirely pro-social life. at age 23, the offender was convicted of a drinking
and driving offence. eighteen months before this event the offender was
sentenced for a home invasion robbery that involved the actual use of a firearm
during the getaway. the offender served the equivalent of 3 years in prison for
those offences.

after
hearing from the offender, i am convinced that he appears genuinely remorseful
about these offences. he is embarrassed. the pre-sentence report writer
described the offender as “polite” and “respectful” and i agree with this
characterization.

all
the same, the offender has a serious and related criminal past. he is neither
youthful, nor naïve in his criminal pursuits. if anything, these offences
suggest an inexplicable return to a criminal lifestyle (assuming there ever was
a departure) that is no less serious than his prior convictions. all of which belies
the offender’s family support, stable relationship, and his acknowledged positive
work history.
circumstances
of the offences

the offender drove around, late at night, with a loaded firearm
concealed in his front pants pocket.

counsel suggests that there is no evidence that anything untoward or
criminal was afoot. in fact, the offender told the pre-sentence report author
that the firearm was carried to help him feel safe because a former friend once
stole money from his home.

i do not accept this logic. if possessing a firearm at home actually made
sense within the offender’s psyche, that had nothing to do with what happened
here. the offender was not at home. rather, he stood in a parking lot
(initially at least), late at night, where he might well encounter intoxicated
patrons. although there is no evidence of an intention to use the firearm, that
does not reduce the criminality or dangerousness of its public possession in a
concealed and ready state. his moral culpability is high because he was
prohibited from possessing firearms for his convictions in march 2022.

this case also underscores the inherent danger of loaded handguns. the police,
the offender, or another member of the public could easily have been mortally
wounded because of the offender’s lack of precaution and unbounded carelessness.
certainly, the offender should not be punished for what never occurred, but neither
should he be credited for the fortuity of random happenstance (the fact that no
one was injured during his apprehension).
sentencing principles

the
fundamental purpose of sentencing as expressed in
section 718
of the
criminal
code
is to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives: denunciation, deterring the offender and others from
committing offences, separating offenders from society, where necessary,
assisting in rehabilitating offenders, providing reparations for harm done to
victims, and promoting responsibility in offenders and an acknowledgment of the
harm done to victims and the community.

the
fundamental principle of sentencing is that the punishment should be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender. the punishment should fit the crime. there is no single fit
sentence for any particular offence. the relevance and relative importance of
each of these objectives will vary according to the nature of the crime and the
circumstances of the offender.


in
r.
v.
hamilton
and mason, doherty j.a. of the ontario court of
appeal stated:
the "gravity of the
offence" refers to the seriousness of the offence in a generic sense as
reflected by the potential penalty imposed by parliament and any specific
features of the commission of the crime which may tend to increase or decrease
the harm or risk of harm to the community occasioned by the offence…
the "degree of responsibility
of the offender" refers to the offender's culpability as reflected in the
essential substantive elements of the offence - especially the fault component
- and any specific aspects of the offender's conduct or background that tend to
increase or decrease the offender's personal responsibility for the crime.


the
court quoted rosenberg j.a. who had previously described the proportionality
requirement in
r. v.
priest:
the principle of proportionality
is rooted in notions of fairness and justice. for the sentencing court to do
justice to the particular offender, the sentence imposed must reflect the
seriousness of the offence, the degree of culpability of the offender, and the
harm occasioned by the offence. the court must have regard to the aggravating
and mitigating factors in the particular case. careful adherence to the
proportionality principle ensures that this offender is not unjustly dealt with
for the sake of the common good.


section
718.1 of the code ensures that proportionality is the fundamental principle of
sentencing. however, proportionality is not the sole principle to be
considered. a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar
offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances.


in
the circumstances of this case, both parties submit that a sentence of
imprisonment in the penitentiary is appropriate, but they differ on the length
to be served.

as
a sentencing tool, institutional imprisonment is to be used only as a last
resort when required by the circumstances of the crime and the background of
the offender.

our
supreme court has instructed that
section 718
requires a sentencing judge to
consider more than simply denunciation and deterrence. the court must also
consider the restorative goals of repairing the harms suffered by individual
victims and by the community as a whole, promoting a sense of responsibility
and an acknowledgment of the harm caused while attempting to rehabilitate or
heal the offender.


although
the rehabilitation of the offender is a secondary consideration in the overall
calculus of an appropriate sentence in this case (well behind denunciation and
deterrence), it is still a factor i must consider, especially in light of the offender’s
potential, his family support, and his demonstrated remorse.

proportionality in sentencing can also account for factors personal
to the offender:
courts should consider the effect of a sentence on the
particular
offender.
the principle of proportionality implies that where the impact of imprisonment
is greater on a particular offender, a reduction in sentence may be appropriate
(
suter,
at para. 48; b. l. berger, "proportionality and the experience of
punishment", in d. cole and j. roberts, eds.,
sentencing in canada: essays
in law, policy, and practice
(2020), 368, at p. 368).
for this reason, courts have reduced sentences to reflect the comparatively
harsher experience of imprisonment for certain offenders, like offenders in law
enforcement, for those suffering disabilities (
r.
v. salehi,
2022 bcca 1, at paras.
66-71
(canlii);
r.
v. nuttall,
2001 abca 277,
293 a.r. 364, at paras.
8-9;
r.
v.
a.r.
(1994),
1994 canlii 4524 (mb ca),
92
man. r. (2d) 183
(c.a.);
r.
v. adamo,
2013 mbqb 225,
296 man. r. (2d) 245, at para.
65;
r.
v. wallace
(1973),
1973 canlii 1434 (on ca),
11
c.c.c. (2d) 95
(ont.
c.a.), at p. 100), or for those whose experience of prison is harsher due to
systemic racism (
r.
v. a.f.
(1997),
1997 canlii 14505 (on ca),
101 o.a.c. 146, at para.
17;
r.
v. batisse,
2009 onca 114,
93 o.r. (3d) 643, at para.
37;
r.
v. marfo,
2020 onsc
5663, at para.
52
(canlii)
).


obviously,
this offender is part of a community that has suffered racism and over-incarceration.
though this does not mean he is entitled to a race-based discount, the offender
should receive the least restrictive sentence (in terms of duration) that is
appropriate in the circumstances.
application
of the principles

imprisonment is a terrible consequence. penitentiaries are dark
places of untold degradation and despair. nonetheless, in some cases, a
penitentiary sentence is the only sentence that will be just.

the
sentencing range for possession of a loaded firearm in similar circumstances is
four to nine years.

the court of appeal for ontario has also made it clear that exemplary sentences
are required to deter gun use and possession.


the
offender’s conduct falls beyond the middle of the range of an appropriate sentence.
there can be no doubt that this re-offending was not minor. the body-worn
camera footage proved that the offender was equally calculating and
uncooperative during the traffic stop. his behaviour exacerbated an already
dangerous situation.

while
i accept that the offender has rehabilitative potential and there are numerous
mitigating circumstances, the short turnaround from his last conviction, the
breach of a prohibition order, and his conduct during arrest require a sentence
that prioritizes denunciation and deterrence above other penal considerations.

the offender has been found guilty of possessing a loaded, illegal
handgun, which he concealed, and possessed carelessly in public, contrary to a
weapons prohibition. his conduct threatened the safety and security of the
public. he is not a first offender, nor is he particularly youthful. nothing
short of a significant penitentiary sentence can adequately address the need
for deterrence and denunciation in adequate measure.

counsel
seeks credit for pre-sentence custody (57 actual days), plus additional
duncan

credit (to enhance pre-trial custody credit to a ratio of 2:1) for time
spent in custody during the covid-19 pandemic, and
downes

credit for stringent bail conditions. defence counsel also suggested a
sentence reduction given the
charter
violation and the lack of any real contest
following the
charter
application.

i am prepared to give the offender credit for the circumstances that
have made his time in pre-trial custody especially difficult. it is well-known
that time spent in pre-trial custody during the pandemic was harsh due to
staff-shortages and additional health protocols. i would credit the pre-trial
custody as the equivalent of 4 months. i would also credit the offender an
additional 2 months for his 22 months on a restrictive bail. although the bail
was set at the uppermost rung of the ladder in terms of its restrictions, this
was reasonable in light of the offender’s criminal record and the seriousness
of the offences.

a
global sentence of 8 years of imprisonment is appropriate for these offences. however,
i will impose a global
remaining
sentence of 7 years in a penitentiary,
apportioned as follows:
i.
possessing a loaded firearm (s. 95, count #3 on the information), 7 years
imprisonment, less 4 months for pre-trial custody, 2 months for restrictive
bail, and 6 months for other considerations (personal characteristics, trial
cooperation, and expressed remorse),
for a remaining sentence of 6 years
imprisonment;
ii.
knowingly possessing a handgun while not licensed (s. 92), 3 years,
concurrent
to count #3;
iii.
having a firearm in a vehicle (s. 94), 4 years,
concurrent
to
count #3;
iv.
carrying a concealed weapon (s. 90), 3 years,
concurrent
to count
#3;
v.
possessing a firearm with an obliterated serial number (s. 108), 3
years,
concurrent
to count #3; and
vi.
possessing a firearm contrary to a prohibition order (s. 117.01), one
year,
consecutive
to count #3.

i have not reduced the sentence for the minor
charter
violation. to do so would undermine the court’s findings that the violation was
momentary, had little impact upon the offender, did not lead to the discovery
of evidence, and was not likely the result of systemic carelessness with
constitutional norms.

although not requested, i also considered the “jump” principle: unless
justified, a subsequent sentence should not be significantly harsher than an offender’s
last sentence.

a seven-year prison sentence is significantly longer than the
offender’s last sentence (the equivalent of 3 years imprisonment). however, the
total sentence is warranted because it accounts for the increased moral
blameworthiness of these crimes:
i.
the offender was in actual possession of a
loaded, illegal handgun;
ii.
the offender did not receive the mitigation of a
guilty plea, which would have lowered the global sentence appreciably;
iii.
these offences were committed within 18 months
of his last sentence; and
iv.
the offender breached a weapons prohibition
which requires a consecutive sentence.

this sentence is a significant one, but it responds to the need to
deter this offender and others from such serious criminal activity. nothing
less than this will adequately denounce this offender’s conduct or deter him or
others from similar conduct.

it bears repeating that i took into account the mitigating
circumstances of the offender’s background, his remorse, and the support he has
in the community. while penal parsimony is appropriate, it cannot predominate
the sentencing process.

given that the ancillary orders were unopposed, it is appropriate to
order the following:
i.
an order pursuant to s.109(2) prohibiting the offender
from possessing any firearm, crossbow, prohibited or restricted weapon or
device, any ammunition, or explosive substance for life;
ii.
an order pursuant to s. 487.051(3)(b) (s. 95 is
an offence for which the maximum punishment is more than five years, making
this a secondary designated offence) for the taking of a sample of the offender’s
deoxyribonucleic acid (“dna”) in circumstances that are hygienic and respectful
of his privacy and bodily integrity, by a person qualified to take such
samples. the order need not be carried out if the offender’s dna is already known
on the national databank. this order may be carried out while the offender is
in custody. if the offender refuses to cooperate with the sampling of his dna, reasonable
force may be used to extract it from him; and
iii.
forfeiture of the firearm, magazine, and 10
rounds of ammunition seized by peel regional police from the offender on 09
october 2023.
conclusion

the appropriate global sentence is 7 years in a penitentiary with
ancillary orders (a s. 109 weapons prohibition for life, dna sampling pursuant
to s. 487.051(3)(b), and s. 491 forfeiture of offence-related property)
in
addition to
one year credited for pre-trial custody and other
considerations.

this sentencing was a difficult one. the court is mindful of the
practical realities of the offender’s background and how incarceration in the
penitentiary imperils his peace of mind and that of his family. the principles
of sentencing permit courts to be lenient and merciful when counter-balanced by
the superordinate goals of denunciation and deterrence.

gideon bonsu appears to have a good brain, a strong will, and an
able body. he is loved by his family and partner. unlike many people i see, it
is anticipated that he can improve himself and move beyond the entries on his
criminal record. i hope this is true for his sake and that of our community.
released: 08 october 2025
justice
g. paul renwick

r.
v.
hamilton
and mason,
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca), o.j. no. 3252 (c.a.) at para.
102.

hamilton, supra, at paras.
90-91.

r.
v. priest,
1996 canlii 1381 (on ca), o.j. no. 3369 (c.a.) at para.
26, as quoted
in
hamilton,
supra, at para.
92.

see subsection 718.2(b) of the
code.

r.
v.
gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc), s.c.j. no. 19 at paras.
43 and 48.

r. v.
hills,
2023 scc 2
at para.
135.

see
r. v.
morris,
2023 onca 816
at para.
87.

r.
v.
danvers,
2005 canlii 30044 (on ca), 2005 o.j. no. 3532 (c.a.)

see
r. v.
duncan,
2016 onca 754.

see
r. v. downes,
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca), o.j. no. 555 (c.a.).