source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj644/2025oncj644.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. andriano, 2025 oncj 644
date: 
december 8, 2025
city of
toronto
court
file numbers:
4860 999 23 23100321-00
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
jacques andriano
before
justice of the peace r. shawyer
heard
on november 14, 2025, and in writing.
reasons
for judgment released on december 8, 2025
bendick, c ……………………………………………………. counsel
for the prosecution
rosso, d....................................................................................... 
counsel for the defendant
justice of the peace shawyer:
introduction

as this court wrote in
r
v. andriano,
2025 oncj
431
the
ontario
provincial offences act,
r.s.o. 1990, c. p.33
(hereinafter “
poa
”) was
designed to provide a fair, efficient, and convenient
method of dealing offences that come before provincial offences courts in
ontario
[i]. therefore,
it should follow that disclosure,
the evidence the
prosecution relies on to prosecute defendants under the
poa, should be
simple and brief
[ii]
however that is not always necessarily the case.

the supreme court of canada’s (hereinafter the scc”) decision in
r. v. stinchcombe,
1991 canlii 45 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 326 (hereinafter “
stinchcombe
”) governs the disclosure
regime in criminal law cases in canada. since
poa
offences are
quasi-criminal
[iii]
in nature stinchcombe also governs disclosure in
poa
courts.
since
poa
offences are
quasi-criminal in nature the question becomes how strictly to apply stinchcombe
in
poa
matters. in other words, does the
nature and
intensity of disclosure obligations differ between criminal cases and
poa
cases. this was a question that was before the ontario court of appeal in
york (regional municipality) v. mcguigan,
2018 onca 1062
(hereinafter “
mcguigan
”), which the onca declined to address
[iv]. therefore, since the onca
declined to answer of whether the
nature and
intensity of disclosure obligations differ between criminal cases and
poa
cases it is left to lower courts, such as this one, to answer the question.
background

on august 20, 2025, in its reasons for decision, the court outlined the facts
in the case at bar, as best as the court understood them. for the purposes of context,
the court will again outline the facts of the case at bar.

in an affidavit that was filed with the court in support of their 11(b)
charter
application, the defendant stated that they purchased the subject property, 346
dundas street east in the city of toronto (hereinafter “346 dundas”), on
december 1, 2004.

on or about july 7, 2014, a building inspection was carried out by the
city of toronto (hereinafter the “city”) at 346 dundas. after that inspection
the defendant was found to be in contravention of section 8, subsection (1) of
the
building code act,
s.o. 1992, c.23, as amended (hereinafter “
building
code act
”). therefore, on july 9, 2014, the defendant was charged with
being in contravention of section 8(1) of the
building code act.

on july 13, 2015, the city sent the defendant a letter entitled “notice
of court action” in relation to the july 9, 2014, charges. the city gave the
defendant until february 3, 2015, to discuss this matter with a manager of
inspections to see if legal action could be avoided.

on september 6, 2019, the city sent the defendant another letter
entitled “notice of court action” in relation to the july 9, 2014, charges. the
city again gave the defendant an opportunity to discuss this matter with a
manager of inspections to see if legal action could be avoided. this time the
city gave the defendant until september 20, 2019.

on november 23, 2021, the city laid an information before the court. that
information charged the defendant with failing to comply with an order dated july
9, 2014, made by an inspector pursuant to section 12, subsection 2 of the
building
code act. however, that the information was withdrawn in court on may 16,
2022.

on march 21, 2022, and april 4, 2022, the city ordered the defendant to again
comply with the
building code act. the city ordered the defendant to do
so because it alleged that the defendant had violated the
building code act
by converting a garage located at 346 dundas into a habitable space without a
permit, amongst other alleged violations.

on july 18, 2022, a senior building inspector for the city of toronto issued
an order to comply (hereinafter the “order”) to the defendant. the order directed
the defendant before the court to obtain a building permit for or remove three unauthorized
constructions at 346 dundas. the three unauthorized constructions identified by
the senior building inspector on july 18, 2022, were as follows:
1.
wooden balcony structures.
2.
two 3
rd
floor additions.
3.
the replacement
of a garage door with a wall.

on march 24, 2023, the city laid a new information before the court. this
information charged the defendant with:
1.
count 1: on
february 9, 2023, at 346 dundas street east in the city of toronto committing
the offence of constructing or causing the construction of a building without a
permit being issued by the chief building officer, contrary to section 36(1) of
the
building code act; and
2.
count 2: on
february 9, 2023, at 346 dundas street east in the city of toronto committing
the offence of failing to comply with an order dated july 18, 2022, made by a
city of toronto building inspector pursuant to section 12, subsection 2 of the
building
code act
contrary to section 36(1)(b) of the
building code act.

on october 21, 2024, count one on the march 24, 2023, information, was
withdrawn. that left the remaining count, count 2, on the march 24, 2023,
information before the court as november 14, 2025.
procedural background –
disclosure motion

the argument of the defendant’s disclosure proceeded thusly:
1.
the defendant’s
matter, after oral argument of the defendant’s 11(b) of the
charter rights
and freedoms
(hereinafter the “charter”)
[v]
application on july 30, 2025, was adjourned to september 26, 2025, in case the
defendant’s 11b application was denied.
2.
on august 20, 2025,
the court issued reasons for decision denying the defendant’s request for a
stay of proceedings pursuant to
section 11(b)
of the
canadian charter
on the
basis that the matter, on a net basis, had taken more than 18 months to reach a
conclusion.
3.
on september 18,
2025, the parties agreed to adjourn the defendant’s matter from september 26, 2025,
to november 14, 2025, because of the unavailability of the court on september
26, 2025.
4.
between
september 18, 2025, and october 7, 2025, the court was advised that the
defendant’s position was that they intended to use the scheduled court date on
november 14, 2025, to argue a motion for disclosure.
5.
on october 7, 2025,
the court sent out an email to counsel advising that the defendant’s motion for
disclosure should be heard in writing, which counsel for the city agreed to.
however, counsel for the defendant did not agree, based on instructions from
the defendant the court learned on november 14, 2025, to have their disclosure
motion proceed in writing. therefore, the defendant’s matter returned to court
on november 14, 2025, with both counsel present but not the defendant due to
ongoing medical issues, for oral argument of the defendant’s disclosure motion.
6.
on november 14,
2025, counsel for the defendant proceeded to begin arguing their client’s
motion for disclosure. however, counsel for the defendant was unable to
complete oral argument of the defendant’s motion on november 14, 2025 because
the court did not have (1) a chart setting out the disclosure the defendant was
seeking, whether the disclosure the defendant was seeking was first or third
party disclosure, and the relevance of the disclosure the defendant was seeking,
and (2) a factum/statement of law from the defendant explaining to the court
the law governing disclosure in
provincial offence act
(hereinafter “
poa
”)
matters in ontario.

before court adjourned for the day on november 14, 2025, the parties
agreed to two things
1.
provide the
chart and factum/statement of law that the court had originally requested on
october 7, 2025, via email, and again requested from counsel on november 14,
2025; and
2.
a timeline for
serving and filing the materials that the court requested.
the law and analysis

in the headnote to the scc decision in
stinchcombe
the disclosure
scheme as outlined in
stinchcombe
was explained as follows:
[t]he
crown has a legal duty to disclose all relevant information to the
defence. the fruits of the investigation which are in its possession are
not the property of the crown for use in securing a conviction but the property
of the public to be used to ensure that justice is done. the obligation
to disclose is subject to a discretion with respect to the withholding of
information and to the timing and manner of disclosure. crown counsel has
a duty to respect the rules of privilege and to protect the identity of
informers. a discretion must also be exercised with respect to the
relevance of information. the crown's discretion is reviewable by the
trial judge, who should be guided by the general principle that information
should not be withheld if there is a reasonable possibility that this will
impair the right of the accused to make full answer and defence. the
absolute withholding of information which is relevant to the defence can only
be justified on the basis of the existence of a legal privilege which excludes
the information from disclosure. this privilege is reviewable, however,
on the ground that it is not a reasonable limit on the right to make full
answer and defence in a particular case.
[vi]

in
stinchcombe,
the ramifications of a lack of proper in criminal
cases was explained as follows:...there is the overriding
concern that failure to disclose impedes the ability of the accused to make
full answer and defence. this common law right has acquired new vigor by virtue
of its inclusion in
s. 7
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
as
one of the principles of fundamental justice.... the right to make full answer
and defence is one of the pillars of criminal justice on which we heavily
depend to ensure that the innocent are not convicted.
[vii]

recognizing that the possible deprivation of an accused’s
s. 7
charter
rights due to a lack of proper disclosure is highest when an accused is charged
with an indictable offence the scc went on, in
stinchcombe, to address the
consequences of a lack of proper disclosure on an accused
s. 7
rights when an
accused is charged with a summary conviction offence
[viii].
the general principles
referred to herein arise in the context of indictable offences. while it may be
argued that the duty of disclosure extends to all offences, many of the factors
which i have canvassed may not apply at all or may apply with less impact in
summary conviction offences. moreover, the content of the right to make full
answer and defence entrenched in
s. 7
of the
charter
may
be of a more limited nature. a decision as to the extent to which the general
principles of disclosure extend to summary conviction offences should be left
to a case in which the issue arises in such proceedings. in view of the number
and variety of statutes which create such offences, consideration would have to
be given as to where to draw the line. pending a decision on that issue, the
voluntary disclosure which has been taking place through the co-operation of
crown counsel will no doubt continue. continuation and extension of this
practice may eliminate the necessity for a decision on the issue by this court.
[ix]

following the release of
stinchcombe
the attorney general of
ontario convened an advisory panel on charge screening, disclosure, and
resolution discussions chaired by g. arthur martin. at the conclusion of the panel’s
work the panel released a report that has become colloquially known as the
“martin report”
[x].
at page 186 of the martin report the panel wrote:
“[i]n
summary conviction and
provincial offences act
prosecutions, proper disclosure as suggested by sopinka j. in
stinchcombe,
[
(1991),
1991 canlii 45 (scc),
68 c.c.c. (3d) 1
(s.c.c.)
] no doubt will
vary with the nature of the statute defining the offence, and the circumstances
of the prosecution. accordingly, the detailed recommendations with respect to
disclosure that follow may have varying degrees of application and/or
importance. in most summary conviction prosecutions and prosecutions under the
provincial
offences act, the disclosure will be simple and brief. on the other hand,
certain matters, for example, some prosecutions under...” [and then it gives
examples in environmental protection legislation,] “...may be highly complex,
and may involve serious allegations with grave consequences. in such cases,
full disclosure may be more lengthy and complex, and its significance may be
heightened.”

since the release of the martin report two decisions have been issued in
ontario that deal with the disclosure scheme when a defendant is charged
pursuant to the
poa. the first decision was
durham (regional
municipality) v. driscoll-rogers,
2008 oncj 581
(hereinafter “
durham
”)
and the second decision was
york (regional
municipality) v. mcguigan,
2018 onca 1062
(hereinafter “
mcguigan
”).

it is axiomatic, since
poa
matters are quasi-criminal in nature that a
defendant in a poa matter has the right to make full answer and defence. if it
is not axiomatic then part iv (trial and sentencing) of the
poa
makes it
explicitly clear that the defendant has this right:
trial on plea of not guilty
46
(1) if the defendant pleads not guilty, the court shall hold the
trial.
2009, c. 33, sched. 4, s. 1 (39).
right to defend
(2) the
defendant is entitled to make full answer and
defence.
r.s.o. 1990, c. p.33, s. 46 (2).
right to examine witnesses
(3) the
prosecutor or defendant, as the case may be, may examine and cross-examine
witnesses.
r.s.o. 1990, c. p.33, s. 46 (3).

in
durham
the court found in its ruling on a dispute between the
defendant and the prosecution over disclosure in a case about a charge of speeding
under part i of the
poa
that when:
1.
applying the
principles found in the martin report at page 186,
2.
considering
s. 2
of the
poa
[xi],
and
3.
reviewing the “
plethora of case law that finds the intention of the
provincial offences act
is to establish a speedy, efficient and convenient method of dealing
with offences under acts of the legislature and under regulations or by-laws
made under the authority of an act of the legislature”
[xii]
disclosure in
poa
matters
can be simple and brief. the court in
durham
grounded its reasoning that
keeping disclosure in
poa
matters simple and brief where possible preserves
a defendant’s right to defend themselves against poa charges while avoiding
poa
courts becoming bogged down in the complexities
that can arise in criminal proceedings.

in 2018, in what is now the leading authority, the
onca provided guidance to litigants on the issue of disclosure in
poa
matters. in
mcguigan
the onca said that “[t]
he
first principle governing the manner of disclosure is that it be meaningful, in
the sense that it be adequate to make full answer and defence.”
[xiii]

addressing the court’s reliance on the martin
report in
durham
to ground its finding that disclosure in
poa
matters can be less comprehensive, the onca stated that it did not:
read
the martin report the same way it was read in
durham.
durham
interpreted the martin report’s reference to “simple and brief” disclosure as
saying that disclosure can be less comprehensive in
poa
matters, than in
criminal cases. in fact, the martin report’s recommendation 36 is that “the
nature and extent of disclosure should not vary based on whether the charge was
prosecuted by way of indictment, summary conviction procedure, or prosecuted
under the
provincial offences act
”. when the martin report
referred to disclosure in poa matters being “simple and brief”, the committee
was doing no more than predicting what full disclosure is apt to look like in
simple prosecutions.
[xiv]

if the “the nature and extent of
disclosure should not vary based on whether the charge was prosecuted by way of
indictment, summary conviction procedure, or prosecuted under the
provincial offences act
”
[xv]
then
how do the principals outlined in stinchcombe apply in the poa context?
in addressing this question, the onca
in
mcguigan
explained the right to disclosure
in poa matters as follows:
a.
the governing principles
70 to be
eligible for disclosure, information and material must be relevant. there are
different modes of achieving disclosure, and the relevance inquiry operates in
modestly different ways between them. what is common to each disclosure
mechanism is that if the information or material lacks logical relevance, no
right of disclosure will exist.
71
 there are two general categories of disclosure.
72
 “first party disclosure” refers to information or material the
crown is obliged, on request, to deliver to the defendant without the need for
an application to the court. material will be subject to first party disclosure
only if it is “in the possession or control of the prosecuting crown”:
r. v.
gubbins,
2018 scc 44
(s.c.c.), at para.
33.
73
 if the accused wishes to compel the production of
information that does not qualify for first party disclosure, it must bring a
successful “third party disclosure” application, resulting in an order to have
the third party produce the information. mechanistically, this is achieved by
serving notice on the third-party record holder along with a subpoena requiring
the target information to be brought to court so that it will be within the
control of the court if production is ordered after a third-party records hearing.
74
in
gubbins,
(2018),
2018 scc 44,
2018 csc 44,
2018 carswellalta 2404,
2018 carswellalta 2405,
 11 w.w.r. 583,
76 alta. l.r. (6th) 213,
32 m.v.r. (7th) 1,
49 c.r. (7th)
209
(s.c.c.)
rowe j. discussed two ways that information can become
subject to first party disclosure, thereby avoiding the need, delay, expense
and formality of a third party record application, namely (1) as the “fruits of
the investigation”, or (2) as “obviously relevant” information: at para. 33.
they are the disclosure mechanisms most directly at issue here.
(1)
the fruits of the investigation
75 the
most familiar first party disclosure mechanism, developed
in
r. v.
stinchcombe,
1995 canlii 130 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 754
(s.c.c.), relates to the
“fruits of the investigation”. pursuant to
stinchcombe,
the prosecuting crown is obliged, on request, to disclose all relevant
information in its possession or control relating to the investigation against
a defendant.
76
 as explained in
jackson,
2015
onca 832
at paras.
93, 95, the “fruits of the investigation” “posits a
relationship between the subject-matter sought and the investigation that leads
to the charges against an accused”. “this information is generated or acquired
during or as a result of the specific investigation into the charges against
the accused”:
gubbins, at para.
22.
77
 it does not matter whether the crown intends to
rely on the fruits of the investigation at trial. the disclosure obligation
includes “not only information related to those matters the crown intends to
adduce in evidence against the accused, but also any information in respect of
which there is a reasonable possibility that it may assist the accused in the
exercise of the right to make full answer and defence”:
r. v. mcneil,
2009 scc 3,
 1 s.c.r. 66
(s.c.c.), at para.
17.
78
 still, the disclosure obligation does not
encompass all things that fall into the fruits of the investigation basket. it
does not extend to information in the crown’s possession that is clearly
irrelevant, privileged,
or
the disclosure of which is otherwise governed
by law:
mcneil, at para.
18.
79
 even though this first party disclosure
obligation is confined to information possessed by the prosecutor, it cannot be
defeated by leaving the fruits of the investigation in the hands of the
investigating police force. as charron j. explained
in
mcneil, at para.
14:
the
necessary corollary to the crown’s disclosure duty under
stinchcombe
is
the obligation of police (or other investigating state authority) to disclose
to the crown all material pertaining to its investigation of the accused. for
the purposes of fulfilling this corollary obligation, the investigating police
force, although distinct and independent from the crown at law, is not a third
party. rather, it acts on the same first party footing as the crown.
80 she
further explained, at para. 18, that the crown has limited, reviewable
discretion relating to the disclosure it makes: “the crown retains discretion
as to the manner and timing of disclosure where the circumstances are such that
disclosure in the usual course may result in harm to anyone or prejudice to the
public interest.”
83
 although
mcneil
dealt with police disciplinary records, this disclosure obligation applies to
all obviously relevant information or material possessed by the investigating
police force, not just obviously relevant police discipline information. this
follows not only as a matter of principle. it finds support in direction
provided by karakatsanis j., for the court,
in
r. v. quesnelle,
2014 scc 46,
 2 s.c.r. 390
(s.c.c.), at para.
12:
in
r.
v. mcneil... [t]his court... recognized that police have a duty to
disclose, without prompting, “all material pertaining to the investigation of
the accused” as well as other information “obviously relevant to the accused’s
case”. [citations omitted.]
84
 the phrase “obviously relevant” “represents a
comment on the obvious nature of the relevance of the record
in the case”:
jackson, at
para.
125;
see also
gubbins, at para.
23. it does not describe a
higher degree of relevance, since there is no such thing. relevance exists if
evidence has some logical tendency to make a material proposition more or less
likely:
r. c. j. (j.),
2000 scc 51,
 2 s.c.r. 600
(s.c.c.), at para.
47. the term “probative value” is used to describe how
compelling the relevant inference is.
mcneil
called for “obviously relevant” information, not obviously probative
information.
4
as
rowe j. explained
in
gubbins, at para.
23, “this phrase simply
describes information that is not within the investigative file, but that would
nonetheless be required to be disclosed under
stinchcombe
because it relates to the accused’s ability to meet the crown’s case, raise a
defence, or otherwise consider the conduct of the defence.”
85 in
context, the “without prompting” reference means that there should be no need
for the accused to bring a third-party record application to secure obviously
relevant information in the hands of the investigating police force. once the
investigating police force supplies the information to the crown, it “should be
turned over to the defence in compliance with the crown’s
stinchcombe
obligation of disclosure”:
mcneil, at para.
58.
86
 this is so notwithstanding that the information
“may not fall fairly within the ordinary sweep of ‘fruits of the
investigation’”:
jackson, at para.
116. information that is
“’obviously relevant’ to the defence case may need to be rustled up by the
police, provided to the crown and disclosed to the defence”:
jackson, at
para.
116. provided, of course, that the obviously relevant information is not
privileged or subject to statutory disclosure regimes.
(3)
other relevant information in possession of the prosecuting crown
87 there
is a third way in which information can become subject to first party
disclosure obligations, namely, where it is relevant and comes into the
possession of the prosecuting crown.
88
in
mcneil,
charron j. recognized as much. she was addressing cases where the crown is put
on notice of the existence of other relevant information in the hands of other
crown agencies or departments, including the investigating police force. she
said that in such cases the prosecuting crown has a duty to inquire about that
relevant information and to obtain it if reasonably feasible to do so:
mcneil, at
para.
49.
89
 this obligation was
described by karakatsanis j.
in
quesnelle, at para.
12, this way:
in
r.
v. mcneil... this court recognized that the crown cannot merely be a
passive recipient of disclosure material. instead, the crown has a duty to make
reasonable inquiries when put on notice of material in the hands of police or
other crown entities that is potentially relevant to the prosecution or the
defence.
90
 as this passage makes plain, this obligation
exists because the crown is not an ordinary litigant, but a minister of
justice, “duty-bound to seek justice, not convictions, and to avoid wrongful
convictions, in the prosecutions of all offences”:
quesnelle, at
para.
18. it owes this duty as an officer of the court unless the notice it
receives appears unfounded:
mcneil, at para.
49.
91
 the prosecuting crown’s duty to request relevant
information from other crown agents does not undermine the separation of the
crown and other crown agents. the other crown agents are not under an
enforceable, reciprocal legal duty to hand over information that the crown inquiries
about and asks for that is not the fruits of the investigation or obviously
relevant. quoting
r. v. arsenault
(1994),
1994 canlii 5244 (nb ca),
153 n.b.r. (2d) 81
(n.b. c.a.), at para.
15, charron j. made plain
in
mcneil, at para.
49,
that if the crown is denied access after making a good faith effort to secure
such information it is to advise the defence that the request was denied. the
accused’s remedy is not against the crown. instead, it should pursue a third-party
record application.
92
 it follows from the
mcneil
decision
that if the crown receives the information it requested, it is to act
as gate-keeper. if the information is relevant and not privileged or covered by
a statutory disclosure regime, the crown must make first party disclosure of
that information to the defence.
(4)
the manner of disclosure
94
 the crown therefore has discretion as to the
manner in which disclosure is made. that discretion is not unbridled. the first
principle is that disclosure must be meaningful, in the sense that it is
adequate to enable the accused to make full answer and defence:
r. v. pan,
2014 onsc 4645
(ont.
s.c.j.),
2014 canlii 74050, at paras.
72-75. this requires that disclosure must
be accessible. the disclosed information must be capable of identification and
the disclosure must enable proper trial preparation:
r. v. dunn
(2009),
2009 canlii 75397 (on sc),
251 c.c.c. (3d) 384
(ont. s.c.j.). to enable full answer
and defence, the accused must also have the means to access the disclosed
information in court, as needed.
(5)
first party disclosure under the
provincial offences
act
95 ….it is
non-contentious that full-blown
stinchcombe
obligations apply in the
summary prosecution of criminal offences. similarly, although this court has
not ruled directly on the question
[xvi], the obligation to make first
party disclosure in
poa
prosecutions appears to be non-controversial:
bruce
(county) v. kramer
2007 31 m.p.l.r. (4th) 79(ont. s.c.j.);
and
ontario (ministry of the environment) v. sault ste. marie (city)
2007 34 c.e.l.r. (3d) 123(ont. s.c.j.). it does not matter whether
the defendant’s life, liberty or security of the person is at risk. the
obligation on the crown to make first party disclosure is supported by
ss. 7
and
11(d)
of the
charter
but does not depend on the
charter.
stinchcombe
rested largely on the common law right to make full answer and defence, which
is provided for in
poa, s. 46(2).

in addition to the onca’s holding in
mcguigan
the poa
also governs the issue of disclosure.
section 35
of the
poa
states:
particulars
35
the court may, before or during trial, if it is
satisfied that it is necessary for a fair trial, order that a particular,
further describing any matter relevant to the proceeding, be furnished to the
defendant.
r.s.o. 1990, c. p.33, s. 35.

based on the foregoing the scheme that governs
disclosure in
poa
matters, in short, is as follows:
1.
is the disclosure relevant to the charges the defendant is facing?
a.
relevant disclosure is evidence that has some logical
tendency to make a material proposition more or less likely or put another way
is information that is required to be disclosed under
stinchcombe
because it relates to the accused’s ability to meet the crown’s case, raise a
defence, or otherwise consider the conduct of the defence
2.
is the disclosure “first” or “third” party disclosure?
a.
first party disclosure is disclosure that is considered either:
(i) “fruits of the
investigation” that led to the defendant being charged, and the prosecution is going
to rely on at trial or
may assist the
accused in the exercise of the right to make full answer and defence,
(ii) evidence in the
possession of the prosecution, either directly or indirectly by way of the investigating
police force, officer, or agency, that is highly relevant and that is not either
privileged,
otherwise not able to be
disclosed through the operation of law, or
(iii) is
otherwise relevant information/evidence that may not fall fairly with the
ordinary sweep of “fruits of the investigation” that the
prosecuting crown has a duty to inquire about that
relevant information and to obtain it if reasonably feasible to do so.
b.
third-party disclosure is disclosure is evidence/information that is
otherwise relevant that may not fall fairly
with the ordinary sweep of “fruits of the investigation” that the
prosecutor has an obligation to try and obtain and if it
cannot then have an obligation to advise the defence as to existence of so that
the defence can bring a third-party records application.
3.
if the disclosure is first party, then the prosecution is required
to furnish the defendant with the disclosure.
4.
if the disclosure is “third-party” disclosure the accused is
required to bring a third-party records application.

circling back to the question posed in the introduction to these
reasons, how strictly must the stinchcombe disclosure scheme be adhered to in
poa
matters, the answer as it usually is, it depends. it depends because if the
case before a
poa
court is a straightforward speeding charge then
disclosure will be simple and brief and neither the prosecution nor the defence
will be required to engage in a stinchcombe analysis to determine whether the
prosecution has satisfied its disclosure obligation. however, if the case
before a poa court is more complex or the penalties are significant, as was the
case at bar before this court, or in an environmental prosecution for instance
then the disclosure will not be simple and brief and both the prosecution and the
defence will be required to engage in a stinchcombe analysis to determine
whether the prosecution has satisfied its disclosure obligation.

as stated in the martin report “
proper disclosure as suggested
by sopinka j. in
stinchcombe,…will vary with the nature of the statute
defining the offence, and the circumstances of the prosecution
[xvii]. therefore, the stinchcombe
disclosure scheme must always be followed in all cases that come before a poa
courts in ontario, as it is in criminal law cases, but the nature of the
engagement in a stinchcombe analysis will depend on the nature of the charge
before a poa court.
defendant’s
request for addition disclosure

the defendant seeks the following further disclosure
from the city on the basis that it is first-party disclosure:
1.
property permits from 1979 and earlier if applicable; file
memorandum, emails from inspectors, and site plans related to the property,
including all documents relating to city of toronto permit file no. 19-182202.
2.
any bylaw amendment documents in the city’s possession related to
the property in or around 1979 and prior to and subsequent to 1979.
3.
an unredacted copy of the disclosure provided to the defendant on
may 27, 2025.
4.
all field notes, memorandum, photos, statements taken, will say
statements, emails as between city inspectors, and the contact information for all
city inspectors who were involved with inspecting 346 dundas.

the basis for the defendant’s request for
disclosure is that the disclosure they seek forms the basis for a potential
defence. that defence according to the defendant is that the wooden balconies in
question were structures that were built prior to the date they purchased 346 dundas.
however, this is not a defence that defendant can raise at trial because of the
finding of the court in kritz v. guelph (city),
2016 onsc 6877:
9
 mr. kritz submits that he is not subject to the
order to comply because, although he is a co-owner of 108 dublin, he did not
carry out the unlawful construction. the city’s position is that the current
owner is responsible for ensuring that 108 dublin is in compliance with the
bca
and the
ontario building code,
o.
reg. 332/12
(the “
obc
”). to hold otherwise would be contrary to
public policy and would allow owners to avoid responsibility by simply
transferring their buildings.
10
 section 12 (2) of the
act
stipulates:
(2) an inspector who finds a
contravention of this
act
or the
building code
may make an order
directing compliance with this
act
or the
building code
and may
require the order to be carried out immediately or within such time as is
specified in the order.
11
 in
r. v. 1267017 ontario ltd.
(2001),
51 w.c.b. (2d) 171
(ont. c.j.)
[
2001
carswellont 2953
(ont. c.j.)
], at para.
21, lampkin j. said:
notwithstanding the evidence
that the construction appeared to be recent, which i would construe to be
within the past year of inspection without actually seeking to define the term
“recent”, if the building was purchased in its present condition, once the
order to comply had been served, the respondent had to make the necessary
arrangements to obtain the building permit. if it sought to dispute the
authority of the building inspector to issue the order, then the provision for
settling disputes in the
act
must be employed. failing that, he is
deemed to have constructed the building without a building permit.
12 as
well, master muir in
toronto (city) v. tseng,
2011 onsc 4594,
87 m.p.l.r. (4th) 220
(ont. s.c.j.), at para
22,
said:
22
the respondent also suggests that this proceeding is an abuse of process
because the respondent was not the owner of the property at the time the
subject addition was constructed. the respondent argues that the applicants’
only remedy is to pursue the former owners, presumably with charges under
section
36 of the
bca. in my view, this argument is also without merit. such an
interpretation would leave a municipality without the ability to enforce
compliance with the
bca, or its zoning and other by-laws, by the simple act of the
transfer of a property that has been constructed or renovated in contravention
of such laws and regulations. moreover, the respondent, through her role as
agent for the former owners, was fully aware of the applicants’ position with
respect to the property when she took title from her parents and siblings on
january 6, 2011. the relief being sought on this application should come as no
surprise to her.
13
 i find both of those cases persuasive. to find
otherwise would mean that one could avoid the requirements of the
act
by
simply transferring ownership. more importantly, it would mean that the city
would be required to attempt to enforce the provisions of the
act
on one
who had no further interest in the land. that former owner would have to
somehow get the new owner to comply. that interpretation would make no sense.
14
 here, if the inspector found a contravention of
the
act, the order must have to be against the owner. in my view, that
is exactly why mr. kritz made the enquiries he did before he took possession of
the property when he purchased it. mr. kritz is bound by the order.

even if the defence that the defendant claims
were open to them, which it is not, the defendant has not established a basis which
could enable the court to conclude that the records do in fact exist and that
they are potentially relevant
[xviii].
the defendant has not because the email dated march 19, 2024 from a city
inspector on which the defendant relies does not discuss building permit plans.
rather, it is an email from a city inspector for direction from a supervisor
because a 2
nd
floor deck is attached to the defendant’s building
without a permit
[xix]:

if the reference to email from a city
inspector for direction, as referenced in the defendant’s materials, is not the
basis for the defendant’s request for further disclosure the only other
possible basis for the defendant’s request for further disclosure that was
brought to the court’s attention
[xx]
was an email dated november 30, 2021. this email is an email by a city building
inspector to a city employee in the city building records department asking if
there were other permit plans
[xxi]
available for 346 dundas:

as the prosecutor in the respondent’s factum
argued there is nothing in this email that either explicitly or implicitly rebuts
the city’s position that there was no building permits issued for 346 dundas as
it pertains to the construction done to 346 dundas that forms the basis of the
july 18, 2022, order to comply, which is at the heart of the litigation before
this court. as such, if the defendant is relying on the november 30, 2021,
email and not the march 19, 2024, email, the defendant still has not
established a basis for which the court can order the further disclosure the
defendant is seeking.

the defendant further argues that they are
entitled to further disclosure in the possession of the city because the
balconies in question “may have probably been built under a previous by-law
that allowed such structures with the city’s approval before amalgamation
[xxii].” without a firmer
foundation than speculation, which is what the statement “may have probably”
amounts to is a fishing expedition. fishing expeditions can not form the basis
for a request for disclosure by a defendant because as stated by the supreme
court in
r v. chaplin
[xxiii]
reference to the possible existence of evidence is purely speculative and mere
conjecture; and mere speculation and conjecture can not be the basis of a
request for disclosure because then all materials produced in the course of an
investigation, whether relevant or not, would have to be disclosed by the
crown, which is contrary to principles governing disclosure as outlined by the
onca in
mcguigan.

finally, the defendant argues that the “city’s
building permit records probably contain evidence that plans and or site plans
were submitted, and permits were issued before 2004, which could provide a
complete response and defence to the only remaining charge
[xxiv]. again, this argument is
based on speculation. further, even if the defendant’s argument were not based
on speculation, the city, as the defendant has acknowledged
[xxv]
does not have any building
permits for the wood structures constructed at 346 dundas that are at issue in
this litigation in its possession; and that building permits that the city has
in its possession for the timeframe the defendant is seeking, 1979 and 2020,
have already been disclosed.
[xxvi]
conclusion

in the party’s respective factum’s much was made
about possible defences,
charter
violations, limitations periods, and
collateral attacks. however, these issues were not before the court. the issue
before the court, as raised in the defendant’s motion, was whether the city
should be required to provide further first party disclosure within its
possession.

it is this court’s view that as the defendant
did not establish that the city has relevant disclosure within its possession
that it has not already disclosed that would allow the defendant to make full
answer and defence the city is not required to provide further first party
disclosure to the defendant. therefore, the court is not granting the order
requested by the defendant.

now that the issue of whether there is outstanding
disclosure that needs to be provided before a trial can commence has been
settled the defendant’s matter can proceed to trial. if the defendant, as
indicated in there notice of motion, wants to raise the issue of a violation of
their
charter
rights, they will be permitted to do so at the conclusion of the
prosecutions case before the opening their case.

the defendant’s trial will commence on the next
juridical day that the defendant’s matter is scheduled to be before this court.
released: december
8, 2025.
signed:
justice of the peace r. shawyer
[i]
r v. nguyen,
2020
onca 609
at para
26, “…
the
poa
is intended to
provide a speedy and efficient process for dealing with regulatory offences…”
[ii]
ontario.
report of
the attorney general’s advisory committee on charge screening, disclosure, and
resolution discussions. toronto, 1993, at page 186 (hereinafter the
“martin’s report”)
[iii]
ontario v. 974649 ontario
inc.,
2001 scc 81
at para.
78
citing
douglas
drinkwalter & douglas ewart, ontario provincial offences procedure
(toronto: the carswell company limited, 1980) at pp 4-7.
[iv]
see
york (regional municipality) v. mcguigan,
2018 onca 1062
at
para
79.
[v]
canadian charter of rights and
freedoms, s 11(b),
part 1 of the
constitution act, 1982, being schedule b to the
canada
act 1982
(uk), 1982, c 11.
[vi]
see
r. v. stinchcombe,
1991 canlii 45 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 326
headnote
[vii]
ibid., at paragraph 17.
[viii]
this court reads
r. v. stinchcombe,
1991 canlii 45 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 326
as only referring to disclosure in strictly criminal law
cases. whereas the court
in
durham (regional
municipality) v. driscoll-rogers,
2008
oncj 581
reads
stinchcombe
as referring to disclosure in both
criminal and provincial offences matters.
[ix]
supra.,
note vii at paragraph 26.
[x]
ontario ministry of the
attorney general,
report of the attorney general's advisory committee
on charge screening, disclosure, and resolution discussions, 1993
[xi]
s. 2 of the ontario
provincial offences act, as
amended, states the purpose of that act as “to replace the summary conviction procedure
for the prosecution of provincial offences, including the provisions adopted by
reference to the
criminal code
(canada), with a procedure that reflects the distinction between
provincial offences and criminal offences”:
see
durham (regional
municipality) v. driscoll-rogers,
2008 oncj 581
at paragraph
30.
[xii]
durham (regional
municipality) v. driscoll-rogers,
2008 oncj 581
at paragraph
31
[xiii]
ibid., note ix at paragraph 130.
[xiv]
see
york (regional municipality) v. mcguigan,
2018 onca 1062
at
footnote 6 in paragraph 97.
[xv]
supra., note x at pg. 186.
[xvi]
see
york (regional municipality) v. mcguigan,
2018 onca 1062,
footnote 5 at
para 95 where the onca noted “
in
1353837 ontario inc.,
(2005),
2005 canlii 4189 (on ca),
2005 carswellont 652,
6 m.p.l.r. (4th) 51,
193
c.c.c. (3d) 468,
195 o.a.c. 213,
74 o.r. (3d) 401,
249 d.l.r. (4th) 720
(ont. c.a.), a justice of the peace denied cross-examination sought in aid of a
stinchcombe
disclosure application. a
certiorari
application was
brought and granted on the basis that this was a jurisdictional error. this
court allowed the appeal, setting aside the
certiorari
order. the appeal
proceeded on consensus that
stinchcombe
disclosure obligations applied.
in
ontario v. 974649 ontario inc.
(1998),
1998 canlii 6098 (on ca),
42 o.r. (3d) 354
(ont. c.a.), and
r. v. ul-rashid,
2014 onca 896,
70 m.v.r. (6th) 181
(ont. c.a.), the crown conceded before this court that it had failed to make
proper
stinchcombe
disclosure.
[xvii]
supra., note x at page 186.
[xviii]
see
r v.
chaplin,
1994 carswellalta 1069
at paragraph
30.
[xix]
affidavit of g. di marco
dated april 6, 2025, at page 70. in the email cited by the defendant the
property is referred to as 166 seaton st, which the court has been led to
believe is the other municipal address by which 346 dundas is known.
[xx]
respondent’s factum at
paragraph 15 citing the affidavit of guiseppe dimarco sworn october 16, 2025,
at tab 2, pg. 52.
[xxi]
permit plans if the court
understands the respondent’s factum dated december 3, 2025, at paragraph 15 correctly
the plans that a person or entity seeking a building permit must submit to the
city as part of there application for a building permit and as such are not
building permits but rather building plans.
[xxii]
defendant’s factum dated november
26, 2025, at paragraph 28.
the
amalgamation that the defendant is referring to in their factum is the
amalgamation of the former municipalities of metro toronto, etobicoke,
scarborough, north york, east york, york, and the city of toronto, on january
1, 1998.
[xxiii]
supra., note xviii at paragraph 30.
[xxiv]
defendant’s factum dated
november 26, 2025, at paragraph 26.
[xxv]
a
ffidavit of guiseppe dimarco
sworn october 16, 2025, at para. 21
[xxvi]
affidavit of hyeji lee sworn
december 3, 2025, exhibits d and e.