source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj527/2025oncj527.html

citation:
r. v. shergill, 2025 oncj 527
court
file no.: 24-61100155
date:
october 8, 2025
ontario
court of justice
central west region
at orangeville
between:
his
 majesty the king
—
 and —
amrit singh shergill
heard
before mr. justice richard h.k.
schwarzl
on
april
11, 15 and september 5, 2025
reasons released on october 8, 2025
ms.
sarah khan..................................................................................................... 
for the crown
mr.
david locke............................................................................................... 
for the defendant
schwarzl,
j.:
reasons for judgment
1.0: introduction
[
1.]
the defendant,
mr. amrit singh shergill, was charged with impaired driving and driving with
excess blood alcohol arising from a single car collision in the wee hours of
january 14, 2024.
[
2.]
at his
trial, two issues are at play. first, whether the prosecution has proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s ability to operate a conveyance
was impaired by the consumption of alcohol. second, whether the police
probably violated the defendant’s right to counsel guaranteed by
section 10(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
(the charter) and, if so,
what remedy, if any, ought to flow.
2.0: facts not in dispute
[
3.]
shortly
after 3:00 a.m. on january 14, 2024, the defendant was driving alone on
centreville creek road in caledon. it was cold, wet, and windy with poor
visibility. he lost control and his car struck a pole, causing not only damage
to his car, but serious injuries to his right eye and head. he immediately
called police to report the accident.
[
4.]
around
3:10 a.m. p.c. martins arrived on scene and saw the defendant standing on the
shoulder of the road near his car. the officer noticed the defendant’s
injuries and that he had alcohol on his breath. although p.c. martins recalled
the defendant stumbling, a viewing of his car’s dashcam did not reveal
stumbling, only being slightly unsure while wearing summer shoes on a snowy
incline. the officer observed that mr. shergill appeared a bit incoherent, but
the officer could not say if that was because of the alcohol or the collision. 
p.c. martin agreed that the defendant showed decent balance and his speech was
clear.
[
5.]
a few
minutes later, constables patterson and franks attended the scene. p.c.
patterson recalled the defendant’s speech was slurred. p.c. franks only went
as far as to say that the defendant sounded dazed, which he said was not
surprising given the defendant’s injuries. p.c. franks conceded that the
defendant’s behaviour at the scene, other than the odour of alcohol, might be
the result of a serious collision.
[
6.]
p.c.
patterson testified that she “suspected the defendant was impaired by alcohol”

and made a screening demand. 
a test was administered, and the defendant failed. p.c. patterson then arrested
the defendant for impaired driving, stating “i had reason to believe he was
impaired and over the legal limit”.

[
7.]
upon his
arrest, the defendant was given his right to counsel. he told the police he
wanted to call someone to facilitate access to a lawyer.
[
8.]
while the
police tended to the defendant, his brother showed up on scene. he actively
obstructed the investigation by encouraging the defendant to refrain from
cooperating with the police. the defendant’s brother also tried to get the
police to “let things go” without any further consequences to the defendant. 
officers eventually got the defendant’s brother to leave the scene shortly
after he was allowed to speak with the defendant inside the ambulance that had
arrived.
[
9.]
the
defendant was transported to the nearest hospital. on arrival, p.c. patterson
asked him if he had a lawyer that he wanted to call. he said he wanted to
speak with his brother to access a lawyer. given his brother’s intrusive
behaviour at the collision scene, the officer asked the defendant if there was
someone else the police could call for him. the defendant replied that he
wanted to speak to his sister.
[
10.]
while
resting on a gurney, the defendant was allowed to speak to his sister. when he
was finished the defendant told p.c. patterson that his sister would call back
with information for a lawyer to call. p.c. patterson said that the sister had
twenty minutes to find a lawyer. no reason was given for this curfew.
[
11.]
the
defendant’s sister called back and wanted to speak to the defendant. p.c.
patterson refused the request and said the sister could give her the lawyer’s
information to pass on to the defendant. at this point, the defendant’s
brother got on the phone wanting to speak with the defendant. p.c. patterson
turned the phone over to p.c. franks because the brother was upset with her. 
p.c. franks cautioned the brother to only provide the defendant with the
lawyer’s name and contact information.
[
12.]
p.c.
franks obliged the brother’s request to speak with the defendant after he said,
“i have spoken with a lawyer. let me speak to amrit.” however, p.c. franks
did not permit the conversation to be private because the brother was not a
lawyer

and was not giving the police any information regarding counsel. there was a
brief conversation between the brothers on speaker phone but not about
accessing a lawyer. the brother once again told the defendant to not cooperate
with the police. p.c. franks took the call off the speaker and told the
defendant’s brother privately to just give the police the lawyer’s information,
failing which they would call duty counsel to which the brother replied, “yes,
contact duty counsel for him.”
[
13.]
at this
point, the phone was disconnected and p.c. patterson called duty counsel. she
did so because “there was no movement on getting the defendant to speak with a
lawyer because he didn’t have his own lawyer” and because the brother would not
identify the lawyer he claimed to have spoken to.
[
14.]
neither p.c.
patterson nor p.c. franks told the defendant that the police could not get any
information about a lawyer from his brother. they did not tell him that duty counsel
had been called at the direction of his brother. neither officer asked the
defendant if there was another person that he wanted to call to try to access a
lawyer.
[
15.]
prior to
providing suitable samples of his breath directly into an approved instrument
that had been brought to the hospital by the qualified technician, sgt.
edwards, the defendant was able to speak with duty counsel with as much privacy
that could be afforded in an emergency room setting.
[
16.]
when he
was finished speaking with duty counsel, p.c. patterson asked the defendant if
he was satisfied with the legal advice he received. he told p.c. patterson and
p.c. franks, “i am satisfied at this point” and did not complain about the
lawyer nor did he ask to speak with another lawyer or anyone else to access a
lawyer. neither officer asked what the defendant meant by “at this point.”
[
17.]
p.c.
franks testified that in hindsight it would have been prudent to ask the
defendant directly about securing a lawyer from another family member or if he
wanted to speak with duty counsel. p.c. franks also agreed that the decision
to call duty counsel was made by the police without any input from the
defendant. p.c. franks acknowledged that normally the police would speak
directly to a detainee about accessing a lawyer but, he said, this situation
was anything but normal given the defendant’s brother’s interference. p.c.
franks agreed that he was flummoxed and frustrated by the brother’s
interference which probably caused him to forget to speak directly to the
defendant about getting legal advice.
[
18.]
a short
time later, the defendant provided suitable samples of his breath directly into
the approved instrument. the truncated test results were both 150 milligrams
of alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood. sgt. edwards felt the defendant was
impaired due to the test results, the defendant’s bloodshot eyes, and his
defensive behaviour with the officer. sgt. edwards agreed that the defendant’s
speech was not slurred and that his balance was sure.
2.0: was the
defendant impaired to drive?
2.1: 
positions of the parties
[
19.]
the crown
submits that given the unexplained collision, the odour of alcohol, and his
dazed behaviour following the crash, they have met their burden of proof
regarding the impairment of the defendant’s ability to drive safely.
[
20.]
the
defence submits that at the highest, the constellation of facts in this case
may give rise to a suspicion that could justify a screening test but does not
reach the threshold of reasonable grounds let alone proof beyond a reasonable
doubt.
2.2: analysis
[
21.]
for
reasons i will explain, i find that the prosecution has failed to meet the
requisite standard of proof the defendant was impaired.
[
22.]
the
circumstances suggest that other than the odour of alcohol, the facts are as
likely to be consistent with an accident as it is with impairment of the
driver. the collision could have reasonably been caused by poor the wet road,
strong wind, and poor visibility. the behaviour of the defendant at the scene
was as equally consistent with significant head injuries as it was with the
influence of alcohol. i am not persuaded that the defendant’s speech was
slurred, that he was dazed and confused, or that his balance was poor because
of consuming alcohol. his red eyes are equally consistent with a serious
injury to his eye and head. his defensiveness with sgt. edwards is not
definitively due to alcohol; to the contrary given the bad advice given by his
brother to him prior to the breath tests, i am not surprised that the defendant
was less than cooperative with the breath technician. alcohol on the breath
is, without more, insufficient to find impairment.
[
23.]
i agree
with the defence that on examining the evidence as a whole, there is
insufficient proof of impairment to justify a finding of guilt on the impaired
driving charge. i therefore find mr. shergill not guilty of this charge.
3.0: did the police likely breach the
defendant’s right to counsel?
3.1: the facts
[
24.]
i have
already made relevant findings of fact earlier in my reasons regarding the
question of rights to counsel.
[
25.]
on a voir
dire, the defendant testified that he knew his sister called and that his
brother was on the phone, too. he said he did not hear what p.c. franks and
his brother talked about. no one told him he could not try someone else to get
a lawyer. he said that if he had been told, he had two other relatives to
call, one of whom knows mr. shergill’s trial lawyer. the defendant’s evidence
is consistent with the evidence of the police about his vacuum of knowledge
before the police called duty counsel.
[
26.]
the
defendant also testified that he knew he was speaking to a lawyer when talking
to duty counsel. he said that when asked about speaking to duty counsel, he
was satisfied at that point. he explained that since he had no way of
accessing a lawyer of his own, he acquiesced to the situation. mr. shergill
testified, “i felt like a third party to my own case. the police froze me out
and didn’t tell me anything. i felt defeated by the way the police were not
including me in the pursuit of my own lawyer.” he added that he said was
satisfied at that point because he believed that duty counsel was all he was
going to get. he said he wanted to speak to a lawyer trusted by his family and
not to a complete stranger.
[
27.]
the
defendant agreed that he was told he could call any lawyer he wished but said
that if he was told his brother was of no use, he would have told the police
about his uncle and his cousin.
3.2: was the defendants’ right to counsel probably
breached?
[
28.]
to
determine whether the defendant’s right to counsel was likely violated by the
police, two questions must be examined. an examination of the conduct of both
the police and the defendant is required. on the one hand, the police must act
reasonably in facilitating access to counsel; and on the other hand, the
detainee must be reasonably diligent in pursuing his desire to speak with a
lawyer.
[
29.]
the
prosecution argued that (a) the police acted reasonably and (b) the defendant
did not. the defence submitted that (a) the police did not act reasonably
whereas (b) the defendant was reasonably diligent.
[
30.]
i agree
with the defendant that pc patterson was unreasonable to give the defendant’s
sister a twenty minute deadline within which to find a lawyer. she had
received an unexpected call in the middle of the night and confronted with news
that her brother was under arrest and in the hospital. pc patterson offered no
rhyme nor reason for what appears to be an arbitrary, if not capricious, limit
on the defendant’s ability to locate a lawyer for him to consult.
[
31.]
of
significance to this analysis is that the defendant always made it clear to the
police that he wanted to speak to a lawyer recommended by his family. at no
time did he say he wanted anyone else. in this aspect he was diligent in
expressing his mode of exercising his rights.
[
32.]
pc franks
was a reliable and important witness. he readily acknowledged that no officer
informed the defendant that his brother did not provide any lawyer’s
information. nor, he said, did the police give the defendant a chance to then
call someone else to get a lawyer. finally, pc franks was candid that the
police skipped involving the defendant and went straight to calling duty
counsel after being irritated by the defendant’s brother.
[
33.]
police
officers are, of course, as human as the rest of us. they frequently have to
deal with situations and people that get under their skin. due to their
training, duties, and civic responsibilities the police are required to
maintain their emotions and be focussed on their tasks including respecting the
rights of detainees.
[
34.]
here, the
defendant was not a real problem, but his brother was. i agree with the
defence that mr. shergill was not given any choice in who he spoke to because
he had been “cut out of the loop” by his brother and by the police. the police
got so annoyed and vexed by the defendant’s brother abominable behaviour that
they outright forgot to facilitate the defendant’s desire to speak a lawyer of
his choosing.
[
35.]
while it
may be tempting to find that in these peculiar circumstances the police acted
reasonably in light of the brother’s interference, to do so would be to condone
the use of emotion over reason by the police. as such, i find that the police
were not reasonable in facilitating the defendant’s access to a lawyer.
[
36.]
i also
find that the defendant was reasonably diligent on these facts. i accept that
when he said he was satisfied “at this point” with the legal advice he was
acquiescing to a situation over which he had been excluded from any input. 
furthermore, the phrase “at this point” was sufficiently ambiguous that the
police had a responsibility to ensure that this was a clear waiver of the
defendant’s rights. by not doing so, they were not acting reasonably.
3.3: having
found a breach of the defendant’s rights, should there be a remedy?
[
37.]
the
defendant seeks to exclude the breath test results as a remedy of the breach.
[
38.]
in
r.
v. grant,
2009 scc 32, the supreme court laid down the three-part inquiry
into the exclusion of evidence as a remedy for a
charter
breach. those parts
are (1) the seriousness of the breach, (2) the impact of the breach on the
protected interested of the detainee, and (3) society’s interest in the
adjudication of the case on its merits. all three parts must be weighed and
balanced and the burden is on the applicant to persuade the court that the
scales are tipped in his favour.
[
39.]
with
respect to the assessment of the seriousness of the breach, the concern is not
about punishing the police but rather to preserve the public’s confidence in
the rule of law and its processes. seriousness is an elastic term that is
placed on a spectrum. as the supreme court
stated in
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12 (canlii),

scj no. 12
at para.
82:
at
the more serious end of the culpability scale are wilful or reckless disregard
of
charter
rights, a systemic pattern of charter-infringing conduct, or a major
departure from charter standards. courts should dissociate themselves from such
conduct because it risks bringing the administration of justice into disrepute.
at the less serious end of the culpability scale are charter breaches that are
inadvertent, technical, or minor, or which reflect an understandable mistake.
such circumstances minimally undermine public confidence in the rule of law,
and thus dissociation is much less of a concern.
[
40.]
in this
case, i would put the breach on the more serious end of the spectrum that
favours exclusion. although not deliberate, the breach was unacceptably
negligent for two reasons. first, there was no reason at all for pc patterson
to put an arbitrary cap on the time within which the defendant could exercise
his rights. second, the failure of the police to act reasonably was the result
of them unacceptably losing focus on the rights of the defendant by utterly
bypassing him once they hung up on his brother, thereby disregarding their
duties to him. i find that there was a significant departure from the standard
of conduct expected of police officer:
r. v. stipo,
 o.j. no.3530
(s.c.j.)
at para 60.
[
41.]
as for
the impact on a defendant’s rights, the court must once again place the impact
on a spectrum from impacts that are trivial, transient, or technical to those
that seriously compromise the interests underlying the rights infringed:
grant,
paras.
76-78;
tim, para
90. the greater the impact, the greater the
risk that admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute.
[
42.]
here, the
fact that the defendant actually received legal advice prior to supplying his
samples of breath attenuates the impact on his
charter
protected rights. 
however, detainees are entitled to speak with a lawyer in whom they have
confidence. access to legal advice is a fundamental right and goes to the
heart of a detainee to get a “lifeline” of their choosing during an obviously
stressful and important situation such as this. here, the impact on the
defendant’s charter protected interests was on the more serious end of the
spectrum, tending to favour exclusion.
[
43.]
finally,
there is no doubt that cases where there is evidence involving bodily samples
are generally reliable and favour admission:
grant
at para.
110. here,
the breath test results are reliable and vital to a determination of the case
on its merits. without the admission of the test results, there is no case for
the prosecution. this factor therefore favours admission of the evidence.
[
44.]
having
considered and balanced the various
factors set out in
grant, i find
that the defendant has persuaded me that the breath test results in this case
ought to be excluded from the evidence. there being no other evidence of the
defendant’s blood alcohol concentration at the time of the alleged offence, i
must find him not guilty of driving with excess blood alcohol.
4.0: conclusions
[
45.]
for the
reasons set out herein, my verdicts are as follows:
(a)
count 2 –
impaired driving: not guilty.
(b)
count 1 –
driving with excess blood alcohol: not guilty.
_______________________________
richard
h.k. schwarzl,
justice
of the ontario court of justice

this is a conflation of two separate
legal doctrines which, unfortunately, appears all too common amongst opp
officers in recent years.

this conclusion was wrong in law. a
fail of a screening test may give rise to reasonable grounds that the person
was driving with excess blood alcohol but not that the driver was impaired
without other indicia of intoxication. if pc patterson believed the defendant
was impaired
before
making a screening demand, there would be no need to
make the demand or to administer the test.

mr. shergill’s brother was, in fact, a
police officer at the time with a major municipal police service.