source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj191/2025oncj191.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
—
(1)
every person who fails to comply with an order made
under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
of the
criminal code. these
subsections and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code, which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2), read as follows:
486.5 order
restricting publication
— victims and witnesses
— (1)
unless an order is made under section 486.4, on application of
the prosecutor in respect of a victim or a witness, or on application of a
victim or a witness, a judge or justice may make an order directing that any
information that could identify the victim or witness shall not be published in
any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is
of the opinion that the order is in the interest of the proper administration
of justice.
(2)
justice system participants —
on
application of the prosecutor in respect of a justice system participant who is
involved in proceedings in respect of an offence referred to in subsection
(2.1), or on application of such a justice system participant, a judge or
justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify
the justice system participant shall not be published in any document or
broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is of the opinion
that the order is in the interest of the proper administration of justice....
(2.1) offences
–
the offences for the purposes of subsection (2)
are
(a) an offence under section
423.1, 467.11, 467.111, 467.12, or 467.13, or a serious offence committed for
the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal
organization;
(b) a terrorism offence;
(c) an offence under
subsection 16(1) or (2), 17(1), 19(1), 20(1) or 22(1) of the
security of
information act; or
(d) an offence under
subsection 21(1) or section 23 of the
security of information act
that
is committed in relation to an offence referred to in paragraph (c).
(3)
limitation
– an order made under this section does not apply
in respect of the disclosure of information in the course of the administration
of justice if it is not the purpose of the disclosure to make the information
known in the community....
486.6 offence
—
(1)
every
person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. k.b.,
2025 oncj 191
date: 
2025 04 09
court
file no.: oshawa 24 28104144
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
k.b.
before
justice joseph hanna
reasons
for judgment released orally on april 7, 2025
written
reasons released on april 9, 2025
k. buker................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
k.
manitius.......................................................................................................... for
the accused
hanna j.:
introduction

this is a case involving serious domestic violence. k.b. pleaded
guilty to three counts of assault, two counts of assault with choking,
threatening to damage property, threatening death, and theft. the crown elected
to proceed by indictment.

the crown seeks a total sentence of 39 months and ½ months less
credit for pre-sentence custody.

the defence submits that a sentence in the range of 18 – 24
months less credit for pre-sentence custody would be appropriate.

these are my reasons for sentence.
circumstances
of the offences

k.b. and a.m. began a dating relationship in
july 2023. they lived together intermittently during the period when the
offences occurred.

on december 24, 2023, k.b. and a.m. were
playfully pushing each other. at one-point k.b. pushed a.m. with force that he
agrees was beyond playful. a.m. pushed him back. k.b. then grabbed a.m.’s shirt
and hit a.m. with other hand. a.m. blocked some of the strikes. she did not
suffer any injuries during this incident.

on may
2, 2024, k.b. and a.m. got into an argument in toronto. a.m. then took the
train alone to ajax. while she was on the train k.b. sent her text messages
containing threats to blow up her jeep and set it on fire. when a.m. arrived in
ajax a passenger on the train drove her to her parked vehicle because there had
been another passenger who had been harassing a.m. after she arrived at her
vehicle k.b. approached a.m. he used one hand to grab her neck and applied
enough pressure to cause a.m. to gasp for air. k.b. used his other hand to
strike a.m. several times in her face. as a result, a.m. sustained slight
bruising to her cheekbone, swollen lips, and a cut on her inner lip. she also
experienced neck soreness, a sore throat, and difficulties swallowing.

on may
3, 2024, k.b. and a.m. got into an argument. k.b. grabbed a.m.’s throat, threw
her against a closet, and strangled her. soon after, k.b. put a.m. into a
headlock and applied pressure to her neck. he covered her mouth and nose. a.m.
feared for her life. k.b. then stole a.m.’s phone from her person and demanded
she provide him her password so that he could review her conversations
contained on it. he later left the residence with a.m.’s phone.

k.b.
found messages on a.m.’s phone from her friends about encouraging her to
contact the police. k.b. then contacted the complainant. he warned her that if
one of her friends contacted the police, he would commit a murder suicide. he
also stated that he might as well kill her now because he was not going to
return to jail. upon hearing a knock at the door, a.m. fled the residence
through the back door and attended a neighbour’s residence where she contacted
the police.
facts
relating to the offender

k.b. is
36 years old.

he grew
up in toronto.

he has
a criminal record. in april 2014 he was sentenced in alberta for 32 domestic
violence related offences arising from 21 incidents, which occurred over a
5-year period. these offences were: two counts of sexual assault, two counts of
assault causing bodily harm, five counts of assault with a weapon, four counts of
unlawful confinement, 12 counts of assault, six counts of uttering threats, and
one count of possessing a weapon for a dangerous purpose. he received a total
sentence of 9 ½ years imprisonment less credit less for time served in
pre-sentence custody. at the time sentence was imposed he had 79 and ½ months
left to serve. the warrant expiry date on his sentence would therefore have
been in early december 2020. he remembers being paroled in july 2018.

after
being paroled he returned to ontario. he is a trained heavy-duty mechanic. he
has been employed at ontario truck centre since 2018. he holds a permanent
fulltime position as a shop foreman/tower operator. he earns a good wage and
holds significant responsibilities at his work.

the
defence filed numerous letters of support from k.b.’s family. i received
letters written from k.b.’s father, sister, brother, and mother. collectively,
they describe k.b. as a hardworking, respectful, helpful, and active person.
his family members indicate through their letters that they will support k.b.
in his rehabilitation by whatever means necessary. i have read all these
letters and will only highlight a few additional portions of them.

his
sister, e.v.’s letter states that she believes it is a waste of time to lock
her brother up. it is e.v.’s opinion that k.b. is not a danger to society and
that he could improve with counselling. she advises that her son, k.b.’s
nephew, has been impacted by k.b.’s incarceration.

his
brother, g.b., advises that k.b. has provided him support and guidance during
difficult times. he describes k.b. as a determined individual who is capable of
change.

k.b.’s
mother mentions that k.b. is a good son who regularly checks in on her and
genuinely cares for her well-being.

i also
received a letter from v.b. she is k.b.’s former domestic partner and the
mother of his child. v.b. was not the victim on k.b.’s previous offences. she
has known k.b. for more than 12 years. she offers her support for him and
opines that with a strong support system he will thrive.

k.b.
read out a letter in court, which was also filed as an exhibit. he apologized
to a.m. for his actions and to his family for putting them through this
situation. he indicated that he had been out of custody for 5 ½ years without
any difficulties. regarding that time, he says that he was able to identify
triggers and use his support system and the tools he had learned to deal with
relationship issues. he stated that on his current offence dates he failed to
recognize his triggers and let anger get the better of him rather than rely on
his supports. k.b. indicated that he had planned on proposing to a.m. and he
described his jealousy when he saw her exiting the train with another man. he
acknowledged that he should not have put his hands on a.m. he advised that he
sometimes carelessly says stupid things that he does not actually mean. he said
that he and a.m. wish to do couple’s counselling. k.b. feels as though he has
learned his lesson. he is eager to return to work and contribute to society. he
advised that he completed an 8-week healthy relationship course while
incarcerated. k.b. stated he believes he would have better access to supports
outside of custody rather than while incarcerated. he also described the harsh
conditions he has experienced while in jail. he ended by stating that there was
no excuse for his actions and by apologizing to a.m.

k.b.
has been in pre-sentence custody for 336 days. he has been triple bunked
approximately 90 percent of that time and has regularly experienced lockdowns.
the total lockdown time for his period of incarceration up until march 18,
2025, was 1022.5 hours. his counsel, ms. manitius, in her submissions,
helpfully highlighted additional troubling aspects relating to k.b.’s time
spent in pre-sentence custody, including him having experienced very long
consecutive stretches of triple bunking and lockdowns.

the
defence filed certificates which show that while k.b. was incarcerated he
completed a 1-hour anger management course on june 5, 2024, and a building
healthy relationships course through the elizabeth fry society.
a.m.’s input

a.m. declined to submit a victim impact
statement. the defence filed an affidavit from her, and emails written by her.
in these statements, a.m. opines that k.b. is not a threat to society. she
describes the positive features of her relationship with k.b. she blames
herself for being difficult to live with and indicates that she would act out
emotionally to get a reaction from k.b. she also states that she wishes to
resume her relationship with k.b., that she is not in favour of the prosecution
against k.b., and that she is not fearful of him. she asserts that the
incidents involving k.b. were out of character for him. a.m.’s affidavit also
describes the impact she believes k.b.’s incarceration would have on k.b.’s
son, his father, and grandparents.

ms. manitius indicated that the main purpose in
filing these materials was to demonstrate some of the obstacles the
prosecution’s case faced. the defence was clear that to the extent that any of a.m.’s
statements could be seen as inconsistent with the facts admitted, k.b. was
maintaining his agreement with the facts which formed the basis for his guilty
pleas.

a.m. was present for the sentencing hearing. she
requested to address me, which i allowed. she made statements consistent with
her emails and affidavit. she advised me that she does not wish to be referred
to as a victim, and that she does not believe that k.b. is a risk to the
community. she mentioned that when she has been in the community with k.b., she
has never observed any problems between k.b. and other females. she advised me
that she was upset to see k.b. take all the blame given that she did not know
when to walk away or stop talking. she also assumed blame for poking at k.b.
given that she knew he had triggers. she wanted me to know that she was not a
100 percent innocent in this situation.
general principles

sentencing judges are required to blend and
prioritize various sentencing objectives listed in s. 718(a) – (f) of the
criminal
code.

proportionality is the fundamental principle of
sentencing. a sentence "must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender":
s. 718.1
of the
criminal code.

sentencing involves balancing the aggravating
and mitigating circumstances relating to the offence and the offender:
criminal
code, s. 718.2(a). parity, totality, and restraint are also principles
which must be considered when determining the appropriate sentence:
criminal
code, ss. 718.2(b)-(e).
the aggravating factors

generally, k.b. has a serious and related criminal record.
furthermore, his current offences involve intimate partner abuse: see
s.
718.2
(a)(ii) of the
criminal code.

i
find the following additional aggravating factors relevant to the particular
counts.

regarding
the december 24, 2023 assault:
•
k.b. struck a.m. more than once.

relating
to the may 2, 2024 offences:
•
the assault, which was motivated by seeing a.m. with another
male, was a possessive act.
•
k.b.’s assault involved multiple strikes to a.m.’s face.
•
a.m. suffered significant injuries including bruising, swelling
and a cut to her lip, neck soreness, and difficulties swallowing.
•
the nature of the threat, namely that he was going to blow up the
victim’s car, was serious.

with
respect to the may 3, 2024 offences:
•
k.b. committed multiple acts which would have interfered with a.m.’s
ability to breath. he grabbed her by the throat, then strangled her, applied
pressure to her neck while having her in a headlock, and later covered her
mouth and nose.
•
a.m. feared k.b. was going to kill her.
•
the theft was an act of exercising control over a.m.
•
k.b.’s examination of a.m.’s phone was a violation of her
privacy.
•
the nature of the threat towards a.m. was chilling.
mitigating factors

the mitigating factors in this case are:
•
k.b. pleaded guilty despite the presence of obvious triable
issues.
•
he experienced harsh jail conditions while in pre-sentence
detention, such as triple bunking and numerous lockdowns:
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344, at paras.
50 – 53.
•
he expressed remorse when addressing the court. while i give this
factor some weight, i am unclear, whether k.b. has come to realize the full
gravity of his conduct. he explained reasons why he acted the way he did, but i
am unconvinced that he appreciates the terror his behaviour must have caused a.m.
that said, i do find some evidence of remorse. this finding is reinforced by k.b.’s
guilty pleas.
•
his has taken counselling while in pre-sentence custody.
•
he has support in the community.
•
he is a skilled worker who has employment available to him upon his
release.
•
there is a gap in his record. there is no indication that k.b.
was involved in any criminal activity for the period of five and half years
between his having been paroled and the december 2023 offence.
collateral consequences

k.b.’s incarceration will have an impact on his
family. there is evidence that he helps his parents and grandparents. his son
and nephew will also be negatively affected by his imprisonment, though i note
that k.b. is not the primary caregiver for either of them. while such
consequences are relevant considerations, the sentence i impose must remain
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the responsibility of the
offender:
r. v. l.c.,
2022 onca 863, at para.
24.
the sentencing objectives most
relevant to this case

denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general, are of
paramount importance in cases involving domestic violence:
r.
v. boucher,
2004 canlii 17719 (on ca), o.j. no. 2689; 2004 canlii
17719, at para. 27.

specific deterrence is of special significance
in k.b.’s case given his prior record for related offences. an offender must
not be repunished for past offences:
r. v. calliou,
2019 abca 8 (canlii), 2019 abca, at para.
8;
r. v. muyser,
2009 abca 116
at paras
7 and 8. that said, a sentence
for the same type of offence should typically be higher than the previous
sentence received because the last sentence was not effective in deterring the
offender:
r. v. u.a.,
2019 onca 946, at para.
12;
r. v. clarke,
2024 onsc 436, at para.
28;
r. v. daye,
2010 nbca 53, at para.
11;
r.
v. m.v.,
2023 onca 724, at para.
64.

it must be stated that k.b.’s sentence in
alberta involved dozens of offences and included even more serious offences
than the ones he is being sentenced for now. i also appreciate that there was a
five-and-a-half-year gap between k.b. having been paroled and the december 2023
offence. that provides some evidence that k.b. was deterred from his previous
sentence for a significant period and that he made rehabilitative progress.

still, i am troubled by the fact that the severe
sentence he received before was insufficient to permanently deter him from
reoffending so violently. i accept that k.b. has shown he has rehabilitative
potential. the gap in his record, his willingness to engage in counselling, and
the support of his family support this inference. i cannot find, however, as
ms. manitius urges, that he has strong prospects for rehabilitation. it is
reasonable to infer that k.b. would have been offered counselling and
programming while in the penitentiary to address his risk factors. despite the
programming i infer he would have been offered, the lengthy sentence he had
served, and his increased age – which one would hope corresponds to increased
maturity, he reoffended. moreover, his current offences were not minor
momentary lapses in judgment. they were outbursts of serious violence. overall,
while i find there are signs for rehabilitative hope, i remain concerned about
the risk k.b. presents.
the appropriate range

the jurisprudence reveals a wide range of sentences in cases of
serious domestic abuse involving multiple incidents and repeat offenders. see
for example:
r. v. rush,
2010 bcca 293;
r. v. gates,
2002 bcca
128;
r. v. jeurissen,
2014 bcsc 1718, at paras.
1 – 6, 449, and
456;
r. v. a.d.,
2024 abca 178, at para.
53;
r. v. martin,
2009
onca 62;
r. v. fraser,
2016 onca 745;
r. v. smith,
2011 onca 564,
at para.
86;
r. v. edwards,
2012 oncj 519. having regards to the facts
in this case and the circumstances of the offender, i am satisfied that the
appropriate sentence lies within the range of sentences proposed by the crown
and the defence.
restraint and totality

in deciding whether to impose concurrent or
consecutive sentences, i must first decide whether there exists a relationship
between the various offences. this is a flexible test. next, i am required to
assess totality by ensuring that the total term is not excessive:
r. v.
millard,
2018 onsc 1299, at para.
30;
r. v. w.q. (2006)
2006 canlii 21035 (on ca), 210 c.c.c.
(3d) 398 at paras.
11-15
(ont. c.a.);
criminal code, s. 718.2(c).

even when offences arise from the same
transaction, it can be appropriate to impose consecutive sentences when the
offences involve different legally protected interests. though, totality must
again be kept in mind:
r. v.
bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26, at
para.
97;
r. v. gillis,
2009 onca 312;
r. v. fournel,
2014 onca
305
at para.
58.

the principle of totality ensures
proportionality. it also guards against rehabilitation being overshadowed by
the competing objectives of denunciation and deterrence. finally, it also
incorporates the principle of restraint:
r. v. george,
2024 onsc 6016,
at paras.
89 – 90.

when assessing totality, it is important to
differentiate between the conduct underlying each count as doing so provides
transparency and permits meaningful appellate review:
r. v. j.h.,
2018
onca 245, at paras.
50 - 52;
bertrand marchand, at para.
93. it is also
essential to “identify the gravamen of the conduct giving rise to all of the
criminal offenses” and ensure that the total sentence is proportional to the
gravity of the offences and the conduct of the offender:
r. v. jewell
(1995),
1995 canlii 1897 (on ca), 83 o.a.c. 81; 1995 canlii 1897 (onca), at para. 27;
r. v. milani,
2021 onca 567, at paras.
40 – 43;
r. v. c.p.,
2024 onsc 6101, at paras.
80 – 82.

in this case the december 24, may 2, and may 3
offences each involve distinct incidents. regarding the may 2nd incident, the
assaults and threatening charge involve different delicts. with respect to the
may 3
rd
incident, the assaults, the threatening charge, and the
theft all involve different legally protected interests. that having been said,
the principle of totality requires that i make several of k.b.’s sentences
concurrent.
the appropriate sentences in this
case

having blended the relevant sentencing
objectives and weighed the aggravating and mitigating factors, i have concluded
that the total appropriate sentence in this case is 30 months jail, less credit
for pre-sentence custody. i find this to be a proportionate sentence having
regard to the seriousness of k.b.’s offences and his moral blameworthiness.

in my view, the aggravating factors in this case
would typically warrant a higher sentence. in arriving at a sentence of 30
months i have placed significant weight on the mitigating factors present,
particularly k.b.’s guilty pleas in the face of a difficult prosecution and the
harsh jail conditions he has experienced.

k.b.’s total sentence of 30 months is the
equivalent of 912 days. he has spent 337 days in pre-sentence custody for which
he is entitled to 506 days of
summers
credit.

his sentence is broken down as
follows:
•
may 2, 2024, assault with choking: 270 days.
•
may 2, 2024, assault: 180 days concurrent.
•
may 2, 2024, threatening to property: 90 days concurrent.
•
december 24, 2023, assault: 180 days concurrent.
•
may 3, 2024, assault with choking: 136 days consecutive, in
addition to 337 days of pre-sentence custody credited for 506 days.
•
may 3, 2024, assault: 270 days concurrent.
•
may 3, 2024, threatening: 270 days concurrent.
•
may 3, 2024, theft under: 180 days concurrent.

k.b.’s
remaining time to serve is therefore 406 days.

following
his release from custody k.b. will be placed on probation for a period of three
years with the following terms:

the
terms of the probation will be as follows:
•
in addition to the statutory terms, you will report to your
probation officer within 2 days of your release and thereafter as directed.
•
cooperate with your probation officer. you must sign any releases
necessary to permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance and you
must provide proof of compliance with any condition of this order to your
probation officer on request.
•
do not contact or communicate in any way, directly or indirectly,
by any physical, electronic or other means, with a.m. except with her prior
written consent filed in advance with the probation intake or the assigned
probation officer. this may be cancelled by a.m. in any manner at any time.
•
do not be within 100 metres of any place
where you know a.m. to live, work, go to school, frequent or any place you know
her to be except with her prior written consent filed in advance with the
probation intake or the assigned probation officer. this may be cancelled by a.m.
in any manner at any time.
•
attend and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed by the probation officer and complete them
to the satisfaction of the probation officer for including, but not limited to:
o
anger
management;
o
domestic
violence, which may include partners assault response (par) program; and
o
stress
management.
•
you shall sign any release of information forms as will enable
your probation officer to monitor your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
•
you shall provide proof of your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
•
you shall not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code.

while
in custody, pursuant to s. 743.21 you will be prohibited from contacting a.m.
unless she has communicated to you in advance her consent to having contact. a.m.
may revoke her consent at any time.

i
also make an order that you provide a dna sample. finally, pursuant to
s. 109
of the
criminal code
there will be a weapons prohibition for life.
released: april 9, 2025
signed:
justice joseph hanna

r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26.