source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj667/2025oncj667.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. towell, 2025 oncj 667
date: december 15, 2025
ontario court of justice
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
mark towell
before
justice b. green
heard
on november 13
th, 2025.
reasons
for sentence released on december 15
th, 2025.
mr. g. jarrar................................................................... counsel
for the crown
ms. owen and mr. goldkind............... 
 counsel for the defendant mr. towell
green j.:
a.
introduction:

mr. towell was charged
with various offences that arose out of his interactions with two vulnerable,
transient women. the crown elected to proceed by indictment. mr. towell elected
to proceed to trial in the ontario court of justice.

after trial, mr. towell
was acquitted of most counts in relation to one of the complainants, ms. r.w.,
other than a breach of probation. he was convicted of sexually assaulting and
assaulting a second complainant, ms. k.d., as well as another breach of
probation because of his mistreatment of both women.

throughout mr. towell’s
dealings with the victims, he was bound by a probation order to keep the peace
and be of good behaviour. he was not abiding by this condition by supplying these
women with deadly narcotics and assaulting them with chemical scented spray from
a can while they were in his home.

the crown emphasized
the multitude of aggravating factors. mr. towell has previous convictions for
sexual and physical violence. mr. towell exploited the vulnerabilities of each
of the victims and abused them. the crown urged me to impose a sentence in the
range of six to seven years of incarceration. in addition, the crown sought various
ancillary orders: a section 743.21 order prohibiting contact while in custody
with the victims, a lifetime soira order and a lifetime ban on possessing any
weapons pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal code.

in contrast, counsel
focussed exclusively on mr. towell’s personal circumstances. he suffered abuse
and inhumane treatment while in custody awaiting the outcome of these
proceedings. he is in the process of losing everything that he owns and earned
since his release from custody in 2016. counsel advocated for a global sentence
of 18 months of incarceration to be followed by a period of probation. she did
not take issue with the ancillary orders requested by the crown.

counsel’s position was clearly
disproportionate and out of step with the current and fitting upward trend for
longer sentences of incarceration for sexual offences. it was not reflective of
any of the guiding sentencing precedents, mr. towell’s previous convictions or
the aggravating factors in this case.

i appreciate the
crown’s passionate and informed submissions emphasizing the vulnerabilities of
these two women. he provided ample case law to support a significant period of
custody. nevertheless, i must consider the absence of some aggravating features,
the focussed and sensitive manner the trial was conducted by counsel, the collateral
consequences of mr. towell’s choices and the principle of restraint as this
will be his first penitentiary sentence.

for the reasons that
follow, i have determined that a total sentence of five years incarceration less
pretrial custody is a just and proportionate sanction.
b.
aggravating
facts and victim impact:

the findings of fact
are detailed in a written judgement. the reasons are lengthy, but they do not
adequately capture the aggravating nature of mr. towell’s predatory crimes.

in 2024, mr. towell became involved with
two transient women who were struggling with drug addictions. on different
dates, he enticed each woman to accompany him to his home with promises of the
supply of some drugs. he falsely assured them that he would give them a safe
place to stay, and he would return them to where he met them the next day.

once the women were in his home, he
denigrated them for their addictions to fentanyl. he refused to bring them back
to town. instead, he watched as they suffered with withdrawal symptoms.
eventually, he provided them with just enough drugs to witness the cycle repeat
itself.

the first victim, ms. r.w., was homeless
when she met mr. towell in town. mr. towell was a stranger to her. they met on
the street. he invited her to his rural home. he provided her with funds to
purchase fentanyl. his attitude towards her suddenly changed once they returned
to his home. mr. towell became verbally and emotionally abusive with her about
her addiction to fentanyl.

mr. towell eventually drove ms. r.w. back
into the city, and they parted ways. months later, mr. towell met ms. k.d. on
the streets in peterborough. they had a conversation about how difficult her
life was at that time. he invited her to stay with him in lindsay. he promised
her a safe place and assured her that he would bring her back the next day. he
brought her to his home and supplied her with drugs. she fell asleep and woke up
naked in a bed.

mr. towell knew that ms. k.d. had no money and
she was particularly vulnerable. just like he had done with ms. r.w., once ms.
k.d. was isolated at his rural home, he began to verbally abuse her. he
expressed considerable disdain for addicts. when she woke up the next day, she
pleaded with him to take her back to peterborough. he refused to bring her
home. she repeatedly told him that she would get sick without more drugs.

ms. k.d. went into withdrawal and became
ill without access to drugs. she felt trapped with little choice but to cope
with her symptoms. she laid down in bed and fell asleep. despite her suffering,
mr. towell woke her up with his penis in her face. he insisted on her
performing oral sex on him. she repeatedly told him no, explaining that she was
too sick. he was insistent. he got into bed with her and pushed her head
towards his penis.

ms. k.d. was alone and afraid that she
would get hurt by mr. towell. she may have performed some oral sex, but she
pretended to fall asleep during the act so that he would leave her alone. he
left the bed after she remained motionless.

while ms. k.d. was staying with mr. towell,
he brought ms. r.w. back to his home a second time. the three of them lived
together for approximately a week or two. during that time, he periodically supplied
both women with fentanyl, but he would control when and how much they consumed
of it. he disparaged them even though ms. r.w. worked around the farm and
cooked for them.

ms. k.d. constantly pleaded with him to drive
her to peterborough but he refused her requests. she did not know anyone in
lindsay. she did not know her way around. she did not want to burden her mother
with her situation.

while they were staying with him, the women
had some bizarre interactions with mr. towell. both women complained that he
sprayed them with an unknown substance from a can on more than one occasion. it
smelled like a chemical. he would duck and hide himself and/or the container
when they confronted him about what he was doing to them. they were aggrieved
and annoyed by this unwanted misconduct.

the last night they were in his home, they
were cooking and one of them left a pot of grease heating up on the stove. they
fell asleep. the kitchen caught on fire. mr. towell yelled at them. he tried to
put the fire out. ms. k.d. ran away but he pursued her. he assaulted her by forcefully
dragging her by her hair back towards the kitchen. she stumbled forward so she was
able to break free from his grip.

the escalation in violence was a turning
point for ms. k.d. the two women fled the residence together. they sought
assistance from a neighbour. eventually, they walked back to town in lindsay.

both victims were homeless, and mr. towell
provided them with food and shelter. nevertheless, i wish to be emphatically
clear that there was nothing benevolent about mr. towell’s intentions for a
variety of reasons:
a.
he targeted these women. he knew from
conversations with them that they were desperate, opiate addicts. there was
planning and deliberation before these crimes to take advantage of their
vulnerabilities.
b.
once they were isolated at his rural
property, he knew it would be challenging for them to get back to the city. he adamantly
refused to return ms. k.d. he knew that she had no way to get home. she was not
familiar with the area. she was helpless once she was suffering from withdrawal
symptoms. she pleaded with mr. towell to no avail. it was ruthless and cruel.
c.
both women were traumatized by their
experiences with mr. towell. they were in a constant cycle of the effects of
their substance abuse or the symptoms of withdrawal from it which was caused by
his refusal to return them to where he found them.
d.
mr. towell expressed his disdain for both
women. he demeaned them. he told them that they were an embarrassment to their parents,
and it would have been better if they were never born. he didn’t offer them
help. he showed them utter contempt. he was rough with both and ripped their meagre
belongings.
e.
the sadistic pleasure mr. towell derived
from their suffering is evident from the sexual assault of ms. k.d. she was
sick from withdrawal and laying helpless in bed. instead of showing her any empathy,
he was aroused by her weakness and sought sexual gratification from her.
f.
when mr. towell met ms. r.w., he was bound
by the terms of a conditional sentence. on march 11, 2024, he was convicted of
assault causing bodily harm. he was sentenced to a 5-month conditional sentence
to be followed by one year of probation. he was supposed to be serving a
sentence of incarceration in his home. instead, he was out trolling the streets
of lindsay for vulnerable women.
g.
obviously, the threat of incarceration had
little deterrent impact on mr. towell. while he was supposed to be serving that
sentence in his home, he was supplying deadly narcotics to a transient woman
and verbally abusing her. that conditional sentence ultimately collapsed, and
he spent time in custody. this explains the gap in time between picking up ms.
r.w. and picking up ms. k.d.
h.
once he was released from custody, mr.
towell was required by his probation order to keep the peace and be of good
behaviour. instead, once again, he was out looking for more women to bring to
his isolated home. he supplied them with highly addictive and dangerous drugs, kept
them isolated on his farm, and aggrieved and annoyed them by engaging in the
bizarre behaviour of spraying them with a chemical substance.
i.
he sexually assaulted and
assaulted ms. k.d. while he was on probation for a recent conviction for assault
causing bodily harm.

in addition to a recent prior offence for violence,
mr. towell was previously convicted of two sexual assaults in 2016 for
attacking random women in toronto.

he was sentenced to 423 days or 14 months of pretrial custody to be followed by
a period of probation of two years.

although there is a gap in his criminal
record from 2016 to 2024, it is obvious that he poses an ongoing threat to the
sexual and bodily integrity of women. he has a recent conviction for an assault
that caused bodily harm. while on probation for that offence of violence, he
sexually assaulted and assaulted a very vulnerable woman.

understandably, ms. r.w. chose not to
provide a victim impact statement. ms. k.d. related how mr. towell’s crimes
have affected her. she related that:
my lifestyle
has changed. i have been extremely emotional and exhausted. i have had many
sleepless nights since the incident. i am scared to converse or interact with
the opposite sex. i avoid gatherings and festivities with family due to
depression and dealing with people.
economically,
it’s difficult to obtain or secure a job due to interviews with random men. i
fear he will contact my friends or family and fear for myself or them.

ms. r.w. explained during the trial that
she chose not to come forward earlier because of her belief that the police and
the criminal justice system have little regard for the safety of women living certain
lifestyles. victims come from all walks of life. no one is less deserving of
the protection of the law. rather, mr. towell’s choice to target these vulnerable
woman is an aggravating feature of the offences.

these crimes have left a lasting and
detrimental impact on women who were already facing various life challenges. a
significant sentence is warranted as an affirmation of their dignity.
c.
mitigating facts
and considerations unique to this offender:
i.
conduct of the
defence:

mr. towell does not have the mitigation of
a plea of guilty. nevertheless, his counsel made a series of admissions on his
behalf at the outset of the trial to simplify the proceedings. absent these
reasonable concessions, the trial would have been much longer, and the victims
would have endured more extensive questioning. more time spent in the witness
box would have been particularly challenging for ms. r.w. who clearly struggled
during the trial.

counsel’s cross-examination was focussed on
the facts that were in issue. she was fair and did not demean either witness’s
life circumstances at the time they met mr. towell.

a fundamental tenet of sentencing, related to the presumption
of innocence, is that the conduct of the defence during the trial cannot be treated
as an aggravating factor for the sentencing:
r. v. kozy,
1990 canlii 2625 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 1586
(ont.c.a.). the converse should not be true.

mr. towell does not have the full mitigation
afforded a plea of guilty. nevertheless, the way counsel conducted the trial
saved valuable court resources. the brevity of the witnesses’ testimony attenuated
the stress and trauma that victims inevitably experience during the proceeding.
i was particularly impressed with counsel’s sensitivity when addressing the
credibility and reliability of the witnesses’ recollections without unnecessarily
degrading them.

counsel act on their client’s instructions.
they should be encouraged to make appropriate admissions to streamline
litigation. while it does not attract the same mitigation of a plea, in the
unique circumstances of this case, i find that this consideration should
mitigate mr. towell’s sentence.
ii.
mr. towell’s
background:

mr. towell is 47 years old. his counsel related
her client’s personal history instead of relying on a presentence report
despite the court’s invitation to arrange an expedited in-custody interview
with him.

he is a college educated man. he is a
talented handy man and mechanic. when he was younger, he worked in property
management and maintenance with his father. he is also adept at landscaping and
operating snowplows.

mr. towell shared a close bond with his
parents. sadly, he lost his mother in 2014 and his father in 2017. he doesn’t
have any family support since he lost them. he inherited their belongings and
treasured many of these memories of them.

mr. towell rented a rural property shortly
after his release from custody in 2016. over the years, he built up a good
reputation for providing many services and tended to the needs of various
customers. he had loyal clients and some friends. he used the garage on the
property to repair vehicles.

he enjoyed rural life. he rescued animals
and engaged in some farming. mr. towell is currently unable to pay the rent due
to his incarceration. as a result, he is facing eviction, especially if he
receives a further period of incarceration. he despairs over the loss of
everything he has accumulated because of his convictions.

mr. towell was given the opportunity to
address the court about the offences. all he related was that he “didn’t do it”
or, at least, not as the women described their interactions with him. he had
the choice to testify during the trial to explain his side of the story, but he
chose not to do so which is his right. he does not accept responsibility or
take accountability for how he mistreated these two women or the physical or
sexual violence. as a result, it is difficult to see his potential for
rehabilitation especially considering his antecedents for similar offences.

i recognize that the absence of expressed
remorse or insight are not aggravating factors. rather, it is the absence of
mitigating facts that assist with determining an offender’s potential for
rehabilitation.

the supreme court explained
in
r. v.
friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para
165
the importance of these mitigating
considerations since “remorse gains added significance when it is paired with
insight and signs that the offender has come to realize the gravity of the
conduct, and as a result has achieved a change in attitude or imposed some
self-discipline which significantly reduces the likelihood of further
offending".

in the absence of these mitigating factors,
i am quite concerned about mr. towell’s potential for future violence. these
concerns are justified considering mr. towell’s prior convictions for sexual
violence and his recent conviction for an assault causing bodily harm. a
conditional sentence of incarceration and a probation order had no specifically
deterrent influence to stem the injurious tide of his violent predispositions.
iii.
time spent in pretrial
custody:

mr. towell has been in custody since
december 5
th, 2024. he has served a total of
376 days pretrial custody. he served that time in central east
correctional center in terrible conditions. he was subjected to repeated lockdowns
and triple bunking. i take judicial notice of the escalating crisis of overcrowding
and understaffing that is contributing to the deteriorating conditions in this
facility. regardless of his crimes, no one should be or deserves to be
subjected to inhumane conditions.

there is an additional aspect of mr. towell’s
pretrial custody that i have considered as unusually mitigating. mr. towell
testified during the sentencing hearing. he related how the ranges are controlled
by fearsome inmates who exert control. these inmates are referred to as
“cleaners”. this is a well-known fact in this region. the inmates post a list
of rules for other detainees to follow, or they will face violent sanctions.
one of those rules is that the inmates must not have outstanding sexual
offences.

if a detainee denies that that he is
charged with any sex crimes, other inmates place calls to ascertain the true
nature of the detainee’s charges. because of the nature of his offences, other
inmates assaulted mr. towell. he suffered various injuries.

he is struggling with post concussion
syndrome. he has medical issues including a persistent ringing in his ears. he
needs ongoing medical attention. in addition to the assaults, he described
horrible conditions. the cells and showers are filthy. inmates get sick often.
they are discouraged from seeking medical attention. it is a place that makes a
person feel helpless and hopeless.

the fact that other inmates attacked and
injured mr. towell is a consequence that i will consider when assessing the
mitigation of his sentence due to his experiences in pretrial custody.

in
r. v. suter,
2018 scc 34
at para
51, the supreme court reviewed various cases and observed that “o
ur courts have held that where an offender is attacked
by fellow inmates in a prison and the attack is related to the offence for
which the offender is in custody, such violence may be considered as a factor
at sentencing”.

with summers credit, the 376 days that mr.
towell has served will be the equivalent of
564 days or 18 months and 24 days. mr. towell’s total sentence will be further
reduced or mitigated to reflect the physical abuse and harshness of the
conditions he endured while awaiting the outcome of these proceedings.

these considerations will not mitigate the
sentence below what would be considered a proportionate disposition. the total
pretrial custody will be reflected as
750 days or 25 months.
iv.
collateral consequences:

i accept mr. towell’s evidence that he reformed
parts of his life since his last period of incarceration in 2016. he rented a
nice rural property on which he built up a business with regular customers. he enjoyed
rescuing animals and tended to them. both ms. r.w. and ms. k.d. described
playing with the animals.

mr. towell suffered the losses of his
parents. he inherited all their belongings. he cherished these items. after he
was arrested, his home was broken into and most of his belongings, including
these mementos, were stolen from him.

he believes that ms. r.w. and/or her
associates are responsible but that has not been proven to be true. mr. towell
made the informed choice to bring indigent, drug addicted women to his home,
victimize them and keep them there. it is hardly surprising that word would
spread to other transient people in lindsay that his rural home was vacant once
he was incarcerated for his crimes.

mr. towell understandably feels like he
lost everything that he worked hard to build for himself. he lost his clients,
business, and good reputation. all the animals he cared for were taken from his
property. anything of value has been stolen from his home, including various
irreplaceable items of sentimental value. he is in the process of being evicted
from the farm. counsel stressed that he is devastated by the enormity of these punitive
consequences.

the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
suter,
2018 scc 34
at para
46, recognised that the collateral consequences
of a crime
may
attenuate the overall sentence. this ensures
proportionality by “taking into account all relevant circumstances related to
the offence and the offender”. the court cited a sentencing text at para 47:
there is no
rigid formula for taking collateral consequences into account. they may flow
from the length of sentence, or from the conviction itself… [citations omitted]
in his text
the law of sentencing
(2001), professor allan manson notes
that they may also flow from the very act of committing the offence:
as a
result of the commission of an offence, the offender may suffer physical,
emotional, social, or financial consequences. while not punishment in the true
sense of pains or burdens imposed by the state after a finding of guilt, they
are often considered in mitigation. [emphasis added; p. 136.]
i agree
with professor manson's observation, much as it constitutes an incremental
extension of this court's characterization of collateral consequences in
pham.
in my view,
a collateral
consequence includes any consequence arising from the commission of an offence,
the conviction for an offence, or the sentence imposed for an offence, that
impacts the offender.
[emphasis mine]

the supreme court went on to explain at
para. 48 that these unique considerations are part of the circumstances of the
offender:
though
collateral consequences are not necessarily "aggravating" or
"mitigating" factors under
s. 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code
-
as they do not relate to the gravity of the offence or the level of
responsibility of the offender - they nevertheless speak to the "personal
circumstances of the offender" (
pham, at para. 11). the relevance
of collateral consequences stems, in part, from the application of the
sentencing principles of individualization and parity:
ibid.; s.
718.2(b) of the
criminal code.
2
the question is not whether collateral consequences diminish the
offender's moral blameworthiness or render the offence itself less serious, but
whether the effect of those consequences means that a particular sentence would
have a more significant impact on the offender because of his or her
circumstances.
like
offenders should be treated alike, and collateral consequences may mean that an
offender is no longer "like" the others, rendering a given sentence
unfit. [emphasis mine]

justice moldaver, writing on behalf of the
majority, explained that there are limitations. when the collateral
consequences are so directly linked to the circumstances of the offence “as to
be almost inevitable”, the mitigating impact or attenuation of the sentence is
substantially diminished:
suter, supra, at paras
49 and 50. furthermore,
it is essential that these consequences are not “used to reduce a sentence to a
point where the sentence becomes disproportionate to the gravity of the offence
or the moral blameworthiness of the offender”:
r. v. suter, supra
at
para.
56. please also
see:
r. v. habid,
2024 onca 830.

a significant collateral consequence is the
loss of everything mr. towell cherished and worked hard to build a life for
himself. however, mr. towell received the benefit of a conditional sentence to
be served in the community just prior to these offences. that sentence should
have been the wake up call he needed to the possibility that he could lose
everything. instead, he was undeterred and made the informed choice to risk
everything by committing more crimes, targeting and taking advantage of these
women.

he had the chance to serve a sentence of
incarceration in the community in 2024. he flouted that opportunity to get back
on the right path. the loss of his home, belongings, work and reputation was an
inevitable consequence of his commission of further crimes while on community
supervision. while the aftermath of his crimes was predictable, i have
considered the magnitude of his personal losses as part of the overall factual
matrix of the impact of mr. towell’s incarceration.
d.
sentencing
principles:
i.
general principles:

in
r. v. j.w.,
2025 scc 16
at paras
38 to 44, the supreme court provided a comprehensive summary of the fundamental
principles that should guide every sentencing decision:
the
purpose, objectives and principles of sentencing are codified in ss. 718 to
718.2 of the
code. this court has interpreted and applied these
provisions in appellate review with a view to providing clarity for sentencing
judges.
section 718
sets out the fundamental purpose of sentencing: "... to protect society
and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the
law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society..."
this
fundamental purpose is to be given effect by "imposing just
sanctions" in accordance with the sentencing objectives set out in s.
718(a) to (f): denunciation, general and specific deterrence, separation of
offenders (to protect society), rehabilitation, reparation, and the promotion
of a sense of responsibility in the offender and acknowledgement of the harm
caused to the victim and to the community. no one sentencing objective trumps
the others. rather, the sentencing judge is to determine what weight to give to
the various objectives; this is to be decided on a case-by-case basis as
sentences are to be "individualized".
section
718.1 provides that the "fundamental principle" of sentencing is
proportionality, i.e., that a sentence be "proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender". this has
been recognized as a "central tenet" of sentencing.
proportionality
is "intimately tied" to the fundamental purpose of sentencing and
gives "sharper focus" to the "objectives" set out in s.
718. "[w]hatever weight a judge may wish to accord to the objectives
listed [in s. 718], the resulting sentence
must
respect the fundamental
principle of proportionality".
proportionality
is the "
sine qua non
of a just sanction". as lebel j. stated
in
ipeelee:
first, the
principle ensures that a sentence reflects the gravity of the offence. this is
closely tied to the objective of denunciation. it promotes justice for victims
and ensures public confidence in the justice system....
second, the
principle of proportionality ensures that a sentence does not exceed what is
appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the offender. in this sense,
the principle serves a limiting or restraining function and ensures justice for
the offender.
a just
sanction is one that "reflects both [the foregoing] perspectives on
proportionality and does not elevate one at the expense of the other".
in 1995,
parliament set out a non-exhaustive list of principles in ss. 718.2 to 718.21
to assist in giving effect to proportionality. these principles include
"the consideration of aggravating and mitigating circumstances, the
principles of parity and totality, and the instruction to consider 'all
available sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in the
circumstances', with particular attention paid to the circumstances of
[a]boriginal offenders". [extensive citations omitted]

any sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. as a result, d
epending on the circumstances of the offence and the
circumstances of the offender, a court may focus on specific principles of
sentencing as the most important factors to guide the court’s decision.

unquestionably, the predominant sentencing principles
in sexual assault cases with vulnerable victims are general deterrence and
denunciation. the
criminal code
was amended to reiterate the
primary
importance of these sentencing principles:
objectives —
offence against vulnerable person
718.04
when a
court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person who
is vulnerable because of personal circumstances — including because the person
is aboriginal and female —
the court shall give primary consideration to the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence of the conduct
that forms the
basis of the offence. [emphasis mine]

both ms. r.w. and ms. k.d were vulnerable
because of “personal circumstances”. mr. towell selected them specifically
because he believed he could get away with abusing them. this sentencing is an
opportunity to communicate a message to the community that, contrary to ms.
r.w.’s worries that women like them don’t matter, there is special recognition when
women are targeted by predators who take advantage of their weaknesses.

ms. r.w. and ms. k.d. naively trusted mr.
towell’s assurances that he would not hurt them. instead, he preyed on them and
abused them. ms. k.d. was especially vulnerable because of her life
circumstances, gender, and addiction to drugs.

in addition,
section 718.2
of the
criminal
code
specifically directs that a court “
shall
also take into consideration”, when sentencing mr. towell, the
following statutorily aggravating factor:
(iii.1)
evidence that the offence had a significant
impact on the victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances,
including their health and financial situation.

the sexual and physical assaults committed
by mr. towell left a lasting negative impact on various aspects of ms. k.d.’s
life. she is struggling to put the pieces of her life back together, which has
been even more difficult with the trauma caused by mr. towell’s violent actions.

to arrive at a just and proportionate
sentence, i must carefully consider all the relevant factors. when trying to
balance competing considerations, some factors may tip the scales one way or
the other when determining the appropriate sentence. some important
considerations include whether the offender has a previous record and whether
less restrictive sanctions could achieve all the sentencing goals including
rehabilitation.
ii.
principle of
restraint:

courts in canada have been unequivocal that
the lack of criminal antecedents should weigh very heavily in terms of tipping
the scales towards a more lenient sentence. mr. towell has a related criminal
record for sexual violence and a recent conviction for an assault that caused
bodily harm.

while mr. towell has served time in the
past, this will be his first penitentiary sentence. i am mindful of the
principle of restraint that is codified in
section 718.2
of the
criminal
code:
(d)
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.

mr. towell is morally culpable for his
choices to abuse these women. victim blaming and his past convictions for
sexually abusing random women causes considerable concern that he presents an
ongoing danger.

the reformatory sentence in 2016 did not
deter him, rather, he chose to predate on other vulnerable women to avoid
detection. as the crown astutely observed, there is an element of planning and
deliberation in his victim selection that demonstrates a frightening evolution
in the sophistication of his crimes.

i agree with the crown that the least
restrictive sanction that is appropriate in the circumstances is a significant penitentiary
sentence to reflect the severity of his crimes and specifically deter him from
future attacks on women. as the supreme court of canada explained in
r. v.
lacasse, supra, at para 12:
the more serious the
crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender's degree of
responsibility, the heavier the sentence will be. in other words, the severity
of a sentence depends not only on the seriousness of the crime's consequences,
but also on the moral blameworthiness of the offender. determining a
proportionate sentence is a delicate task. as i mentioned above, both sentences
that are too lenient and sentences that are too harsh can undermine public
confidence in the administration of justice.

there are some offences, like repeat
offences of physical and sexual violence against vulnerable victims, which are
so serious that the paramount principles of denunciation and deterrence demand
a lengthy custodial sentence.

c
onsidering
mr. towell’s antecedents, the nature of the offences, and the multiple
aggravating features, these offences cry out
for a penitentiary sentence to achieve the principles
of sentencing and as an affirmation of the sexual integrity, dignity and
autonomy of the victims. moreover, considering he was on a conditional sentence
and then a probation order during the period he was keeping these women in his
home, mr. towell’s prospects for rehabilitation are questionable.

it would be an error in principle to give
“primary” consideration to any rehabilitative objectives by unduly focussing on
an offender’s mitigating factors and the impact that a custodial sentence will
have on him.

in
r. v. b.m.,
2023 onca 224
at
paras
15 to 16, the ontario court of appeal considered
section 718.01
of the
criminal
code
and emphasized the court’s obligation to give “primary consideration”
to deterrence and denunciation:
the court
emphasized
in
friesen
that the expression "primary
consideration" in
s. 718.01
prescribes a relative ordering of sentencing
objectives that is absent from the general list of six objectives in s. 718(a)
through (f) of the code: at para. 102. at para. 104, the court went on:
section
718.01 thus qualifies this court's previous direction that it is for the
sentencing judge to determine which sentencing objective or objectives are to
be prioritized.
where parliament has indicated which sentencing objectives
are to receive priority in certain cases, the sentencing judge's discretion is
thereby limited, such that it is no longer open to the judge to elevate other
sentencing objectives to an equal or higher priority.
however, while
s.
718.01
requires that deterrence and denunciation have priority, nonetheless,
the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other
factors (including rehabilitation and
gladue
factors) in exercising
discretion in arriving at a fit sentence, in accordance with the overall
principle of proportionality. [emphasis added.]

i am cognizant of the statutorily
prescribed weight that sits on one side of the scale when trying to arrive at a
balanced sentence.

mr. towell is not a young man, and he has a
criminal record but that does not mean i should not exercise restraint. i have
cautioned myself that this sentence should not be so crushing that he is left
with no hope for his eventual reintegration into society and restarting a new
life.

ultimately, i must sentence mr. towell to
the shortest period of incarceration that fairly achieves the competing
sentencing objectives, reflects the seriousness of his crimes as well as any
mitigating facts. to arrive at a sentence that balances these opposing
considerations, it is helpful to review any sentencing precedents that have
considered the appropriate sentence ranges for these types of cases.
iii.
the principle of
parity:

in addition to these guiding sentencing
principles, the principle of parity is an important consideration. it is set
out in subsection 718.2 of the
criminal code
which requires that:
a sentence should be
similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances.

while this is a worthy goal, each individual case is
often so unique that it is difficult to achieve parity in sentencing.
ultimately, considering the unfortunately
countless ways to commit a sexual assault, the distinctiveness of each offence
and each offender, it is often challenging to find comparable cases. as
chief justice lamer stated in
r. v. m.
(c.a.),
1996 canlii 230 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 500
at paragraph
92:...sentencing is an
inherently individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate
sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a
fruitless exercise of academic abstraction.

sexual offences range from minimally
intrusive momentary occurrences to horrifying facts. offenders can be responsible,
sympathetic, and apologetic or they can be recalcitrant, unrepentant
recidivists. the ontario court of appeal observed in
r. v. e.c.,
2019 onca 688
that:
the offence of sexual
interference can be committed in any number of ways, and with varying levels of
moral turpitude.
the broad range of
available sentences is rooted in the "infinitely variable ways in which
the offence can be committed":
r. v. m.b.,
2013 onca 493,
at para.
21. within the wide range of available sentences, the court must
impose an appropriate sentence - one that is proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender, and, respecting
the principle of parity, is proportionate to sentences imposed for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances:
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64,
 3 s.c.r. 1089, at para.
53.

despite the myriad of ways that victims of
sexual violence are unfortunately violated, there is a clear and consistent
trend in the appellate authorities that the sentence range must increase for
these crimes.

appellate courts have been clear that
sexual violence must be denounced and deterred in a manner that is intended to
stop this seemingly endless cycle of violence. modern sentences must reflect
the egregious nature of these offences and our present understanding of the
impact on the victims.

older authorities that are inconsistent with the
increasing sentence range are of little assistance when deciding the
appropriate penalty. for example, counsel
relied on
r. v. micula,
2016
oncj 467. notably, the crown only sought a sentence of 12 to 14 months of
incarceration. in addition, the pivotal decision from the ontario court of
appeal that altered the sentencing range in
r. v. a.j.k.,
2022 onca 487, was not available at that
time to guide the crown’s submissions or the court’s decision.

the supreme court was unequivocal
in
r.
v. friesen,
supra, that sentences must increase to reflect that “
our understanding of the profound physical
and psychological harm that all victims of sexual assault experience have
deepened”.

since this direction
in
friesen, the
ontario court of appeal has consistently and repeatedly reiterated that the
appropriate range of sentence for the sexual violation of a vulnerable person
by an adult
first
offender is between 3 to 5 years of incarceration:
r. v.
a.j.k,
2022 onca 487
at para
77: although the facts were
different, the majority of the court of appeal made the following oft-cited
guiding remarks:
absent
some highly mitigating factor, the forced penetration of another person will
typically attract a sentence of at least three years in the penitentiary. while
bradley
and the cases following it suggest that the range is three to
five years, this is of course just a range, a quantitative sentencing tool
designed to assist busy trial judges with where to start:
parranto, at
paras. 15-17. accordingly, there will be circumstances where a departure
from the range, either above or below the
range, is entirely appropriate.
r. v.
henry,
2022 onca 191: the
appellant met the victim online and they went on a date.
he sexually assaulted her, including acts
of forced fellatio and vaginal intercourse. the appellant's behavior towards
the complainant was described as “demeaning”. the court of appeal found that
“the trial judge correctly identified the range of sentence for this offence as
being between three and five years”. the sentence of 3 ½ years was upheld.
r. v.
r.s.,
2023 onca 608: the
defendant sexually assaulted and attacked the victim in her own apartment. they
were previously involved in an intimate relationship. the victim was stripped,
her tampon removed, and she was digitally penetrated. the court repeated that “
denunciation and deterrence are primary
considerations on sentencing in cases of serious sexual assault”. despite
various mitigating considerations, the court of appeal overturned a sentence of
90 days intermittent with a conditional sentence and probation:
40
as i have said, this was a
serious sexual assault. the crown accepts, and i agree, that this was a case in
which r.s.'s moral culpability could rightly be considered to be reduced by his
background, but not to the extent that the sentencing judge concluded. this was
a case in which nothing less than a term of imprisonment was appropriate.
taking into account all of the aggravating factors, mitigating factors, and the
gladue
factors, a proportionate global sentence for the sexual assault
and choking offences was at the lower end of the 3 to 5-year range - a
penitentiary term of 3 years.
r. v.
s.w.,
2024 onca 173: the
court of appeal was emphatic that the absence of certain aggravating factors
does not justify a sentence below the range of 3 to 5 years, but additional
violence may justify a sentence beyond the range:
39
notably, the three-to-five-year range
comes from
bradley, which did not involve any additional violence,
beyond the violence inherent in non-consensual sexual intercourse. moreover, as
this court
described in
a.j.k., non-consensual sexual intercourse is
inherently violent. added violence may justify additional or different charges,
for example under s. 272 (sexual assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm)
or s. 273 (aggravated sexual assault) of the
criminal code.
added violence may also be
an aggravating factor that would justify a sentence at the higher end of the
range or, in appropriate circumstances, beyond the higher end of the range.
however, the use of the word
"forced"
in
a.j.k.
should not be taken to mean anything
more than a reference to the fact the sexual assault was non-consensual.
[emphasis mine]

despite the clear direction from the court
of appeal
in
r. v. s.w.,
supra, counsel emphasized that mr.
towell said “please” and the absence of gratuitous violence and that he stopped
forcing ms. k.d. to perform oral sex when she feigned being asleep. she
submitted that these facts support a sentence below the applicable range.

it bears repeating that the absence of
aggravating facts does not justify a sentence outside the applicable range.
rather, the presence of aggravating facts may support a sentence
above
the range. for example, a substantially aggravating consideration is the danger
posed by a repeat sex offender.

in
r. v. c.p.,
2024 onca 783, the court
of appeal addressed similar issues with the impact of the absence of
aggravating facts on the applicable sentence range.

the victim was described as
"in and out" of consciousness as the offender
“aggressively fingered her anus and vagina, attempted vaginal penetration from
behind, performed oral sex on her, and forced his penis into her mouth”. the
offender
had an
“unblemished record”, strong community ties and he was prepared to pay $10 000
in restitution to the victim. the trial court sentenced him to a conditional
sentence.

the court of appeal found the sentence to
be demonstrably unfit and would have imposed a period of incarceration of 3 ½
years. the court observed that:
35
the trial judge went on to incorrectly
state that certain other factors, including the fact that this was not a
planned offence and that c.p. did not ply the complainant with alcohol or use a
weapon, mitigated the seriousness of the offence.
it is an error in principle to treat the absence of an
aggravating factor, including the absence of gratuitous violence in a sexual
assault, as mitigating:
see
r. v.
friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para
150;
r. v. b.m.,
2008 onca 645, at para.
7.
36
we are not persuaded that the trial
judge's mischaracterization of some of the circumstances of the offence and the
offender as mitigating factors, materially affected the sentence she imposed. overall,
however, we conclude that the general tenor of her reasons minimizes the
seriousness of the offence. in particular, we note that, after reviewing the
authorities submitted by counsel, the trial judge emphasized the facts that the
appellant did not supply the complainant with alcohol, that his actions were
not predatory and that the choking that occurred was not done to overcome the
complainant's resistance. these comments fail to capture the very serious
nature of the appellant's actions in using force to sexually assault in
multiple ways a highly vulnerable sleeping and intoxicated victim.

the only reason the court of appeal did not
order the offender to serve the appropriate period of incarceration in the
penitentiary was because it was no longer in the interests of justice to
incarcerate him.

in addition to inappropriate weight placed
on the absence of certain aggravating facts, counsel also overemphasised the
nature of the act to support her position. mr. towell committed an act of
forced oral intercourse on a woman who was suffering through the symptoms of
withdrawal because he refused to bring her home. the fact that the sexual act in
this case was coerced oral sex as opposed to intercourse does
not
alter
the applicable range.

six years ago, in
r. v. u.a.,
2019
onca 946
at para
11, the court of appeal found that: “a
lthough the circumstances of each case are different,
numerous offenders have been sentenced in the three-to-five-year range for
sexual assault involving forced oral sex in analogous circumstances”.

this is consistent with the supreme court
of canada’s observations
in
r. v. friesen, supra
at para
146
that:
there is no type
of hierarchy of physical acts for the purposes of determining the
degree of physical interference.
as
the ontario court of appeal recognized in
stuckless (2019),
physical acts such as digital penetration and fellatio
can be just as serious a violation of the victim's bodily integrity as penile
penetration
(paras. 68-69 and
124-25). similarly, it is an error to assume that an assault that involves
touching is inherently less physically intrusive than an assault that involves
fellatio, cunnilingus, or penetration. for instance, depending on the
circumstances of the case, touching that is both extensive and intrusive can be
equally or even more physically intrusive than an act of fellatio, cunnilingus,
or penetration. [emphasis mine]

to support the suggested sentence of 18
months incarceration, counsel also relied on a decision filed by the crown,
r.
v. n.l.,
2024 oncj 286
because the offender received a sentence of 12
months for sexual offences against his wife. this decision is factually
distinguishable.

the offender had no prior record. the crown
only sought a sentence of 18 months of incarceration. the court grappled with concerns
about the impact the sentence would have on the victim’s and offender’s mutual children.
in addition, there were other mitigating considerations unique to a
first
offender. none of these considerations apply to this case.

counsel emphasized that mr. towell received
a sentence of 14 months in 2016 for two sexual offences. she submitted that tripling
his sentence for the sexual assault against ms. k.d. would offend the jump
principle resulting in an unduly harsh sentence.

in
r. v. green,
2021 onca 932
at
paras
11 and 12, the court of appeal explained that:
the jump
principle stands for the proposition that a
subsequent sentence imposed on an offender should not be
disproportionate to sentences imposed for prior offences, provided the subsequent
offence is not significantly more serious than the prior offence. essentially,
a subsequent sentence for an offence should have an incremental increase
proportionate to the frequency of the repeated offence:
r. v. white,
2007
nlca 44,
270 nfld & p.e.i.r. 351. the application of this principle is
contextual to the level of seriousness of the subsequent offences.
as noted by
rosenberg j.a. in
borde, at para. 39,
the jump principle "has little application where
the severity of the offender's crimes shows a dramatic increase in violence and
seriousness". the same is true when dealing with multiple convictions for
an offender with a lengthy criminal record, or where previous sanctions have
been ineffective in deterring the offender. [emphasis mine]

there are several reasons why a significant
increase in the period of incarceration from mr. towell’s last sentence will
not offend this principle.

i do not know enough about the
circumstances of mr. towell’s prior offences. for example, i do not know if he
pled guilty or the crown’s position or the nature of the offences other than it
involved grabbing unsuspecting women. furthermore, mr. towell was sentenced as
a first offender at that time.

in contrast, mr. towell is a repeat sex
offender who accumulated a recent conviction for violence causing bodily harm for
which he was being supervised in the community when he reoffended with two
different victims. finally, the range of sentence for these crimes has changed since
2016 post
friesen
and
a.j.k.,
supra.

i appreciate that sentencing precedents setting
out recommended ranges for certain offences are intended to provide guidance as
opposed to dominating the sentencing process.
in
r. v. parranto,
2021
scc 46
at para
36, the supreme court summarized these “key principles”:
1. starting
points and ranges are not and cannot be binding in theory or in practice;
2. ranges
and starting points are "guidelines, not hard and fast rules", and a
"departure from or failure to refer to a range of sentence or starting
point" cannot be treated as an error in principle;
3. sentencing
judges have discretion to "individualize sentencing both in method and
outcome", and "[d]ifferent methods may even be required to account
properly for relevant systemic and background factors"; and,
4. appellate
courts cannot "intervene simply because the sentence is different from the
sentence that would have been reached had the range of sentence or starting
point been applied". the focus should be on whether the sentence was fit
and whether the judge properly applied the principles of sentencing, not
whether the judge chose the right starting point or category. [citations
omitted]

similarly,
in
r. v. kelly,
2022 onsc 5500
at paras.
35 and 36, the court cautioned that:
the supreme
court of canada has emphasized that usual ranges of sentence are neither
"straitjackets" nor hard and fast rules. rather, they are properly
understood as "historical portraits for the use of sentencing judges, who
must still exercise their discretion in each
case":
r. v. lacasse,
2015
scc 64
at paras.
56-60. there is no requirement for exceptional
circumstances for a sentencing judge to impose a sentence outside the usual
range:
friesen, at paras.
36-39; 111-112.
thus, while
ranges are relevant to the analysis, sentencing is best understood as an
exercise of judicial discretion to individualize the sentence for a particular
offender who committed particular offences, in a particular community.
proportionality remains the overarching objective.

the applicable sentence range of 3 to 5
years represents an appropriate upward trend in sentences for sexual violence. this
range may increase over time as crowns advocate for longer sentences and our
courts benefit from a growing awareness of the lasting personal and societal
harms of sexual violence. trial judges will also have further guidance from
more recent appellate decisions upholding higher sentences.

of course, there may be sentences above and
below this range depending on the individual circumstances in each case. sentences
at or below the lower end of the range often involve a first offender who pleads
guilty, demonstrates insight, expressed sincere remorse, has significant
potential for rehabilitation or has invested in counseling. there may be other unique
or substantially mitigating considerations or the absence of certain
aggravating features.

there is nothing exceptionally mitigating
about mr. towell’s background or his current circumstances that attenuates his
moral culpability. the unintentional but entirely foreseeable impact of the
loss of his liberty and destruction of the life he built up cannot justify a
disproportionate sentence.
e.
conclusion:

counsel’s recommended sentence of 18 months
of incarceration was demonstrably unfit. frankly, it would be a glaring error
in principle as a disproportionate disposition.

while the crown’s position of 6 to 7 years
of incarceration was informed by the upward trend in sentencing and the
aggravating features of these offences and this offender, it did not consider
the absence of certain aggravating facts, and some mitigating considerations
outlined in these reasons.

i have determined that a fit and proportionate
sentence is as follows:
•
sexual assault on ms.
k.d. 25 months ptc + 27 months =
52 months
•
assault on ms. k.d 4
months consecutive
•
breaches of probation 4
months consecutive but concurrent to each other

the total sentence is a period of
5 years
or
60
months. considering the
pretrial custody of 25 months, he has a balance of
35 months of incarceration left to serve.

there will be an order pursuant to
section
743.21
of the
criminal code
prohibiting contact while in custody with either of
the victims or any members of their immediate families. in addition, he will be
bound by a lifetime s.o.i.r.a order, a
section 109
weapons prohibition for life
and he will supply samples of his dna.

the victim fine surcharges are obviously an
undue hardship and will be waived in the circumstances.

this information was provided by the crown during submissions