source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj238/2025oncj238.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. gallant,
2025 oncj 238
date: 
2025 04 29
court
file: toronto# 4810 998 23 48124578-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
jason gallant
sentencing
decision
before
justice brock jones
heard
on december 12, 2024; april 4 and 15, 2025
written
reasons provided on april 29, 2025
b. chu..................................................................................................... counsel
for the ppsc
r. sherman.......................................................................................... counsel
for mr. gallant
jones j.:
introduction

on december 12, 2024, jason gallant pleaded
guilty to four counts of trafficking fentanyl on different dates in 2023,
contrary to section 5(1) of the
controlled drugs and substances act
(cdsa).

the supreme court has identified the proliferation and abuse of fentanyl
across canada as a matter of grave national importance. a
powerful denunciatory statement is required from the courts when those who trafficked
in fentanyl are brought to justice, even when other mitigating factors might be
present.
facts in support of the guilty pleas

on september 19, 2023, an undercover officer contacted mr. gallant by
phone. he agreed to sell the officer fentanyl. they met in person, and he sold
the officer 0.86g of fentanyl for $200.

the process was repeated on october 7, october 17, and november 21,
2023. on those dates, mr. gallant sold 1.6 grams, 0.52 grams, and 2.5 grams of
fentanyl to an officer for $200, $60, and $240, respectively.

on the last date, he was arrested. a search incident to arrest revealed
another 3.4 grams of fentanyl in his possession.

at the time of these transactions, mr gallant was homeless. he was
addicted to fentanyl and other substances. he was in poor health and was
characterized as an addict-dealer.
pre-sentence report (“psr”) and other information about mr.
gallant

mr. gallant is 50 years old. he has a substantial prior criminal record,
but the last entry was in 2007.

his mother raised him in summerside, prince edward island. he has four
siblings and a large extended family. unfortunately, he has no relationship
with any of his family members.

his stepfather struggled with alcoholism and was physically and verbally
abusive. he was struck as a child. at the age of 10, he was placed in foster
care. he had already experienced a tough childhood. he described the group home
where he was placed as traumatic.

his
problems with addiction stretch back many years. mr. gallant began
experimenting with drugs when he was only eight years old. at ten, he began to
use alcohol. as a teenager, he used other drugs, including cocaine.

he
had regular contact with the criminal justice system during his teenage years
and early adulthood. he was often in jail. his addictions only grew stronger.
after being released from custody at age 26, he admitted he would use “anything
that you could get in a needle.”

at
the age of 30, he attended a nine-month drug treatment program. he was then
clean for twelve years but relapsed.

his
addiction to drugs has cost him dearly. in 2017, he was married. sadly, he has
not contacted his wife for many years. the relationship ended due to his drug
addiction. he has two adult children from two other women and has no
relationship with them either.

he
currently resides in a rooming house. he is not employed. he supports himself with
government assistance.

for
the last eight years, he has used crystal meth, fentanyl and crack cocaine
daily.

there
have been glimmers of hope. he is currently taking prescription medication to
assist him with curbing his addiction. hannah levitt, a case manager at mobile
safer opioid supply, advised that she has been working with mr. gallant since
may 2022. she believes she has witnessed a remarkable difference in his demeanour.
he has attended counselling regularly.

mr.
gallant believes he may have an undiagnosed mental health issue. no further
evidence was presented to support this belief at the sentencing hearing, other
than a reference to suffering from depression. he was also diagnosed with
arthritis and has back pain.

when
he exercised his right of allocution, mr. gallant explained that every day for
him as a person with an addiction has been a struggle. he used drugs to try to
block out the shame and guilt he continues to feel due to his difficult life
experiences. in particular, he expressed great regret for his marriage falling
apart. he does not consider himself a “pusher” and thought he was helping
someone out when he provided fentanyl on the offence dates.
testimony of ms. m. juhary

ms.
juhary testified during the sentencing hearing and adopted the report she
authored. mr. sherman challenged her on certain portions of the report,
suggesting they may have been inaccurate. i will expand upon the controversial
portions of her report later in this judgment. she emphasized in her testimony that
she cautioned mr. gallant several times that anything he told her would be
included in the final report.
other evidence

two
letters from ms. p. mahindan were provided. she is a nurse practitioner at
parkdale queen west community health centre. she has been providing care to mr.
gallant since 2022. she explained that he has been battling substance use
issues for many years. he joined a safer opioid supply program as a means of
decreasing his reliance on street drugs. he suffers from depression as well. he
has struggled with homelessness in the past, but has now acquired housing.

gehan
imbrahim, a pharmacist at gate pharmacy, provided a letter confirming that mr.
gallant has been a patient for three years. he regularly attends to obtain his
medication.
positions of the parties

mr.
chu seeks a reformatory jail sentence of two years less a day. he submits that there
are several aggravating factors present, including the deadly nature of
fentanyl that mr. gallant trafficked for profit and his prior criminal record. he
provided me with a list of reported decisions that have all held that custodial
sentences are necessary to reflect the gravity of the harm associated with
trafficking in fentanyl.

he noted, correctly, that the “proliferation of
fentanyl strains our hospitals, destroys families and injures and kills
individuals.”

mr.
sherman submits that a conditional sentence of two years less a day meets the
applicable sentencing principles. he asked me to consider his client’s guilty
plea, the challenges of his life, and his commitment to rehabilitation. his
client has not reoffended and has stable housing. while his client still uses
drugs daily, he has cut back considerably.

mr.
sherman provided several prior reported decisions supporting his position,
which i will address in the following reasons.
sentencing for trafficking in fentanyl

the
fundamental principle of sentencing is that a sentence must be proportionate to
“the gravity of the offence committed and the moral blameworthiness of the
offender”: see
criminal code
section 718.1. proportionality must be
understood as a fundamentally individualized concept, demanding “an
individualized assessment of all of the relevant factors and circumstances,
including the status and life experiences, of the person standing before them”:
see
r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, at para.
75.

while
those individual characteristics are important, the gravity of the offence and
the harm to the community must also be appropriately considered. as the supreme
court of canada stated in
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, “[t]he more
serious a crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender’s degree of
responsibility or moral blameworthiness, the heavier the sentence will be”: para.
12. the offence of trafficking in a schedule i substance is punishable by a
maximum of life imprisonment:
cdsa
section 5(3). trafficking in fentanyl
is so severe that even a first-time offender can potentially face a significant
penitentiary sentence: see
r. v. loor,
2017 onca 696, at para.
50.

in
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46, justices moldaver and côté commented on the
dangers associated with trafficking in hard drugs in general:
 trafficking in such
substances causes both direct and indirect harms to society. directly, the
distribution and abuse of hard drugs leads to addiction, debilitating adverse
health effects, and, all too frequently, death by overdose. as lamer j.
(as he then was) astutely observed, where addiction and death occur — as they
so often do — those who oversee the distribution of these drugs are personally
“responsible for the gradual but inexorable degeneration of many of their
fellow human beings” (
r. v. smith,
1987 canlii 64 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 1045, at p. 1053).

trafficking also leads indirectly to a
host of other ills, including an increase in all manner of crime committed by
those seeking to finance their addiction, as well as by organized crime
syndicates (
pushpanathan v. canada (minister of citizenship and immigration),
1998
canlii 778 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 982, at paras.
85‑87, per
cory j., dissenting, but not on this point;
r. v. kang‑brown,
2008
scc 18, 1 s.c.r. 456, at para.
184, per deschamps j.,
dissenting, but not on this point). given that much of this criminal activity
is violent, trafficking has come to be understood as an offence of violence,
even beyond the ruinous consequences it has for those who abuse drugs and in
the process, destroy themselves and others…

a further and perhaps even more
devastating consequence of the hard drug trade is its impact on families and
the intergenerational trauma it causes:
trafficking in drugs, and in
particular hard drugs such as cocaine, is a crime whose victims can be found
far beyond the individuals who become addicted to the drugs. families can be
torn apart by either the loss of the individual to the addiction itself or to
the violence that all too often accompanies the drug
trade....
children suffer immense harm
from the effects of addiction in their home, whether this addiction be from pre‑natal
impact or from physical and/or emotional violence in the homes that they should
be safe in. the future of these children and their families is damaged and all
of society pays the price.
(
r. v.
profeit,
2009 yktc 39, at paras.
25‑26
)

finally, the trafficking of hard drugs
leads to “significant if not staggering” costs to society in terms of health
care and law enforcement expenses, as well as lost productivity (
pushpanathan,
at para.
89; see also
r. v. lloyd,
2016 scc 13, 1
s.c.r. 130, at para.
82
). in 2017, for example, it is estimated that abuse
of opioids and cocaine in canada resulted in total costs of $9.6 billion
(canadian substance use costs and harms scientific working group,
canadian
substance use costs and harms
(2015‑2017)
(2020), at
p. 1).

fentanyl
trafficking raises specific concerns for sentencing courts. fentanyl is “an
extremely dangerous and powerful painkiller and sedative… [its] potential for
harm is… significantly greater than other opioids”, with the risk of “overdose
and death… extremely high”:
parranto
at para.
94.

in
r. v. campbell,
2024
scc 42, the majority of the supreme court of canada
commented, again, on the magnitude of the risk presented by abusing even small
quantities of fentanyl at para.
132:
fentanyl is a highly addictive and
extremely powerful opioid pain reliever and sedative intended to be
administered in medical settings. it is estimated to be up to 100 times more
potent than morphine and about 25 to 50 times more potent than heroin. a lethal
dose can be less than two milligrams, or about the size of a single grain of
salt. fentanyl is also much cheaper than other drugs, and so drug dealers will
often mix small amounts of it with other drugs to create a cheaper product with
similar effects, thus significantly increasing their profits. because fentanyl
is visually indistinguishable from other hard drugs, it exposes vulnerable drug
users to the risk of serious harm, including brain damage, organ damage, coma,
and death.

the
alberta court of appeal noted the devastating effects of fentanyl in
r. v.
bellows,
2025 abca 100, released earlier this year, at para. 63:
in recent years, our society
has been stunned by the impact of the commonly lethal artificial drugs fentanyl
and carfentanyl being part of what statistics canada has reported as a total of
49,105 opioid toxicity deaths in canada between january 2016 and june 2024, mostly
in british columbia, alberta and ontario. what is worse about such drugs is
that there seems to be an inexhaustible supply of such manufactured poisons,
they can be made here from precursors or supplied by unfriendly nations, and
addiction to opioids can occur accidentally.

justice
barrett described the harm associated with fentanyl trafficking in
r. v.
ahmed,
2024 onsc 6664, at para.
23:
trafficking in a deadly drug
such as fentanyl causes immeasurable harm to the community. as noted by the
court of appeal for ontario in
r. v. loor,
2017 onca 696, at
para.
33, “every day in our communities, fentanyl abuse claims the lives
of canadians.” indeed, given its deadly and addictive properties, fentanyl has
been described as “public enemy number one”:
r. v. parranto,
2021
scc 46, 3 s.c.r. 366, at para.
93;
r. v. mengesha,
2022
onca 654, 516 c.r.r. (2d) 31, at para.
16;
r. v. campbell,
2022
onca 666, 163 o.r. (3d) 355, at para.
83.

succinctly
put: fentanyl kills. we are bombarded with cases in this courthouse regularly
about the devastating effects of this drug. each life lost is a tragedy. every
death could have been prevented.

our
jurisprudence continues to evolve and develop in response to this growing
menace. yet, some principles must always be taken into consideration. section
10 of the
cdsa
states that
without restricting the
generality of the
criminal code, the fundamental purpose of any
sentence for an offence under this part is to contribute to the respect for the
law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society while encouraging
rehabilitation and treatment in appropriate circumstances, of offenders and
acknowledging the harm done to victims and to the community.

while
this section speaks to “encouraging rehabilitation and treatment in appropriate
circumstances,” there is no doubt that the primary sentencing principles in
cases of trafficking a schedule i substance such as fentanyl are deterrence and
denunciation: see
r. v. lawal,
2024 onsc 3621,
at
para.
27;
r. v. johnson,
2020 mbca 10, at para.
12.

mr.
gallant trafficked fentanyl on four dates. the total amount of fentanyl
trafficked was 5.4 grams, and he had another 3.4 grams on his person when
arrested. the repeated nature of the offences and the quantum of fentanyl are
aggravating. he furthermore trafficked for profit, which is another aggravating
factor. i also agree with mr. chu’s submission that trafficking in fentanyl is
qualitatively different than possessing fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking. active trafficking is an objectively more serious offence: see
r.
v. king,
2013 onca 417, at para.
54;
r. v. malabre,
2024 onsc 6111,
at para.
50.

penitentiary
sentences for repeatedly trafficking in fentanyl are the norm. in
r. v.
campbell,
2024 onsc 2220, justice boswell of the superior court of justice
reviewed the existing authorities that have been reported for trafficking in
small amounts of fentanyl and noted that the appropriate sentencing range for
this offence was “not yet settled”: see para. 45. nevertheless, a sentence
between two and three years was generally appropriate, although upper reformatory
sentences were imposed in some cases with sufficient mitigating factors: see
para. 46.

two
other recent decisions of the superior court of justice in ontario have similarly
held that penitentiary sentences are generally appropriate. in
lawal,
the
offender pleaded guilty to three counts of trafficking in fentanyl. the total
amount of fentanyl was 1.19 grams. the accused was only 22 years old at the
time of the offences, with a minor and unrelated criminal record. there were
significant mitigating factors before the court, including the guilty plea and
expression of remorse, and social-context evidence that suggested the offender
was motivated by a desire to help his mother escape poverty in a problematic
neighbourhood in toronto. the offender had strong family support and had
complied with his bail conditions for nearly five years.

yet
justice nakatsuru imposed a penitentiary sentence of 29 months: see para. 27.

in
ahmed,
the offender trafficked in fentanyl on three different dates. the
total amount was approximately 10 grams. he pleaded guilty. he did not have a
prior criminal record. like mr. gallant, he struggled with addiction. he had
the support of his family and had taken some steps towards his rehabilitation
since his arrest.

despite
a finding that he had “strong rehabilitative prospects,” justice barrett wrote
the following in para. 34 (my emphasis added)
it is purely good fortune that
no one was killed …minimal amounts of fentanyl can and do cause death. because
of these dire risks and the prevalence of fentanyl in our society, the
sentences meted out by courts are lengthy, even for simple possession. the sentences
communicate a strong message of denunciation and general deterrence in an
attempt to rid our society of this insidious drug.
i find that the fact that
you trafficked this deadly drug, not just once,
but on three occasions,
makes a sentence of less than two years unfit.
a reformatory sentence is
simply not appropriate given all of the circumstances of this offence. in fact,
were it not for the many mitigating factors in this case,
a sentence of five
years would be entirely appropriate.”

the
final sentence was 30 months of concurrent custody on each charge (served
concurrently).

in
r. v. landell,
2023 onsc 6526, justice goodman held that a conditional
sentence for trafficking in hard drugs should be reserved for rare or
exceptional cases. mr. sherman has attempted to persuade me that this is one
such case, mainly because his client is an addict-trafficker. he is correct
that the ontario court of appeal has recognized that some drug traffickers are themselves
victims of a drug culture they struggle to escape. in appropriate cases, their
treatment and rehabilitation better serve the public interest: see
r. v.
n.h. (c.),
2002 canlii 7751, at para.
31. an offender who is an addict
trafficker may also have a lesser degree of moral blameworthiness for his offending
behaviour: see
loor
at para.
41.

mr.
sherman directed me to several cases where courts have found exceptional or
sufficiently mitigating circumstances to justify a conditional sentence. i have
also reviewed several other reported decisions.

in
r. v. maki,
2023 bcsc 2470, the 30-year-old offender pleaded guilty to
one count of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. following a
traffic stop, a search of his vehicle incidental to arrest revealed a plastic
bag containing $74,680 in canadian currency, a total of 42 grams of fentanyl in
powder form and 804 fentanyl pills. mr. maki explained during the sentencing
process that he had accepted a ride from a person he knew to be a drug dealer and
that he knew about the presence of the drugs in the vehicle. that was the
extent of his liability.

he
was involved in two car accidents, where he suffered injury and was diagnosed
with a brain tumor at age 18. he suffered from addiction but had regularly
attended alcoholics anonymous. he was employed and had strong community support,
including his family. justice church was satisfied there were exceptional
circumstances and imposed a conditional sentence order of two years less a day.

in
r. v. gordon,
2023 oncj 157, the offender pleaded guilty to possession
for the purpose of trafficking fentanyl. the total amount was 12.07 grams. he
accepted that he also possessed 7.02 grams of cocaine and 30 hydromorphone
pills for the purpose of trafficking. he was an addict trafficker, homeless,
and impoverished at the time of his offences. by the time of his sentencing
hearing, he had obtained housing and was committed to treatment at camh. the
court imposed a conditional sentence for two years less a day.

in
r. v. williams,
2023 oncj 259, the 25-year-old offender pleaded guilty
before me to one count of possession for the purpose of trafficking fentanyl. he
was found to have 14.27 grams of fentanyl. he provided financial support to his
sister and her two children. he also had a child that he co-parented with his
former partner. he was employed. justice monahan imposed a conditional sentence
of two years less a day.

in
r. v. nacinovich,
2020 onsc 7604, the offender pleaded guilty to
possession for the purpose of trafficking in fentanyl. the total amount was 8.6
grams. he was also an addict-trafficker. however, he had abstained from using
drugs for 18 months by the date of sentencing. a physician was treating him. he
received a conditional sentence of two years less a day, but it was reduced by
the 211 actual days he had already spent in pre-sentence custody in jail.

in
r. v. han,
2022 oncj 343, the offender pleaded guilty to possession for
the purpose of trafficking fentanyl. the total amount was 15.6 grams. the
offender was 24 years old and had no prior criminal record. he had an addiction.
before sentencing, she attended 24 drug rehabilitation sessions and obtained
employment. the court imposed a conditional sentence of two years less a day.

in
r. v russell,
2023 oncj 133, the offender pleaded guilty to one count of
possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. he was arrested, and a
search warrant was then executed at his home, where police discovered 7.73
grams of fentanyl, 33 grams of cocaine and $5,500 in cash. he was a single
father responsible for four dependent children. justice silverstein imposed a
conditional sentence, in large part due to concerns about what would happen to
his children if he were incarcerated.

in
r. v. hugh,
2024 onsc 6135, the first-time, 63-year-old offender pleaded
guilty to one count of possession of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. he
was observed by officers conducting a street-level transaction in downtown
toronto. he was arrested and searched. he was caught with 15.70 grams of
fentanyl. there was medical evidence presented to the court that the offender
had suffered from a stroke, had previously been unfit to stand trial, and would
experience hardship in jail accordingly. a conditional sentence was imposed.

very
recently, in
r. v. benjamin,
2025 oncj 129, justice porter imposed a
conditional sentence of two years less a day for an offender found guilty of
trafficking fentanyl on four different dates. he turned 21 just before the last
transaction. he had no prior criminal record.

justice
porter found that during his teenage years and at the time he committed the
offence, mr. benjamin was addicted to opioids and was “desperate for money.”
as he was a youthful first-time offender with good rehabilitative
prospects, justice porter imposed a two-year conditional sentence, less a day.

there
is also appellate authority in support of mr. sherman’s position. in
r. v.
hall,
2024 onca 664, the offender was convicted of trafficking fentanyl. he
used drugs with his friends and sold the victim a small quantity of fentanyl
for personal use. tragically, the user died. the offender had a “particularly
difficult life” and became an opioid addict as a result of an injury. he
entered an early guilty plea, was remorseful, had a positive employment history,
and had made “extraordinary” efforts at rehabilitation. the trial judge imposed
a conditional sentence of two years less a day, followed by three years of
probation. the crown appealed the sentence, but it was upheld by the court of
appeal.

however,
the court noted that the “objectives of denunciation and deterrence will
typically require carceral sentences where fentanyl trafficking is concerned.”
based on the “unusual circumstances” of the case, it was open to the sentencing
judge to impose a conditional sentence: see para. 6.

in
my view, mr. gallant’s circumstances do not align with those of these other
offenders. mr gallant is not a first-time offender. he was not inadvertently
involved in the drug trade. he decided to sell fentanyl on four occasions. he
has a considerable prior criminal record, even if it is dated, including
trafficking in controlled substances. he has continued to abuse drugs since his
arrest. he is not employed. as i will describe, his attitude towards the trafficking
of fentanyl is alarming and speaks to his likelihood of reoffending.

what
was revealed in mr. gallant’s psr is of great concern. i accept the contents of
that report as accurate and reliable. ms. juhary was an excellent witness, and i
find she conducted herself fairly and professionally when dealing with mr.
gallant. nothing that arose during cross-examination raised concerns about
accepting the psr's contents.

mr.
gallant admitted to selling fentanyl repeatedly since 2020. he downplayed the
risks associated with this illegal activity, claiming those risks are made out
to be a “bigger deal than it is.” he believed the drug should be legalized. he
also told ms. juhary that because he “tested” the fentanyl himself before
selling it, he did not consider it risky. he explained that any potential
consumers would inevitably obtain their fentanyl from another source, so it did
not matter if he was dealing. in his mind, at least he was selling “clean”
fentanyl.

these
comments are shocking and disturbing. mr. gallant’s attitude to distributing
fentanyl and his lack of appreciation for the harm he is causing are very
alarming. as an addict himself and having witnessed firsthand the devastating
consequences his addiction has had on his life, mr. gallant knew how harmful hard
drugs are to those who abuse them. yet he continued to sell fentanyl regardless,
potentially victimizing others and attempting to falsely rationalize his
conduct while downplaying his high degree of moral culpability.

mr.
sherman submitted that these were simply expressions of mr. gallant’s personal
views that drugs should be decriminalized. his personal beliefs should not be
used against him by the court. while mr. gallant, like any citizen, is entitled
to his views about drug policy, i disagree with mr. sherman that they should
play no role in my determination of an appropriate sentence. mr. gallant’s statement
to ms. juhary that there is nothing wrong or dangerous with selling fentanyl
that he deems “clean” to members of the community demonstrates
that he does not understand the seriousness of his offences.

it
is also directly linked to his risk of re-offending. whatever progress he
appears to have made with ms. levitt, the contents of the psr cause me to
question whether mr. gallant has truly gained meaningful insight into his
crimes and the pressing need for him to stop trafficking fentanyl. i note that he
has been working with ms. levitt since 2022, but these offences occurred in the
fall of 2023. furthermore, the suggestion that a street-level
user, such as mr. gallant, can determine, on their own, what is “clean”
fentanyl (meaning somehow safe for consumption) is frighteningly misguided, and
anyone who subscribes to this falsehood must know it will find no traction in
the courts.

ms.
juhary also noted that mr. gallant had failed to attend two scheduled
appointments to prepare the psr. when he arrived for the third appointment, he fell
asleep and had to be awoken multiple times. he admitted he was unprepared and
described the report as a “waste of time.” he admitted to using crack cocaine
and fentanyl before the appointment. when offered to return on a different day
to conduct the interview, he stated that he uses drugs every day, so
rescheduling would not “make a difference.”

these remarks greatly diminish the weight i can
place on mr. gallant’s commitment to rehabilitation and whether he can be
trusted to comply with a community-based sentence. i appreciate that an
addiction to drugs is a lifelong struggle to overcome. mr. gallant has made
some progress on his path to healing, as detailed in the letters from ms.
mahindan from parkdale queen west community health centre. nevertheless, his attitude
towards his offences and his inability to remain sober even when attending an
interview with a probation officer demonstrate that his commitment to refraining
from using and distributing fentanyl is uncertain at best. this is a relevant
consideration when determining if a conditional sentence is appropriate, as i
must consider the offender’s future dangerousness: see
r.
v. bynoe,
2025 onca 274, at para.
11.
conclusion

despite
mr. sherman’s able and passionate submissions, i am not satisfied that this is
an exceptional case. the severe harm that fentanyl has wreaked must be
acknowledged through significant sentences from the courts. every instance of
trafficking carries an unacceptable risk to human life.

as
noted by justice barrett, penitentiary sentences of as high as five years
should be expected for an offender who trafficks fentanyl on multiple
occasions.

the
mitigating factors in this case are of moderate weight but not exceptional. while
mr. gallant pleaded guilty, the case against him was overwhelming. his remarks
to the psr author dramatically attenuate his purported acceptance of
responsibility. he is not a young first-time offender. he is a mature man in
his 50s.

he
has recently undertaken some efforts at rehabilitation, with decidedly mixed
results. he continues to abuse drugs daily.

i
have no evidence of any diagnosed mental health issues, whether purportedly
linked to his childhood trauma or otherwise. even if they were present, to
constitute a mitigating factor, a causal link between any mental health concern
and the trafficking of drugs must be established: see
r. v. mcknight,
2024
bcca 394, at para.
25;
r. v. barham,
2014 onca 797, at para.
8.

however,
i agree with mr. sherman that his client’s physical health concerns and
vulnerabilities remain relevant. the particular vulnerabilities of any offender
must be considered before imposing a jail sentence: see
r. v. hills,
2023 scc 2, at para.
135;
r. v. salehi,
2022 bcca 1, at para.
65. no
matter where mr. gallant serves his sentence, his time in jail will be
difficult. however, this factor cannot be given undue weight. the correctional
authorities are required, by law, to address the healthcare needs of all
inmates, and i have heard no evidence that mr. gallant’s particular needs
cannot be provided with adequate accommodations: see
r. v. r.c.,
2015
onca 313, at para.
8.


in my view, mr. chu’s position already
fairly incorporates consideration of mr. gallant’s circumstances and the other
mitigating factors present in this case. indeed, it is lenient. a penitentiary
sentence of at least three years would have been entirely appropriate.

after discussions with counsel, i have
chosen to impose a two-year sentence. notwithstanding the position of the ppsc,
in my view, the objective gravity of trafficking in fentanyl on four occasions
can only be adequately reflected in a penitentiary sentence. furthermore, mr.
gallant will receive more suitable rehabilitative programming in a better
environment for his needs in the federal correctional system than in a
provincial jail.

ancillary
orders include a lifetime weapons prohibition order (
criminal code
section
109(1)(c)) and an order for a sample of mr. gallant’s dna to be taken (
criminal
code
section 487.051).

a
forfeiture order was granted for the property associated with drug dealing that
was in mr. gallant’s possession at the time of his arrest.

the victim fine surcharge is waived.
released: april 29, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

i acknowledge that where compelling evidence in this regard is presented, it
may justify a conditional sentence as opposed to imprisonment: see, for
example,
r. v. faroughi,
2024 onca 178, at paras.
121-122.