source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj724/2025oncj724.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. arrindell, 2025 oncj 724
date: 2025
04 15
court
file no.: brampton 3111 998 22 31101767
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ronald arrindell
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 30-31 july 2024 and 15 april 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 15 april 2025
t. kim.......................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
a. vaughan.................................................... counsel
for the defendant ronald arrindell
reasons for judgment following a trial
renwick j.:
introduction

the defendant is charged on a single-count
information with stealing a 2021 land rover sport utility vehicle. the
prosecution proceeded summarily.

four witnesses (including the complainant)
testified for the prosecution during the trial. there were several video
recordings and still images that became exhibits.

the case is entirely circumstantial. there is no
direct evidence that the defendant is the perpetrator of the theft.

the main issue for determination is whether the
circumstantial evidence leads to the inescapable conclusion that the defendant
is the person who stole the complainant’s vehicle. this determination is
essential to discover if the charge has been proven beyond a reasonable
doubt.
governing legal principles

the supreme court of canada has recently
reiterated the legal principles that govern the fact-finding process engaged during
a trial.


the onus during a criminal trial begins and ends
with the prosecution to prove the guilt of a defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt. everyone charged with a criminal offence is presumed innocent and that
presumption remains throughout the whole of the trial, unless and until the
court is satisfied that the charges have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
the prosecution’s burden of proof never shifts during the trial. in this case,
if at the end of my consideration of the evidence and submissions i am not satisfied
that the prosecution has proven any element of an alleged offence beyond a
reasonable doubt, and more specifically, if i have a reasonable doubt that the
defendant committed the theft, he will be acquitted of the charge.

a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or
frivolous doubt. it must be based upon reason and common sense and it logically
derives from the evidence or the lack of evidence adduced during a trial. while
likely or even probable guilt is not enough to meet the criminal standard, proof
to an absolute certainty is inapplicable and unrealistic. the supreme court of
canada has cautioned that there is no mathematical precision to proof beyond a
reasonable doubt, but it lies much closer to absolute certainty than to proof
on a balance of probabilities.

if after considering all of the admissible evidence, i am sure that
a defendant committed an alleged offence and i am not left with any reasonable
doubt, i must convict them since this demonstrates that i am satisfied of their
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. likewise, if i am not sure, or some reasonable
doubt remains, then the charge has not been proven to the required degree and
an acquittal must follow.

the evidence of identity in this case is
circumstantial. to be satisfied that the identity of the suspect has been
proven to be the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt, i must be satisfied that
it is the
only
reasonable inference available on the evidence.

in assessing the case, i must
consider the evidence cumulatively and as a whole, including gaps in the
evidence. given that each circumstantial piece of evidence may be insufficient
on its own to support the required inference, i must consider all the
individual pieces of evidence together to determine whether the prosecution’s
burden is overcome. the test is a strict one, because triers of fact are
susceptible to the danger inherent in the use of circumstantial evidence: jumping
to unwarranted conclusions.

when assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact must also
consider other plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities which are
inconsistent with guilt.

admissibility and the weight attached to evidence are two
distinct considerations. in addition to the testimony received, there are video
recordings and photographs to consider. the probative value of evidence is not
presumed. in all cases, a trier of fact must determine the appropriate weight
to give each piece of evidence and what, if anything, is established or proven
and to what degree.
the
evidence and findings of fact

in this part, i will outline some of the
evidence and provide an assessment of the testimony, with references to
specific portions of the evidence. although i will not refer to all evidence, i
listened to each witness carefully, i have taken detailed notes, and i have
assessed all testimony for intrinsic and extrinsic consistency, plausibility,
balance, motive, and the witness’ ability to recall and communicate.

i will not recapitulate the entirety of the evidence received
during this trial. suffice it to note that i have used several opportunities
during the trial and subsequent to the completion of the submissions to review
my notes and the exhibits and to listen to parts of the digital audio
recordings of the proceedings. i have thoroughly reviewed the evidence in this
case, and i will only discuss parts of the evidence where it serves to
underscore my findings. lastly, despite any verbal exchanges during the
evidentiary phase of the trial or submissions, i came to no conclusions about
any of the evidence received until the closing submissions were made and my
review of the evidence, submissions, and the law was complete.
the police testimony

constable stefan arroyo testified first. he explained his
response to the call for service and video evidence he seized of the area where
the stolen range rover was recovered approximately four hours after the fact.

the officer identified security video from a business where the
range rover had parked. constable arroyo noted that the vehicle had attempted
to enter the parking lot for the wayfair building, but a security gate arm did
not lift and the vehicle parked in a neighbouring lot. with his phone,
constable arroyo took a video of the monitor upon which he viewed the security
footage from the neighbouring business (congevec). the original video had gaps
where the recording had stopped and started. a man is suddenly seen walking closely
in the area of the stolen vehicle apparently away from where it had been
parked. the male wore a white and gray sweater with a black horizontal stripe
across the chest and back, black pants, and tan work boots with black toe-caps.
the male had black skin and short dark hair. the officer testified that he
noted the time on the video monitor for the security footage, 4:36 p.m. the
video showed the male leave the parking lot and walk across a boulevard behind
a parked trailer and out of sight. the video is grainy.

at the wayfair building, the officer saw additional security
video that appeared to show the same male with the distinctive white and gray
sweater, dark pants, and tan work boots walk from behind a parked trailer
across a large lot at the side of the wayfair building, and eventually (from
another camera angle), across the front of the building and into the front
entrance.

constable arroyo did not seize the first video he saw of the
range rover attempting to enter the wayfair parking lot before attending the
congevec parking next door.

constables angela annoni and matt davis also testified. their
testimony assisted with identifying the wayfair videos and still photographs
entered as exhibits.

uniquely, constable davis testified that he saw video of the male
exit the stolen vehicle after it had parked, the male was at the trunk, he saw
the vehicle lights flash (as if the vehicle was locked using the key fob), and
the male left it in the congevec parking lot. this officer was not
cross-examined on this evidence.

aside from the testimony that officer davis saw the male leave
the stolen the vehicle and lock it, the police testimony is not contentious.
the defendant was arrested at wayfair, his place of employment, sometime after
8:00 p.m. the defendant was searched incident to arrest and he was found in
possession of the complainant’s car keys (for the stolen vehicle and the
defendant’s wife’s car), and other keys, which were returned to the complainant
at 9:15 p.m.
the testimony of the
complainant

mr. dharminder brar testified about the theft of his 2021 range
rover. it was worth over $150,000. he left the vehicle with the keys inside for
a couple of minutes and when he returned, it was gone. mr. brar tracked his
vehicle (using an app) to the location where it was recovered. he believed that
he arrived at the wayfair building within one hour of losing the vehicle. mr.
brar was uncertain whether the vehicle was stolen around 2:00-3:00 p.m. or
3:00-4:00 p.m. or so, but he was certain that he found the vehicle and waited
there for many hours watching it, parked and undisturbed, until the police
arrived.
analysis of
the evidence
credibility
and reliability generally

triers of fact must consider both credibility
and reliability in determining whether the allegations are proven beyond a
reasonable doubt. credibility is shorthand for truthfulness and believability.
reliability is the lens through which we evaluate the accuracy of evidence.
trial judges must be careful not to conflate credibility with reliability
otherwise the fact-finding net might entangle even the least reliable piece of
evidence.

it is important to remember that in some cases
credibility takes a back-seat to reliability. for example, there are
prosecutions where the suspect is unknown to the complainant and the latter may
be honestly mistaken about the identity of the perpetrator. in such a case,
reliability concerns govern the analysis because credibility does not guarantee
accuracy.

while credibility is not a proxy for
reliability,

where the evidence is highly credible, consistent, plausible, not inconsistent
with other evidence, largely undisturbed upon a vigorous cross-examination, and
not found to be otherwise unreliable, truth and accuracy are likely
established.

assessments of credibility and reliability can
be the most important and challenging judicial determinations in a criminal
trial. our highest court has reminded us:
credibility
and reliability assessments are also context-specific and multifactorial: they
do not operate along fixed lines and are “more of an ‘art than a science’.”
with respect to credibility in particular, while coherent reasons are crucial,
it is often difficult for trial judges to precisely articulate the reasons why
they believed or disbelieved a witness due to “the complex intermingling of
impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and
attempting to reconcile the various versions of events.” the task is further
complicated by the trial judge’s ability to accept some, all, or none of a
witness’ testimony.


judicial fact-finding is often based on
inductive reasoning and evaluations of “probable interpretations of the
evidence.”

it necessarily depends on common-sense inference-drawing.

to again quote the supreme
court:
reasoning
about how people generally tend to behave, and how things tend to happen, is
not only permissible, it is often a necessary component of a complete
testimonial assessment.

self-instruction respecting credibility and witness certainty

in this analysis, i have specifically cautioned
myself to be careful when assessing the credibility of witnesses. witness
certainty is not an indicator of accuracy. in this case, the police officers and
the civilian were confident that the stolen vehicle was recovered in a timely
way and that the defendant was the culprit based on circumstances of timing,
clothing descriptions, and recognition of the defendant as the male in the
security video seen near the stolen vehicle shortly after it was parked.

this is a circumstantial case. many similar
cases have led to wrongful convictions because alternative explanations for the
evidence were not known or presented at trial.

in the end, the trier of fact must be satisfied
of the value of the various pieces of evidence, the significance of gaps in the
evidence, and whether the inferences sought by the parties are reasonable when
all evidence is considered as a whole.
the circumstantial
evidence proves the defendant drove the stolen vehicle

to be satisfied that the circumstantial evidence
proves that the defendant is the vehicle thief, i must conclude that the only
reasonable inference available in respect of all of the evidence is that the
defendant is guilty. all alternative possible inferences must be considered and
rejected by the court before the prosecution’s theory can be considered.

the defendant is alleged to have stolen mr. brar’s range rover
and within an hour he drove to his place of employment, where he was found
several hours later in possession of the complainant’s vehicle key fobs and other
keys. though there is no evidence that puts the defendant inside the stolen
range rover, a finding of guilt would entail rejecting the possibility that
someone else stole the vehicle and gave the defendant the keys that were later
found on him.

i have difficulty accepting the testimony of constable davis that
he saw video footage of the suspect leaving the stolen vehicle and locking it.
while the witness was fairly confident during this testimony, it is unclear what
video he was referring to, and why that video was not apparently recovered.
that testimony is contradicted by the video evidence in exhibit 2a. in that
video, it is clear that the recording skips (a moving transport trailer in the
background is suddenly several lengths ahead at one point; at a later point,
the male suspect is suddenly outside the range rover). for whatever reason,
this officer’s memory is incorrect. i am satisfied that there is no video that
recorded the suspect leaving the stolen vehicle or apparently locking it.

nonetheless, the photographic evidence
satisfies me that the defendant is proximate to the range rover just after it
is parked. i have carefully reviewed all video and still images. i have taken
into account the build of the male (slender), his clothing (colour, style, and
fit), his long gait, his footwear, and the timing of his movements from
congevec to the wayfair parking and around the building and i find that all of
the videos depict the same male walking from the stolen vehicle and into
wayfair. based on the clothing, the gait, the body type (apparently tall and
slender), and even his right hand position (the male at the side of the
building appears to be holding an object up to his head, which appears to be a
phone on the third wayfair video – exhibit 6d), i am satisfied that the male
that appeared near the stolen range rover is the same male that entered the
wayfair building and signed in as an employee.

i am further satisfied that the male suspect is the defendant for
the following reasons:
i.
the suspect in the video footage generally looks like the defendant as
he appeared hours later at the police station in terms of gender, build, age,
and skin colour;
ii.
the suspect has the same hair colour, hair length, and hair style as the
defendant;
iii.
the suspect has the same distinctive hairline as the defendant (see
exhibit 6d, wayfair 3 video at 3:44 and exhibit 5b);
iv.
the outline shape of the suspect’s head (the cut of his hair) as
captured in the still image of the third wayfair video (see exhibit 6f) is
identical to the still photograph of the defendant in the police interview room
video (exhibit 5b);
v.
the suspect puts on what appears to be a white mask when he enters the
wayfair building (exhibit 6g). this is similar to the white mask worn by the
defendant at the police station (exhibits 5a and 5b);
vi.
the suspect and the defendant are both employees at wayfair who happened
to be working on the same day; and
vii.
the defendant appears to be wearing very dark coloured pants upon
arrest, similar to the suspect in the wayfair videos.

i acknowledge that the defendant is never seen
wearing the distinctive sweater with the black horizontal stripe. i also
acknowledge that the police interview photographs do not depict the defendant’s
footwear. however, the police testified that the defendant was wearing the
distinctive footwear of the suspect and this evidence was not challenged.

the issue remains whether all of the evidence
establishes only that the defendant is the vehicle thief. i am left with a
reasonable doubt that the defendant stole the complainant’s range rover or had
any knowledge of the theft for the following reasons:
i.
the range rover has no obvious signs of theft; it
would not be apparent to someone borrowing the vehicle that it was stolen;
ii.
the stolen vehicle is tracked to its ultimate
parking spot within one hour of the theft; this does not preclude the thief
from having loaned the vehicle and the keys to the defendant, shortly after the
theft;
iii.
mr. brar did not testify that the vehicle drove
directly from his office on derry road to the location where the vehicle was
found; the evidence does not preclude the opportunity for the defendant to have
become in innocent possession of the vehicle before driving to his work;
iv.
the defendant did not seem to hide his
possession of the vehicle; but for the lack of a parking pass, he may well have
parked the vehicle at his place of employment;
v.
the vehicle was not forensically examined for
unknown finger-prints; and
vi.
the defendant did not confess to having stolen
the vehicle or any knowledge that it was stolen.

i am satisfied that the evidence established to
a near certainty that the defendant was in possession of a stolen 2021 range
rover on 07 june 2022. i have a reasonable doubt that he knew the vehicle was
stolen or that he had anything to do with the theft.
conclusion

the theft allegation against the defendant has not
been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. i find ronald arrindell not guilty as
charged.
released: 15 april
2025
justice
g. paul renwick

r.
v. kruk,
2024 scc 7
at paras.
59-62.

r.
v. starr,
2000 scc 40 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 40 at para.
242.

r. v.
villaroman,
2016 scc 33 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 33 at paras.
17,
18, 22, 26-32, 34, 35, 36, 41, 42, 55, and 56.

villaroman, supra,
at paras.
27, 29, and 30.

r.
v.
h.c.,
2009 onca 56
at para.
41.

kruk, supra, at para.
81.

kruk, supra, at paras.
71 and 75.

ibid.

kruk, supra, at para.
72.