source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj679/2025oncj679.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. walker, 2025 oncj 679
date: 
2025 12 18
court
file no.: 4810 998 24-48129275
toronto
region
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
andre miguel walker
before
justice c. faria
heard
december 11, 2025
reasons
for judgment released december 18, 2025
theo sarantis...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
andre miguel walker................................................................................ 
on his own behalf
faria j.:
i.
introduction

andre miguel walker is charged with threatening
bodily harm and assaulting ron dominique, as well as disobeying court order by
not keeping the peace while he was on a peace bond.

he was arrested the same day
these events are alleged to have occurred.

having called no evidence on whether mr. walker
signed a peace bond in june 2024 and was to have been keeping the peace on
september 23, 2024, mr. sarantis for the crown invited the court to dismiss
count 3: disobey court order. the charge was dismissed.

i heard the evidence of the complainant, mr.
dominique, and watched a video of the person mr. dominique testified threatened
and assaulted him. i am asked by the crown to determine if the person in the
video is mr. walker and to accept mr. dominique’s evidence as credible and
reliable.

mr. walker represented himself. he called no
evidence and decided not to testify, as is his right.

these are my reasons for judgment.
ii.
legal principles

before i begin to review the evidence, i must say, that as in
every criminal case, mr. walker is presumed innocent. the onus rests on the
crown to prove the essential elements of each offence beyond a reasonable
doubt. that onus never shifts. reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and
common sense taken from the evidence or lack of evidence.


i must also say that when i consider what
evidence to accept, i am considering the credibility and reliability of a
witness. credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the truth. reliability
relates to the actual accuracy of the testimony. the credibility and
reliability of a witness must be tested in the light of all the other evidence
presented.


although mr. walker did not take issue with
whether identity was proven beyond a reasonable doubt, given that mr. dominique
did not identify mr. walker by name, and mr. walker did not testify, i will
determine identity via the
nikolovski

test as outlined by the supreme court of canada.
iii.
evidence

ron dominique testified he was working as a
security guard at toronto metropolitan university (tmu) in downtown toronto on
september 23, 2025, when he received a call about a fight at 297 victoria st.
he checked the video footage and observed two people. one was “in the face” of
the other. he and his partner went to the location.

as mr. dominique was speaking to the person he
identified as “the victim” of the interaction he previously observed, a male approached
and interjected into mr. dominique’s conversation. mr. dominique held up his
right hand and told the male to stop and step away. the male was close enough
to him that he believes his hand made contact with the male when he held it up.

mr. dominique testified the male said to mr.
dominque: “you don’t know who i am. don’t mess with me”.
while saying these words, he made a gun gesture using his index finger and
pointed directly at mr. dominique’s nose. the male then said “you want to get
one to the dome?”

mr. dominque told the male he was trespassing.
the male made the same gesture again and swung his right hand, hitting mr.
dominique’s nose.

mr. dominique then put his hands on the male and
informed him he was being arrested for assault. the male resisted, and he was
taken to the ground by mr. dominique and his partner. mr. dominique struck the
male once and the male complied thereafter. the male was handcuffed and taken
to the holding room in the security office.

on the way to the holding room, the male again said
mr. dominique did not know who he was dealing with, and that he is from
rexdale, he is a “gangster”, that he would “come back and shoot” mr. dominique
because “mans like me carry guns.”

mr. dominique gave the male his rights and
called toronto police. when police arrived, they were taken to the holding room
where the male sat. mr. dominique then observed the officer provide the male
with his rights to counsel via cctv. the body-worn camera surveillance of that
officer providing those rights to the male in the holding room was played for
the court and filed as an exhibit.

mr. dominique identified the male on the video
to be the one who threatened and assaulted him, and to be the accused male
before the court.

mr. walker chose not to cross-examine mr.
dominique. he did “not want to ask any questions”, even after being repeatedly
told this was his opportunity to challenge mr. dominique’s version of events,
his memory, his reliability, and his credibility. he simply did not want to
“talk” to the witness.
iv.
analysis and findings

mr. dominique’s credibility and reliability were
not challenged via cross-examination. however, mr. walker submitted that mr.
dominique’s version of events is not accurate. mr. walker submitted that he was
not spoken to prior to being taken to the ground, and that none of what mr.
dominique testified to is true.

regardless that an alternate version of events
was not put to mr. dominique, i must carefully assess his evidence,
particularly in light of the fact mr. walker represented himself.

i thoroughly reviewed mr. dominique’s evidence. he
testified in a very cautious manner. although he remembered the event and
testified in detail, mr. dominque asked to refresh his memory so as to testify
to the words the male used verbatim. mr. dominique was very careful about the words
said, and the specific gesture made, being sure to state he could not recall
which hand the male was used and clarify exactly what he did not remember. he
was also forthright about when, how and why he struck the male once while
arresting him. he was candid and direct.

i find him to be a credible and reliable
witness. i accept his evidence.
i.
identity

the quality of the video evidence is excellent.
it is in colour and clear. it depicted the male sitting down, and then as the
officer moved closer to the male, the video provided a close up of his face. the
video shows the male speaking directly to the officer, standing up and then
turning around within 2 feet, if that, from the camera. his build, height,
clothing, and physical demeanour are clear. the entirety of his face is captured,
including specific identifying features such as his hairline, the hair loss at
the top of his head, the shape of his forehead, the shape of his eyes, his
facial hair, the shape of his nose and lips, his smile, as well as his hair
colour, hair style and length of hair. it captured the tone of his voice, and
his facial expressions.

the clarity, quality, and duration of the video

depicting the male’s face
leaves me with no difficulty concluding the male in the video is mr. walker
before the court.
ii.
threat

i find both the specific words mr. walker said, “you
don’t know who i am. don’t mess with me” and “you want to get one to the dome?”
and the specific gesture he made, that of pointing a gun, while he said the
words to constitute a threat. in the context of being told to step back while mr.
dominique investigated an incident, the only reasonable inference for the
purpose of the words and gesture was to intimidate mr. dominique.

further, mr. walker continued to threaten mr.
dominique as he was escorted to the holding room when he told him that he was a
“gangster” who would “come and shoot” mr. dominique as “mans like me carry
guns.”
iii.
assault

mr. dominique testified that mr. walker hit his
nose with his hand while making a gun gesture after the first threat and the
first gun gesture, and after having been told he was trespassing. he
demonstrated to the court how mr. walker swung his extended arm and where mr.
walker’s finger in the gun gesture struck him in the nose. the assault was the
trigger for the arrest.

mr. walker was the aggressor; he came to within
a foot of mr. dominique’s face, pointing directly at his nose. the hand gesture
is a threatening one, and it was accompanied by threatening words. the physical
contact with mr. dominique’s nose was a purposeful action, particularly
considering mr. dominique’s physical size, he is 6”1 with a large build and mr.
walker is about 5”7 or 5”8 with a slim athletic build. mr. walker had to reach
up with his arm in order to strike mr. dominque.

although, the physical force applied without
consent was not significant, in this case, the context and purpose of the
physical force applied without consent is significant.
conclusion

mr. walker, i find the crown has proven each
element of both offences, and has satisfied me beyond a reasonable doubt that
you are guilty of both counts.
released: december 18, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

contrary to
ss. 264.1(1),
266, and
127(1)
of the
criminal code of canada

r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 320.

r. v. stewart,
1994 canlii 7208 (on ca), o.j. no.
811 (c.a.) at para
27.

r. v. nikolovski,
1996 canlii 158 (scc), s.c.j. no. 122.

nikolovski, supra at para.
29.