source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj586/2025oncj586.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. jerlo, 2025 oncj 586
date: 
2025 11 05
court
file no.: toronto region 4810 998 23 48121819
between:
his majesty
the king
— and
—
trevor jerlo
before
justice joseph callaghan
heard
on may 28, 2025 and october 6, 2025
reasons
for decision on
charter
application
released
on november 5, 2025
m. boissonneault............................................................................... counsel
for the crown
a. harnett................................................................................................................... 
amicus
t. jerlo................................................................................... 
self represented accused
j. callaghan
j.:
overview

on october 8, 2023, trevor jerlo was operating a
motor vehicle on jane. st. in the city of toronto, where he was stopped as part
of a ride spot check operation. as part of the ride set up, a mobile booth was
on scene where arrested persons could exercise their right to counsel in
private and where a qualified breath technician (qbt) was located to administer
the breath test procedure on an approved instrument.

during a brief discussion with mr. jerlo,
officer mohamed haji suspected that there was alcohol in mr. jerlo’s body.

in making a breath demand for mr. jerlo to
provide a sample of his breath into the approved screening device (asd),
officer haji did not specify on which section of 320.27 of the
criminal code
he was relying. when he testified before me, he made it clear that he had
relied on s. 320.27(1)(b).
it appears that he erroneously believed that
a demand pursuant to s. 320.27(2) was not available to him.

the grounds for officer haji’s suspicion were that when queried
about the consumption of alcohol, mr. jerlo was hesitant in responding and there
was a very strong smell of perfume emanating from the vehicle. the officer
explained that based on his many years of experience, people who had consumed
alcohol and then operated a motor vehicle would sometimes use perfume (or smoke
cigarettes or chew gum) to mask the smell of alcohol.

despite officer haji’s honest belief that he had
reasonable grounds to suspect that mr. jerlo had alcohol in his body at the
time of driving, it is agreed by the crown and amicus that the officer’s
grounds for the demand pursuant to
s. 320.27(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
were
insufficient to reach the level of reasonable suspicion. (mr. jerlo adopted
amicus’ positions throughout the proceedings.)

after receiving a ‘fail’ on the asd, officer
haji made a breath demand. mr. jerlo was immediately given his rights to
counsel, which he exercised in a private booth and spoke with duty counsel. after
speaking with duty counsel, mr. jerlo was turned over to the on-site qbt where
he provided two samples of his breath:
(1)
131 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood
(2)
123 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood

mr. jerlo was released at the scene on a form 9.

the entire process, from vehicle stop to
release, was approximately 1.25 hours in duration.
procedural overview

mr. jerlo is representing himself. on may 28,
2025, prior to commencing the trial in this matter, mr. jerlo was given the
opportunity to review the video evidence and speak with duty counsel. rather
than seek more time to retain counsel, mr. jerlo indicated his desire to
proceed as scheduled, without counsel.

in response to the evidence of officer haji,
crown counsel made it clear that in arguing the validity of the asd demand, he
would be relying on the mandatory alcohol screening (mas) demand in s.
320.27(2), rather than
s. 320.27(1)
(b), the section relied upon by the officer
in his testimony before me.

given the potential complexity of the legal
arguments, which were novel to me, and the fact that mr. jerlo, who had no
legal training, was representing himself, i made an order appointing amicus to
assist me in understanding the issues, including the view contrary to the
crown’s position.

this case went over a number of months for mr.
harnett to be selected by lao and for amicus counsel to get up to speed,
including obtaining a copy of the disclosure and the transcript of officer
haji’s evidence. over the course of this timeframe, crown counsel, mr. boissonneault,
should be commended for assisting amicus in this endeavour.

mr. harnett, on mr. jerlo’s behalf, filed an
application alleging a breach of sections 8 and 9 of the
charter
and
seeking to exclude the breath readings in this case. he also filed a factum on
the relevant issues to help me. i am grateful for mr. harnett’s assistance in
this matter.

it is not disputed that the statutory
preconditions for a valid mas demand pursuant to s. 320.27(2) existed in this
case:
(1)
officer haji had in his possession an approved
screening device;
(2)
officer haji was acting in the course of the
lawful exercise of his powers in conducting a valid ride spot check; and
(3)
mr. jerlo was operating a motor vehicle at the
time the demand was made.
constitutional validity of a ride
stop and s. 320.27(2) not at issue

the supreme court has repeatedly affirmed that,
although various forms of random vehicle stops for the purpose of roadside
screening under the
criminal code
(including ride spot checks) violate s.
9 of the charter, they are justified under s. 1 because of the relatively short
duration and slight inconvenience involved in such stops, and the compelling
public objective of deterring and detecting impaired driving. [see
r. v.
wright,
2025 skca 52
at paras.
35-36;
dedman v. the queen,
1985 canlii 41 (scc), 2
scr 2;
r. v. hufsky,
1988 canlii 72 (scc), 1 scr 621;
r. v. ladouceur,
1990 canlii 108 (scc), 1
scr 1257; and
r. v. mccolman
2023 scc 8
at para.
29]

further, the constitutional validity of s.
320.27(2) has not been challenged in these proceedings. indeed, there is a
broad consensus at the trial level that the mas demand is constitutional, and
earlier this year, the saskatchewan court of appeal upheld the constitutionality
of s. 320.27(2). [see
r. v. wright,
2025 skca 52
and the decisions of
justice leszczynski in
r. v. blysniuk,
2020 oncj 603
and justice michie
in
r. v. brown,
2021 nspc 32.]
issue

given
officer haji’s flawed reliance on s. 320.27(1)(b), can the crown rely on the
provisions of s. 320.27(2) to justify the ads breath demand made in this case?
in other words, did officer haji need to be subjectively motivated by s.
320.27(2) to make a demand for a breath sample lawful under that authority?

mr.
boissonneault, on behalf of the crown, submits that the
s. 320.27(2)
of the
criminal
code
does not require an investigating officers’ subjective reliance to be
valid. rather, it only requires that they satisfy the three prescribed
statutory conditions. he relies on the decision of justice m. heerema in
r.
v. handley,
2024 nspc 39, which factually is quite similar to the present
case.

mr.
boissonneault argued that officer haji’s breath demand remains lawful because
it complied with
s. 320.27(2), despite the officer’s belief that he was acting
pursuant to s. 320.27(1)(b) and that a mas demand was unavailable.

amicus, on behalf of mr. jerlo, submitted that it is concerning
that officer haji, an experienced officer, applied the test under s. 320.27(1)(b)
incorrectly. had he properly assessed reasonable suspicion, mr. jerlo would
have been allowed to go on his way. mr. harnett pointed to the decision of
justice cozens in
r. v. schmidt,
2023 yktc 32, in which the court
declined to allow the crown to rely on
s. 320.27(2)
at trial after the
investigative officer relied on reasonable suspicion in s. 320.27(1) to make
the asd demand.
analysis
relevant section of the
criminal
code

section 320.27
of the
criminal code
reads
as follows:
testing for
presence of alcohol or drug
320.27
(1)
if a peace officer has reasonable grounds to
suspect that a person has alcohol or a drug in their body and that the person
has, within the preceding three hours, operated a conveyance, the peace officer
may, by demand, require the person to comply with the requirements of either or
both of paragraphs (a) and (b) in the case of alcohol or with the requirements
of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (c) in the case of a drug:
(a)
to immediately perform the physical coordination tests
prescribed by regulation and to accompany the peace officer for that purpose;
(b)
to immediately provide the samples of breath that, in the
peace officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be made
by means of an approved screening device and to accompany the peace officer for
that purpose;
(c)
to immediately provide the samples of a bodily substance that,
in the peace officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be
made by means of approved drug screening equipment and to accompany the peace
officer for that purpose.
mandatory
alcohol screening
(2)
if a peace officer has in his or her possession an approved
screening device, the peace officer may, in the course of the lawful exercise
of powers under an act of parliament or an act of a provincial legislature or
arising at common law, by demand, require the person who is operating a motor
vehicle to immediately provide the samples of breath that, in the peace
officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be made by
means of that device and to accompany the peace officer for that purpose.

it is clear that the reasonable suspicion requirements
in s. 320.27(1) (“reasonable grounds to suspect”) must be established on both a
subjective and objective basis. the subjective standard is satisfied when an
officer testifies to having an honestly held suspicion that the person had
alcohol or a drug in their body. the objective standard is satisfied when the
crown can point to factors that establish that this suspicion was reasonable.
[see
r. v. bernshaw,
1995 canlii 150 (scc), 1 scr 254 at para.
62]

in contrast, a plain reading of the preconditions
for a mas demand made under
s. 320.27(2)
suggests there is no similar
subjective element.

to prove the preconditions for a mas demand, the
crown must prove that:
(1)
the peace officer who made the demand was in
possession of an approved screening device;
(2)
the officer was acting in the lawful execution
of their duties; and
(3)
the suspect was operating a conveyance.

if these three simple, easy to understand
preconditions are met, a mas demand is legally valid.
rationale for
s. 320.27(2)

the introduction of the mas demand in
s.
320.27(2)
unquestionably expanded the ability of peace officers to make asd demands.
while the constitutionality of
s. 320.27(2)
is not being challenged in the case
before me, it is helpful when analyzing this section to understand its purpose,
as parliament intended. as justice r. michie noted in
brown, in
upholding the constitutionality of
s. 320.27(2):
there can be
no reasonable argument that the purpose of s. 320.27(2) of the
code,
to deter, detect and remove impaired drivers from the streets and highways of
canada is highly compelling. despite the efforts of government and society over
decades, impaired driving remains the most significant criminal cause of death
in canada. this legislative purpose or intent is clear from the preamble to
bill c-46 and
s. 320.12
of the
criminal code.
the preamble
of chapter 21 states in part:
whereas
dangerous driving and impaired driving injure or kill thousands of people in
canada every year;
whereas
dangerous driving and impaired driving are unacceptable at all times and in all
circumstances;
whereas it
is important to deter persons from driving while impaired by alcohol or drugs;
where it
is important that law enforcement officers be better equipped to detect
instances of alcohol-impaired or drug impaired driving and exercise
investigative powers in a manner that is consistent with the
canadian
charter of rights and freedoms.
whereas it
is important to simplify the law relating to the proof of blood alcohol
concentration;
whereas it
is important to protect the public from the dangers posed by consuming large
quantities of alcohol immediately before driving;
whereas it
is important to deter persons from consuming alcohol or drugs after driving in
circumstances where they have a reasonable expectation that they would be
required to provide a sample of breath or blood;
whereas it
is important that federal and provincial laws work together to promote the safe
operation of motor vehicles;
and
whereas the parliament of canada is committed to adopting a precautionary
approach in relation to driving and the consumption of drugs, and to deterring
the commission of offences relating to the operation of conveyances,
particularly dangerous driving an impaired driving.
section
320.12
of the
criminal code
sets out the objectives of detection
and deterrence, and states, in part:
it is
recognized and declared that
operating
a conveyance is a privilege that is subject to certain limits in the interests
of public safety that included licensing, the observance of rules and sobriety;
the
protection of society is well served by deterring persons from operating
conveyances or while their ability to operate them is impaired by alcohol or a
drug, because that conduct poses a threat to the life, health and safety of
canadians;
[see
brown
at paras.
42-44]

justice leszczynski, in his comprehensive
decision upholding the constitutionality of s. 320.27(2), provided helpful
context regarding the rationale for mas demands:
…the personal and informational
privacy interests of an individual who is operating a motor vehicle in their
blood alcohol concentration as measured by an approved screening device
administered pursuant to the statutory requirements of s.
320.27(2) is, at its highest, a minimal and residual privacy interest.
the
pressing and substantial objectives of the law aimed at increasing the rate and
reliability of detection and increasing deterrence are met by eliminating
suspicion-based testing, which has proven to be unreliable in many
circumstances, with a screening method that is scientifically-accepted and
reliable
…section 320.27(2) contains appropriate restrictions on when
and in which circumstances the police may conduct this screening (lawful stop,
present operation of a motor vehicle, and the approved screening device in the
officer's possession), as well as, the limited use that can be made of the
results (only as a screening measure and not to establish guilt). if charges
are laid against an individual, there is judicial oversight through a trial
where the defence can challenge the lawfulness of the stop, lawfulness of the
demand and the search itself. while there is the potential for the
disproportionate application of this law against racialized and other
marginalized populations, this can also be said of the former s. 254(2).
in many ways s. 320.27(2) serves to increase overall fairness by
removing the subjectivity involved in the prior suspicion-based testing…
[see
blysniuk
at para.
66, emphasis added; see also
r. v. switenky,
2020 skpc 46
at para.
9.]
sections 320.27(1) and 320.27(2) are
not mutually exclusive

there is nothing in the legislation that creates
a hierarchy of demands, requiring an officer to rely upon subsection (1) prior
to resorting to subsection (2). indeed, neither section relies on the other
when prescribing conditions precedent to an officer’s exercise of their asd
demand powers. they are mutually exclusive.

other courts have come to similar conclusions.

in
r. v. dirksen,
2020 abqb 363, justice
belzil, sitting as a summary conviction appeal judge, found that the two asd
demand provisions in
s. 320.27
are not mutually exclusive. in that case, the
demanding officer made an initial demand pursuant to s. 320.27(2); however,
when the accused refused to provide a proper sample, the officer made a demand
under s. 320.27(1), erroneously believing that a refuse charge could only arise
from a demand made under subsection (1). justice belzil concluded that there is
nothing in the wording of
s. 320.27
preventing an investigating officer from
making use of the demand provisions in both subsections and the officer’s
erroneous understanding of the
criminal code
did not change the legal
consequences of her interaction with the accused. [see
dirksen
at paras.
25-33; see also
r. v. chisholm,
2022 oncj 462
at para.
2;
r. v. morris-rainford
2020 oncj 447;
hayley bradley v. her majesty the queen,
2022 nbqb 31; and
r.
v. thome,
2020 skpc 36
]

in
r. v. monet,
2025 oncj 242, justice
monahan, in finding that the demanding officer had the requisite reasonable
suspicion to make a s. 320.27(1)(b) demand, noted that given the criteria for a
mas demand had also been met, the officer had grounds under both subsections of
320.27 to make an asd demand. [see
monet
at para.
11]
an officer is not required to
declare which subsection of 320.27 they are relying upon to make an asd demand

in my view, there is nothing in the legislation
that requires an investigating officer to declare, either to the suspect driver
or in their testimony in court, on which subsection they relied in making an
asd demand. rather, the law requires that for a demand to be lawful, it must
meet the preconditions of one of the two subsections in
s. 320.27.

in
r. v. rahmanian,
2024 oncj 411,
another case involving a ride stop, justice ghosh found that the officer had a
reasonable suspicion sufficient to make a demand under s. 320.27(1)(b).
however, he also found that the officer could rely on s. 320.27(2), even
without expressly invoking it:
 the mandatory alcohol
screening provision has been repeatedly found to be constitutional. the
charter
permits
the police to employ this investigatory step without any grounds whatsoever.
the police must simply comply with the statutory requirements before demanding
that a driver provide an alcohol screening sample of breath.
 
 officer samuel clearly satisfied all statutory preconditions
before relying on the mandatory screening authority. mr. rahmanian was
“operating a motor vehicle”. in conducting a driver sobriety check, the officer
was in the “lawful exercise” of his duties. the officer had an approved
screening device in his “possession”. there was an “immediate” demand and
ensuing screening process.
 
 the applicant does not submit that the officer was required
to expressly invoke the mandatory screening power to the driver at roadside.
neither the
criminal code
nor the
charter
requires
such notification. constable samuel notified mr. rahmanian that he was
conducting a sobriety check and immediately issued a lawful screening demand.
 
 rather, the applicant submits that the
code
and
the
charter
required that the officer “declare” during
testimony that he had relied on the mandatory alcohol screening authority in
s.320.27(2). it is submitted that given the power to extract a screening sample
without grounds, thereby challenging privacy and arbitrariness protections, a
proper balancing of
charter
interests minimally requires a
declarative invocation of the mandatory authority. we have not found any
jurisprudence directly determining this issue, but this cannot be the law.
 
 the earlier referenced law supporting that the police are not
required to testify using any “magic words” to establish the “reasonable
suspicion” for a screening demand applies more powerfully where the same step
is also authorized without any grounds. to draw from the dated terminology for
the “reasonable suspicion” standard – where the police do not need “articulable
cause” to use an investigatory tool, they cannot then be
charter-
bound
to “articulate” their reliance on it, especially given no “cause” is required.
the
charter
demands substance over form.
[see
rahmanian
at paras.
25-29]
 in the case before
me, the fact that officer haji testified that he made the asd demand of mr.
jerlo under s. 320.27(1)(b), and believed he could not meet the requirements of
s. 320.27(2), should not preclude me from considering all the evidence to
determine if the preconditions for a mas demand in 320.27(2) had been met.
a mas demand does not require
subjective motivation

unlike in s. 320.27(1)(b), there is nothing in
the wording of s. 320.27(2) that places an obligation on an investigating officer
to form subjective grounds prior to making a mas demand. on the contrary, as
noted earlier, subsection (2) establishes a purely objective set of
preconditions for a mas demand to be valid.

in my view, given parliament’s intention to
simplify and improve the detection of impaired drivers by allowing police to
make asd demands without relying on sometimes flawed roadside assessments, it
does not make sense to read in an additional subjective requirement for the use
of s. 320.27(2) to be lawful.

i found the decision of justice heerema in
handley,
to be particularly persuasive on this issue. the issue at trial in
handley,
and the issue before me, was whether the crown can rely on the provisions of s.
320.27(2) to justify the asd demand, despite the investigating officer’s
subjective reliance on s. 320.27(1)(b).

in
handley, the investigating officer pulled
over the accused driver in response to a call from a concerned citizen. after a
short interaction with the accused, the officer made an asd demand. in her evidence
at trial, the officer testified that in making the demand, she had a reasonable
suspicion that the accused had consumed alcohol.

in that case, and in the case before me, the
accused was not told specifically that a breath sample was being demanded under
the authority of s. 320.27(1)(b).

and in both cases, the accused (mr. handley and
mr. jerlo) were found operating a motor vehicle by an
officer engaged in a lawful traffic stop who had an approved screening device
in their possession. after a short interaction with the drivers, the officers
made a demand for the driver’s breath without reference to either subsection.

further, in both cases, all parties agreed that
the evidence that informed the officer’s reasonable suspicion was objectively insufficient;
however, the preconditions for a demand pursuant to s. 320.27(2) had been met.

in the present case, while i accept that officer
haji subjectively believed, based on his experience, that he had met the
reasonable suspicion standard, i agree with counsel that the constellation of
objectively discernible facts did not support his honest belief. i also agree
with the parties that the preconditions to a mas demand pursuant to s.
320.27(2) had been met.

in my view, the fact that the officer had
insufficient grounds to make a demand pursuant to s. 320.27(1)(b) and did not
appreciate that he could have made a demand under s. 320.27(2), does not preclude
my assessment of the objective facts. the preconditions to a valid mas demand
clearly existed at the time officer haji engaged mr. jerlo and made the asd
demand.

like justice heerema in
handley
[see
paras.
38 to 45], i fail to see how officer haji’s “mistaken, but unvocalized”
reliance on s. 320.27(1)(b) invalidates what is otherwise plainly lawful under
s. 320.27(2). accordingly, i find the asd demand made by officer haji was
lawful and did not breach mr. jerlo’s
charter
rights. [see also
r. v.
wynn,
2024 nspc 51
at paras.
19-22]

further, unlike
r. v. haqyar,
2019 abpc
195, the information before me did not particularize the section under which the
demand was made.

finally, i decline to follow
r. v. schmidt,
2023 yktc 32, which has subsequently been overturned, albeit with the reviewing
justice declining to opine on the issue before me. [see
r. v. schmidt,
2024
yksc 18
]
if there was a s. 8 breach, i would
not exclude the evidence under s. 24(2)

if i am wrong and the asd demand in this case
was unlawful, then a s. 8 breach occurred. in this alternative
situation, a s. 24(2) analysis is required to determine whether the
"fail" should be excluded from the evidence.

the first factor under the
grant
analysis
requires an assessment of the seriousness of the state infringing conduct and
the need for the court to disassociate itself from it.

in the case before me, i do not find that
officer haji’s conduct was driven by bad faith or wilful disregard for mr.
jerlo’s rights. on the contrary, i find that officer haji was otherwise respectful
of mr. jerlo and his
charter
protected rights throughout his dealings
with the accused. as noted earlier, i find that officer haji subjectively and
honestly believed he had met the standard for reasonable suspicion.

further, i adopt the reasons of justice fiorucci
in
r. v. campbell,
2022 oncj 571, in which he explained how the
existence of s. 320.27(2) has some relevance at the first stage of the
grant
analysis:
furthermore,
if i am in error in finding that the requisite reasonable suspicion existed for
the asd demand to be made pursuant to s. 320.27(1)(b),
the existence of
a statutory basis under
s. 320.27(2)
to make the demand
without any grounds in these circumstances attenuates the seriousness of
the
charter
breach.
the seriousness of the breach would be at the inadvertent or minor end of
the spectrum.
[see
campbell
at para.
40, emphasis added]

i conclude that the first factor only weakly
favours exclusion.

turning to the second factor, i must consider the
impact of the breach on the interests of the accused, and i must do so using
the broader lens as explained by the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
zacharias,
2023 scc 30
at para.
57. in this case, i must consider that the
accused was detained for approximately 1.25 hours and was required to provide
samples of his breath. unlike many impaired cases, however, mr. jerlo was never
transported to the police station in handcuffs and detained for hours.

i find that this factor under
grant
only moderately
favours exclusion.

turning to the third
grant
factor, i find
that society’s interest in an adjudication on the merits is significant. indeed,
impaired
driving remains a scourge on our society, leaving far too many broken families
and destroyed lives. this factor strongly favours admission.

finally,
when balancing the
grant
factors, i find
that the admission of the evidence would better serve the truth-seeking
function of the criminal trial process and society’s interest in the
adjudication of the case on its merits. indeed, i find that in
the circumstances of this case, the exclusion of the breath test evidence would
damage the long-term repute of the criminal justice system.

accordingly, i dismiss the
charter
application filed by amicus on behalf of mr. jerlo.
released: november 5, 2025
justice
joseph callaghan