source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj493/2025oncj493.html

citation:
r. v. baig, 2025 oncj 493
date: 2025 09 16
court
file no.: 4810 998 24 48108571
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
muhammad hamza baig
before
 justice david porter
heard
 on august 21, 2025
reasons
 on application for a stay pursuant to ss. 11(b) and 24(1) of the
charter
s. eta-ndu
 …………………………………………………………………………counsel for the crown
a. m. morphew ……………………………………………………………….counsel
 for the defendant
porter j:

muhammad hamza baig (“mr. baig”) applies for a stay of
proceedings for an alleged breach of his right to be tried within a reasonable
time guaranteed in s.11(b) of the
charter. mr. baig was charged with
fraud, and related offences, in an information sworn march 6, 2024. he was
charged alone in the information. there was no co-accused.

according to the summary of the allegations before me, it is
alleged that mr. baig was an employee at teletime, and an owner of the premium
superstore, both of which were involved in the sale of furniture and
appliances. it is alleged that mr. baig committed fraud in relation to a
finance company flexiti, by submitting fraudulent applications to flexiti for
customer financing for the purchase of products at teletime and the premium
superstore, thus resulting in a significant loss to flexiti. it was alleged
that mian muhammad saud acted as a go-between between mr. baig and hasnain
akram, an alleged party in the fraudulent scheme.

the trial is set to end november 21, 2025, 626 days or 20.5
months after the charges were laid, about 2.5 moths above the presumptive
ceiling in
r. v. jordan,

1 s.c.r.771.

it is clear from the record filed that counsel for mr. baig
consistently attempted to move the matter forward and consistently asserted mr.
baig’s reliance on his s.11(b)
charter
rights.

while mr. baig was charged alone in the information, on
august 26, 2024, crown counsel informed counsel for mr. baig that mr. baig
would be prosecuted with mian muhammad saud. mr. saud was arrested on february
29, 2024 and charged separately in an information sworn march 6, 2024. mr.
baig was never charged jointly with mr. saud in an information in this matter.

counsel represented mr. saud in communications with the crown
on behalf of mr. saud (hereinafter “mr. saud’s counsel”).

at a crown pre-trial on november 14, 2024 with counsel for mr.
baig, the crown indicated that a joint information would be laid charging baig
and saud jointly. in fact, this was never done.

mr. baig’s counsel attempted to obtain judicial pre-trial
(“jpt”) dates in december and dates were offered between december 9 and january
16, 2025. mr. baig’s counsel was available for dates in december. the crown
supported mr. saud’s counsel’s request to have the jpt on january 10, 2025 as
he stated it did not make sense to have a jpt without co-accused’s counsel, and
mr. saud’s counsel did not yet have disclosure.

mr. baig’s counsel raised concerns about delay. no
indication was made by mr. saud’s counsel that he was not retained for trial. at
the request of mr. saud’s counsel, the jpt was set for january10, 2025.

at the january 10, 2025 judicial pre-trial, mr. baig’s
counsel raised s.11(b) concerns. it was agreed that a 15-day trial would be
set for the prosecution of baig and saud and a follow-up jpt scheduled for
april 17, 2025. counsel appearing for mr. saud said nothing about not being
retained for trial.

on february 11, 2025, when early trial dates were offered for
a 3-week trial in a trial scheduling call, mr. saud’s counsel advised that he
was not fully retained for trial.

at the trial scheduling conference that day, counsel for mr.
baig was available for the estimated 3-week trial offered by the court starting
april 7, 2025. the crown was not available the week of april 7 and between
april 30 and may 9.

i conclude on the evidence before me that the court, crown
and counsel for mr. baig were available for a 3-week trial starting april
14-30, and continuing may 10-15, 2025. those dates would have resulted in a
trial concluding 14 months and 9 days after the information charging mr. baig
was sworn on march 6, 2024.

however, these dates were not set on february 11, 2025 because
mr. saud’s counsel, who was not retained for trial, was not available for the
above dates. mr. saud was not then, and never was, included as a co-accused in
the information charging mr. baig. mr. saud’s counsel was not available for
the weeks april 7, 14 and 22, and between may 9 and october 13, 2025. however,
on february 11,2025, he was not retained for trial in any event.

mr. saud’s counsel suggested in an email to counsel and the
trial co-ordinator that the trial dates should be set in court for mr. saud on
a with or without counsel basis.

in his submissions before the court in this application, the
crown submitted that the crown was of the view that, to avoid the possibility
of inconsistent verdicts, and to avoid the expenditure of court resources
involved in separate trials, the crown was of the view that a joint trial for
baig and saud was appropriate. however, the crown never had an information
sworn charging them jointly.

if this was the crown’s view, rather than setting dates 20.5
months after mr. baig was charged, because mr. saud’s counsel was not available
for the earlier dates, the crown should have had an information sworn charging
baig and saud jointly, and required saud to set dates with or without counsel. 
this was a reasonable step that could have been taken by the crown to set trial
dates that respected mr. baig’s asserted right to be tried in a reasonable
time.

in my view, this should have occurred, and trial dates should
have been set for the april 14-30 and may 10-15 dates available to the crown, the
court and counsel for mr. baig who was asserting his 11(b)
charter
rights and was available for those dates within the
jordan
presumptive
ceiling.

instead, on february 13, the current trial dates taking into
account the schedule of mr. saud’s counsel were set between october 20-24, november
3-7 and november 12-14, and november 21, resulting in a proposed trial outside
the
jordan
presumptive ceiling.

the agent for ms. morphew, mr. baig’s counsel, stated on the
record in a court appearance that day:
“i just want to note for
the record that counsel does intend to schedule an 11(b) if the trial is over
the presumptive ceiling. we have had earlier trial dates and we’ve been
seeking to set trial dates for months.”

a self-represented person judicial pre-trial was scheduled
before the pre-trial judge in a busy plea court on march 10, 2025. as the
court had a full list of matters, in a busy plea court, the self-rep jpt could
not proceed that day. counsel for mr. saud appeared to assist mr. saud with
putting dates for trial on the record. ms. morphew confirmed she was prepared
to set trial dates and crown counsel mr. eta-ndu confirmed that “saud and baig
are supposed to be tried together.”

a further pre-trial was held on april 17, 2025 in which the
pre-trial judge noted that, as mr. saud was self-represented, no admissions
could be considered to shorten the trial and the parties were asked to try to
find earlier trial dates. ms. morphew noted the 11(b) issue. counsel were
directed to attempt to find earlier trial dates, and to schedule an 11(b)
application.

between that date and june 5 matters did not progress as the
crown was engaged in resolution discussions with mr. saud, whose resolution was
not certain. on june 5, the trial co-ordinator advised there were no earlier
dates for a 3-week trial. counsel for mr. baig reiterated her request for a
date for a s.11(b) motion. for the first time, the crown mentioned he would
consider a possible severance, although formally no joint information had been
sworn charging baig and saud together.

a further pre-trial was held on june 20, at which time the
pre-trial judge agreed that a 2-week trial estimate could be used to find an
earlier trial date for mr. baig alone as mr. saud was pursuing a resolution. the
pre-trial judge directed that if earlier dates could not be found a s.11(b)
motion should be scheduled.

on june 23, 2025, counsel were advised there were no earlier
trial dates available for a 2 week trial. the current trial dates were
confirmed and the date of august 21, 2025 was set for a s.11(b) motion.

an information charging baig and saud jointly was never
sworn.
analysis

the fundamental issue in this case is the treatment of the 6
month delay from the end of the trial dates available to the court, crown and
counsel for mr. baig (may 14), a trial within the jordan presumptive ceiling, and
the current trial dates scheduled to finish 20.5 months after the charges were
laid against mr. baig.

in my opinion, the delay of 6 months in the trial dates is
the responsibility of the crown for failing to take reasonable steps to ensure
that mr. baig, who continuously asserted his 11(b) rights, received the trial
within the presumptive
jordan
ceiling, when this was available to be
scheduled for him at the trial scheduling of february 11, 2025.

mr. baig was charged alone in the information charging him
with fraud. saud was not a co-accused and the crown had not brought a motion
to have mr. baig’s information tried together with mr. saud’s information. while
the crown had indicated that “baig and saud should be tried together”, he had
done nothing to formalize this intention.

one reasonable option was for the crown to accept that it had
done nothing to formalize its intention to have a joint trial for baig and
saud, and set the early trial date available for baig alone on february 11, 2025,
which was available for a 3-week trial ending 14.5 months after baig was
charged.

alternatively, realizing that it did not have a joint
information before the court, the crown could have had an information sworn
charging baig and saud jointly, and set the trial for the early dates
available, on a with or without counsel basis for saud, ignoring counsel for mr.
saud’s unavailability, as he was not retained for the trial.

if either of these steps had been taken, the scheduled trial
would have been compliant with the presumptive ceiling in
r. v. jordan
and the ocj practice direction for
jordan
compliant scheduling dated
november 1, 2023 requiring trial dates to be completed within 15 months of the
date the information was sworn.

if, in light of its intention to have baig and saud tried
together, the crown was prepared to schedule the trial on dates outside the
jordan presumptive ceiling, in order to accommodate the schedule of mr. saud’s
counsel ( on the basis that mr. saud may retain that counsel for the trial), in
my opinion the crown was required to first formalize its intention that they be
tried together, by applying to the court in a timely way, for an order that the
informations charging baig and saud be tried together:
r. v. clunas,
1992 canlii 127 (scc), 
1 s.c.r. 595, at page 610.

this would have given the court an opportunity to consider
whether a joint trial was in the interests of justice, in light of baig’s
readiness to proceed to trial on jordan-compliant trial dates, and the fact
that saud had not even retained counsel by february 11, 2025, 11 months after
both he and baig had been separately charged:
r. v. clunas, supra
at pp.
610-611.

regrettably, the crown neither agreed to the early trial
dates for a trial available for baig alone, or laid a new information charging
baig and saud jointly ( and setting early trial dates based on baig’s counsel’s
schedule, on a with or without counsel basis for saud),or brought an
application for baig and saud to be tried together to permit a court to decide
whether a joint trial was in the interests of justice.

the crown was clearly on notice from february 13, and
earlier, that if trial dates outside the
jordan
presumptive ceiling were
set, mr. baig’s counsel would bring a s.11(b)
charter
application. this
required an urgent response which was not forthcoming from the crown.

rather than take any of the above steps, the crown proceeded
with further judicial pre-trials, which were conducted on the basis that the
crown was intending to try baig and saud together.

on april 17, counsel for mr. baig proposed an agreed statement
of facts (“asf”) on many trial issues to reduce the trial estimate. mr. saud’s
counsel did not attend the jpt on april 17, and counsel for mr. baig pressed
the crown to canvass earlier trial dates with mr. saud. this did not happen in
any timely way as the crown began resolution discussions with mr. saud, which
resulted in the crown ignoring mr. baig’s attempt to find a new trial date
within the jordan presumptive ceiling.

the crown and counsel for mr. baig attended the trial
coordinator on june 5
th
and no earlier trial dates were available for
a 3-week trial.

the crown solidified an agreement for mr. saud to plead
guilty through further discussions with his counsel, and after a jpt on june
20, an effort was made to find earlier dates for a 2-week trial for mr. baig
which were unsuccessful and the current trial dates were confirmed in court on
june 23, 2025.

in
r. v. jordan, the supreme court makes it clear that
s.11(b) considerations may cause the joinder of accused to be unjustified where
one accused is responsible for delay prejudicing a co-accused’s right to be
tried in a reasonable time.

in
r. v. jordan, the court discussed the complexity
caused by joint prosecutions of co-accused at paras 77-79:
“
as
indicated, exceptional circumstances also cover a second category, namely,
cases that are particularly complex. this too requires elaboration. particularly
complex cases are cases that, because of the nature of the
evidence
or
the nature of the
issues, require an inordinate amount of trial or
preparation time such that the delay is justified. as for the nature of the
evidence, hallmarks of particularly complex cases include voluminous
disclosure, a large number of witnesses, significant requirements for expert
evidence, and charges covering a long period of time. particularly complex
cases arising from the nature of the issues may be characterized by, among
other things, a large number of charges and pre-trial applications, novel or
complicated legal issues, and a large number of significant issues in dispute. proceeding
jointly against multiple co-accused, so long as it is in the interest of
justice to do so, may also impact the complexity of the case.

a
typical murder trial will not usually be sufficiently complex to comprise an
exceptional circumstance. however, if an inordinate amount of trial or
preparation time is needed as a result of the nature of the evidence or the
issues such that the time the case has taken is justified, the complexity of
the case will qualify as presenting an exceptional circumstance.

it
bears reiterating that such determinations fall well within the trial judge’s
expertise. and, of course, the trial judge will also want to consider whether the
crown, having initiated what could reasonably be expected to be a complex
prosecution, developed and followed a concrete plan to minimize the delay
occasioned by such complexity (
r. v. auclair,
2014 scc 6, 1 s.c.r. 83, at
para.
2
). where it has failed to do so, the
crown will not be able to show exceptional circumstances, because it will not
be able to show that the circumstances were outside its control. in
a similar vein, and for the same reason, the crown may
wish to consider whether multiple charges for the same conduct, or trying
multiple co-accused together, will unduly complicate a proceeding. while the
court plays no supervisory role for such decisions, crown counsel must be alive
to the fact that any delay resulting from their prosecutorial discretion must
conform to the accused’s s. 11(
b
) right (see,
e.g.,
vassell
)....”

in
r. v. tran,
2023 onca 532
at paras.
39- 40, the
court of appeal stated with respect to the impact of delay caused by a
co-accused on an accused’s s 11(b) breach claim:
“
to be sure, where a trial is being conducted jointly,
delay caused by a co‑accused is not “defence delay” by the accused that counts
against the accused. therefore, the delay caused by mr. nguyen and ms. vu’s
change of counsel continues to form part of the period of
prima
facie
delay in mr. tran’s trial. as
gillese j.a., recognized for the majority
in
r. v. gopie,
2017 onca 728,
140 o.r. (3d) 171, at paras.
128, 136, an individualized approach must be taken in
calculating delay. the trial judge fully appreciated that. the delay in mr.
tran’s trial was therefore in
prima facie
breach of s. 11(b).

however, the majority
in
gopie
also accepted that delay caused to the accused by the
conduct of a joint trial can qualify as an “exceptional circumstance” that may
permit delay in excess of the
prima facie
unreasonable delay period:
gopie, at paras.
142, 170. for delay caused by a joint trial to qualify as an
exceptional circumstance it must first be in the interests of justice to
conduct a joint trial:
r. v. manasseri,
2016 onca 703,
132 o.r. (3d) 401, at para.
373, leave to appeal denied, s.c.c.a. no. 37322. to
qualify as an exceptional circumstance in any context, the delay must arise
from “circumstances [that] lie
outside the crown’s control
in the sense that (1) they are reasonably
unforeseen
or
reasonably unavoidable,
and
(2) crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the delays
emanating from those circumstances once they arise” (emphasis in the
original):
jordan, at
para.
69. therefore, to rely upon exceptional circumstances to
excuse delay that has been caused as the result of the prosecution of a joint
trial, the crown must establish that: (1) the joint trial is being undertaken
in the interests of justice; (2) the delay has arisen because of the joint
trial; (3) the delay is unforeseen
or
reasonably unavoidable; and (4) the crown could not
reasonably have ameliorated that delay.”

in my opinion, the decision of the supreme court of canada in
r. v. vassell,
2016 scc 26, is of particular relevance on the facts of
this case in establishing the obligation of the crown to apply to sever the
charges (where several accused are jointly charged) to preserve the s.11(b)
charter
rights of an accused whose trial is delayed by the conduct of a co-accused.

in
r. v. vassell,
2016 scc 26
moldaver j., stated at
paras. 5-7:
“in this case, the crown
chose to prosecute all seven accused jointly, as it was entitled to do. but
having done so, it was required to remain vigilant that its decision not
compromise the s. 11(
b
) rights of
the accused persons (see, for example,
r. v. auclair,
2014 scc 6, 1 s.c.r. 83, and
r.
v. schertzer,
2009 onca 742, 248 c.c.c. (3d) 270, at
para.
146
).

in many cases, delay caused by proceeding against multiple
co-accused must be accepted as a fact of life and must be considered in
deciding what constitutes a reasonable time for trial. but here, it was clear
from the outset that the delay caused by the various co-accused not only
prevented the crown’s case from moving forward, it also prevented mr. vassell
from proceeding expeditiously, as he wanted. importantly, this is not a case
where mr. vassell simply did not cause any of the delay; rather, it is one in
which he took proactive steps throughout, from start to finish, to have his
case tried as soon as possible. in this regard, his counsel reviewed disclosure
promptly, pushed for a pre-trial conference or case management, worked with the
crown to streamline the issues at trial, agreed to admit an expert report, made
the crown and the court aware of
s. 11
(
b
) problems, and at all times
sought early dates.

in these circumstances, i believe that a more proactive stance on
the crown’s part was required. in fulfilling its obligation to bring all
accused to trial within a reasonable time, the crown cannot close its eyes to
the circumstances of an accused who has done everything possible to move the
matter along, only to be held hostage by his or her co-accused and the
inability of the system to provide earlier dates. ….”

similarly, in
r. v. mannasseri,
2016 onca 703, the
court of appeal stated at para. 323:
“where the proceedings are
a joint trial, delay caused by a co-accused cannot be ignored in assessing
whether an individual accused’s right to be tried within a reasonable time has
been reached:
vassell, at para.
4. where the crown, as here, chooses to
prosecute both accused jointly, it must remain vigilant that its decision to
proceed jointly does not compromise the s. 11(b) rights of an individual
accused:
vassell, at para. 5. the crown is disentitled to close
its eyes to the circumstances of an accused who has done everything possible to
move a case along, only to be held hostage by his or her co-accused and the
inability of the system to provide earlier dates:
vassell, at
para.
7. sometimes, the crown may have to sever
accused jointly tried to vindicate the s. 11(b) interests of one burdened down
by another for whom trial within a reasonable time seems anathema:
vassell,
at para.
10.”

on february 11, 2025, it should have been obvious to the
crown that its proposal to try baig and saud together, not yet formalized by
court order or an information charging them jointly, doomed baig to a trial
beyond the
jordan
presumptive ceiling. baig’s intention to seek a stay
of proceedings for a s.11(b)
charter
breach for any trial beyond the
presumptive ceiling was confirmed in court on february 13, 2025, when i infer
the
jordan
compliant dates for baig’s trial (either alone or with saud
as a self-represented co-accused) available on february 11 would still have
been available.

in
r. v.
jordan,
supra, the court
stated, in describing the crown’s obligation to address exceptional
circumstances that threaten to prevent a trial within a reasonable time, at
paras. 69-70:
“
exceptional
circumstances lie
outside the crown’s control
in the sense
that (1) they are reasonably unforeseen
or
reasonably unavoidable,
and
(2)
crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the delays emanating from those
circumstances once they arise. so long as they meet this definition, they will
be considered exceptional. they need not meet a further hurdle of being rare
or entirely uncommon.

it is not
enough for the crown, once the ceiling is breached, to point to a past
difficulty. it must also show that it took reasonable available steps to avoid
and address the problem
before
the delay exceeded the ceiling.
 this might include prompt resort to case management processes to seek the
assistance of the court, or seeking assistance from the defence to streamline
evidence or issues for trial or to coordinate pre-trial applications, or
resorting to any other appropriate procedural means. the crown, we emphasize,
is not required to show that the steps it took were ultimately successful –
rather, just that it took reasonable steps in an attempt to avoid the delay.”

and further at para. 75:
“thus, any portion of the
delay that the crown and the system could reasonably have mitigated may not be
subtracted (i.e. it may not be appropriate to subtract the entire period of
delay occasioned by discrete exceptional events).”

in my view, the 6-month delay resulting from the crown
failure to schedule the trial for baig either alone or with saud as a self-represented
co-accused, on the early dates available on february 11, 2025 cannot be
justified as an exceptional circumstance.

the 6-month delay was not outside the crown’s control. as
noted above, it had several reasonable options it could have pursued shortly
after it learned counsel for mr. saud was not retained for mr. saud’s trial, any
one of which would have ensured baig’s trial was scheduled to be completed
within the
jordan
presumptive ceiling of 18 months.

the failure of the crown to set the trial dates available for
baig alone on february 11, 2025, or to obtain a joint information for baig and
saud and set those same trial dates (on a with or without counsel basis for
saud), or alternatively to bring an application for an order that baig and saud
be jointly tried, in which a court could have considered whether this was in
the interests of justice in light of baig’s s.11(b)
charter
rights, means
that the crown failed to take reasonable available steps to avoid and address
the problem before the delay exceeded the ceiling:
r. v. jordan, at
paras. 69-70.

i have considered this failure in the context of a record of
other evidence of the crown’s casual approach to moving this case forward, which
resulted in the first crown pre-trial (“cpt”) being held on november 14, and
the first jpt being held january 10, 10 months after mr. baig was charged.

for example, the assigned crown did not respond to
correspondence from baig’s counsel sent may 30, 2024 until august 26, 2024. mr.
baig’s counsel’s email of may 30, 2024 noted that disclosure was incomplete and
asked whether mr. baig would be prosecuted in a group, and offered to speak
with the crown. the email was not responded to until august 26, 2024 (after
follow-up requests had been sent by mr. baig’s counsel on july 9, 2024 and
august 14, 2024). crown counsel indicated an intention to prosecute baig with
saud.

in an appearance of october 3, the crown in court advised
that disclosure was complete. this was incorrect. after counsel for mr. baig
advised the assigned crown that disclosure was not complete, and requested a
cpt, a cpt was not held until november 14, after counsel for mr. baig attended
jicmc court and raised a concern about delay and the lack of a pre-trial. the
cpt was held on november 14. additional disclosure was sent on a usb on
november 28, 2024.

while jpt dates were available to the jpt judge, the crown
and mr. baig’s counsel, in december, the crown deferred to mr. saud’s counsel’s
request to defer a jpt until jan 10, as he had just received disclosure. the
jpt was held on january 10,2025, a month after the earlier dates available to
the crown, the jpt judge, and counsel for mr. baig.

on the totality of the evidence, i conclude that the s.11(b)
charter
rights of mr. baig were breached. the delay of 20.5 months is outside the
jordan
presumptive ceiling. it is not justified as an exceptional circumstance or by case
complexity. the crown and the court and counsel for baig had available dates
for the trial within 14.5 months which the crown could have set, but for an
unreasonable attempt to accommodate the dates of mr. saud’s counsel, who was
not retained for trial, and when saud was not a co-accused in a joint
information.

the crown had available several reasonable methods of
ensuring that mr. baig’s s.11(b) rights were respected, none of which were
pursued. this occurred in the context of a casual approach by the crown to
moving the case forward towards a trial for mr. baig within the
jordan
presumptive
ceiling.

i have concluded that mr. baig’s s.11(b)
charter
rights
were breached. accordingly the charges before the court against mr. baig are
stayed pursuant to s.24(1) of the
charter.
dated: september 16, 2025 ______________________________
justice
david porter