source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj669/2025oncj669.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r.
v. younkman, 2025 oncj 669
date: 2025·12·16
court
file no.: toronto region
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
christopher younkman
before
 justice michael waby
reasons
 for judgment released on december 16, 2025
a. merenda............................................................................................................... 
 for the crown
j. berkes.................................................................................................................. 
 for the accused
waby m.:
overview

christopher younkman is charged with a
single count of sexual assault as against the complainant r.m. the sexual
assault is alleged to have happened on 24
th
september 2020. prior
to this date the parties were unknown to each other. the accused and complainant
connected that same day on the dating app grindr and then subsequently
communicated by text message and then via the messaging app signal.

the parties arranged to meet at mr.
younkman’s apartment and the accused organised an uber to collect r.m. who
travelled in the uber and arrived at mr. younkman’s apartment as arranged at
approximately 1:00 p.m. where r.m. was met outside by him and they then went
inside the apartment together.

it is alleged that over the course of the
next 10 hours r.m and mr. younkman’s engaged in a combination of consensual and
non-consensual sexual activity.

the crown proceeded by way of indictment.
mr. younkman elected trial in the ontario court of justice and pleaded not
guilty.
overview

the case for the crown is advanced through
solely the testimony of the complainant. mr. younkman did not testify in his
defence.

sections 278 and 276 rulings were previously
made in this case by justice mainville, prior to her elevation to the superior
court of justice. i adopt those rulings and the accompanying reasoning. with
the consent of the parties, these proceedings continued before me without the
need for a re-arraignment of the accused.

defence counsel brought an application for a
stay of proceedings pursuant to s 11(b) of the
charter
on december 8,
2025 on the first rescheduled date of trial before me. i dismissed the
application and found that there was not a breach of mr. younkman’s 11(b)
rights. i indicated that i would subsequently provide reasons to the parties
for that decision.

the following are my reasons for dismissing
the 11(b) decision as well as my judgement with respect to the trial.
section 11(b)
charter
application

the section 11(b) application in this case
represents a request for a stay following a delay of 15 months which is
therefore under the presumptively unreasonable delay outlined in
r. v.
jordan.

the surrounding facts may be summarized thus.
a 2-day trial was scheduled in this matter for september 15 and 16, 2025. 
the accused now resides in the united states and travelled to toronto, as
required, for his trial. on the first scheduled day of trial, the crown raised
the issue with justice mainville whether defence counsel would be permitted to
cross-examine the complainant with respect to certain text messages he had
exchanged with the accused on the day of the alleged incident.

submissions were made by counsel before her
honour as to whether certain texts or messages amounted to records and were
subject to the section 278 regime. it quickly became apparent that a clear and
unambiguous waiver of the materials had not been obtained by the crown as it
related to the section 278 materials.

it also became apparent that it was
necessary for her honour to determine whether any of the messages were subject
to the section 276 regime and its requirements.

in the wake of the sections 278 and 276
issues that had been raised, on the first day of trial, both crown and defence
counsel were responsive and sought to pro-actively manage the emerging
situation. defence counsel made a number of concessions and sought to limit
the nature and scope of any potential 276 materials. however, defence counsel
reasonably maintained the need to reserve the right to cross-examine the
complainant on one particular message, “the signal message” in the event that
the complainant’s
viva voce
evidence was inconsistent with its contents.

crown counsel accepted that they had
proceeded on the basis of an implied waiver with respect to materials that were
found by her honour to be records and which had been provided by the
complainant to the police and in turn by the crown to defence counsel as part
of the disclosure process.

a draft waiver was obtained and steps were
taken for the complainant to receive access to the required independent legal
advice (ila). the signed, albeit incomplete, waiver by the complainant was
provided to defence counsel and the court on the second scheduled date of
trial. in an effort to expedite matters, crown counsel conceded stage 1 for
the purposes of section 278.93. the matter was then adjourned to appoint
counsel for the complainant and to conduct the stage 2 proceedings. new trial
dates were set for december 8 and 9, 2025.

subsequently, on october 29, 2025, justice
mainville rendered a comprehensive 35-page decision on the sections 276 and 278
issues. her honour found that the signal message fell within the ambit of s.
276 and also found it was admissible. her honour further determined the
admissibility of materials pursuant to the section 278 records regime. i adopt
her honour’s decision in its entirety.

the applicant’s position is that the entire
delay in this case following the trial dates scheduled in september 2025 is
attributable to the crown not seeking a sufficiently informed waiver and ila
with respect to the records materials and that the applicant was entitled to
rely on the presumption that disclosure of the materials by the crown, amounted
to a waiver of its use, absent evidence to the contrary.

mr. berkes submits that defence counsel
acted expeditiously and that the fact that the applicant now resides in the
united states means that he has also suffered unreasonable prejudice as a
result of having to re-attend for the subsequently scheduled trial dates in
december 2025.

the crown submits that the delay in this
case emerging since the september trial dates lies squarely at the feet of the
defence. mr. merenda submits that the sections 278 and 276 issues were
canvassed at the judicial pre-trial (“jpt”) in this case and defence counsel
had indicated that they would not be live issues for trial. it is the crown
position that on the first scheduled trial date the crown sought to avoid delay
and any mid-trial applications by confirming, prior to arraignment that defence
counsel was not seeking to rely on any materials that may attract the necessary
scrutiny of the s. 276 regime.
section 11(b) analysis

i do not propose to extensively rehearse the
well-established principles articulated in
r. v. jordan
and related case
law. counsel provided relevant case law to me and i have reviewed and
considered it along with their respective materials. the parties do not
dispute the timelines in this case nor that the relevant delay is 15 months at
the time of the application.

the issue in this case is who bears
responsibility for any delay that occurred between the september trials dates
and those now scheduled before me and how that delay should be treated by the
court.

this section 11(b) application is below the
presumptively unreasonable 18-month
jordan
ceiling and the onus is on
the applicant to demonstrate unreasonable delay. in order to do so, he must
establish that he took meaningful steps to demonstrate a sustained effort to
expedite proceedings and that the case took markedly longer than it reasonably
should have,
r. v. jordan
2016 scc 23.

i accept entirely that defence counsel, and
crown counsel acted with as much flexibility and expedition as was possible
once the s. 276 and 278 issues reared their heads on the first trial date. all
reasonable concessions were made and all necessary steps were then taken to
narrow and focus the issues. the simple and unarguable reality, however, is
that this valiant rearguard action by both crown and defence counsel was
entirely avoidable.

the crown rightly accepts that they should
have taken additional steps beyond those of assuming that an implicit waiver of
any s. 278 materials by the complainant was sufficient. while i accept that
the crown canvassed the s. 278 issue briefly at the jpt, the responsibility
lies with the crown to take any corresponding steps required by to ensure
unambiguous compliance with respect to the s. 278 records regime and any informed
waiver by the complainant.

it was not unreasonable for defence counsel
to conclude that the receipt of these materials in disclosure was accompanied
by the necessary waiver for all relevant purposes. no evidence to the contrary
appears to have been flagged until the issues reared its head at the september
trial date.

equally, it is very clear that defence
counsel was firmly of the view that, from his perspective, none of the relevant
text messages he anticipated relying on would be subject to the s. 276 regime. 
this led to defence counsel indicating at the jpt that s. 276 would not be an
issue for trial.

as justice mainville’s decision made clear,
defence counsel’s confidence was misplaced and there remained relevant material
that fell to be considered under the s. 276 regime with all that flows from
that. it is not accurate to suggest that the delay from the september trial
dates to the current trial dates lie solely at the feet of the crown.

the evidential issues that emerged on
september 15, 2025 necessitated a substantial ruling from justice mainville,
much of which centred on her consideration of the s. 276 issue and the related
signal message. her honour was able to provide this decision to the parties on
october 29, 2025. while defence counsel is not expected to be imbued with the
gift of hindsight and is also entitled to be wrong, that decision and its
consequences cannot reasonably lie at the feet of the crown.

if defence counsel had at least sought a
motion for directions, he would have been able to establish well in advance of
the scheduled trial dates whether the court shared his view that the text
messages did not engage the s. 276 process. the law and procedures around
sexual assaults have become increasingly complex and complicated and counsel
have long been urged to exercise caution in their approach to issues relating
to these important evidential issues.

well-established, statutory frameworks exist
for good reason to consider and address these issues and motions for directions
are a common phenomenon that are easily set before the court. however,
confident a counsel may be on an issue of evidential admissibility and usage,
the court acts as gatekeeper to these issues and does not delegate this
function to counsel who are responsible for the consequences of their
decisions.

despite the various positive steps defence
counsel took to expedite this case, this did not include addressing the s. 276
issue with the court. the reasonable and prudent course in this case, with the
use of foresight, not hindsight, would have been for defence counsel to seek
judicial guidance on the s. 276 issue given the fact that he knew he intended
to rely upon at least one, if not more, of the text messages related to this
incident at trial. this would have avoided precisely the issue that arose and
the type of mid-trial applications it necessitated and against which counsel
have frequently been enjoined.

neither crown nor defence acted with any bad
faith and each sought to salvage the situation that arose to the best of their
ability, however, i find that the reality is that both crown and defence share
responsibility for the avoidable delay that occurred. either the s. 278 or the
s. 276 issue would have led to an adjournment of the trial dates. the combination
of the two merely compounded the problem. it is also fair to say that the s.
276 issue necessitated more legal analysis and consideration than the waiver of
the complainant’s records. indeed, the importance of the signal message to
defence counsel was such that he sought, unsuccessfully, to have her honour
revisit her ruling on it with respect to the s. 276 framework and its
application.

in
j.f., the supreme court
highlighted that “because the prospective
approach adopted in
jordan
allows the parties to know from the outset
what time is reasonable for
their proceedings, they have a responsibility to
take proactive measures to
prevent that time from being exceeded. this
responsibility lies upon both
the crown and the defence.” this is why
courts now routinely schedule
section 11(b) hearings ahead of the trial
itself: to ensure court time
is used efficiently. in this case, i note that this s. 11(b) application was
scheduled for the first day of the re-scheduled trial.

additionally, court resources must be
carefully guarded for the benefit of
all participants of the criminal justice
system. in the supreme court of
canada’s decision of
j.j., the supreme court
directed
that, as a general
rule, “private record applications should be brought at the pre-trial
stage of
the proceedings”, 2022 scc at para. 86

the court noted the following relating to
the dangers associated to mid-trial applications and the ripple effect it has
on participants of the system:
…
if
mid-trial applications become routine, this would result in frequent
adjournments, significant delays, scheduling difficulties – particularly in
jury trials – and potential unfairness to the accused. mid-trial applications
could also harm complainants and discourage the reporting and prosecution of
sexual offences. para. 86

justice mcvey in the superior court of
justice decision of
r. v. a.g., commented further by noting that
mid-trial applications will often, if not always, and as they did here, result
in an adjournment and negatively affect the proceedings before the court as
well as the administration of justice more broadly.
r. v. a.g.,
2025
onsc 2453
at paras.
8-14, 43.

finally, in the decision of
r. v. ranu
from the ontario court of appeal, the court further cautioned against mid-trial
applications. although in reference to a trial judge foreclosing a section
278.1 third-party records application in the middle of cross-examination, the
court provided the following guidance regarding the trial judge’s decision to
dismiss a mid-trial application being brought and concluded… “this type of
mid-trial application is exactly what the supreme court of canada cautioned
against in
r. v. j.j.”,
2022 scc 28,
 2 s.c.r. 3, at para.
86.1.

i find that as it relates to the critical s.
276 issue, while this was the only area that defence counsel failed to address
in an expeditious fashion, that inevitably had significant and avoidable
consequences to the trial dates in september. i appreciate that the applicant
has had to return to toronto for the december trial dates in this matter and
that there is a cost and inconvenience to him for that. it was nevertheless an
unavoidable reality given how events unfolded.

while the crown bears its share of
responsibility with respect to the confusion around the s. 278 waiver, i am
unable conclude that the present 15-month timeframe amounts to a delay that is
markedly
longer than it should reasonably have been in all of the circumstances nor that
defence counsel acted with the necessary expedition in these particular
circumstances. while not exclusively responsible for the adjournment of the
first trial dates that became inevitable, defence counsel’s approach to the s.
276 issue was a significant contributing factor.

accordingly, i do not find in this case the
mr. younkman’s 11(b)
charter
rights were violated and his application is
dismissed.
trial proper
issues

the defence position is simply articulated. 
mr. berkes submits that there is a failure by the crown to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that there was an absence of consent in this case. in the
alternative, the accused challenges the crown's evidence of
mens rea
by
asserting an honest but mistaken belief in consent.

at the close of the crown’s case, defence
counsel brought an application for a directed verdict that was unsuccessful for
the reasons i provided at the time of that ruling. in short, i was satisfied
that the crown had met the low threshold required in
r. v. shepherd
and
r.
v. arcuri
and related case law.

mr. merenda for the crown submits that the
evidence of r.m. clearly establishes a lack of consent on his part to some of
the sexual activity that occurred. in the alternative, the crown argues that
when the court considers the principles and guidance provided in
r. v.
akhali,
 o.j. no.1254
and related law, there is not a factual basis
for the court to conclude mr. younkman took the necessary steps to legitimately
reach such a belief.
law and analysis
sexual assault

a conviction for sexual assault requires
proof beyond reasonable doubt of two basic elements, that the accused committed
the
actus reus
and that they had the necessary
mens rea. the
actus reus of assault is unwanted sexual touching. the
mens rea
is the
intention to touch, knowing of, or being reckless of or wilfully blind to, a
lack of consent, either by words or actions, from the person being touched.
actus reus

the crime of sexual assault is only
indirectly defined in the
criminal code, r.s.c., 1985, c. c-46. the offence
comprises an assault within any one of the definitions in s. 265(1) of the
code,
which is committed in circumstances of a sexual nature, such that the sexual
integrity of the victim is violated: see
r. v. s. (p.l.),
1991 canlii 103 (scc),
 1
s.c.r. 909. section 265 provides that:
265. (1) a person
commits an assault when
(a) 
without the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that
other person, directly or indirectly;
(b) he
attempts or threatens, by an act or a gesture, to apply force to another
person, if he has, or
causes
that other person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability
to effect his purpose; or
(c) while
openly wearing or carrying a weapon or an imitation thereof, he accosts or impedes
another person or begs.

this section applies to all forms of
assault, including sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a
third party or causing bodily harm and aggravated sexual assault.

the
actus reus
of sexual assault is
established by the proof of three elements: (i) touching, (ii) the sexual
nature of the contact, and (iii) the absence of consent. the first two of
these elements are objective. it is sufficient for the crown to prove that the
accused's actions were voluntary.

the sexual nature of the assault is
determined objectively; the crown need not prove that the accused had any
mens
rea
with respect to the sexual nature of his or her behaviour: see
r. v.
litchfield,
1993 canlii 44 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 333, and
r. v. chase,
1987 canlii 23 (scc),
 2
s.c.r. 293.
consent

to be legally effective, consent must be
freely given. therefore, even if a complainant consented, or their conduct
raises a reasonable doubt about their non-consent, circumstances may arise
which call into question what factors prompted their apparent consent.

the absence of consent, however, is
subjective and determined by reference to the complainant's subjective internal
state of mind towards the touching, at the time it occurred: see
r. v.
jensen
(1996),
1996 canlii 1237 (on ca), 106 c.c.c. (3d) 430 (ont. c.a.), at pp. 437-38, aff'd
1997 canlii 368 (scc), 
1 s.c.r. 304,
r. v. park,
1995 canlii 104 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 836, at p. 850, per
l'heureux-dubé j., and d. stuart, canadian criminal law (3rd ed. 1995), at p.
513

the
code
defines a series of
conditions under which the law will deem an absence of consent in cases of
assault, notwithstanding the complainant's ostensible consent or
participation. as enumerated in s. 265(3), these include submission by reason
of force, fear, threats, fraud or the exercise of authority, and codify the
longstanding common law rule that consent given under fear or duress is
ineffective:

as articulated in
r v ewanchuk…
“the
words of fish j.a. in saint-laurent v. hétu,
1993 canlii 4380 (qc ca), r.j.q. 69 (c.a.), at p. 82,
aptly describe the concern which the trier of fact must bear in mind when
evaluating the actions of a complainant who claims to have been under fear,
fraud or duress: “consent” is stripped of its defining characteristics when it
is applied to the submission, non-resistance, non-objection, or even the
apparent agreement, of a deceived, unconscious or compelled will.”

in these instances, the law is interested in
a complainant’s reasons for choosing to participate in, or ostensibly consent
to, the touching in question. in practice, this translates into an examination
of the choice the complainant believed they faced. the courts’ concern is
whether they freely made up their mind about the conduct in question.

as articulated in
r. v. ewanchuk,
1999 canlii 711 (scc), 
1 s.c.r. 330, “the question is not whether the complainant would have preferred
not to engage in the sexual activity, but whether they believed themself to
have only two choices: to comply or to be harmed. if a complainant agrees to
sexual activity solely because they honestly believe that they will otherwise
suffer physical violence, the law deems an absence of consent, and the third
component of the
actus
reus
of sexual assault is established. 
the trier of fact has to find that the complainant did not want to be touched
sexually and made their decision to permit or participate in sexual activity as
a result of an honestly held fear. the complainant’s fear need not be
reasonable, nor must it be communicated to the accused in order for consent to
be vitiated. while the plausibility of the alleged fear, and any overt
expressions of it, are obviously relevant to assessing the credibility of the
complainant's claim that they consented out of fear, the approach is
subjective,
r. v. ewanchuk
at para.
39.

in sexual assault cases which centre on
differing interpretations of essentially similar events, trial judges should
first consider whether the complainant, in their mind, wanted the sexual
touching in question to occur. once the complainant has asserted that they did
not consent, the question is then one of credibility.

in making this assessment, the trier of fact
must take into account the totality of the evidence, including any ambiguous or
contradictory conduct by the complainant. if the trier of fact is satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the complainant did not in fact consent, the
actus
reus
of sexual assault is established and the inquiry must shift to the
accused's state of mind.

if there is reasonable doubt as to consent,
or if it is established that the complainant actively participated in the
sexual activity, the trier of fact must still consider whether the complainant
consented because of fear, fraud or the exercise of authority as enumerated in
s. 265(3).

the complainant’s state of mind in respect
of these factors need not be reasonable. if their decision to consent was
motivated by any of these factors so as to vitiate her freedom of choice the
law deems an absence of consent and the
actus reus
of sexual assault is
again established.
r.m.’s evidence

in the case before me, the evidence is clear
and uncontested that r.m. and mr. younkman actively participated in a range of
sexual activity together over the course of approximately 10 hours after r.m.
arrived at the accused’s residence. this included sexual touching, mutual
masturbation and mr. younkman performing oral sex on r.m. and several instances
of anal sex.

prior to meeting on the date of the alleged
incident, the two were strangers and met on-line for the first time that day. 
during the course of their online exchanges, mr. younkman and r.m. exchanged a
signal app text message which was the subject of the s. 276 ruling by justice
mainville. it was at 9:54 a.m. and the relevant excerpt has mr. younkman
writing in a series of texts: “i know you’re nervous, but don’t worry. we will
go slow and i want you to be comfortable and you can stop at any time. just
come and we’ll have lunch. and if you want to i’ll uber you home at any time. 
oh, btw, i’m still wearing biking clothes. do you care? or should i
change? r.m. responds, “put clean clothes on ig ( i guess) ?” to which mr.
younkman replies “ok, i’m changing now”

the probative force of prior statements of
intention will depend on, among other things, their degree of specificity and
their temporal proximity to the alleged assault. as the court noted in
r.
v. starr,
2000 scc 40,
 2 s.c.r. 144,
a statement of intention can support an inference that the declarant followed
through on the intended course of action only if it is “reasonable on the
evidence for the trier of fact to infer that the declarant did so” (para. 169).

r.m. testified in-chief that approximately 3
hours after this text he was picked up in an uber at a local park and travelled
to meet mr. younkman. r.m. described feeling apprehensive and that upon
arrival, he was met outside by the accused. they went in together to the
accused’s apartment which r.m. described as being a large, converted warehouse.

after some preliminary small talk, r.m gave
evidence that he told the accused the sexual acts he did not wish to engage
in. he testified that this included no oral or anal sex nor any kissing.

in examination-in-chief, r.m. described the
sexual activity starting by him removing all of his own clothes aside from a
long pair of cotton socks, the accused then pushed on his shoulders,
which
r.m. took as a cue to kneel down which he did not do. mr. younkman immediately
ceased pushing his shoulders and
then took a belt and tied r.m.s wrists
behind his back and placed a blindfold over his eyes and circled around him
talking a series of pictures.

when asked whether he or the accused had
said anything throughout this phase of the encounter, r.m. testified “i can’t
remember”. he described feeling nervous and uncertain at this stage. he asked
to use the shower and the accused led him to the shower while r.m. was still
blindfolded. r.m. estimated he spent 10-20 minutes showering and testified that
he did not leave the bathroom during this time as he was nervous.

upon exiting the bathroom r.m. and the
accused discussed a puddle of pre-ejaculate from r.m’s penis that was
apparently on the floor and mr. younkman touched r.m.s penis and placed his
fingers in r.m’s mouth. r.m. could not recall whether what if anything was
said while this happened.

r.m. then again asked to go to the washroom
and was taken by the accused whom r.m. observed remaining in the room. the
accused then left the washroom upon the request of r.m. upon exiting the
washroom, r.m. sat on the sofa with mr. younkman who was still fully clothed. 
mr. younkman advised r.m. he had a work meeting to attend on video and would be
a few minutes.

r.m. testified that while this happened he
scrolled through netflix to try and find something to watch on the television. 
he estimated the meeting lasted 20 minutes after which mr. younkman returned to
where r.m. was watching television and ran his hands through r.m.’s hair and
touched his neck and upper body and then told r.m. he had another remote work
meeting to attend.

r.m. gave evidence that he believes there
may have been a total of 3 meetings the accused participated in while he was
there and after second one, the accused returned, pulled out his own penis and
placed r.m.’s hand on it and moved it up and down. the accused then asked
r.m. to wipe the pre-ejaculate from the tip of the accused’s penis which he did
using his socks. r.m. could not recall whether he said anything at this point. 
the accused then attended his third remote work meeting.

when asked by the crown whether he asked the
accused to stop any of the interaction at this point, r.m. testified that he
did not as it was not something he was opposed to doing. it was his evidence
that he did not recall saying anything to the accused but he “knew in his own
head he was okay with it.”

r.m. testified that he lay naked on the
couch watching television for the next 15 or so minutes while the accused
attended his third work meeting after which mr. younkman returned and tied
r.m.’s wrists in front of him with a necktie. r.m. could also not recall
whether any words were spoken at this point.

subsequent to this, mr. younkman licked and
fingered r.m.’s anus and performed oral sex on him. this lasted for
approximately 5 minutes and r.m. gave evidence he did not recall saying
anything and that he believed that this was because he was shocked at what was
happening to him but that his focus was mostly on the television.

r.m. testified the accused seemed ‘rough’ at
this point although did not articulate how this manifested itself. he then
gave evidence that the accused attempted to penetrate him anally but was
unsuccessful and then he picked up r.m. in his arms and carried him upstairs to
the bedroom where he lay r.m. down on the bed.

after mr. younkman again attempted to anally
penetrate him, r.m. gave evidence that he said to the accused “should we use a
condom?” and that he asked the accused whether he had any sexually transmitted
diseases. r.m. testified that mr. younkman told him he was on prep, (a
pre-exposure prophylaxis medication to prevent hiv in hiv negative individuals
at high risk) and life was easier if he did not use one a condom.

r.m. testified that he was not sure whether
he could trust the accused but accepted that he did not express any
reservations to mr. younkman at all in any way. r.m. estimated this portion of
the encounter lasted approximately 20 minutes. subsequently r.m. gave evidence
that the accused again licked and fingered his anus and then penetrated him
anally while his hands were still tied with the tie. at one point, r.m.
wriggled a hand free and pushed against accused who stopped. then described
them ‘spooning’.

at one point, r.m. told the accused ‘it
hurts’ and the accused said “i’ll take it out slowly” and he then removed his
penis.
further anal sex then occurred after which r.m., asked to go to
the washroom again and while he was inside the locked washroom, the accused
called out and asked if r.m. was okay to which he replied that he was.

r.m. gave evidence that while he was in the
washroom on this occasion he was stunned and shocked and was wondering whether
he had been raped and estimates he stayed in the bathroom for 10-15 minutes
before exiting. he then chatted with the accused at the kitchen counter, had a
glass of water and testified that the accused began to rub some oil over r.m.’s
anus to which r.m. said ‘do we have to use that?” to which mr. younkman
replied, “it will feel good.” he then subsequently penetrated r.m. again at
which point it was his evidence he told the accused it hurt and the accused
stopped.

the accused and r.m. then went back upstairs
to the bedroom together where the accused told r.m. he wanted to try a new
position and to which r.m. said “i don’t know” and the accused asked him if he
wanted to be “good” at which point r.m. testified mr. younkman seated r.m. on
his penis after, which they changed positions and r.m. then advised “i need a
break” at which point, mr. younkman stopped sexual activity and then cuddled
with r.m. after saying “should we cuddle”.

after cuddling together, r.m. testified he
and the accused had penetrative sex approximately 4-6 further times for brief
periods of time before the accused ejaculated on r.m. and went to the bathroom.

r.m. testified that he lay there for a few
minutes before going to the bathroom where he said he felt shock and pain and
was confused and wondered about the next steps to take and that “in my head he
felt disgusting.”

subsequently r.m. and mr. younkman sat and
chatted on the sofa with r.m.’s feet on the accused lap. r.m. asked if the
accused would launder his thigh high socks for him and if he could take another
shower. mr. younkman agreed to both requests. after this r.m. returned to the
sofa and sat with the accused who lay with his head in r.m.’s lap for about 15
minutes and after returning with r.m.’s freshly laundered socks sat next to him
with his head on r.m.’s shoulder for a further 20 minutes.

after this, r.m. told the accused he wanted
to go home and the accused ordered him an uber which he then took back to the
park he had originally come from, leaving at about 11:00 p.m.

when asked by the crown how he felt about
the experience of being with the accused, r.m. testified that “it was a very
bad experience” and he did not feel he could trust him. four days later, r.m.
attended women’s college hospital (“wch”) where a saek was carried out. 
approximately 3 years later, r.m. reported the sexual assault to police. when
asked by the crown why he reported the incident when he did, r.m testified that
it was because he had grown as a person and in confidence and felt it was his
duty to come forward in case there were other victims

when asked how the accused seemed when r.m.
left his apartment, r.m. described mr. younkman as seeming neutral or “okay”
but r.m. described himself feeling stunned and disgusting. he gave evidence
that at no point did he say in words to mr. younkman that anal penetration of
any kind was okay and nor were there any express enquiries made by mr.
younkman.

in cross-examination, r.m. confirmed that he
provided various written materials and text messages to the police when he
reported the matter to them a little over three years after the alleged
incident and that he did so to help them with their investigation but r.m.
could not recall when exactly in 2024 he had provided them.

in cross-examination, r.m. made a number of
concessions. he agreed his memory about the incident was better 5 years ago
than now and his recall would have been more accurate then than now and that
his recall of details from the alleged incident may now be incorrect.

r.m. agreed that he voluntarily got into the
uber that was ordered for him and voluntarily attended the accused apartment
and entered it with him without further discussion. r.m. also accepted that he
and the accused had discussed the accused taking intimate pictures of r.m. and
of r.m. exploring various sexual fantasises with mr. younkman once he arrived.

when asked whether he consented to the
intimate pictures being taken, r.m. replied “that depends on how you define
consent”. when pressed, he gave evidence that he believed ‘a verbal
affirmation’ was required to amount to consent. defence counsel put to r.m.
that he had consented to the pictures being taken r.m. testified that he had
not. when mr. berkes repeated his suggestion that r.m. was fine with the
intimate pictures being taken at the time, r.m. then agreed that he was. he
also confirmed that when he asked the accused to delete the pictures he had
done so without demur in front of r.m. to ensure he could see it had happened
and that he did so one by one by scrolling down the screen on his phone as he
did so.

r.m. agreed that he had his phone with him
the entire time he was in the apartment and had unrestricted access to it. he
also agreed that he had locked the bathroom door each time he entered the
bathroom and that had he wished to do so, he had the means to use his phone to
call police, friends or family for help. when asked why he testified that he
did not feel safe in the apparent absence of any evidence to support that
conclusion, r.m. testified that it was because he thought mr. younkman had
over-reached on the initial boundaries r.m. had set.

r.m. agreed that mr. younkman appeared at
various points to be solicitous of r.m., r.m. was sufficiently comfortable that
in the 10 hours he spent at the accused apartment, he spent three separate
periods of time reclining naked on the sofa watching netflix while the accused
participated in 3 separate work meetings which each time was punctuated by
intimate contact between him and mr. younkman.

r.m. agreed with defence counsel that when
he and the accused engaged in mutual masturbation there had been no verbal
exchange between them and that r.m. was agreeable to this behaviour.

r.m. also agreed with the defence
suggestions that “your personal truth” may differ from what happened during the
alleged incident and that with hindsight a person may view an incident
differently and change their mind bout what had happened. r.m. also agreed
that he was fine with the kissing that had taken place between them, despite
testifying earlier that he did not wish to engage in such behaviour.

r.m. also agreed that in his text exchanges
with mr. younkman very shortly before their encounter, he was clear that he
could tell mr. younkman if he wanted to stop any unwanted sexual behaviour and
had not done so throughout their encounter. he also agreed that at no point
did he say “no” or ask mr. younkman to stop any sexual behaviour, including the
instances of anal or oral sex. however, he reiterated his position that he had
not consented to anal sex or anal touching and testified that in his view, all
of his actions were consistent with the accused knowing r.m. did not wish to
engage in anal sex.

r.m. denied that at one point during anal
sex he had asked mr. younkman to switch to a more comfortable position and that
this would imply he was consenting to the activity. when an excerpt of his
police statement was then played to him, r.m. acknowledged that he had in fact
told officers “i asked if we could move to a more comfortable spot”. r.m. also
agreed that during further anal sex in the bedroom he and mr. younkman had
discussed the use of a condom although r.m. agreed he had not asked the accused
to use one or expressed any preference and that they had also discussed stds
prior to anal sex continuing.

during cross-examination, defence counsel
suggested to r.m. that based upon their conversations, the reasonable person
would conclude that these exchanges were a prelude to consensual sexual
activity. after a lengthy pause, r.m. agreed with counsel’s proposition. 
r.m. also agreed after his police statement was played to him that he told
police he “went along with the anal activity that day.” in a subsequent
exchange with defence counsel, r.m. testified “i went along with it but i
wasn’t okay with it”. when asked by defence counsel if r.m. participated
voluntarily, r.m. responded “yes” but added that he felt forced. he then
agreed with defence counsel that he went along with everything that happened on
the day of his encounter with mr. younkman.

r.m. also agreed with defence counsel that
he had previously told the police that the reason he went to wch for a saek 4
days later was because his main concern was whether he may have contracted an
std following unprotected sex with mr. younkman. when asked “is the truth
today that the reason you went to wch was because of your concern regarding an
std”. r.m. replied “yes”. r.m. then subsequently denied it was the main
reason and denied that he had been persuaded by a nurse to report a sexual
assault to the police.

r.m. agreed that he had also told the police
in his statement that he believed he was in denial about a sexual assault
having occurred and that he believed the sexual assault was the reason that he
was snapping and irritable with his friends and family. when asked by defence
counsel whether r.m. thought it was possible there may have been a reason other
than a sexual assault for this irritability, r.m. responded “it’s possible”. 
he also agreed again with defence counsel’s suggestion that he was never forced
by mr. younkman to do anything, that he had gone along with all of the activity
that occurred, knew he could have stopped any of the activity at any point he
wished and that mr. younkman had complied with any requests made by r.m.

r.m. also agreed with defence counsel’s
suggestion that sometimes people regret their past behaviour but not because a
person was forced into doing something but because they subsequently view
events differently. nevertheless, r.m. denied he was now just looking to blame
mr. younkman because he now regretted what had voluntarily happened between
them.

while the complainant's testimony is the
only source of direct evidence as to his state of mind in this case,
credibility must still be assessed by the trial judge, in light of all the
evidence. it is open to the accused to claim that the complainant's words and
actions, before and during the incident, raise a reasonable doubt against his
assertion that he, in his mind, did not want the sexual touching to take
place. if, however, the trial judge believes the complainant that he subjectively
did not consent, the crown has discharged its obligation to prove the absence
of consent

consent is defined by the
criminal
code
as the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the
sexual activity in question:
s. 273.1(1). as mr. merenda rightly submitted it
is the conscious agreement of the complainant to engage in every sexual act in
a particular encounter and must be given freely, must exist at the time of the
sexual activity, and can be revoked at any time:
r. v. barton,
2019
scc 33, 2 s.c.r. 579, at para.
88.

given that the first essential element of
this offense has been admitted, the second essential element, the absence of
the subjective consent of the complainant, is the remaining
actus reus
component
of the offence, and it must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. this consent
is with reference to the complainant's internal state of mind. in other words,
i must determine whether the complainant wanted the sexual activity to take
place:
r. v. ewanchuck,
1999 canlii 711 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 330,
at para.
26.

whether or not the complainant subjectively
consented is a matter of credibility to be weighed in light of all the
evidence:
ewanchuck, at paras. 30 - 31;
barton, at
para.
89. the complainant need not express their lack
of consent, or their revocation of consent, for the
actus reus
to
be established:
r. v. j.a.,
2011 scc 28,
 2 s.c.r. 440, at para.
37.

i must also be mindful that consent to one
act does not amount to consent to another act. consent
must be given for each and every sexual act engaged in. for example, agreement
to one form of penetration is not an agreement to any or all forms of
penetration:
r. v. hutchinson,
2014 scc 19 (canlii),
2014 s.c.c. 19,
 1 s.c.r. 346, at para.
54;
r. v. kirkpatrick,
2022 scc 33 (canlii),
2022 s.c.c. 33,
 2 s.c.r.
480, at para.
44.

consent cannot be implied because of a
pre-existing relationship, like a common law
partnership or marriage:
j.a., at para.
64. consent also cannot be
implied by the complainant's silence, passivity, or ambiguous conduct:
r.
v. kruk,
2024 scc 7 (canlii),
2024 s.c.c. 7,
433 c.c.c. (3d) 301, at para.
36.

in this case, if i accept the complainant's
evidence that he did not consent to the sexual touching in question, beyond a
reasonable doubt, then this element of the offence is proven. only if i find
that there was consent, or i have reasonable doubt about the complainant's
consent, do i need to determine if the consent was vitiated in any way:
r.
v. g.f.,
2021 scc 20 (canlii),
2021 s.c.c. 20,
 1 s.c.r. 801, at para.
53.

r.m.’s evidence stood alone in this case. 
corroboration is not necessary for proof of a sexual assault, but of course if
it existed, it would strengthen the crown’s case. there are no other witnesses
beyond r.m. who testified.

in assessing a witness’s testimony, i may accept some, all, or none of their evidence and i must consider the credibility and reliability of the account
provided. in assessing the credibility and the reliability of the evidence of
the witnesses, i have distinguished between credibility and reliability. 
credibility relates to a witness’ sincerity, whether he/she is speaking the
truth as she believes it to be.

reliability relates to the actual accuracy
of his/her testimony. in determining this, i must consider his/her ability to
accurately observe recall and recount the events in issue. a credible witness
may give unreliable evidence. see
r. v.
morrissey,
1995 canlii 3498 (on ca), o.j.
no. 639 (c.a.) at para
33;
r.
v.
h.c.,
2009 onca 56 (canlii), o.j. no. 214 (c.a.)
at para
41. accordingly, there is a distinction between a finding of
credibility and proof beyond a reasonable doubt. see
r. v.
j.j.
r.d.,
2006 canlii 40088 (on ca), o.j. no. 4749 (c.a.) at para
47;
r. v.
j.w.,
 o.j.
no. 1979 (c.a.) at para. 26.

the credibility and reliability of a witness
must be “tested in the light of all the other evidence presented”.
r.
v.
stewart,
1994 canlii 7208 (on ca), o.j. no. 811 (c.a.) at para.
27.

the reality is that r.m. presented as an
intelligent and articulate witness, albeit one who at times bordered on the
very methodical with a number of his answers. there were a number of instances
where he paused for significant periods of time before answering key questions
in cross-examination and at times, i found r.m. to be evasive in his answers to
defence counsel particularly once he had answered a question that he considered
may undermine his evidence.

while r.m.’s was often candid as he was, he
often sought to resile from answers or qualify his evidence in a manner
inconsistent with much of his earlier evidence. in cross-examination, he made
a number of significant admissions that were clearly against his own
interests.

despite his evidence, it is r.m.’s position
that he did not consent to any of the anal sex of touching or oral sex that
occurred between him and mr. younkman. mr. merenda for the crown submits that
the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt through r.m.’s evidence that
there was no valid consent on r.m.’s part, nor indeed was there any reasonable
basis for mr. younkman to conclude an honest or mistaken belief in consent on
r.m.’s part.

proof beyond a reasonable doubt goes
hand-in-hand with the presumption of innocence which is a fundamental principal
of our system of justice. the burden of proof in a criminal trial always rests
with the crown. the burden of proof is a heavy one. it is proof beyond a
reasonable doubt in relation to each of the offence’s essential elements.

a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary,
far-fetched, or frivolous doubt. it is not a doubt based on sympathy for or
prejudice against anyone involved in this trial. it is a doubt based on reason
and common sense and is logically derived from the evidence or the absence of
evidence.
r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320, 118 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at
para.
39

to be clear, it is not sufficient that on
the whole of the evidence that i am satisfied that mr. younkman is
probably
guilty. even if i believe the accused is probably
guilty or likely guilty, that is not sufficient. in those circumstances, a
judge must give the benefit of the doubt to the accused and acquit because the
crown has failed to satisfy the court of the guilt of the accused beyond a
reasonable doubt.

the burden
never
shifts
to the accused to establish their own innocence, and the onus always lies with
the crown to prove every essential element (
r. v.
j.h.s.,
2008 scc 30, 2 s.c.r. 152, at para.
13
).

on the totality of the evidence before me, i
am not satisfied that the crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that r.m.
did not consent to all of the sexual activity that occurred between him and mr.
younkman. i find on r.m.’s own evidence and all the reasonable inferences that
i draw from it that there is a marked lack of credibility to this suggestion. 
there is no reasonable inference from the evidence to conclude that there was a
basis for r.m. to have feel unsafe, coerced or any at risk at the hands of mr.
younkman. nothing in his behaviour would support this finding.

nor do i find, based upon the evidence of
r.m. that his words or actions throughout the encounter were consistent with a
lack of freely given consent. r.m.’s evidence at trial made a number of
significant concessions. i accept that in the face of these concessions r.m.
was consistent that he did not consent to certain activity with mr. younkman
and that his words and actions supported this. nevertheless, i do not find
this to be a credible assertion on his part in light of the evidence before me.

i accept there may well have been points
during which r.m. felt nervous during the lengthy encounter he had arranged
with mr. younkman and the range of activity in which they engaged. however, on
his own evidence, he was at no point coerced or forced shamed or intimidated
into any activity. mr. younkman respected any requests he made, whether these
were expressed verbally or otherwise and the accused was solicitous of r.m.
during their time together. r.m. accepted the reasonable inferences that would
be drawn from his actions and at times testified inconsistently, and in
important regards, with the information he had provide to the police in his
statement to them.

i accept entirely that there is no such
thing as a standard response by the victims of sexual assault and that
individuals may legitimately react in a variety of ways. however, on the facts
of this case, and taken at its highest, being intermittently nervous, cannot be
elevated such that it is conflated with a lack of consent on r.m.’s part. in
light of the evidence before me, i do not find the crown has established beyond
a reasonable doubt that r.m. did not consent to the sexual activity as
alleged. further consideration of any possible mistaken belief in consent is
therefore redundant.

accordingly, i find mr. younkman not guilty
of sexual assault.
dated: december 16, 2025. _______________________________
justice
michael waby