source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj585/2025oncj585.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v.
ayoubi, 2025 oncj 585
date: 2025 10 24
court file no.: central
west – brampton – 3111 998 24-31109171
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
mohammad
ayoubi
reasons on s.11(b)
application
before justice a. neil
singh
heard on october 2, 2025
reasons for judgment on
s.11(b) released on october 24, 2025
simran singh.................................................................. counsel
for the respondent/crown
virgil cojocaru.................... counsel for the applicant/defendant
mohammad ayoubi
table of contents
introduction..
2
the
factual background..
2
the
jordan
framework..
3
positions of the parties.
5
analysis & discussion..
5
total
delay.
5
defence
delay.
6
net
delay.
7
delay
below the presumptive ceiling..
8
(i)
sustained effort to expedite the proceedings
8
(ii)
markedly longer
9
conclusion..
12
singh j.:
introduction

the
applicant seeks a declaration that their right to be tried within a reasonable
time under
s.11(b)
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
(charter)
has
been breached. he applies under
s.24(1)
of the
charter
for a stay of
proceedings. the respondent opposes the application.

on july
23, 2024, the applicant was charged with sexual assault. the information was
sworn august 8, 2024. the presumptive
jordan
ceiling is february 8, 2026.
the trial is scheduled to be completed january 29, 2026. the applicant seeks to
meet his onus for a below-the-ceiling stay.

these
are my reasons:
the factual background

to
properly assess whether a
s.11
(b) breach has been established, a summary of the
factual background is necessary. while this is not meant to be exhaustive, i
have considered the entire evidentiary record before me. the following are simply
the key factual circumstances necessary to understand the issues and the
court’s ultimate determination of this application.
date
facts
july 23, 2024
mr. ayoubi is arrested by the peel regional police service
 on a charge of sexual assault. he is released on an undertaking and given a
 first appearance date of august 14, 2024.
july 26, 2024
counsel for mr. ayoubi sends a written request for
 disclosure to the brampton crown attorney’s office.
august 7, 2024
counsel for mr. ayoubi schedules a crown pretrial (cpt) for
 august 23, 2024.
august 8, 2024
the information is sworn.
august 21, 2024
a first appearance was held. disclosure is noted as
 outstanding by the defence. the crown acknowledged and stated that disclosure
 was still being vetted.
a jpt was scheduled by counsel for september 10, 2024.
august 23, 2024
the initial cpt was held.
september 10, 2024
an initial jpt was held. the issue of obtaining a certified
 translation of the complainant’s statement was raised. a continuing jpt was
 determined to be necessary.
october 16, 2024
the applicant scheduled a continuing jpt for november 12,
 2024.
october 28, 2024
the crown disclosed the statement of the complainant. the
 complainant’s statement is translated by an officer in real-time during the
 statement.
november 5, 2025
the respondent formally requested certified translations of
 the video statement.
november 7, 2024
defence counsel contacted the trial coordinator’s office
 and cancelled the november 12, 2024, jpt due to the lack of translated
 disclosure.
november 8, 2024
the defence rescheduled the jpt for december 3, 2024.
november 14, 2024
the crown communicated to counsel that they would not be
 providing certified translations. the crown took the position that the
 real-time translation provided by the officer was sufficient.
december 3, 2024
the continuing jpt was held. a trial time estimate was
 confirmed. timelines were discussed for pretrial motions pursuant to
s.278.92
of the
criminal code.
counsel booked a trial scheduling conference and secured
 the first available date: december 13, 2024.
december 13, 2024
at the trial scheduling conference, the earliest date
 offered that accommodated the pretrial motion timelines were the trial dates
 of january 26-29, 2026.
february 18, 2025
a further trial scheduling conference was held. dates for a
 stage 1 and stage 2 hearing were secured in accordance with the discussed
 timelines. a
s.11
(b) motion was also secured as well.
july 8, 2025
the crown advised the defence that it revised its position
 and would be providing certified translations of the complainant’s statement.
july 23, 2025
the certified translations were completed.
september 18, 2025
the certified translations were disclosed to the defence.

the
total time from the date the information was sworn to the anticipated end of
the scheduled trial is
539 days or 17.7 months.
the
jordan
framework

in
determining whether an applicant’s right under
s.11(b)
of the
charter
has
been breached, application judges are required to employ the framework
established by the supreme court of canada in
r v. jordan. for a matter proceeding in the
ontario court of justice, the supreme court established a ceiling of 18 months
from the swearing of the information, after which the delay is considered presumptively
unreasonable.

in
r v. coulter,
the ontario court of appeal helpfully distilled the framework down to the
following steps:
(1)
calculate
the total delay, which is the date of the swearing of the information to the actual
end or anticipated end of trial (i.e., the end of the evidence and closing
arguments).
(2)
to
calculate the net delay, subtract defence delay, including delay that is waived
by the defence, from the total delay.
(3)
compare
the net delay to the presumptive jordan ceiling.
(4)
if
the net delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the delay is presumptively
unreasonable. the onus is on the crown to rebut the presumption of unreasonable
delay by establishing the presence of exceptional circumstances. if the crown
is unable to do so, a stay will follow. exceptional circumstances fall under
two categories: discrete events and particularly complex cases.
(5)
to
calculate the remaining delay, subtract, from the net delay, delay caused by
discrete events.
(6)
if
the remaining delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, consider whether the case
was particularly complex, so as to justify the time the case has taken and lead
to a conclusion that the delay is reasonable.
(7)
if
the remaining delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is on the
defence to show that the delay is, in any event, unreasonable.

to
establish a below-ceiling breach of an applicant’s
s.11(b)
charter
right,
the applicant must satisfy both of the following criteria: (1) that the defence
took
meaningful
steps
demonstrating a
sustained effort
to expedite the
proceedings; and (2) that the case took
markedly longer
than it
reasonably should have.
their onus is assessed on a balance of probabilities.

it
should be noted that a stay within the presumptive ceiling should be considered
as rare and limited to “clear cases.”


the
burden at this stage is on the applicant to show that they took meaningful,
sustained steps to expedite the proceedings. the court is to consider what the
defence could have done, and what it actually did to get the case heard as
quickly as possible.
substance matters, not form. the defence
are expected to act reasonably, not perfectly.


in
determining whether the case took markedly longer than it otherwise reasonably
should have the court is to look at a number of factors including (i) local
considerations, (ii) the complexity of the case, and (iii) the crown’s efforts
to expedite the proceedings.


in
assessing local considerations, trial judges should “employ the knowledge they
have of their own jurisdiction, including how long a case of that nature
typically takes to get to trial in light of the relevant local and systemic
circumstances.” trial judges are supposed to take a step back from the minutiae
and adopt a bird’s-eye view of the case.
it is unlikely that the time requirements of a case will have been markedly
exceeded if the crown has done its part to ensure the matter proceeded
expeditiously.

ultimately,
the issue is whether the case took markedly longer than it reasonably should
have. in assessing a
below-the-ceiling stay, the court is to start from the position that the state
brought the applicant to trial within a presumptively reasonable time, and from
there, ask whether the presumption of reasonableness has been rebutted.

positions of the parties

the
applicant submits that although the presumptive
jordan
ceiling has not
been breached, he has nevertheless established a breach of his
s.11
(b) right to
a trial within a reasonable period of time. the applicant submits that he has made
sustained efforts to expedite the matter, and the matter took markedly longer
than it otherwise should have.

the
respondent has opposed the application. the respondent submits that the
applicant has failed to meet their onus on either step of the test for an
under-the-ceiling stay. the respondent submits that the applicant’s delay in
scheduling and cancelling jpts establish that their efforts were not
meaningfully sustained. in addition, the matter did not take markedly longer
than it otherwise reasonably should have.
analysis & discussion
total delay

the
total delay from the swearing of the information (august 8, 2024) to the
anticipated end of trial (january 29, 2026) is 539 days, or 17.7 months. this is below the presumptive
jordan
ceiling. the onus thus remains with the defendant to establish a breach of his
s.11
(b) right within the presumptive
jordan
timeframes.

while
the total delay is within the
jordan
timeframes, it is necessary to
consider the net delay in the matter. any defence delay may become relevant in
assessing whether the efforts they made to expedite the matter were meaningful
and sustained.
defence delay

the
applicant submits they are not responsible for any delay. they never waived
their
s.11
(b) right at any time, nor did their actions cause any of the delay
in this matter.

the
respondent, however, submits that there are two discrete areas of defence
delay.

first,
the respondent submits that the defence inexplicably delayed scheduling the jpt
continuation after the first jpt. the respondent submits that the defence is
responsible for 36 days of delay between september 10, 2024, and october 16,
2024.

second,
the respondent submits that the defence is responsible for a period of 26 days
from the unilateral cancellation and rescheduling of the second jpt. the
respondent submits that the period from november 12, 2024, to december 3, 2024,
is defence delay.
delay in scheduling jpt continuation

it
must be remembered that the initial jpt was scheduled without the defence
having the benefit of disclosure. the initial jpt was held with counsel not
having the complainant’s statement to the police. the statement of the
complainant existed at the time of mr. ayoubi’s arrest. it is the complainant’s
statement that furnished the grounds for his arrest. disclosure issues were
discussed at the jpt. it was determined that a continuing jpt was required. a
trial estimate was not fashioned at the initial jpt.

while
it was known that a continuing jpt was required, it was incumbent on the
parties to ensure that the jpt was going to be a meaningful one. it appears
that the court did not find it appropriate to furnish a trial estimate after
the first jpt.

based
on the timeline in this matter, had the defence set a jpt on september 10, 2024,
as the crown submits they ought to have, a jpt would have been scheduled in
early october 2024. this would have been approximately 3-weeks prior to
receiving the critical disclosure that was outstanding.

it
was reasonable for the defence to wait some time to receive the outstanding
disclosure prior to setting the continuing jpt to ensure it would be a
meaningful one. the outstanding disclosure was critical to advancing the case
and obtaining trial time estimates at the jpt. disclosure issues had already
been discussed at the first jpt. when disclosure did not appear to be forthcoming
after a reasonable waiting period, the defence nevertheless moved to set the
continuing jpt without it.

this
is not defence delay. the statements had been in the hands of the crown since,
at the time of his arrest, or shortly thereafter. the defence had already
conducted a jpt without the benefit of this disclosure. disclosure issues were
canvassed at the initial jpt. the defence waited a reasonable period to
receive the disclosure and then moved to set a continuing jpt without it.

had
the defence done as the crown submitted, it is entirely probable that the
second jpt would have occurred before the crown disclosed the statements.
nothing would stand to be accomplished at the jpt other than to remind the
crown of their outstanding
stinchcombe
disclosure obligations. the
matter would have been adjourned and rescheduled, yet again. the court should
not serve as a reminder system for the crown’s disclosure obligations.

the
delay in scheduling the continuing jpt was not occasioned solely by the
defence. it was largely occasioned by the crown not disclosing critical
disclosure sooner.
unilaterally rescheduling the continuing-jpt

once
in receipt of disclosure, the defence rescheduled the jpt. this decision was
unilateral. it resulted in the rescheduling of the jpt from november 12, 2024,
to december 3, 2024. the reason stated for rescheduling the jpt was due to the
outstanding certified translations of the complainant’s statement.

this
was not required. it is trite law that the defence need not every piece of
disclosure to move a case forward. the statement was provided to the applicant.
it was translated on video by an assisting officer who spoke the same language as
the complainant.

the
defence conducted the jpt on december 3, 2024, absent the translations. they
were successful in obtaining a trial time estimate. there have been no
suggestions by the applicant that since receiving the certified translations
that (i) the officer’s translations were substantively inaccurate, or (ii) that
the trial time estimate needed to be revised.

getting
a certified translation of a statement can take some time. the crown is often
at the mercy of the retained translator and their schedule. what is important
is whether the defence has been furnished with enough information to move the
matter forward. once in receipt of the video statements, the clear answer from
the evidentiary record is, yes.

i
also find that the crown’s initial position that they would not provide
certified translations, is immaterial my analysis. what matters for my task at
hand is whether the defence could have moved the matter forward. even if the
crown took the position that they would provide certified translations from the
get-go, the defence had enough to move forward. it was incumbent upon them to
do so, and not wait on the translations. the defence had sufficient information
to conduct a jpt and set trial dates.

accordingly,
i find
21
days
of defence delay from the rescheduling of the continuing-jpt.
net delay

there
are no further deductions. the case is not complex, nor are there any discrete
exceptional circumstances. the net delay and remaining delay are the same:
518 days
or
17 months.
delay below the presumptive ceiling

to
be eligible for a below-the-ceiling stay, the applicant must meet their onus on
both prongs of the test. first, they must establish that the applicant took
meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained effort to expedite the
proceedings. second, they must establish that the case took markedly longer
than it reasonably should have.
(i)
sustained
effort to expedite the proceedings

the
applicant submitted that at all stages of the proceeding, they exhibited a
sustained effort to expedite the matters. the respondent says that the delays
occasioned by the applicant rebut any such submission.

in
assessing the defence efforts, i remind myself of justice moldaver’s
instructions
in
jordan
that i am to consider what the defence could have
done, and what it actually did to get the case heard as quickly as possible.
substance matters, not form. further, the defence must show that they attempted
to set the earliest possible hearing dates, was cooperative and responsive to
the crown and the court, put the crown on timely notice when delay was becoming
an issue and conducted all applications reasonably and expeditiously. i also
remind myself not to take this opportunity, with the benefit of hindsight, to
question every decision made by the defence. the standard is one of reasonableness,
not perfection.


the
applicant was proactive throughout the proceedings. before the information was
sworn, counsel was retained, disclosure requested, and a cpt scheduled. a jpt
was scheduled in advance of any disclosure being received, on the date of the
first appearance.

the
first jpt was conducted. disclosure was outstanding, in particular the
statement of the complainant, her husband, and the applicant himself. a trial
time estimate was not arrived at on that date, and the jpt concluded on the
understanding that a continuing-jpt would need to be scheduled.

counsel
reasonably waited to receive the critical disclosure. when it was not
forthcoming, they scheduled the continuing-jpt. once in receipt of the
disclosure, they rescheduled the jpt to allow time to have the statements
properly translated.

once
the defence was advised by the crown’s office that they would not be
translating the statements, they conducted the jpt, obtained trial time
estimates, and promptly secured trial dates.

the
applicant’s actions were reasonable. they were meaningful. they were sustained.
all their actions were geared towards moving the matter forward towards trial
expeditiously. while i have found the defence responsible for 21 days of delay
from rescheduling the continuing-jpt, that does not mean their efforts were not
meaningful and sustained.

in
the context of this case, the action in rescheduling the jpt was reasonable,
albeit imperfect. the key is the purpose. the purpose here was to allow the
crown time to provide translated statements and to save the court time from
having to conduct a meaningless jpt. this was after translations were discussed
at the initial jpt, and before the crown formally communicated to counsel that
they would not be providing any.

while
the defence caused a delay in rescheduling the jpt, the efforts were geared at
proceeding efficiently and advancing the matter expeditiously. the actions of
the defence clearly demonstrate that they were interested in progressing the
matter and setting the earliest trial dates possible.

jordan
recognizes
that an under-the-ceiling stay can occur even where there is defence delay. at
paragraph 48 of
jordan, the court stated, “if the total delay from the
charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial (
minus defence
delay
or a period of delay attributable to exceptional circumstances) falls below the
presumptive ceiling, then the onus is on the defence to show that the delay is
unreasonable.” the standard the defence is held to is one of reasonableness,
not perfection.

the
supreme court clearly found that an unreasonable delay below the presumptive
ceiling can be found where there is defence delay. otherwise, the court would
have foreclosed such a possibility. they did not do so, and in fact
specifically allowed for such a possibility.

it
is also relevant to understand that this situation was largely created by the
crown’s delay in providing disclosure.
in march 2024, justice harris of the superior
court of justice in this courthouse observed, in a case involving analogous disclosure
issues, that the relevant video evidence could have been provided on the day of
the accused’s arrest, as it had already been recorded by that time.
his honour,
however, permitted the crown an allowance of one-month to provide the
disclosure.

in
this case, providing the video disclosure in a timely fashion would have been at
the same time initial disclosure was provided, on august 23, 2024. i pause to
note that there is no evidence before me that there were any particular issues with
the disclosure that necessarily would have delayed its delivery – for instance
the need to redact the materials for personal information, investigative
privilege, etc.

had
the police and/or crown heeded justice harris’ words, the parties would have
all been able to arrive at a trial time estimate at the initial jpt on this
matter on september 10, 2024 (49 days after the applicant’s arrest). the
crown’s failure to do so set into motion everything that occurred after the
initial jpt. the applicant’s resultant actions were, in all the circumstances, reasonable.

for
these reasons, i find as a fact, that the applicant took meaningful sustained
efforts to expedite the matter.
(ii) markedly longer

at
this stage, the court is required to assess whether this case took markedly
longer
than it otherwise reasonably should have. the analysis requires
that i take a bird’s eye view and resist the urge to focus too narrowly on the
minutiae of the case. the court must assess (i) local considerations, (ii) case
complexity, and (iii) whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the
proceedings.
local considerations

one
of the most often repeated refrains in this courthouse is that brampton is one
of the busiest jurisdictions in the country.

i
do not, however, have any evidence that brampton is under-resourced compared to
other jurisdictions. just because a jurisdiction is busy, it does not mean it
will necessarily suffer from systemic delays. a busy jurisdiction can be fully
served by its system of justice.
in fact, it ought to be.

as
justice harris
stated in
a.(c.), “the decades long chronic delay in
brampton exacerbated the situation and should not lead to greater tolerance for
delay, but less.”

the police had complete (or at least nearly complete) disclosure from the date
of arrest. further, the crown took no steps to expedite the matter.
case complexity

this
is a straightforward case. it is an allegation of sexual assault. there is
nothing complex about it. there are pretrial motions in relation to
s.278.92,
but in the context of this case, the records at issue are discreet and not
voluminous. it certainly does not add significant complexity to this matter. no
one has submitted otherwise.

in
terms of trial scheduling, it is important to note that the pretrial motions
did not impact the dates offered. the record shows that trial dates were
offered and secured first. the pretrial motion dates were obtained afterwards, in
accordance with the timelines established by the court at the jpt. they were
scheduled efficiently, and did not contribute to delay in this matter.

in
terms of disclosure, the vast majority (if not all) of the disclosure had
crystallized at the time of the offence. while most of the disclosure could
have been provided to the applicant on the date of the arrest, a reasonable
allowance for its provision to the defence ought to be afforded. as i have
stated above, a conservative allowance for a straightforward case such as this would
be one month.
crown efforts to expedite

i
find that the crown did not undertake efforts to expedite this matter. there is
no evidence that they did anything to expedite this case at any stage of the
proceedings. they did not seek to expedite disclosure, and once
s.11
(b) was
raised by the defence, well in advance of the trial dates, they did not attempt
to secure earlier dates. they could have sought to have this matter stacked on
a list with other cases and then prioritize it.
they did not do so. my experience in this jurisdiction has shown me that had
the crown chosen to prioritize this mater, the court certainly would have been
able to offer earlier trial dates.
conclusion on step 2: this case took markedly longer than it
reasonably should have

when
factoring in local considerations and case complexity, i find that this case took
markedly longer than it reasonably should have. taking a bird’s eye view of
this situation, this jurist sees a few issues.

this
is not a complex case. once disclosure was provided, the matter moved quickly
through the system. the delay here was three-fold, the crown’s failure to
provide the video statements in a timely fashion, the court’s failure to offer
earlier dates at first instance, and the crown’s failure to try to expedite.

the
disclosure here existed at the time of the arrest, or shortly thereafter. the
information was not sworn for another 16 days. the crown had a head start
before the
jordan
clock started to tick. yet somehow, and without
explanation, the statements were provided 97 days after the applicant’s arrest.

we
all know that a defendant cannot be complacent and reap the benefits of
accumulating delay. similarly, the crown cannot be complacent in its constitutional
disclosure obligations and then benefit from it by asserting that the timeframe
for the case-at-bar is what is typical in this jurisdiction.

in
r. v. r.m., my brother justice bernstein found a delay of 505 days (16.6
months) for a 5-day, non-complex sexual assault trial to be markedly longer
than it should have taken.
in another
a.(c.), justice harris of the superior court of justice found
17-months to be markedly longer than it should have been for a straightforward 3-day
trial in the ontario court of justice.
in both cases, the delay in the matter proceeding sooner, was as a result of crown
disclosure issues. when i consider the entire evidentiary record before me and adopt
a bird’s eye view of the case, i come to the similar conclusion with some
additional factors contributing.

the
jordan-
compliant trial scheduling practice direction of the ontario
court of justice has been in place since november 2023. it expects that the
court offer trial dates that are expected to complete within 15 months of the
information being sworn. it is also expected that the parties will be ready to
set trials within 6 months of the swearing of the information date.

had
the crown provided disclosure in a timely fashion such that a trial time
estimate could have been arrived at on the initial jpt date, the trial
coordinator would have been likely been able to provide trial dates within that
15-month time frame.

factoring
in the defence delay, the parties would have been ready to set dates in this
matter well within 6 months, at just over 3 months. the first feasible dates
offered by the court were 13 months out, taking it beyond the 15-month target.

the
combination of delayed disclosure and the inability of the court to offer any
dates earlier than 13 months into the future collectively operate to make the
delay in this case markedly longer than it reasonably should be.

there
is no explanation as to why disclosure wasn’t provided sooner, or why trial
dates could not be offered less than 13-months away. additionally, the crown
did not seek to prioritize this case when
s.11
(b) concerns were raised.

i
am mindful that under-the-ceiling stays are restricted to “clear cases.” that
is to ensure that borderline cases are not stayed, given the significant public
interest in seeing a criminal matter resolved on the merits.”


based
on my reasons above, this is not a borderline case. it is a clear one.

this
is a straightforward matter that was the subject of delayed disclosure and an
inability of this court to offer timely dates. additionally, the crown did not
take steps to expedite the matter. to repeat the words of justice harris
in
a.(c.),
“the decades long chronic delay in brampton exacerbated the situation and
should not lead to greater tolerance for delay, but less.”

i couldn’t agree more.
conclusion

the
applicant has met their onus, on a balance of probabilities, for a below-the-ceiling
stay. they undertook meaningful and sustained efforts to expedite the
proceedings, and the matter took markedly longer than it otherwise should have.
mr. ayoubi’s
charter
right to be tried within a reasonable time has been
infringed.

sexual
violence is one of our society’s most insidious evils. the damage and trauma it
inflicts is far-reaching and ever lasting. it is a stain on the fabric of our
community.

i
acknowledge, without commenting on the merits of the case, that police and
crown have put forth considerable efforts into this matter. the complainant has
shown remarkable bravery.

a
trial on the merits is always the preferred route, but it cannot come at the
cost of our collective rights and freedoms as enshrined in the
charter.

the
charges will be stayed. all future dates will be vacated.
released: 
october 24, 2025
signed:
justice a. neil singh

2016 scc 27

2016 onca 704
at paras.
34-41

r v. jordan,
supra at paras
82-83

ibid
at para 48

ibid
at para 84, 85

ibid
at para 87

ibid at
para 89, 91

ibid
at paras 90, 112

r v. k.j.m.,
2019 scc 55
at para
107

r v. s.a.,
2024 onca 737
at para
35

i have adopted the calculation of
paciocco j.a.
in
r v. shaikh
2019 onca 895
at para
33
rounded to the
nearest 10
th.

the actual period of time is 21 days.

a jpt was secured 27 days from the date it was scheduled. 27
days from september 10, 2024, was october 7, 2024. the video statements were
provided by the crown on october 28, 2024.

r v. stefan,
2024 oncj 565
at para
46.

r v. jordan,
supra at paras
84-85

r. v. a.(c.),
2024 onsc 1603
at
para
63.

r. v. a.(c.),
2024 onsc 1603
at
para
77

r v. a.(c.),
supra at para
114

r v. a.h.
2025 oncj 243
at para
28

r v. stefan,
2024 oncj 565
at para
58

r v. r.m.,
2024 oncj 491

r v. a.(c.),
supra

https://www.ontariocourts.ca/ocj/notices/jordan-compliant-trial-scheduling/

r v. k.j.m.,
supra at para
78

r v. a.(c.),
supra at para
114