source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj101/2025oncj101.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. correia, 2025 oncj 101
date: 
2025 02 18
court
file no.: 23-37100655-01/02
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
blake correia
and tabatha hamilton
before
justice christa reccord
heard
on december 19, 2024; january 13, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on february 18, 2025
tim mccann........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
matthew campbell-williams..................................... counsel
for accused blake correia
jennifer ho............................................................ counsel
for accused tabatha hamilton
reccord, j.:
introduction

blake correia is charged with possession of cocaine
for the purpose of trafficking, possession of methamphetamine for the purpose
of trafficking and possession of proceeds of crime. the crown only seeks a
conviction on the possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking count and
in relation to tabatha hamilton, seeks only a conviction of simple possession
of methamphetamine.

the defence allege breaches of mr. correia’s and
ms. hamilton’s section 8 and 9 rights under the
canadian charter of rights
and freedoms. they seek to exclude the evidence seized pursuant to
section
24(2)
of the
charter. the parties agree that the
charter
application is dispositive of this matter.

for the reasons that follow, i find that there were
breaches of mr. correia’s and ms. hamilton’s
section 8
and
9
charter
rights and i am excluding the evidence pursuant to
section 24(2)
of the
charter.
factual narrative

detective constable eric trottier and detective constable
mark o’dacre from the ontario provincial police renfrew community street crime
unit (scu) testified during the blended trial and
charter
voir dire.

their testimony revealed that the scu had
received information from the crime unit that there were two individuals not
from the city of pembroke possibly involved in illicit drug trafficking. detective
trottier testified that he was provided with the name of “blake” and the street
name “h”.

based on this information, the scu conducted surveillance
on june 21, 2023 at various addresses of interest to see if they could locate
the individuals purported to be involved in drug trafficking. they located an
individual known to detective trottier as “blake” from prior investigations at
80 hunter street, pembroke. from that point on the team conducted surveillance
on “blake” (later identified as mr. correia), ms. hamilton and their youth
associate.

the surveillance took place over a period of
approximately 8 hours. members of the scu followed mr. correia, ms. hamilton
and their youth associate from pembroke to ottawa and back to highway 17 where ms.
hamilton’s vehicle was stopped and all three individuals were arrested. i will
say more about the stops made, routes taken and particular observations later in
the discussion with respect to the grounds for arrest.

mr. correia was searched incident to arrest and a
package of 4.7 ounces of cocaine was found in his groin area. the search of ms.
hamilton’s purse revealed 12 speed pills. other items seized from the vehicle
included cell phones, two containers of baking soda, a scale with powder
substance, a measuring cup and some canadian currency.
the police did not have objectively
reasonable grounds to arrest
the law

this case turns on whether the police had
reasonable grounds to arrest mr. correia and ms. hamilton. if those grounds are
lacking, then the warrantless searches incident to arrest are not justified.

section 495
of the
criminal code
authorizes a peace officer to arrest a person if the officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that the person has committed or is about to commit an
indictable offence. the officer’s grounds must be both subjectively and
objectively reasonable. the objective grounds are to be assessed based on the
totality of circumstances and from the perspective of a reasonable person standing
in the shoes of the police officer (
r v storrey,
1990 canlii 125 (scc), 1 scr 241 at pp
250-251;
r v canary,
2018 onca 304
at paras
21-30
).

“reasonable and probable grounds” is a higher
standard than “reasonable suspicion” in that it requires a credibly-based
probability rather than possibility of crime. however, police are not required
to make out a
prima facie
case before making an arrest (
r v debot,
1989 canlii 13 (scc), 2 scr 1140 at p 1166;
r v chehil,
2013 scc 49
at para
27;
canary,
supra,
at para
23
).
evidence of detective trottier

detective trottier was the officer who formed
the grounds for arrest. he testified about the information he had received
which led to this investigation. i heard no evidence with respect to the
provenance of this information or its reliability, but this is of no importance
because the crown does not rely on that information as forming part of the
basis for detective trottier’s grounds for arrest.

detective trottier indicated that he relied on
the following factors in forming his grounds to arrest the accused for
possession for the purpose of trafficking:
a)
in december 2022, detective trottier conducted
surveillance during a drug investigation with an opp guns and gangs unit out of
ottawa. during that surveillance, he made observations of mr. correia and his
youth associate at a separate residence in pembroke that was known to him for
illicit drug trafficking. he testified that they had obtained a ride from an
individual in pembroke, travelled to ottawa making short duration stops at
areas known to officers to be associated with illicit drugs, then returned back
to pembroke. in cross-examination, detective trottier testified that that
surveillance took place over a period of approximately 8 hours and that no
enforcement action had been taken at that time.
b)
mr. correia, ms. hamilton and their youth
associate were located in the morning of june 21, 2023 at 80 hunter street in
pembroke, in the area of unit 2, which the officer described as an address
known to police as being part of the drug subculture and the location of an
overdose death.
c)
ms. hamilton was known to detective trottier as
a person associated with the drug subculture in pembroke.
d)
the three individuals travelled by motor vehicle
to ottawa via highway 17, but took a circuitous route through renfrew, making
no stops, which the officer described as a being consistent with a “heat
check,” that is, an attempt to evade or detect police surveillance.
e)
once in ottawa, mr. correia and his youth
associate were observed exiting the vehicle on bullman street. mr. correia then
is observed exiting 8 bullman street and getting into a car with a quebec
licence plate. mr. correia was in that vehicle for approximately one minute. he
then went back into 8 bullman street. detective trottier said that this
residence was not of any particular significance but described the area as
being one associated with illicit drugs.
f)
after mr. correia and the youth associate left 8
bullman, ms. hamilton drove them to the area of catherine street, ottawa and
parked. they remained in the car for approximately 30 minutes.
g)
after leaving catherine street, they returned to
the area of pinehurst avenue and bullman street. two other individuals exited 8
bullman street and walked towards ms. hamilton’s car. everyone, including the
two other individuals, got into the car, which was then followed to a garage on
somerset street, not too far from bullman street. at the garage, the youth
associate got into a second car. both cars then returned to 8 bullman street.
h)
ms. hamilton, mr. correia and the youth
associate then went to a building on the outskirts of chinatown in ottawa. they
attended an address, but the surveillance team was unable to see exactly where
they were. they remained at this address between 20 minutes and an hour.
i)
when they left this address, they travelled back
through ottawa towards highway 17. at some point, the vehicle did a u-turn of
sorts through a convenience store area. detective trottier described the u-turn
as a possible “heat check.”

detective trottier testified that in his
experience the short meeting in the car with the quebec plate outside of 8
bullman street and then the travel to and time spent waiting on catherine
street indicated that an order or payment was made for a substance. the
departure from that address was consistent with waiting for the substance to be
weighed or measured. the return to that area and then attending a second
location, in his experience, was consistent with the point in the chain where
they obtained the substance.

it is unclear to me from the evidence whether
the second location referred to by detective trottier is the garage on somerset
street or the building on the outskirts of chinatown.

the officer further testified that based on the
totality of the factors listed above, his experience and the fact that they had
not stopped at any commercial businesses in the city of ottawa, he formed
grounds to believe that mr. correia, ms. hamilton and the youth associate had
travelled from pembroke to ottawa to pick up drugs and return to pembroke.

in cross-examination, constable trottier
conceded that the there had been stops at commercial businesses, including stops
at the tim horton’s in cobden, the garage on somerset street, and a quickie
mart in ottawa.

with respect to his experience, detective
trottier testified that he had been a police officer since december 2017. at
the time of the arrest, he had been with the scu for approximately one year. when
he joined that unit, detective trottier completed some courses on recruitment
of confidential informers and a three-week surveillance course. during his
first year in the scu he would have used his surveillance skills almost daily,
or at least multiple times a week. he has also been involved in investigations
where he was strictly part of a surveillance team.

detective trottier acknowledged in cross-examination
that in his experience a hand-to-hand transaction is usually quicker than ten
minutes. when defence counsel put to him that traffickers do not normally hang
out with their customers, the officer said that it could depend on whether the
parties are known to one another.

he further acknowledged in cross-examination
that he did not see any money or drugs during surveillance.
analysis

defence did not take any issue with detective
trottier’s credibility. he testified in a straightforward and forthright
manner. it is common ground that detective trottier possessed the requisite
subjective grounds for arrest. the only issue to be determined is whether those
grounds were objectively reasonable.

do the factors relied on by detective trottier
viewed through the lens of an officer with his training and experience and viewed
in totality amount to objectively reasonable grounds to believe that mr.
correia and ms. hamilton possessed drugs for the purpose of trafficking? in my
view, they do not.

with respect to detective trottier’s prior
observations of mr. correia over a period of eight hours in december 2022,
there is very little detail as to what those observations were, apart from a
general statement that the behaviour was similar to that observed on june 21,
2023. this behaviour occurred six months prior to the june 2023 investigation
and did not lead to any enforcement action. i find that very little weight can
be placed on these prior observations given the lack of detail, their staleness
and the lack of any enforcement action related to them.

with respect to detective trottier’s assertion
that the address of 80 hunter street in pembroke is associated with the drug
subculture, it also falls short. there are very few details about the address’s
connection to drug subculture other than a generic statement that there were
occurrences of suspicious activity and an overdose death, the date of which the
officer could not recall. the officer was not aware who was living there at the
time of the investigation. there was no indication as to whether the purported
suspicious activity was drug related and no information was provided with
respect to any drug investigations,
controlled drugs and substances act
search warrants or charges related to that address. i would not say that this
factor has no value, however, its value is limited.

with respect to the two ‘heat checks,” i accept
the officer’s evidence that the circuitous route through renfrew could be consistent
with an attempt to evade surveillance. the officer, having done a year of
surveillance, is well placed to draw that inference and he is not required to
rule out every other possible exculpatory explanation (
r v chehil,
2013 scc
49
at para
34
). this is a factor that can be considered in reviewing the
totality of the circumstances.

the second possible heat check was the u-turn
near the convenience store when the car was en route back to pembroke. the
officer was equivocal in his evidence about this u-turn. while he stated that
this u-turn appeared to be a heat check, he immediately conceded that the
accused could have been lost. as a result, i find that it is of limited use in
the analysis.

with respect to ms. hamilton’s purported
connection to the drug subculture, once again, very few details were provided
about what that connection was other than a generic statement that she was
involved in several different occurrences that were drug related. in cross-examination,
detective trottier confirmed that ms. hamilton had not been charged in relation
to those occurrences. no other details were provided with respect to the types
of occurrences or the dates of those occurrences. this lack of detail limits
the value of this information.

moreover, in cross-examination, the officer
confirmed that he was aware that ms. hamilton was known to be a taxi driver
employed by a legitimate taxi company in pembroke. in my view, this evidence
detracts from the officer’s grounds to arrest ms. hamilton.

then there are the surveillance observations
made of the various stops in ottawa. as noted above, detective trottier
asserted that the pattern of the stops made in ottawa were consistent with an
order or payment of drugs being made, with the buyer waiting for the order to
be ready and then picking up at a second location. he also noted that the area
of 8 bullman street was an area known to be involved in illicit drug
trafficking. those observations in combination with his assertion that the
accused did not go to any commercial businesses contributed to his grounds.

in cross-examination, detective trottier
conceded that the accused did attend at commercial businesses including the
garage and at least one stop at a convenience store. he clarified that when he said
there were no stops at commercial businesses, he meant clothing, leisure and
entertainment businesses. no explanation was given as to why it was significant
that the individuals had not stopped at businesses. as a result, this
information is of little value.

with respect to the area of 8 bullman street
being associated with drug trafficking, detective trottier testified that the
particular address of 8 bullman street was not of significance, but rather the
area was. there was no detail provided as to how big the area was or why it was
an area that was involved in drug trafficking. the evidence with respect to
this is thin and it is of little value. see
r v brown,
2012 onca 225
at
para
18
and
r v hariraj,
2014 onsc 6875
at para
110.

as to the pattern of stops made being consistent
with individuals traveling to ottawa to pick up drugs to bring back to pembroke,
i must consider whether the officer’s experience is such that the inference he
draws is objectively reasonable. with respect, i am unable to conclude that is
the case.

detective trottier had been in the scu for about
a year at the time of this investigation. he testified that he used his
surveillance skills routinely. officer o’dacre testified that the scu conducted
both property crime and drug investigations.

there was no detailed evidence about how many of
detective trottier’s investigations were drug investigations and how much
surveillance was drug related. detective trottier offered no explanation as to
why the pattern of behaviour observed was consistent with a drug trafficking
transaction.

in fact, he testified in cross-examination that in
december 2022, a mere six months earlier, he was not educated enough to have
known what the significance of those types of observations was. i glean from his
testimony that in june 2023 he felt that he had sufficient experience to
appreciate the significance of such observations. however, i do not have any
evidence as to what experience or education he gained in those six months apart
from general statements that he conducted surveillance.

with respect to assessing an officer’s
experience, the supreme court stated in
chehil, supra,
at paragraph
47:
evidence as to
the specific nature and extent of such experience and training is required so
that the court may make an objective assessment of the probative link between
the constellation of factors relied on by the police and criminality. the more
general the constellation relied on by the police, the more there will be a
need for specific evidence regarding police experience and training.

given the limited information of value and the
general nature of the observations made during surveillance, i find that i do
not have enough specific evidence as to the nature and extent of detective trottier’s
experience as a drug investigator to conclude that he is able to draw the
inference he does in respect of the pattern of travel between pembroke and
ottawa as being consistent with a drug transaction.

the crown urged me to consider the importance of
the reality of what occurs in rural communities and how it is different than
larger centres. he argued that in small communities, drugs are coming in from
larger communities. i accept that this is a valid proposition. i also appreciate
that drug trafficking is a clandestine business that is often difficult to
detect and investigate. the difficulty i have, however, is that these propositions
are not grounded in the evidence before me. indeed, when the crown asked
detective trottier whether it was relevant to his grounds that the two
individuals were not from the area (i.e., pembroke), he testified that it was
only relevant to the identification of those individuals.

given the lack of detail in respect of many of
the factors relied upon by detective trottier, the lack of detail in respect of
his drug investigation experience, as well as the lack of explanation as to why
the pattern of behaviour observed was consistent with drug trafficking, i find
that the officer’s grounds were not objectively reasonable in this case.

as a result, there were breaches of mr.
correia’s and ms. hamilton’s
section 8
and
9
charter
rights. their
detentions and arrests were unlawful, as were the seizures of the cocaine,
methamphetamine and other items.
admission of the evidence would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute

i now must consider whether the evidence that
was obtained in a manner that infringed rights guaranteed by the
charter
ought to be excluded pursuant to
section 24(2)
of the
charter. in so
doing, i am to apply the framework set out by the supreme court in
r v grant,
2009 scc 32.

the first consideration is the seriousness of
the
charter
-infringing state conduct.

defence counsel conceded that there was no bad
faith on detective trottier’s part. i agree that the officer was acting in good
faith. however, the law of warrantless arrest is well settled. here we have no
novel legal issue or unchartered legal waters; the police are expected to know
what the law is (
r v le,
2019 scc 34
). as a result, this factor
militates towards exclusion of the evidence.

next, i must consider the impact of the breaches
on mr. correia and ms. hamilton.

the crown, in its factum, states an
acknowledgement that the impact of a non-
charter
compliant arrest and
search is always serious.

the detention and arrest took place on highway
17, a busy and public area. the roadside searches of mr. correia’s and ms.
hamilton’s persons were inherently intrusive, though there was no evidence that
the searches were demeaning to their dignity. the search of the vehicle was
less intrusive given the lower expectation of privacy in a vehicle.

i find that the invasions of privacy and liberty
are not minor or technical in nature and are therefore serious.

defence counsel asserted that mr. correia had
also been strip searched at the station. i heard no evidence in respect of
this; likely because nothing was found as a result of that search. the crown
did not refute this assertion in his submissions. if there was a strip search,
that would put the impact of the breaches on mr. correia’s at the more serious
end of the spectrum.

this factor also tends towards exclusion of the
evidence.

finally, i must consider society’s interest in
adjudication of the case on its merits. this factor militates in favour of
admission of the evidence because without this evidence, the crown’s case would
be gutted. i agree with the crown that these are serious charges given the
nature and quantity of cocaine that was intended for distribution in a rural
community.

when i weigh the three factors, i find that both
the first and second factors weigh in favour of exclusion and that the third
factor, while weighing in favour of admission, does not tip the balance in this
case. as a result, i find that the admission of the seized evidence would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute.
conclusion

mr. correia’s and ms. hamilton’s application is
granted. their section 8 and 9
charter
rights were violated. all items
seized from them and from ms. hamilton’s vehicle are excluded pursuant to
section 24(2)
of the
charter.
released: february 18, 2025
signed:
justice christa reccord