source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj291/2025oncj291.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. rathore, 2025 oncj 291
date: 
2025 05 28
court
file no.: toronto 22-12000239
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
jawad rathore and vince petrozza
before
justice d. moore
reasons
for judgment released on may 28, 2025
scott patterson and vallery bayly................................................. counsel
for the crown
scott k. fenton................................................ 
counsel for the accused jawad rathore
gerald chan and dan goudge..................... 
counsel for the accused vince petrozza
d. moore j.:

mr. rathore and mr. petrozza each face a single count
of fraud over $5,000 contrary to
s. 380
of the
criminal code. the charge
period is january 31, 2011 to july 29, 2015.

mr. rathore and mr. petrozza are, of course, presumed innocent of the
charge against them. the burden in this case rests upon and remains with the
crown throughout to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. rathore and/or mr.
petrozza committed the offence charged. mr. rathore and mr. petrozza do not
have to prove anything, rather the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
all the essential elements of the offence.

the supreme court of canada has set out the standard of proof beyond a
reasonable doubt in the cases of r. v. starr

and r. v. lifchus

as being the highest standard known to our legal system. although the crown
need not prove its case to an absolute certainty, as that test would be
impossibly high, the standard of reasonable doubt is much closer to absolute
certainty that it is to the civil standard of balance of probabilities. when
dealing with a determination of mr. rathore and mr. petrozza’s liberty no
lesser standard would suffice.
a. overview

mr. rathore and mr. petrozza were the operating minds
behind an organization i will refer to as fortress. fortress was in the business
of raising funds for construction projects through the investment vehicle of
syndicated mortgages. it was also at times a partial or full owner of the corporation
that owned the construction projects (sometimes referred to as the developer).

syndicated mortgages are an investment vehicle whereby
investors pool their funds together to lend their money in the form of a
mortgage that is registered as a charge on title to the property. each investor
holds a portion of the amount of the charge that corresponds to their
investment. the investors are lenders in these transactions, the developer is
the borrower.

fortress’ business was focused on filling a need for
financing during the early stages of a development. the financing was to be
used to assist the developer in getting the project to a stage where it would
qualify for construction financing through an institutional lender.

fortress marketed these syndicated mortgages as an
investment product to the public. syndicated mortgages are regulated
transactions,
and each party to the transaction needs to be represented by a licenced
mortgage broker. fortress acted on behalf of the borrower/developer and was
represented in most transactions by the mortgage brokerage centro/bdmc. the investor/lenders were in
most cases represented by three brokerages set up primarily to handle these
transactions, collectively referred to during the trial as the “f brokers”: fmp
mortgage investments inc, ffm capital inc., and fds brokers services inc.. each
of these brokerages employed individual licenced brokers who dealt directly
with the investor/lenders.

the f brokers would locate investors through referrals,
advertising, and the conducting of informational seminars/presentations/conferences. 
fortress was involved in advertising, educating the f brokers about the
available offerings, the details of the transactions, and providing brochures and
other promotional materials to be used or referenced in the seminars/presentations/conferences
or other meetings with lenders. fortress created the structure of the offering
and have admitted in the agreed statement of fact to knowledge of the information,
forms, and documents provided to lenders describing the project, the risks
associated with the mortgages, and other matters. documentation provided to
lenders was quite voluminous and the parties have filed all of the primary
documents for each project, although not the specific forms completed by each
investor, just a selection of same. in particular, this documentation included
a form 9d which is a form required by the law society of ontario that was completed
with each lender during the provision of independent legal advice by a lawyer
as well as the financial securities commission of ontario (fsco)
investor/lender disclosure form required by regulation to be completed by the lender
with their individual licenced broker.

fortress’ business model was overall very successful,
this
financing offered by fortress to developers was designed to carry the
construction projects through the early stages of the projects before the
developers were able to obtain construction financing from institutional
lenders. fortress was involved in raising approximately $920,000,000 by way of
syndicated mortgage loans for approximately 25 different developers. rathore
and petrozza, through fortress, were involved in financing approximately 80
construction projects that resulted in the construction of approximately 5,300
residential units and approximately 1,700 commercial units.


many of the syndicated mortgage loans [
sml
s] were completed and “exited” (whether through ultimate completion
of the project or though another entity taking over the project or land and
repaying the investors/lenders’ interests as part of the transaction) with the investors/lenders
being paid back their principal and interest in full as well as a bonus
completion return. unfortunately for the investors/lenders involved, some projects
did not exit successfully and they lost money. the rcmp began an investigation
in 2016 into fortress and related individuals and entities, ultimately leading
to the charge before the court.
b. history of the proceedings

mr. rathore and mr. petrozza were initially charged with one count
of fraud over $5,000 and one count of secret commissions contrary to
sections 380
and
426
of the
criminal code. at the outset of the trial the accused
brought an application for particulars which i granted. additional particulars
were furnished providing that:
both
counts
(fraud
and
secret
commissions)
pertain
to
one
or
more
of
four
projects:
(i) colliers, (ii) crates, (iii) skycity,
or
(iv) harmony village.
the
fraud
count
is
particularized
to
the
following:
(i)
misrepresenting
to
the
public the
valuation or
appraisal
of security or property, or
(ii)
misrepresenting
to
the
public
how
investor funds
would
be
used, diverted, or secured,
specifically by failing
to disclose fees that
jawad
rathore,
vincent petrozza, or their companies were
taking from investor funds.

on january 27, 2025 the crown entered a stay of proceedings with
respect to the secret commissions count. the crown also ultimately decided it
was not seeking a conviction with respect to the crates and harmony village
projects, leaving only the colliers and sky city projects as the
actus reus
for the remaining count of fraud over.

viva voce
evidence on the trial proper commenced
october 28, 2024 and continued somewhat intermittently over 11 days concluding
january 27, 2025. the defence did not call any evidence. submissions were heard
april 1-3, 2025.
c. the law

there is little, if any, dispute between the parties with respect to
the law of fraud. it was largely settled decades ago by the decision of the
supreme court of canada in r. v. théroux.

the elements of the offence of fraud are:
1)
an act of deceit, a falsehood, or some other fraudulent conduct;
2)
deprivation or risk of deprivation to another caused by the
dishonest act;
3)
subjective knowledge of the dishonest act; and
4)
subjective knowledge that the dishonest act could cause deprivation
or risk of deprivation.

the first two elements constitute the
actus reus
of the
offence, the latter two the
mens rea.
d. the subject projects

(a) colliers

colliers
was launched in october 2011 by mady developments, through a single purpose
corporation, mady collier centre ltd. (“
mady collier
”).

on
june 15, 2012, a letter of intent was executed by frdi and mady collier
regarding the financing of colliers, followed by the execution of a development
loan agreement on july 17, 2012.

on
january 30, 2015, mady collier applied for creditor protection under the
companies
creditors arrangement act, r.s.c. 1985, c. c-36. at the time, construction
of the concrete structure was complete but substantial work remained.

on
april 8, 2015, the court approved a process proposed by the mady collier’s
court-appointed monitor to seek a sale of the project.

on
october 16, 2015, mady collier and fortress collier centre ltd.—a single
purpose corporation incorporated by fortress to purchase colliers—entered into
an agreement of purchase and sale under which fortress collier centre ltd.
agreed to purchase colliers from mady collier for $32,700,000.00.

morrison
financial realty corporation is a private mortgage financer and financed the
construction of colliers for a $60,000,000 mortgage that stood in priority to
the smls on the project. when fortress collier centre ltd. defaulted on this
loan and listed the property for sale in july 2018, morrison financial
transferred the property to morison financial realty corporation for
$18,457,000.

morrison
realty completed construction of colliers which is now called the lakeview
corporate centre.
(b) sky city

on
july 27, 2012, petrozza agreed to purchase the property located at 245 graham
ave., winnipeg, mb, in trust for a company to be incorporated.

subsequently,
a single purpose company, 6566074 manitoba inc. (the “
skycity project co.
”)
was incorporated to own and develop the skycity project. the skycity project
co. was 50% owned by mady winnipeg 2013 inc., with fortress winnipeg 2013 inc.
(“
fortress winnipeg
”) owning the other 50% of the shares. rathore held
80% of the shares in fortress winnipeg, with petrozza holding the other 20%.

on
may 10, 2023, mady development corporation and fortress winnipeg entered into a
joint venture agreement, under which fortress winnipeg and mady development
corporation agreed to split the profits of skycity evenly between them. as a
part of the joint venture agreement, fortress winnipeg agreed to obtain all
financing for skycity, while mady development corporation agreed to act as construction
manager, for which it would be paid a fee in addition to its share of the
profits for the project.

after
mady development corporation began experiencing financial difficulties, mady
winnipeg 2013 inc. agreed to sell its shares in the skycity project co. to
fortress winnipeg in january 2015.

on
october 13, 2020, the priority mortgage holder on the property, 11615467 canada
ltd. issued a notice of sale, seeking the repayment of outstanding amounts to
it. on march 25, 2021, a public auction was held, however, no offers were made
to purchase the property. the property was subsequently sold in a private
transaction for an amount that was less than the amount owning to 11615467
canada ltd. under the priority mortgage.

construction
never began at the skycity site and deposits were returned to condo buyers.
e. the evidence

in addition to the
viva voce
evidence i have a vast amount of
material filed on consent of the parties. i cannot say enough about how hard
counsel have worked together to narrow and focus the issues and organize the
material into a manageable form. this trial could easily have taken many, many
months of scarce and valuable court time and the public has been very well
served by the collective and collaborative efforts of counsel.

having had the benefit of the excellent written and oral submissions
of the parties there is very little in dispute between the parties about the
evidence in this case. unlike most criminal cases, the credibility and
reliability of the
viva voce
witnesses is not much in dispute.

although the witnesses were testifying about events that occurred in
some cases more than a decade previously raising obvious reliability concerns,
those concerns were almost always allayed by the documentary evidence that was
prepared at the time of the events and provided a reliable record of what
occurred as a more than adequate substitute for the perfectly understandable gaps
left by the frailties of human memory.

where the evidence is not disputed there is no need for me to make
findings in relation to that evidence and i will thus not extensively review
the entirety of the evidence at trial in this judgment. i will, however, make
findings with respect to the evidence of three witnesses whose evidence on
particular points is somewhat contested. i will also note the absence of
evidence in certain areas.

mr. john filice provided an opinion of value that was used as the
basis for the syndicated mortgages in relation to the colliers project (and
many other projects that are not the subject of charges). i have significant
credibility concerns with respect to his claim that he did not have any
knowledge that his opinions were going to be provided to investors in
syndicated mortgage loans. it is directly contradicted by contemporaneous
email communications and other documents. i generally found his testimony to
be self-serving and an after the fact attempt to justify and/or excuse his
actions and perhaps to shield himself from criminal or civil liability. i thus
cannot accept his evidence unless it is corroborated by other evidence that i
do accept or not disputed by the parties.

mr. glen may-anderson was the president and principal broker of the
fds brokerage. he was also its chief compliance officer. i generally found
his evidence to be credible. unlike mr. filice he did not appear to be trying
to portray himself after the fact in a particularly positive light. there were
a few areas of his evidence however, such as his purported lack of awareness of
the offering memoranda, that were contradicted by contemporaneous email
correspondence. he was, of course, testifying about events that occurred many
years previously. i do not find that he was intentionally lying or trying to
mislead the court, but i do think his recollection of the events was not
entirely accurate. where his
viva voce
evidence is contradicted by contemporaneous
reliable evidence i accept the contemporaneous evidence and reject his
viva
voce
evidence.

mr. greg puklicz was the project manager at mady on the collier
project. he prepared a monthly “management team report” sent to a variety of
parties updating the progress of the project in a variety of areas. some of
these reports referenced the funds raised for mady by the smls. they were
described as, “an $11 million participating equity loan was closed with
fortress real capital and their investors in august 2012. the term of the loan
is 24 months with a 6 month extension option with at least 3 months prior
written notice. the investors will receive 50% of the project profit and have
registered a $16.9 million mortgage on the property.”

these monthly reports were altered by mr. petrozza and distributed
to the investor/lenders without referencing the $11 million/$16.9 million
discrepancy. mr. puklicz knew that mr. petrozza was going to alter the reports
and distribute them to the fortress investors. he disputed that he knew
exactly what in the report was going to be altered. he testified that the $11
million referred to his “capital stack” and that even though colliers did
receive the full $16.9 million and authorized the disbursement of the funds
that brought the amount down to $11 million, this reporting was somehow in line
with generally accepted accounting principles (gaap).

based on my review of the email exchanges between mr. petrozza and
mr. puklicz i find that either mr. puklicz actually knew exactly what mr.
petrozza was changing in the report or he just did not care to know. either is
certainly possible. i also find that describing the transaction as “an $11
million participating equity loan” is not an accurate and truthful
description. collier received $16.9 million and a mortgage was registered in
that amount. the investor/lenders loaned collier $16.9 million, not $11
million.

finally, there is an absence of evidence that might (or
might not) have been material to the issues i must decide. i have not been
provided with any expert opinion evidence whatsoever at this trial. i have not
heard from an expert in forensic accounting, or property valuations, or the
construction industry, or financial instruments. i am thus left with my own
general knowledge of financial matters to try to assess the transactions in
this case.

i also do not have the financial records of fortress. i do not know
what their expenses were for salaries, advertising or anything else to assess
the reasonableness of the fees charged. i do not know what fortress’ net
income was. although some reference was made to personal expenses being paid
out of fortress-related bank accounts, i do not know if these expenses were
treated as draws against equity or dividends, or salary compensation, or
repayment of a shareholder loan, or something else. i do not have income tax
returns or other accounting records to show how revenue, expenses, and equity
were classified for tax purposes. i do know through the tranche schedules what
monies were received by fortress from the smls, but that is all i know.
e. analysis

despite the volume of evidence in this case, my resolution of the
issues is really quite simple. the crown has two theories of liability. the
evidence on these issues is factually quite narrow and focused.
(a) non-disclosure of
up front fees

fortress was in the business of raising funds for developers. they
entered into agreements with the developers to be paid for raising those
funds. the developers were sophisticated market actors able to assess whether
the fees were reasonable or not, and would have been aware of other fundraising
options and able to make informed choices based on comparison with those other
options.

although somewhat complicated in the sky city project by fortress
also being the developer, the fees charged appear to be in line with other projects
where fortress was not the developer, or at least i do not have any evidence that
the fees were disproportionate or out of line compared to other projects. with
respect to colliers, fortress’s takeover of the project occurred after the
charge period so it is the agreement with mady that governed at the relevant
time.

the borrower paid fortress’s fees. the lender did not. raising
funds was part of moving the projects forward, which was what the funds raised
by the loans were supposed to do. the borrower owed to the lender the full
amount of the loan plus interest. the fees paid to fortress did not reduce the
amount owing to the lenders by the borrower. although the disclosure of the
fees in the sml transactions was somewhat obfuscated and certainly less fulsome
and clear than in the offering memoranda, i find that there was no obligation
to disclose the fees at all. the fees were a matter between fortress and the
borrower.

as noted earlier, i do not find that removing reference to the $11
million/$16.9 million discrepancy in the management team reports was false or
misleading.

accordingly, i find that the crown has not established beyond a
reasonable doubt that mr. rathore and mr. petrozza committed fraud by
“misrepresenting to the public how investor funds would be used, diverted, or
secured, specifically by failing to disclose fees that jawad rathore, vincent
petrozza, or their companies were taking from investor funds.” as
particularized.
(b) misrepresentations
of value

mr. rathore and mr. petrozza were in the business of raising funds
through syndicated mortgages. they offered these smls to the public. mortgages
are a relatively secure form of loan since they are registered on title to real
property. the effect of this registration is that the borrower cannot sell the
property to anyone without first discharging (repaying) the monies owed to have
the charge removed. additionally, if the borrower defaults on the loan the
lender can force a sale of the property in order to recoup the monies owed.

based on the evidence of the investor/lenders mr. straw, ms. frei,
ms. mcdowell, ms. gasner and mr. jiang, fortress’ own promotional material, and
my own common sense and general non-expert business knowledge, from the sml lender’s
perspective there are three key factors in making a decision to lend money:
(i)
rate of return – how much profit will i make on
my investment and how does that rate of return compare to other investments i
might make?
(ii)
credit worthiness – how likely is it that the
borrower is going to be able to repay the loan?
(iii)
security – in the event of default can i recoup the
money lent from the sale of the property?

as part of each sml transaction (on both the colliers and sky city
projects), the details of the transaction were set out in a variety of forms
completed by the lender with the broker and independent counsel. key to the
crown’s theory of the case are the fsco investor/lender disclosure form and the
form 9d.

i except a chart from the crown’s factum of the relevant portions of
each form below:
collier
skycity
fsco
5.
appraisal:
5.
appraisal:
investor/lender
disclosure
form
…
an
appraisal
has
been
done
on
…
an
appraisal
has
been
done
on
the
property
…
appraised
“as
is”
the
property
…
appraised
“as
is”
value: 21,840,090.00
value: 18,000,000.00
…
…
date of
appraisal: july 17, 2012
date of
appraisal: may 17 2013
name and address of
appraiser:
name and address of
appraiser:
john
filice,
cushman&
jeff
cheong
&
kevin
ferguson
wakefield ltd.
of
legacy
global
merchantile
partners limited
6. loan to value ratio (according
to information from borrower)
6. loan to value ratio (according
…
to information from borrower)
appraised
“as
is”
value:
(from
…
part a) $21,840,090.00
appraised
“as
is”
value:
(from
loan
to
“as
is”
value:
(c/d
x
part a) $18,000,000.00
100) 85.00%
loan
to
“as
is”
value:
(c/d
x
projected
value:
(where
100) 88%
appropriate) $ [left blank]
projected
value:
(where
loan
to
“projected
value”
ratio:
appropriate) $ [left blank]
(c/f x 100) 85.00%
18
loan
to
“projected
value”
ratio:
(c/f x 100) 88.00%
19
18
investor witness documents, tab 1, frei fsco ild, pdf
pp. 48-49.
19
investor witness
documents, tab 2, gasner fsco ild, pdf pp. 47-48.
law society 9d form
i am satisfied that the approximate and
current
 value
of
the
property
against
which
my investment
has
been
secured
is
$21,840,090.00.
the
means
taken to determine said value was a
 letter of opinion completed by john filice, cushman & wakefield ltd.
 dated july 17,
2012.
20
i am satisfied that the approximate
and
current
market
value
of the property against which my investment has been secured is
 $18,000,000.00. the means taken to determine said value was a letter of
 opinion authored by kevin ferguson & jeff cheong of legacy global
 mercantile partners ltd. dated may 17 2013.
21
20
investor witness documents, tab 1, frei 9d form, pdf p. 6.
21
investor witness documents, tab 2, gasner 9d form, pdf p. 5.

fortress held out the opinions of value of mr. filice and mr. cheong
in these documents as appraisals of “as is” value and current value/current
market value. based on all the evidence i find beyond a reasonable doubt that
they were not appraisals, they did not show the “as is” value, and mr. cheong
and mr. filice were not certified appraisers. they did not demonstrate the current
value or current market value in the sense of the amount of money that could
likely be obtained in the event of a forced sale as a result of default on the
loan, rather at best they showed what another developer might possibly pay for
the land if they planned to take over the project and see it through to
completion. since the loan would only go into default if the project was in
trouble, valuations based on a project takeover with assumptions of a positive
outlook on the project as a whole are unlikely to be accurate or appropriate estimates
of recoupable value in the event of a forced sale.

the opinions of value were used to calculate the loan to value ratio
(ltv). most lay people, and the investor/lenders in this case, likely would
have interpreted this calculation as similar to calculating the equity in your home. 
indeed in promotional material fortress drew precisely that analogy. no bank
would ever give someone a mortgage for more than 100% of the value of the home,
and they usually require there be at least 10% equity in the home. thus ltvs
of 90% or less appear reasonable. in their promotional material fortress held
out that their ltv was “typically” even lower, 75%.

for both the colliers and sky city projects fortress was in
possession of appraisals done by certified aaci appraisers that appraised the
value of the lands as much lower than the opinions of value: $7.2 million for
colliers and two separate appraisals based on somewhat different methods and
assumptions of $5.9 million and $11 million for sky city. i find as a fact
based on all the evidence that these values are representative of the “as is”
values of the properties. if these values were used to calculate ltvs they would
have been close to 300% for colliers and between 300-150% for sky city.


the opinions of value were not helpful to investors in determining
what they were held out by fortress as demonstrating: the amount of security they
were actually getting in exchange for the loan. fortress advertised the smls
as secure investments. as a fortress pamphlet stated “this unique type of
security is not available through any other type of product and forms the basis
of fortress real capital’s core strategy:
security,
first and foremost.
”

i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that fortress’ use of the opinions
of value and ltv ratios based on them included falsehoods in the fsco forms,
deceived investors with respect to the actual security they were being given in
the smls, and that the non-disclosure of the actual “as is” value that was
known to fortress amounted to non- disclosure of material facts.

i am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that these acts created
a risk of deprivation for every sml investor/lender and although not the sole
cause of the losses, contributed to their actual deprivation when the projects
were ultimately unsuccessful.

mr. rathore and mr. petrozza are very smart, sophisticated
businessmen. they designed these transactions. their business model would not
have worked if ltv was calculated on an “as is” value. i find beyond a
reasonable doubt that they both intentionally misled investors about the value
of their secured interest in order to induce them into investing. while they
likely hoped that all the projects would be successful and the investors would
be paid back, i find beyond a reasonable doubt that they knew they were putting
investor funds at risk.

i also of course find beyond a reasonable doubt that the amount of
the fraud was over $5,000.

i find mr. rathore and mr. petrozza guilty of fraud over $5,000.
released: may 28, 2025
signed:
justice daniel moore

(2000),
2000 scc 40 (canlii), 147 c.c.c. (3d) 449 (s.c.c.)

(1997),
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 118 c.c.c. (3d) 1 (s.c.c.)

although the formal corporate structure was somewhat more complex than set out
here since the corporate entities are not charged separately and neither
defendant has submitted that the evidence is more or less inculpatory against their
co-accused or that they were not the directing minds behind the organization i
will not review that structure in any detail in these reasons.

under the
securities act, r.s.o. 1990, c.s.5 and the
mortgage
brokerages, lenders and administrators act, 2006 s.o. 2006 c. 29 and
regulations thereto.

centro mortgage inc./building and development mortgages canada inc.

agreed statement of facts [
asf
], exhibit 1, para. 7

1993 canlii 134 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 5

descriptions excerpted from the asf

note that the footnote numbers are from the crown’s factum, not this judgment.

mr. cheong gave 3 opinions of value that increased over time and fortress
arranged for additional smls based on that increasing value. i have used the
may 17, 2013 opinion as an example.