source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj232/2025oncj232.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. kakepetum, 2025 oncj 232
date: 
2025 04 25
kenora
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
cadence
kakepetum
before
justice evelyn j. baxter
heard
on april 10, 17, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on april 25, 2025
james little......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
aaron seib............................................. 
counsel for the accused cadence kakepetum
baxter j.:

(orally) these are my reasons for judgment in
the aggravated assault trial of ms. kakepetum. aggravated assault is a
straight indictable offense. the accused elected to be tried in the ontario
court of justice.

according to an agreed statement of facts
submitted to the court, on august 7, 2022, in the city of kenora, the victim,
marissa spade, was viciously assaulted. marissa spade suffered multiple
serious injuries, including trauma to her face, head and chest areas. she
received a traumatic brain injury that required surgery in winnipeg. a
tracheostomy and feeding tube had to be inserted, and she is still in long term
care in thunder bay. she is expected to have a substantial lifelong cognitive
disability as a result of the aggravated assault. because she had no memory of
the assault, she was unable to give evidence in this case and could not be
called as a witness.

two people were charged. one was a young person
(aj), who cannot be identified. the other person charged is the accused before
the court, cadence kakepetum. the youth has since plead guilty and was sentenced
in youth court.

a trial for ms. kakepetum was commenced in
kenora on february 15, 2024. the court heard evidence from two witnesses. 
however, the trial could not continue before the original presiding justice,
and pursuant to
s. 669.2
of the
criminal code, the trial had to be
recommenced before me. on consent, the parties agreed to file the transcript
of the proceedings from the first day as exhibit 4 and to refile the other
exhibits. moreover, the court was directed to refer to
r.
v.
j.d.,
2022 scc 15, to support the filing of the transcript in the first trial to
recommence the current trial.

therefore, the trial continued on april 10 and
17, 2025 in person before me. ms. kakepetum was in custody.

the parties agreed the injuries sustained by ms.
spade amount to aggravated assault under
s. 268
of the
criminal code.

jurisdiction and date of the offense were
admitted, as was the identity of ms. kakepetum being the person charged and is
the accused before the court.

at issue in this matter is whether ms. kakepetum
participated in the aggravated assault upon marissa spade, which the crown must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt in order to obtain a conviction.
the evidence

kellie or summer twoheart testified on february
15, 2024. she said came upon the scene on august 7, 2022, after walking from
the washroom at the local waterfront pavilion. at the outset, in chief, she
testified she did not have a good memory and wanted to re-read her statement to
refresh her memory (exhibit 4, page 7, line 26), but the crown pressed her for
her independent recollection.

ms. twoheart stated she saw two girls fighting
with her friend, marissa. she described the girls as “stomping” on marissa’s
head. she recognized the youth who was stomping but did not recognize or know
the other girl. she pointed out ms. kakepetum in the prisoner’s dock in court
but could not say she recognized ms. kakepetum otherwise in cross examination
(exhibit 4, page 30).

ms. twoheart stated she saw ms. kakepetum doing
most of the stomping as ms. twoheart was walking toward the area where the
assault was taking place. she said she pushed the youth off ms. spade to stop
the assault, and the other girl was already walking away. she does not recall
saying anything to the two girls. there was a man nearby sitting and watching
the assault, but he, according to ms. twoheart, was not doing or saying
anything, but as the assault ended, he was telling the girls to stop.

ms. twoheart then indicated she helped the
police locate the girls in a nearby alley where they were arrested. she
described the arrest of the girls.

under cross-examination ms. twoheart discussed
her drug addiction and the fact she had been free from drugs for a year at the
time she testified. on the night of the assault, she had been using drugs
throughout the day as was her usual practice at the time to avoid being “dope
sick”.

on the evening of the assault, ms. twoheart
shared a 3.5 gram shot of methamphetamine mixed with opioids with 3 other
people just before she used the washroom and walked up the stairs where the
assault took place. she noted if a person takes “meth” for days on end, it
could result in psychosis and hallucinations. she denied she was in that state
when she saw the assault but did admit using the drugs can impact her
recollection of details (exhibit 4, page 22, line 1-3).

from her vantage from the washroom to the scene
up the walkway steps is at least 100 feet away, possibly more, and it was
getting dark. she heard noises and walked toward the scene she described.

it is noted in exhibit 4 and the recording, ms.
twoheart was a reluctant witness. she was testy, impatient and did not want to
be in court at all. she had to be admonished by the presiding judge of her
requirement to remain in court and complete her evidence. she was properly
subpoenaed to be a witness.

in cross examination ms. twoheart admitted she
could not see from the washroom across the street who was doing what, only that
there was a “commotion” on the stairs. (exhibit 4, pages 26, 27) she also agreed
the youth was doing most of the stomping and that ms. kakepetum was trying to
get the youth to leave with her by grabbing her and trying to pull her away. 
she told the court the girls walked up the stairs to leave the area. (exhibit
4, page 27, line 29)

i did note the city’s cctv footage that was
later played for me clearly shows the 2 girls walk down the stairs, ms.
kakepetum in front, with the youth trailing behind by about 10 steps or more.

ms. twoheart said she went up to the street to
flag down help after seeing how badly hurt her friend was. this is confirmed
by the city’s cctv footage of that street’s view.

the next witness was aj, the 17-year-old youth
who was charged and who plead guilty to committing the aggravated assault on
ms. spade.

aj testified she was drinking beer and walking
around downtown kenora with ms. kakepetum, who she had not known for long on
august 7, 2022. aj said ms. kakepetum asked her if she wanted to beat someone
up to which aj said “no”, but ms. kakepetum said if aj did not then she would
beat her up, so aj said “okay”. aj and ms. kakepetum were walking up the ramp
and saw ms. spade. aj said she grabbed ms. spade, threw her on the ground and
started kicking her body and face, then ms. kakepetum joined in. (exhibit 4,
page 37)

aj said ms. kakepetum was using her right foot
to kick ms. spade in the face. the two of them kicked ms. spade for a couple
of minutes until ms. twoheart came up the ramp saying aj’s name. ms. twoheart
called the police, and the girls “took off” to a nearby alley.

aj said she grabbed and beat up ms. spade, who
she did not know, because she was afraid of ms. kakepetum. she also did not
recall if anyone was nearby where they were beating ms. spade. when they left
the scene, aj said she left the area first, followed by ms. kakepetum.

aj testified ms. kakepetum was wearing an orange
shirt and black shorts that day, while aj was wearing a pink shirt and blue
jean shorts.

under cross examination, aj said she had been
out walking around kenora most of the day drinking beer. she would
occasionally see ms. kakepetum throughout the day, but they did not spend the
whole day together. at some point in the latter part of the day, ms.
kakepetum’s grandfather bought them beer. aj admits she “blacked out” during
some parts of the evening.

according to aj, she and ms. kakepetum kicked
ms. spade to the point there was blood spattering around and on the ground. 
they stopped when they heard someone coming telling them to stop, but aj
stopped and walked away followed by ms. kakepetum. they go up the stairs to
the street and off to back alleys.

aj also agreed that she believed if ms.
kakepetum was the main perpetrator she could get a lighter sentence as she had
not yet been sentenced for this incident when she testified. she told the
court she was afraid of ms. kakepetum and took part in the assault so she would
not be assaulted herself.

it was suggested by defense counsel that aj and
ms. kakepetum were on the stairs drinking with ms. spade and others, and aj was
in a blackout at that point. ms. spade got up to leave, hugged ms. kakepetum,
gave her a kiss goodbye, and as she left, aj ran up to her, grabbed her and
began the assault. ms. kakepetum tried to get aj to stop and to leave by
tugging on her shirt or pulling her away. aj could not agree or disagree as
she said she did not remember what had occurred.

at this point the city’s cctv videos were played
for the witness that showed ms. kakepetum wearing black pants and a green
t-shirt, with aj following behind her wearing a pink shirt and black shorts. 
they are seen walking away from the scene down the stairs and turning left near
the pavilion mentioned earlier. at one point aj is seen on video turning back
to gesture and possibly say something to ms. twoheart who was with the injured
ms. spade.

another video of the alley where the girls were
arrested was played for the witness. it showed aj walk up to a man with ms.
kakepetum walking away from them. aj then grabbed the man, assaulted him and
tried to swing him around, likely to throw him off balance. aj said she did
not remember doing this and that she was in a black out. further, she had not
seen the videos before. once confronted with the videos, aj shut down and did
not answer several of the questions put to her.

as aj left the courtroom she yelled to ms.
kakepetum, “you’re lucky i don’t fucking kill you”. (exhibit 4, page 64)
april 10 and 17, 2025 – trial
continuation

ben chicago kabestra (mr. chicago) was the
crown’s next witness. he was the man sitting on a concrete barrier/ledge on
the side of the stepped walkway and who observed the assault.

mr. chicago described himself as a chronic
alcoholic who generally spends his days walking around kenora, drinking
anything he can “get his hands on” and mingling with others on the streets.

he said nothing unusual happened on august 7,
2022, until the evening when he saw two indigenous girls stomping on a woman’s
head near where he was sitting next to the stairs described earlier.

mr. chicago said he was quite intoxicated but
was adamant he knew what he saw. he did not push the girls away as he was
afraid he could get charged, so he chose to not get directly involved.

in cross examination, mr. chicago could not
identify ms. kakepetum in court, admitting he only learned her name from the
subpoena he was served.

mr. chicago also admitted he usually
periodically blacked out from drinking throughout the day, but if he is given
time to think about things or has heard from others, he can remember things. 
he could not recall seeing ms. twoheart that night. he also said he saw two
girls holding onto each other for leverage as they stomped or kicked ms. spade.
police evidence

the remaining crown witnesses were three police
officers who described the call to the incident, the arrests and the forensic
evidence obtained and processed. the arresting officer testified aj was
combative with him and he had to punch her in the face to gain control of her. 
ms. kakepetum said she told the officer she did not “do anything” when she was
arrested. she also told police aj assaulted ms. spade because she had kissed
ms. kakepetum.

next opp staff sergeant david delorme, regional
manager for forensic identification services, testified. he was the officer
who processed the blood/dna evidence that was sent to the centre for forensic
sciences.

he reviewed and explained the photos taken of
the scene, the accused persons and the items police seized. a photo book,
three biology reports and videos were filed as exhibits.

when the accused and their clothing were
photographed at the police detachment, officer delorme noted aj had blood
spatter on her legs below the knees. her shoes had noticeable blood spatter
stains on the tops, sides, heel areas and soles. he also noted one of aj’s
hands and a finger were swollen.

ms. kakepetum had no visible blood on her
clothing or person save one small blood stain on the outside heel edge of her
right shoe and a small blood stain on her t-shirt. he did not sample or submit
the stain on her shirt. in addition, he noticed a black hair on the shoelace
of one shoe which was sent off to be tested.

the stains were tested by cfs and confirmed to
be marissa spade’s blood. the hair found on ms. kakepetum’s shoe was tested
but no dna could be obtained from it. further, ms. spade, ms. kakepetum and aj
all had black/dark hair.

with respect to photos of the scene, officer
delorme noted the large pool of blood on the ground, which he described as a
“blood letting” and a large, roughly 3 feet radius of blood spatter emanating
from the pool of blood. also visible were shoe impressions that matched aj’s
shoes.
the defense case

ms. kakepetum testified. she denied taking part
in the attack on ms. spade.

according to ms. kakepetum she had been drinking
all day on august 7, 2022 – at first to stop the withdrawal symptoms in the
earlier part of the day, and the rest of the day was to get intoxicated. she
had been living on the streets on and off because her mother did not allow her
to be in her house intoxicated. she was 19 years of age in august 2022.

ms. kakepetum said she had not met aj before
that day but decided to walk around with aj sharing the beer her grandfather
bought for her. she and aj met up with ms. spade and mr. chicago at the stairs
mentioned earlier. they shared some beer, and as ms. spade was leaving, she
hugged and kissed ms. kakepetum. ms. kakepetum knew ms. spade and called her
“aunty” because ms. spade was dating ms. kakepetum’s aunt.

as ms. spade walked away, aj ran after her,
grabbed her by the jacket, swung her around until ms. spade fell to the ground,
whereupon aj began stomping and kicking her in the face, head and chest.

ms. kakepetum described, at one point, seeing aj
kick ms. spade’s head on the left side causing her head to snap to the right
and then seeing a lot of blood “splatter” out of her mouth. at that point ms.
kakepetum said she grabbed aj at the shoulder area trying to get her to stop
and leave. ms. kakepetum said she got scared because she realized the situation
she was in.

she noted mr. chicago was “just sitting there”
not saying or doing anything. ms. kakepetum said she walked away down the
stairs. aj followed behind, and they circled back up toward the street via
another set of stairs toward the alley where they were arrested. she described
feeling like her “buzz” was wearing off.

in the alley she saw aj assault a man. after
that assault, ms. kakepetum tried to calm aj down by giving her more beer. she
was unsure what to do. she noted she wanted to walk away from everyone and to
keep aj from other people as she thought aj might continue assaulting people.

under cross examination, ms. kakepetum explained
she was afraid when ms. twoheart came up to the scene, because it might look
like she was involved given she was standing next to aj. she was trying to get
aj away from ms. spade, and when aj would not immediately leave, ms. kakepetum
walked off, which was when aj decided to follow.
defense closing argument

counsel argued this case requires a
r.
v.
w.d.
 1 s.c.r., analysis, and ms. kakepetum ought to be acquitted
based on the analysis of all three prongs of the
w.d.
test. he pointed
out ms. kakepetum’s evidence was uncontradicted and not successfully
challenged. the credibility and reliability issues with the evidence of the
civilian witness are clear and should convince the court of a reasonable doubt.

ms. kakepetum’s evidence was also supported to
some degree by the evidence of ms. twoheart and mr. chicago. the most
important factor for the defense was the forensic evidence supporting ms.
kakepetum’s version of events.

further, aj’s outburst in court demonstrated her
explosive temper and her inability to control herself, thus adding further
credence to ms. kakepetum’s evidence.
crown closing arguments

crown counsel argued the burden of proof beyond
a reasonable doubt has been met. he argued the civilian witnesses all
testified to seeing two girls assault ms. spade. the blood on ms. kakepetum’s
shoe proves she took part in the assault, but likely not in the stomping on ms.
spade’s head. if she kicked ms. spade on another part of her body, there would
likely be no blood spatter on her clothing.

he conceded aj’s credibility was negatively
impacted by her outburst/threat toward ms. kakepetum in court. he also
acknowledged the other witnesses’ drug and alcohol use may have some impact on
their reliability, but not to the level that would result in acquitting ms.
kakepetum, because the civilian witness evidence is key to this case.

the forensic evidence, while compelling, is not
as vital as defense would have the court believe.

the crown referred to
w.d.,
r.
v.
j.j.r.d.
2006 oj, and
r.
v.
hoohing,
2007 onca 577, to support the position
ms. kakepetum is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
analysis

assault is defined in
s. 265
of the
criminal
code
as the intentional application, or attempt to intentionally apply,
force directly or indirectly to another person without their consent.

an aggravated assault occurs when the assault on
a person results in the person being wounded, maimed, disfigured, or has their
life endangered, as set out in
s. 268
of the
criminal code.

the three-prong test set out in
w.d., and
the further guidance provided in
j.j.r.d.
regarding adequacy of reasons,
are relied upon for the court to analyze and weigh all the evidence received in
this case.

as in
w.d., credibility and reliability
are fundamental matters to be considered on the evidence of the civilian witnesses
and the evidence of the accused in the case at bar. in addition, the forensic
evidence here cannot be ignored. i must consider and weigh all the evidence in
this case in determining whether the crown has met its burden of proof.

the test in
w.d.
is set out as follows:
1.
if i believe the evidence of the accused, i must
acquit.
2.
if i do not believe the testimony of the accused
but am left in reasonable doubt by it, i must acquit.
3.
even if i am not left in doubt by the evidence
of the accused, i must ask myself whether on the basis of the evidence i do
accept, am i convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of the guilt
of the accused.

in addition,
hoohing
at paragraph
15,
instructs the evidence of an accused is not to be considered in isolation of
any evidence led by the crown when conducting a
w.d.
analysis:
the evidence of
any witness, including an accused, may be believable standing on its own, but
when other evidence is given that is contradictory, or casts doubt on the
accuracy or reliability of the witnesses’ evidence, that evidence may no longer
be believable, or in the case of an accused, may no longer raise a reasonable
doubt.

here, the evidence of the three civilian
witnesses is of mixed credibility and reliability. ms. twoheart said at the
outset of her evidence in chief she did not have a good memory. in addition,
on the night of august 7, 2022, she had just taken drugs, and agreed her recall
might also be affected by the drugs she took. further, she gave conflicting
evidence saying in chief it was ms. kakepetum doing the most stomping on ms.
spade’s head, but in cross examination she said it was hard to see who was
doing what to ms. spade given the distance, lighting, and the passage of time.

ms. twoheart said she pushed aj off ms. spade,
and ms. kakepetum was already trying to leave (page 12 of exhibit 4). ms.
twoheart was also mistaken about the direction the girls went when they left
the scene.

aj’s evidence, i find, was self-serving, did not
match the video or forensic evidence, and clearly demonstrates she was trying
to shift some blame to ms. kakepetum. while aj admitted to grabbing and
throwing ms. spade to the ground, and that she also stomped and kicked ms.
spade’s head and face, she tried to say ms. kakepetum stomped on ms. spade’s
face. if that were true, one would expect there to be much more blood on ms.
kakepetum’s shoes and clothes as aj had on hers, especially in light of aj’s
own admission she started the stomping on ms. spade’s head and ms. kakepetum
joined in at some point.

in addition, the videos show aj was not correct
about what direction the girls left the area and who was the first to leave. 
furthermore, aj did not accurately describe ms. kakepetum’s clothing, nor did
she mention she assaulted another person in the alley where she and ms.
kakepetum were arrested. when confronted with the video evidence, she shut
down and did not answer the questions put to her.

aj did not recall mr. chicago being present
during the assault even though she may have been drinking beer with him just
before the attack on ms. spade.

finally, i simply do not believe aj’s evidence
ms. kakepetum wanted to beat people up, and aj complied out of fear of being
beaten up by ms. kakepetum. given aj’s outburst in court, the random assault on
the man in the alley, her resisting police, i find aj’s evidence not
sufficiently credible or reliable. i find it far more probable aj was the
aggressive person of the pair as demonstrated by the other evidence presented.

mr. chicago, the bystander who admitted to being
intoxicated, in the throes of his chronic alcoholism, in and out of blackouts
that day, and whose memory needed time and reminders to come together,
testified he saw two girls hanging onto one another to gain leverage while they
were stomping on ms. spade’s head and face.

he did not recall ms. twoheart being there, nor
would he agree his level of intoxication and the blackouts would affect his
perception and recall. while mr. chicago believed he saw two girls stomping on
ms. spade, i find his memory of the events of that night to be unreliable,
particularly considering the blood evidence i reviewed. he acknowledged being
intoxicated, in and out of blackouts, and having relied on “street chatter” to
assist his recollection.

moreover, mr. chicago did not identify ms.
kakepetum. he did not know ms. kakepetum and did not recognize her in court
except to assume her identity, because she was in the prisoner’s box, and the
name on his subpoena revealed the name of the accused. the frailty of in dock
identification has been commented upon in jurisprudence and scholarly writing
for many years. relying on his evidence and recall would be dangerous given the
seriousness of the charge here.

turning to ms. kakepetum, her evidence is
corroborated by the video, forensic and some of the witness evidence. she gave
details of her movements of that day, who she met, how she shared her alcohol
with others, and what occurred after ms. spade tried to leave the steps where
they were socializing with mr. chicago and possible other people.

her evidence of how aj attacked ms. spade by
grabbing onto her jacket, swinging her around to get her to the ground so she
could stomp on her is supported by the video later showing aj using that same
technique on the man she tried to put to the ground as she assaulted him.

the blood that came out of ms. spade’s mouth
when aj delivered one of the kicks to her face is supported by the photos of
the “blood letting” pool described by officer delorme. the direction of the
blood spatters and the lack of blood on ms. kakepetum’s shoes support her
version of events. if ms. kakepetum was stomping on ms. spade’s head and face,
why is there not more blood on her and her clothes? all the police found on
her shoe was one small drop of blood.

ms. kakepetum knew ms. spade as her “aunty”
given her relationship with ms. kakepetum’s aunt. she had only met aj that
day. it makes no sense she would take part in such a vicious, senseless attack
on her aunt’s partner. ms. kakepetum stated aj attacked ms. spade for the kiss
she gave to ms. kakepetum when she was leaving the area.

the city’s cctv videos also support ms.
kakepetum’s version of events as does the forensic blood evidence. when aj
assaulted the man in the alley, ms. kakepetum is clearly visible on the video
walking away, avoiding the situation.

when she was arrested, ms. kakepetum told police
she didn’t do anything, and that aj attacked ms. spade for kissing her.

the evidence of the other witnesses was not
sufficiently credible or reliable when taken in totality with the forensic
evidence received and weighed and in considering the evidence of ms. kakepetum.
while minor inconsistencies may not diminish the credibility of a witness, a
series of inconsistencies can become quite significant and raise a reasonable
doubt about the reliability of a witness’s evidence, which is what i find
here. for the most part ms. kakepetum’s evidence was unshaken in cross
examination. based on the totality of the evidence i received in this case, i
find that while i do not believe everything ms. kakepetum said, i am left with
reasonable doubt as to whether she took part in the aggravated assault on ms.
spade. the crown has not met its onus here. therefore, i must acquit ms.
kakepetum of the charge of aggravated assault.
released: april 25, 2025
signed:
justice e.j. baxter