source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj259/2025oncj259.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. belk, 2025 oncj 259
date: 
2025 05 12
court
file no.: central east – newmarket 4911- 24-91111431-00
between:
his majesty
the king
— and
—
kay
louise belk
before
justice a. a. ghosh
heard
on april 17, 2025
reasons
for judgment
released
on may 12, 2025
j. kim..................................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
i. donnell........................................................................................ counsel
for the defendant
ghosh j.:
i.
overview:

ms. kay louise belk stabbed her husband while he
slept. no proximate disagreement nor conflict preceded this incident. she was
in a dreamlike state at the time and heard voices compelling her to commit the
act.

ms. belk pleaded not guilty to “attempted
murder”. she agreed to committing the act of stabbing her husband. all parties
jointly proposed that i find ms. belk was not criminally responsible (ncr) for
the offence, by virtue of a mental disorder.

these are my reasons in finding that she was
indeed ncr, due to symptoms of a confirmed major neurocognitive disorder that
prevailed upon her at the time.
ii.
summary of the evidence

on december 15, 2024, at 11:51 p.m., police
attended the belk residence regarding a weapons call. kay louse belk lived
there with her husband, professor russell belk. they were both seventy-nine
years old. their daughter, amy, had been visiting from the states. amy had
called the police to report her mother had stabbed her father.

police arrived to find russell belk lying on the
floor, being tended to by amy. the knives allegedly involved in the incident
were found on the kitchen counter. kay louise belk was arrested by the police,
taken to the police station, then transferred to southlake regional health
centre, pursuant to the mental health act. russell belk was also taken there to
have his injuries addressed.

russell belk provided a statement to the police.
he reported that there was nothing “abnormal” about the conduct of his wife
that day, nor was he aware of any signs she had been hallucinating.

mr. belk had been sleeping “peacefully” when he woke
to feel a sudden pain in his back. he saw his wife holding a knife in each
hand. she demonstrated “super-human strength”, such that he was unable to fend
her off and called for their daughter, who helped “disarm” ms. belk.

during the incident, mr. belk asked ms. belk what
she was doing. she replied, “i’m killing you.” she kept repeating this phrase
to their daughter. once amy got the knives away from ms. belk, things “seemed
to calm down”. she seemed no longer “in a rage”. mr. belk had never seen his
wife in this state, nor had she ever been aggressive before.

the couple usually slept in separate bedrooms,
although they had shared a bed while their daughter was visiting them. there
were no apparent conflicts within the couple, and certainly nothing in the
recent interaction could have portended an unprovoked stabbing. mr. belk
characterized her stabbing him as “very bizarre”.

mr. belk reported that his wife had been on
anti-depressant medication for the past fifty years. she had a history of
suicidal ideation, although she had not expressed any such concerns to him for
the past six months or longer.

mr. belk reported ms. belk had been experiencing
cognitive challenges for approximately three years. she had fallen twice,
likely injuring her head each time, and she received neurosurgery to treat a
subdural hematoma. there were complications from this procedure, and she was
subjected to a second neurosurgical operation. since these injuries, mr. belk
noted that she could “hold a normal conversation… but there are big chunks of
her memory that are gone.”

their daughter amy confirmed to the police that
her mother was not the same after these brain injuries. she observed that her
mother’s memory deteriorated in the evenings, as she seemed to be experiencing
“sun downers”. amy observed that her mother had never been aggressive towards
anyone, and that this incident was “so out of character.”

amy heard her father shouting “kay, why are you
doing this?” then he yelled “amy, amy, come here! amy, come help!” she ran to
their bedroom. amy observed her mother on the floor holding knives in both
hands. her father was in his underwear, attempting to disarm and “subdue” her
mother. there was a stab wound on his back.

amy also demanded to know what her mother was
doing. kay replied, “i’m trying to kill you both.” amy collected the knives and
took them to the kitchen. russell said he felt like he was going to faint, so
amy promptly called 911.

kay remained “very aggressive”, but amy was able
to move her to the sofa as her father lay on the floor. kay was still agitated
as amy rubbed her back and rocked her in an effort to soothe her. kay was upset
by these efforts and said, “don’t rock me like a baby”. she soon calmed down.

kay belk was recorded on the police in-cruiser
camera during transport to the police station, and then later to the hospital. when
asked if she wished to contact duty counsel, she replied “i guess, i don’t
know”. she then asked if she could lie down “for a second”, as she was “going
to faint”. she laid down for the rest of the recording. ms. belk wanted someone
to notify her ailing sister judy of her arrest. her affect appeared somewhat
blunted. she did not show any emotional response during the recording, even
when she was informed of the criminal charge.

the second recording captured the interior of
the police cruiser that transported ms. belk to the hospital. she was silent
for most of the video and showed no emotion. she asked to lie down. after
fifteen minutes, she sat up, examined her injured hands, and asked “will
somebody look at my hand while we’re there? ‘cause it’s bleeding again”.
iii.
victim impact and perspective – russell belk

russell belk sustained a laceration to his right
upper back and superficial lacerations on his left upper thigh and right upper
arm. he had an abrasion on his left hand. he was treated with sutures and
discharged the same day.

a victim impact statement of mr. belk was
referenced, and notably he had asked his wife’s lawyer to read it to the court.
his only remarks emerged from his reply to the request in the victim impact
form to distill any physical impact of the incident: “none. i’m fully recovered
both physically and mentally.”

sensing mr. belk may wish to convey more to me
or the ontario review board, i later further invited mr. belk to share his
related insights or perspectives. he observed:
“it’s been
difficult for these past four months now that i haven’t been able to talk to my
wife and i’m sure it’s been difficult for her as well. so, i’m hoping after the
hearing today that i will be able to visit her and communicate with her and
that i hope she’ll be home soon. i do love her and miss her and i know that’s
mutual.”
iv.
analysis:
a.
uncontested facts and a joint submission for an
ncr finding:

the defence intended to acknowledge the
commission of the criminal act and join the crown in proposing that i find ms.
belk “not criminally responsible”. while a formal plea of “no contest” or
nolo
contendre
is not available in the
criminal code,
“its functional
equivalence has developed in ontario courts.”

prior to arraignment, i conducted an ncr-focused plea inquiry to ensure her
participation in this process was voluntary and informed.


in doing so, i confirmed that ms. belk understood
the consequences of admitting to the criminal act. despite the joint submission
for an ncr finding and the supportive expert opinion, i confirmed with all
parties that the ncr verdict cannot be automatic and is fundamentally a
judicial determination. i further confirmed with ms. belk that she understood
the prospect that, upon an ncr finding, she would likely remain detained and potentially
under the undefined and indeterminate supervision of the ontario review board
(orb).

ms. belk was instructed to plead not guilty upon
arraignment for “attempted murder”. the crown read in agreed upon facts that
ms. belk stabbed her husband. with the assistance of instructed counsel, ms.
belk accepted she committed the act of stabbing her husband.

counsel then jointly submitted that i find she
committed the criminal act, but that i render a verdict that ms. belk was not
criminally responsible (ncr) on account of mental disorder, pursuant to
s.672.34. the report of the assessing forensic psychiatrist was received in
evidence on consent, and both sides waived the right to examine the expert. i
provided summary reasons imposing the ncr verdict, with these reasons to
follow.
b.
the defence of not criminally responsible (ncr)
via mental disorder:

the
s.16
criminal code
defence of ncr
(“not criminally responsible”) provides a defence for a person who committed a
criminal act or omission while suffering from a mental disorder. to avail oneself
of the defence, it must be established on the balance of probabilities that the
mental disorder rendered the person “incapable of appreciating the nature and
quality of the act or omission or of knowing that it was wrong”.


“wrong” in this context means not only legally
wrong, but “morally” wrong. for example, a person may know that an act is
illegal, but the disorder may render them incapable or knowing the act is
morally wrong by societal standards. such a proven impairment would establish
the ncr defence.


the “inquiry focuses not on general capacity to
know right from wrong, but rather on the ability to know that a particular act
was wrong in the circumstances. the accused must possess the intellectual
ability to know right from wrong in an abstract sense. but he or she must also
possess the ability to apply that knowledge in a rational way to the alleged
criminal act.”

c.
ncr – application of the law to the evidence:

all accept that ms. belk was suffering from the
symptoms of a mental disorder at the time she stabbed her husband. it must be
determined whether the disorder prevented her from knowing her actions were
wrong or from appreciating the nature and quality of her actions.

ms. belk reported during the assessment that she
may not have understood her actions or their consequences. the evidentiary
record lends some support to this self-report. one fact may serve to undermine
the proposition that she did not “appreciate the nature and quality” of the act
of stabbing her husband. when mr. belk implored her during the incident to
explain what she was doing by stabbing him, she responsively answered: “i’m
killing you”. this may signal that she may have understood on some level that
by stabbing him, she was doing just as she explained. i need not resolve this.

i accept the force of the unchallenged expert psychiatric
opinion that ms. belk, by virtue of a mental disorder, did not appreciate that
her act was morally wrong. firstly, she met the diagnostic criteria for “major
neurocognitive disorder (moderate severity)”, due to multiple etiologies (alzheimer’s
disease, traumatic brain injury, and vascular disease). there was a palpable
absence of any personality disorder or aggressive traits. the assessors
determined that there was no evidence of malingering, and that her confusion
and memory deficits, displayed both during the incident and the assessment, were
clearly symptoms of disorder.

secondly, ms. belk persuasively reported to the
assessors that she was confused and felt she was in a sleep-like state at the
time of the incident. she reported that she had a “horrifying nightmare and i
said i needed to stab somebody”. she heard “metallic”, mechanical, or robotic
voices compelling her to do so. these voices seemed to be telling her to either
kill “someone” or the “evil one”. ms. belk described feeling compelled to
follow the commands of this voice, without a coherent understanding of her
actions or their consequences.

she then grabbed knives. “russ must have made a
noise. i automatically stabbed him, thinking he was part of the metallic
voices.” she did not recognize the person she was stabbing as her husband.

ms. belk recalled feeling frightened by the noise.
when she was asked about the metallic voices, she replied that she only
recalled that she “had to stab whatever was making that noise”. in doing so,
she thought she was doing something “helpful” in the moment.

at the time of the forensic assessment, she had
a clearer understanding of what she had done. she still had “vague flashes” of
the incident, and that it was like watching a slow-motion picture. she recalled
feeling as if it could not be her committing the acts.

in the context of these facts, reports, and
observations, the following conclusion by the forensic assessor is unassailable
from a legal perspective:
“at the time
of the alleged offence, because of the cognitive impairments and disorientation
she was experiencing, ms. belk was unable to rationally perceive her situation,
and therefore unable to engage in rational choice regarding her actions. she
was, therefore, unable to recognize her actions as wrong, according to the everyday
standards of the ordinary person.”
v.
conclusion:

ms. belk stabbed her husband in a confused state
informed by the symptoms of a major neurocognitive disorder. in committing the
criminal act, she did not know that what she was doing was wrong.

as a result, i must find on the balance of
probabilities that ms. belk was not criminally responsible (ncr) for the
offence due to the symptoms of a mental disorder prevailing upon her at the
time.

accordingly, pursuant to
s.672.47
of the
criminal
code,
i decline to impose a disposition, and defer that function to the
ontario review board. pursuant to that provision, a disposition hearing is to
be held within 45 days.

my thanks to counsel.
released: may 12, 2025
signed:
justice a. a. ghosh

r. v. simpson-fry,
2022 onca 108, paras.
9-12

r. v. anderson,
2021 onca 333, para.
53

criminal code,
s.16 – the ncr “defence of mental disorder”

r. v. oommen,
1994 canlii 101 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 507,
para.
21;
r. v. chaulk,
1990 canlii 34 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 1303, paras.
97-101

oommen,
para.
21;
r. v. bharwani,
2023 onca 203, paras.
230-33;
r.
v. worrie,
2022 onca 471