source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj234/2025oncj234.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. k.t.,
2025 oncj 234
date: 
2025 04 16
court
file no.: pembroke 22-37100396; 23-37101038
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
kt
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on june 17, august 1, august 15, 2024, january 9, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on april 16, 2025
richard morris.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
marnie munsterman....................................................................... counsel
for the accused
richardson,
j.:
introduction

this is a complex sentencing.

the court must wade through a myriad of
minefields in the following issues:
a)
the length of sentence that should be imposed for an untreated, indiscriminate
sex offender;
b)
how, if at all, the offender’s low average and borderline results in
some aspects of his intellectual functioning should affect the assessment of
whether he has “diminished moral blameworthiness”;
c)
the collision between the sentencing principle of totality, that is
the need to sentence the offender in a way that is not so long that it is
unduly harsh and crushing for him, while respecting parliament’s direction to
impose minimum sentences for some offences and consecutive sentences in others;
d)
the impact of the deplorable and untenable conditions in which the
offender has been housed while he awaits sentencing and the degree to which he
should receive additional credit for his pre-sentence custody time.

as i have been editing and honing the 51 pages
that follow, i have been thinking about the words of former justice doherty of
the ontario court of appeal in his recent address to the criminal lawyers
association, in which he said:
it
seems to me, however, that the many and diverse demands that are now made on
the criminal justice system, and the complexity that has overtaken the
substantive and procedural law in response to new demands endangers the fair
and efficient operation of the criminal justice system. i refer you to the
remarks of the court of appeal in a case called
king
in 2022.
i have previously described the criminal
process as akin to a cargo ship, which has been running along the same route
for years and years, making its way from port to port. however, now, at each
stop, more and more cargo is loaded on the ship, and none is taken off. as the
ship continues the journey, it slows and sinks lower and lower into the water
until it finally disappears from view.
my fear is that the complexity and—well,
primarily the complexity—i'll leave it at that we have developed in the
criminal law, is really making it close to unworkable, at times.

my base court is pembroke. kt is the third offender
that i am sending to the penitentiary for sexual offences within the last
month. these cases are necessarily demanding, difficult and time consuming.

i took kt’s plea on these charges in june 2024. 
i heard sentencing arguments in august, 2024 and january, 2025 and i reserved
judgment until today. along the way, i have repeatedly insisted on receiving
assessments which will assist me in understanding who kt is and in fashioning a
sentence for him that is proportional to his moral blameworthiness.

these are assessments that are necessary, not
only to me in the process of his sentencing, but also to the correctional
service and parole board, who will be called upon to implement a correctional
treatment plan for kt and decide on when he is a candidate for release back
into the community.

as much as the law with respect to sexual
offences in general, and sexual offences against children specifically,
focusses primarily on denunciation and deterrence, the imposition of sentence
must always have an eye on the fact that, absent a finding that an individual should
be subject to a indeterminate sentence, the offender will be released back into
the community and the community is entitled to be kept safe from him when that
time comes.

in this case there are aspects of the
assessments that are sloppy and incomplete. for example, there is no
assessment of kt’s risk to reoffend.

it is easy to blame the assessors. but one must
also bear in mind that they are overworked. where i preside, there is a
shortage of forensic psychiatrists.

i have also had to balance writing this judgment
with the incessant demands of my other cases, only two of which i have
discussed above. the complexity of our law makes the process of doing justice
to kt arduous and time consuming. the judgment must demonstrate to the parties
and to any appellate courts that may be called upon to review it, that i have
considered everything, including the proverbial kitchen sink, in fashioning
kt’s sentence.

two things bother me the most about this
process:

first, i suspect that kt will not understand
these reasons for sentence. he will understand the final number, but i have
grave doubts as to whether he will understand the process that i have followed
in arriving at it.

fortunately, he has the benefit of a caring and
able defence counsel who i know explain it to him and for whom i am extremely
grateful.

this, however, is a failing of our system and a
symptom of how complex the law has become.

secondly, while assessments have been conducted,
arguments heard and judgment considered, kt has been kept at the ottawa
carleton detention centre, where conditions are deplorable and where he has been
unable to receive meaningful treatment for his criminogenic challenges. this
too is a failing of our system.
facts
information 22-37100396

on june 17, 2024, kt entered pleas to the
following offences:
a)
criminally harassing ba, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code;
b)
criminally harassing hbc, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code;
c)
criminally harassing rl, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code;
d)
criminally harassing ac, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code;
e)
indecently communicating with ad, contrary to
section 372(2)
of the
criminal
code;

the crown proceeded by indictment.
1.
criminal harassment against ba

with respect to the offences against ba, both ba and kt worked at
a restaurant in the town of petawawa. ba started to receive unwanted photos of
a male penis. she believed that the sender was kt. she also received videos
of him masturbating. she ignored them. he then sent threatening messages to
her. i note that at the time of the offences, ba was an adult.
2. criminal harassment
against hbc

with respect to the offences against hbc, both hbc and kt worked
at the same restaurant. hbc started to receive unwanted messages asking her to
“fuck me”. she also received two videos of him masturbating. she then
received a phone call from him. she recognized his voice. he was explicit in
his conversations with her. hbc was a youth when she received these communications.
3. criminal harassment against
rl

with respect to the offences against rl, both rl and the accused
worked at the same restaurant. rl started to receive unwanted messages from
the accused. she telephoned him and told him to stop communicating with her. 
he then attended at her other place of employment uninvited. he sent her
videos of him masturbating. in the videos he told rl to “fuck me”. she also
received messages from kt where he told her “i want to fuck you.”
4. criminal harassment against
ac

with respect to the offences against ac, both ac and kt worked at
the same restaurant. kt started communicating with her. those communications
were unwelcome. in one message, she sent a nude photo of herself as a younger
female. the photo showed her breasts. kt demanded that she send him more
photos and told her if she didn’t, he would disseminate the images of her
without her consent. he then sent messages offering to pay her money if she
sent him photos of her breasts.
5. indecent communications
against ad

ad was the manager at the fast-food restaurant where kt worked. 
she started receiving messages from an unknown number asking her if she could
keep a secret. he told her that she was a “goddess”. he offered her $1000 for
sexual favours. she then received a call from the same number and she
recognized the voice as that of kt. ad went to kt’s house and told his parents
what was happening. despite this, kt continued to send unwanted messages to
ad.

the accused was arrested for these offences on september 20,
2022. he gave a statement to the police where he admitted to repeated
communications and sending videos of himself masturbating to ba and hbc as an
act of revenge for them “being mean” to him. he admitted to sending unwanted
messages to rl because she “broke his heart”. he admitted to sending unwanted
messages to ad because he wanted to cause trouble in her relationship with her
husband.
information
23-37101038

on june 17, 2024, kt also pleaded guilty to the
following offences:
a)
making sexually explicit material available to c, a person under the
age of 16, contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code;
b)
exposure to om, a person under the age of 16, contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code;
c)
possession of child pornography contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal
code;
d)
communicating with om, a person under the age of 16 for the purpose
of facilitating child pornography, contrary 172.1(1)(b) of the
criminal code;
e)
communicating with an unknown person under the age of 18 for the
purpose of facilitating child pornography contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(a) of
the
criminal code;
f)
voyeurism, contrary to
section 162(1)
of the
criminal
code;
g)
exposure to a person under the age of 16 (k), contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code;
h)
making sexually explicit material available to a person under the
age of 18 (kx), contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code.

the crown proceeded by indictment.

when kt was arrested in relation to the criminal harassment
offences, police located a cell phone on his person which was seized incident
to arrest. they also obtained a search warrant for his residence and they
seized a variety of electronics and devices.

the balance of the facts outlined pertain to what the police
discovered on kt’s devices and through police follow-up investigation.
1.
making sexually explicit material available to c, a person under the age
of 16

using
snapchat,
kt communicated with c. a screen
recording of the conversation was saved to his phone. he asked her to show him
her breasts. c told kt that she was 15 years old. kt then sent c a video of
himself masturbating. he also sent other videos, all of which are explicit in nature. 
in the videos she requested that c say his first name. in another video, he
told c that he was going to “break her vagina”.
2. exposure to a person
under the age of 16 (om) and communicating with a person under the age of 16
(om) for the purposes of facilitating child pornography (
luring
)

using
tik tok,
kt found om. om was 15 at the time of the
offences and her profile on
tik tok
indicated her age. kt told om that
he was a bit older than she was (in reality he was in his early 30s). he asked
om for nude photographs. he also insisted that she watch him masturbate and he
exposed his penis to her while doing so. he directed her to say things to him
to assist him in masturbating. he sent om money for participating. police located
images and videos of her genitalia and breasts in their search of kt’s devices.
3.
possession of child
pornography

police discovered a total of 2,257 images that depict child
pornography on kt’s devices. the children depicted in the images are male and
female between six months and 17 years old. the images depict masturbation,
intercourse and bestiality.

police discovered a total of 3,651 videos that depict child
pornography on kt’s devices. the children depicted in the images are male and
female between six months and 17 years. the images depict vaginal and anal
intercourse and solo sexual acts as well as foreign object insertion into the orifices
of the victims.
4. communicating with an
unknown person under the age of 16 for the purpose of facilitating child
pornography (unknown female) (
luring
)

kt spoke with another young person, whose identity is unknown,
who is under the age of 16. he asked her to send him photos of her breasts. 
he promised he would not save any of the photos. he also sent her videos of
him masturbating. he told her that he wants to give her so much and he offered
to send her money. he directed her to message him while he is masturbating and
asked her to watch him. he asked her for photos of her breasts and requested
videos where she said, “i want your cock k.”
5.
voyeurism
(unknown
male)

police located a video on one of kt’s devices that depicted kt
and an unknown male in kt’s bedroom. both males undress and have their
genitals exposed to the camera. the unknown male asked kt, “you’re not
videoing this are you, over there?” and gestured towards kt’s cell phone. kt
stated, “no, i don’t give a fuck about that.” kt and the unknown male then
performed consensual sexual activity on each other. when they were finished,
the unknown male told kt that he wanted to be discrete and mentioned kt’s cell
phone. kt stated, “no, not at all”. he then walked the unknown male out of
his room. a short while later he returned, picked up his cell phone and stopped
the recording.
6. exposure to a person
under the age of 16 (k)

at the time of these offences, k was 15 years old. kt reached
out to k and told her he would pay her for photos of her breasts and body. he
sent her multiple video clips of him masturbating. he told her that he would
not record her.
7.
make sexually
explicit material available to a person under the age of 18 (kx)

during a conversation on social media, kt asked kx to help him
masturbate. kx refused. he offered to pay her a $100 amazon gift card. kx sent
him a photo of herself where she obviously appears to be a young teenager. kt
told her, “damn, you are only 13.” kt then asked kx to turn on her camera so
she can watch him masturbate. kt then masturbated while she watched. kx was watching
with a filter disguising her face. kt instructed kx to turn the filter off.

on consent, the crown filed exhibit 1, which was a summary of the
allegations along with the particulars of the various social media
conversations referred to above.

on consent, the crown also filed exhibit 5, which was a report
created by detective earle of the ontario provincial police child exploitation
unit, setting out the categorization of the videos and photos, which i referred
to above.
age of the offender

kt was born [xxx], 1989. he is now 35 years of age.
criminal record of the offender

kt does not have a criminal record.
the report regarding whether kt is not criminally
responsible

prior to my involvement, a report was ordered to assess whether
kt was “not criminally responsible” such that a defence to the charges might be
available under
section 16
of the
criminal code.

that report, dated december 20, 2023, was filed on consent as
exhibit 2, at the sentencing.

the report is authored by dr. julian gojer, acting clinical
director and staff psychiatrist at the forensic program of the royal ottawa
hospital. dr. gojer is well known to this court as an expert in forensic
psychiatry.

kt is the youngest of three children. his father was a
member of the canadian military.

there is a history of alcoholism, bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia among grandparents, uncles and cousins.

kt’s mother, jt, told dr. gojer that she suffered from high blood
pressure and hypoglycemia when she was pregnant with kt. she said that his
childbirth was difficult but a full-term delivery.

kt developed asthma when he was two. when he was three, one of
his lungs collapsed due to a virus and he had to be hospitalized. there were
concerns that his oxygen levels had dropped and he had brain damage.

he is said to have been “hyperactive” when he was a child. he
had difficulty with stealing at a young age. he had difficulty keeping
friends. he had difficulty with bed-wetting until he was six years old.

he was diagnosed with attention deficit disorder and prescribed
ritalin. jt terminated the use of that medication because kt was not eating or
sleeping.

jt described him as a difficult but happy go lucky child. he
could be annoying.

he never failed any subjects and received grades in the cs and
ds. he was expelled from high school when he was in grade 11 after he was
found with cannabis. apparently this was not his first time being found with
cannabis. he is two credits short from achieving his high school diploma.

jt stated that he had difficulty concentrating when he was in
high school.

he has worked in the restaurant industry since he was 17.

kt identifies as bisexual. he estimated that he has had 12
female partners and three male partners. he told dr. gojer that he has
difficulty maintaining a relationship because he is moody.

he denied ever being sexually abused. he explained his interest
in young females as “curiosity”. he stated that he has never had hands on
contact with a child.

kt started drinking when he was 16. he drank heavily until he
was about 32. he told dr. gojer that he would experience “shakes” when he
stopped using it. he got to the point that he could not sleep without using
alcohol. he had a short stay at pembroke hospital and was able to reduce his
alcohol consumption. he told dr. gojer he had not consumed alcohol for about
a year before he was arrested.

he takes trazodone to assist with sleep.

kt started using cannabis when he was 15. he was a daily smoker
until he was arrested. his daily intake was about three grams. he believed
that the use of cannabis calmed him down.

kt started using cocaine when he was 29 years old. he initially
started using cocaine to help him stay awake when he was working. at the time
of his arrest, he was using a gram and a half of cocaine on a daily basis.

jt was aware of problems with kt’s drinking. she was also aware
that he was using cannabis and cocaine, but she was not aware how much that he
was using.

kt has been told that he has symptoms of sleep apnea. he has not
been tested for it.

kt told dr. gojer he suffers from chronic depression and his mood
fluctuates. when he is moody, he talks excessively and is irritable and
confrontational. elevated episodes of mood last for about an hour.

jt told dr. gojer that kt’s moodiness started when he was about
19. she stated that elevated mood would last a week or two. when his mood was
elevated, he had difficulty sleeping. he would talk a lot. his discussions
were not focused.

according to jt, episodes of depressed mood would last three to
six weeks. he would struggle to get out of bed, neglect his hygiene and wear
the same clothes. there was one occasion where he was suicidal. he viewed
himself as a failure and a burden to society.

at first, there were periods of “normal” behaviour between the
periods of elevated and depressed mood. in the last few years, there were no
normal periods and his mood was either high or low.

kt did not endorse hallucinations. he stated that he does suffer
from some paranoia. he believes that people talk about him behind his back and
conspire against him. he stated that cannabis and cocaine help to calm this
down.

he does not suffer from any seizures.

when he was in high school he fell and hit his head and lost
consciousness for a few minutes. he has had a number of blackouts where he
gets dizzy and faints. he has suffered from panic attacks since he was ten. jt
told dr. gojer that kt had memory problems after this happened.

jt indicated that kt was hypersexual. she believed that he
masturbated many times a day.

dr. gojer found kt was able to relate well to the questions that
he was asked. he did not detect evidence of depression, anxiety, elevated
mood, irritability, delusions, or hallucinations. he did not appear to have
difficulty with being distracted or holding his attention.

dr. gojer opined that kt was “average” in intelligence and
“somewhat insightful into his mental health problems.”

dr. gojer suggested the following potential mental health
problems:
a)
attention
deficit disorder and associated problems of impulsivity;
b)
potential brain
injury due to his fall in high school. dr. gojer added, however, that there are
no “overt neurological deficits” but “subtle deficits may be present”. 
neurological testing to identify whether there are deficits was not undertaken. 
he also opined that “mr. t could benefit from a full neuropsychological
evaluation.”;
c)
alcohol use
disorder (now in remission);
d)
cannabis use
disorder (now in remission);
e)
cocaine use
disorder (now in remission);
f)
depression
and hypomania. dr. gojer noted that these are symptoms that are often
associated with bi-polar disorder but stopped short of diagnosing that. dr.
gojer also explained that hypomania can also increase kt’s libido, enhance his
sexual desire and contribute to his offending. he also explained that the use
of alcohol and drugs “clouds the diagnosis of bi-polar disorder.” dr. gojer
suggested that cyclothymic disorder is a more fitting diagnosis, but further evaluation
was necessary.

dr. gojer avoided commenting on whether kt suffered from sexual
deviation. he suggested that “pedophilia needs to be evaluated”, and “phallometric
testing at our laboratory could shed light on any deviant sexual
proclivities.” he suggested that if this was desirable, this could be
conducted as part of an assessment under section 21 of the
mental health act.
the section 21 report

a section 21 report was ordered and the assessment was conducted
by dr. gojer. this report, dated march 14, 2024, was filed on consent as
exhibit 3 at the sentencing. that report reveals the following:
a)
normal hormonal
levels;
b)
no issues with
cognitive distortions involving children;
c)
high arousal to
audio testing involving female children;
d)
some arousal to
audio testing involving male children;
e)
high arousal to
adult female stimuli.

dr. gojer opined that testing was indicative of pedophilic
disorder. his pedophilia is not exclusive, meaning that “he has an erotic
interest in adults and erotic interest in children.”

he also repeated his earlier diagnosis of adhd, cyclothymic
disorder, alcohol, cannabis and cocaine use disorder.

dr. gojer stated that he would benefit from prescription mood
stabilizers an anti-depressant, and a stimulant for his adhd. he also stated
that kt needs substance use counselling and sex offender counselling.

if sentenced to the reformatory, dr. gojer suggested that
treatment for kt was available at the st. lawrence valley correctional and
treatment centre.

i note that dr. gojer’s report is completely silent with respect
to a prognosis of the risk to the community that kt poses. in reports of this
nature, there is usually an assessment of the risk posed by the accused using
various psychometric actuarial instruments. this is completely missing from
this report.
follow up neuropsychological assessment

after reviewing dr. gojer’s previous reports, i was concerned
that kt had not been subjected to neuropsychological testing and i asked dr.
gojer to examine kt for that purpose. dr. gojer’s report on this issue, dated november
29, 2024, was entered on consent as exhibit 9.

when he met with dr. gojer to prepare this report, kt complained
of insomnia, back pain and high anxiety. he told dr. gojer that he is seeing a
psychiatrist in custody. he is finding his medication regime is helping. he
spends his time colouring and reading. he asked dr. gojer to give him some
drawings to colour.

the report also revealed the following:
a)
with respect to
intellectual functioning, kt scored in the average or low average range.
b)
with respect to
learning and memory, kt generally scored in the low average to borderline
range.
c)
with respect to
attention and executive functioning, kt’s results were mixed.

his reading ability is average and is a grade 12.9 equivalent. 
sentence comprehension is low average with a grade 8.9 equivalent. math
computation is borderline, grade 4 equivalent.

dr. gojer concluded:
a)
kt functions
generally at a low average level on cognitive tests;
b)
he has no real
deficits but he does have weaknesses in his performance;
c)
there is a
strong probability of neurodevelopmental disorder, specifically adhd and
perhaps a learning disability for mathematics;
d)
he seems to be
doing better on stimulant medication while in custody;
e)
he should
undergo psychotherapy to help manage his anxiety and depression.

dr. gojer repeated his earlier opinions, including his opinion
that if sentenced to reformatory, the treatment kt needs is available at the
st. lawrence valley treatment centre.
crown follow up with dr. gojer

crown counsel followed up by email to dr. gojer to ask whether
the treatment that kt needs would also be available in the penitentiary. dr.
gojer replied that “[a]ll treatments are available in both locations.” a copy
of this email chain was entered into evidence, on consent, as exhibit 10.
victim impact statement of ba

ba’s victim impact statement was filed as exhibit 6.

ba has now moved to another city and province. she stated that
before she moved, she was afraid of walking her dog in her neighbourhood
because kt lived in the same area. she was also afraid to go work at the
restaurant.

even now that she has moved, ba expressed fear that kt would go
after her family.

she is also afraid that once he is released from custody, he will
contact her.
kt’s letter to the court

a letter from kt was filed as exhibit 8. in his letter, kt
expressed a desire to be sentenced to custody at the st. lawrence valley
treatment centre. he is of the view that he “won’t get proper rehabilitation”
if he is sentenced “to prison”.

he expressed the opinion that his “brain does not operate properly”
because of his collapsed lung and oxygen deprivation when he was young. he
stated:
i feel if given the right
treatments and help i could become a better part of society. i know what i’ve
done is not something to speak lightly of but i have seen all my faults on a
open platter and lost almost everything because of what i’ve done.
submissions of the crown

citing the “startling breadth of offences” that kt has committed,
the crown sought a global sentence of eight years less credit for time served.

the crown reminded me that pursuant to
section 718.3(7)
of the
criminal
code,
the court must impose consecutive sentences for sexual offences
committed against children. the crown also reminded me that sentences for offences
contrary to section 163.1 must also be served consecutively to other offences.

the crown argued that denunciation and deterrence are the primary
sentencing objectives in this case.

the crown submitted that the principle of totality does not apply
to render a fit sentence unfit.

the crown acknowledged the following mitigating factors:
a)
kt does not have
a criminal record;
b)
kt entered a
plea of guilt, which saves the resources of a trial and is a sign of contrition
and remorse;
c)
kt has mental
health problems.

the crown argued that the following factors are aggravating
factors:
a)
kt used his
workplace to target some of the victims of his offences;
b)
kt’s offences
involve abuse of persons under the age of 18 which is statutorily aggravating;
c)
there are
multiple victims, both unknown and known;
d)
the images and
videos are extremely degrading;
e)
there is a
significant quantity of images and videos;
f)
kt lacks
insight as evidenced by the following:
i)
he told police that he committed the offences against some victims out
of revenge for them being mean to him.
ii)
he committed the offence against one victim, his manager, because he
wanted to cause trouble between her and her husband.
iii)
his letter to me focused on what he has lost. he has not considered the
harm that he has caused his victims.

the crown argued that although st. lawrence valley would be an
appropriate place for kt’s rehabilitation, such a sentence would be “wholly
inappropriate” for the following reasons:
a)
kt is not
“seriously mentally ill”. he does not have diminished moral blameworthiness. he
clearly had the intellectual capacity to know what he was doing, and plan and
carry out the elements of the offences he committed. this is not a
situation where there is a diminished capacity to understand. crown
counsel repeated that this is also made out in the sheer volume and breadth of
offences that he has entered pleas to.
b)
there is no
guarantee that kt would be placed at st. lawrence valley, even if the court
were to recommend that kt be placed there.
c)
st. lawrence
valley is a reformatory. kt is deserving of a penitentiary sentence.
defence submissions

defence counsel argued that kt should receive:
a)
credit for time
served at the usual 1.5:1 ratio;
b)
additional credit
for unduly harsh conditions in ocdc, as evidenced by the lock-down report filed
as exhibit 11, pursuant to
r. v. duncan;
c)
a maximum period
of incarceration in the reformatory (two years less one day) with the court
recommending that kt serve his sentence at the st. lawrence valley treatment
centre; and
d)
three years of
probation.

defence
counsel submitted that st. lawrence valley was specifically designed for
individuals suffering from a major mental illness. she noted that this
institution also has a wing specifically designed for the treatment of
individuals who have committed sexual offences.

she
argued that kt’s cyclothymic disorder is a major mental illness and is simply
less prolonged than bipolar disorder. she drew the court’s attention to the
fact that dr. gojer has clearly linked kt’s offending behaviour to his mental
health difficulties.

she
stated that kt’s problem controlling his impulsivity is sufficient to bring him
within the category of offenders who are entitled to a lesser punishment on the
basis of their “diminished moral blameworthiness”.

she
noted that kt’s mental illnesses have been successfully treated while he has
been in custody. he has good community support from his parents. she noted
that until kt’s charges came to light, although it was clear that he was
struggling with mental health and addiction, there was no proper diagnosis of
mental illness.

defence
counsel also pointed to kt’s low average and borderline results in some
neuropsychological testing as a result of a likely brain injury suffered from
the loss of oxygen in his early years or a head injury in high school.

defence
counsel argued that kt is very amenable to treatment, noting that he has
completed the following programs while incarcerated at ocdc:
a)
substance abuse;
b)
anger management;
c)
thoughts to
action;
d)
managing stress;
e)
use of leisure
time;
f)
understanding
feelings;
g)
looking for work;
and
h)
planning for
discharge.

defence
counsel submitted that specialized treatment, such as that available at st.
lawrence valley is the best way to foster the long-term protection of the
public.

she
disagreed with the crown’s suggestion that kt’s justification for the
commission of his offences when he was arrested are a complete and accurate
picture of who he now is.

she
noted that dr. gojer opined that kt has insight into the commission of
the offences. she also pointed out that the offences themselves, what kt has
said about the offences, his willingness to give a statement to the police, his
letter to the court, his cooperation with dr. gojer and his completion of
treatment while in custody demonstrate that he is not a sophisticated criminal
who hides who he is.
analysis
the offences and the
criminal code
sentencing provisions that
apply

section 264
of the
criminal code
(criminal harassment) has a
maximum sentence of ten years imprisonment. there is no minimum.

section 372(2)
of the
criminal code
(indecent communications)
has a maximum sentence of two years imprisonment. there is no minimum.

section 171.1
of the
criminal code
(making sexually explicit
material available to a child) has a maximum sentence of fourteen years and a
minimum sentence of six months.

section 173(2)
of the
criminal code
(exposure to a person
under 16 for a sexual purpose) has a maximum sentence of two years and a
minimum sentence of 90 days.

section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal code
(possession of child
pornography) has a maximum sentence of ten years. the mandatory minimum of one
year was struck down by the court of appeal in
r. v. john,
2018 onca
702.

section 172.1(1)
of the
criminal code
(luring) carries a maximum
sentence of 14 years. the minimum sentence of one year was struck down by the
supreme court of canada in
r. v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26.

section 162
of the
criminal code
(voyeurism) carries a
maximum sentence of five years.

section 718
of the
criminal code
states:
the fundamental
purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime
prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just,
peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of
the following objectives:
a)
to denounce unlawful conduct in the harm done to victims or to the
community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
b)
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences;
c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
and
f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community.

section 718.01 sets out the following sentencing objectives when
dealing with offences against children:
when a court
imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a child under the
age of eighteen years, it shall give primary consideration to the objectives of
denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.

section 718.1
of the
criminal code
establishes the
fundamental principle of sentencing: “a sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.”

section 718.2
of the
criminal code
sets out “other sentencing
principles”:
a
court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a)
a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender, and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(i)
evidence
that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race,
national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or
physical disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression, or
on any other similar factor,
(ii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of
eighteen years,
(ii.2)
evidence
that the offender involved a person under the age of 18 years in the commission
of the offence,
(iii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
(iii.2)
evidence
that the offence was committed against a person who, in the performance of
their duties and functions, was providing health services, including personal
care services,
(iv)
evidence
that the offence was committed for the benefit of, at the direction of or in
association with a criminal organization,
(v)
evidence
that the offence was a terrorism offence,
(vi)
evidence
that the offence was committed while the offender was subject to a conditional
sentence order made under section 742.1 or released on parole, statutory
release or unescorted temporary absence under the
corrections and
conditional release act,
and
(vii)
evidence
that the commission of the offence had the effect of impeding another person
from obtaining health services, including personal care services,
shall be
deemed to be aggravating circumstances;
(b)
a sentence should be similar to sentences
imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in similar
circumstances;
(c)
where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(d)
an offender should not be deprived of liberty,
if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all available sanctions, other than
imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the
harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.

section 718.3
of the
criminal code
provides that:
718.3
(1)
where an enactment prescribes different
degrees or kinds of punishment in respect of an offence, the punishment to be
imposed is, subject to the limitations prescribed in the enactment, in the
discretion of the court that convicts a person who commits the offence.
(2)
where an enactment prescribes a punishment in respect of
an offence, the punishment to be imposed is, subject to the limitations
prescribed in the enactment, in the discretion of the court that convicts a
person who commits the offence, but no punishment is a minimum punishment
unless it is declared to be a minimum punishment.
….
(4)
the
court that sentences an accused shall consider directing
(a)
that the term of imprisonment that it imposes be served
consecutively to a sentence of imprisonment to which the accused is subject at
the time of sentencing; and
(b)
that the terms of imprisonment that it imposes at the same
time for more than one offence be served consecutively, including when
(i)
the offences do not arise out of the same event or series of
events,
(ii)
one of the offences was committed while the accused was on
judicial interim release, including pending the determination of an appeal, or
(iii)
one of the offences was committed while the accused was
fleeing from a peace officer.
….
(7)
when a court sentences an accused at the same time for
more than one sexual offence committed against a child, the court shall direct
(a)
that a sentence of imprisonment it imposes for an offence
under section 163.1 be served consecutively to a sentence of imprisonment it
imposes for a sexual offence under another section of this act committed
against a child; and
(b)
that a sentence of imprisonment it imposes for a sexual
offence committed against a child, other than an offence under section 163.1,
be served consecutively to a sentence of imprisonment it imposes for a sexual
offence committed against another child other than an offence under section
163.1.

section
719(3)
to
(3.3)
of the
criminal code
states:
(3) in determining the sentence to be imposed on a
person convicted of an offence, a court may take into account any time spent in
custody by the person as a result of the offence but the court shall limit any
credit for that time to a maximum of one day for each day spent in custody.
(3.1) despite subsection (3), if the circumstances
justify it, the maximum is one and one half days for each day spent in
custody.
(3.2) the court shall give reasons for any credit
granted and shall cause those reasons to be stated on the record.
(3.3) the court shall cause to be stated on the record
and on the warrant of committal the offence, the amount of time spent in
custody, the term of imprisonment that would have been imposed before any
credit was granted, the amount of time credited, if any, and the sentence
imposed.
sentencing
is an individualized process

it is well developed in our law that sentencing is a delicate and
highly individualized process. as my colleague justice march has often said,
“no two offenders are alike”. see also
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
and
r.
v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64.
the cardinal
principle of sentencing is proportionality

in
r. v. lacasse,
supra, the supreme court of canada determined that the “cardinal
principle” of sentencing law is the principle of proportionality; that is, the
more serious the crime and the greater the degree of responsibility, the more
severe the sentence will be. this must be balanced against the moral
blameworthiness of the offender.
assessment
of general aggravating and mitigating factors applicable to kt

kt entered a guilty plea. none of the victims have been put through
the trauma of testifying in court. this is somewhat mitigating.

the trial of these charges would have taken a considerable period of
time in a jurisdiction with a significant backlog.

that said, kt gave a statement admitting to some of his crimes. 
other crimes would be proven through the execution of search warrants. thus,
while he is entitled to mitigation for entering a guilty plea, it would seem to
me that the crown would have been successful in proving many of the offences
for which he was charged.

kt does not have a criminal record. this is also mitigating.

kt has the ability to maintain employment.

ordinarily this is a mitigating factor. in this case, however, kt committed
many of the offences for which he has been convicted by using his workplace as
his victim pool. this essentially neuters any mitigating effect that the
ability to maintain employment has and changes a mitigating factor to an
aggravating one.

work is an activity that we all must engage in order to survive. working
women, particularly those in low-paying jobs like restaurant workers, must work
in order to provide for themselves and for their families. young women must
often work in these jobs to earn money to pay for their education.

they are entitled to attend their workplaces free from the spectre
of being criminally harassed by a co-worker, particularly criminal harassment
of a sexual nature.

i do not know what to make of the various reports with respect to
kt’s mental acuity or dr. gojer’s conclusion that there is a high probability
of a neurodevelopmental disorder. the interplay between intellectual
disability and the commission of crime, particularly sexual crime,
surprisingly, is not well understood.
a 2022
swedish study found that offenders with intellectual disability are much more
likely to have a sexual crime as an index crime: edberg, h.; chen, q;
andine, p; larsson, h. and hirvikoski, t., crimes and sentences with
individuals with intellectual disability in a forensic psychiatric
context: a register-based study: epidemiology and psychiatric
sciences
2022; 31: e2.

i also do not have any information concerning the risk that kt
poses. his offending profile would suggest, as i have indicated, that kt is an
indiscriminate sex offender. he will offend against women, men and children. he
has been diagnosed a pedophile. i find that left untreated, kt would be at a
very high risk to reoffend. he needs institutional based treatment.

fortunately, kt is amenable to treatment, particularly if that
treatment is received by placement at st. lawrence valley which would require a
reformatory sentence. i find he has an earnest desire to address his offending
behaviour.

i agree with the crown that kt does not really express remorse and
empathy for his victims. his letter to the court and his comments in court
demonstrate a keen desire for treatment, but there is little expressed
understanding of how profoundly wrong his actions were, and no evidence of
concern for the plight of his victims.

i am not an expert in psychiatry, but kt does not strike me as
psychopathic. i blame his lack of remorse and insight on the combination of his
intellectual disability and his pedophilia. as i have indicated, kt is also
genuinely interested in treatment. his cooperation with the police in giving a
statement and with dr. gojer strongly suggest that he is not “faking good” in
this desire.
principles
of sentencing in cases involving criminal harassment

one of the first cases dealing with the sentencing principles to be
applied in cases of criminal harassment is
r. v. wall,
1995 canlii 2320,
a decision of the prince edward island supreme court, where justice mcquaid
stated:
section
264 is a relatively new offence having only come into force in 1993. the
section was enacted to address conduct which, while falling short of what might
constitute other offences, would, nevertheless, be dangerous and would place
victims at substantial risk. the section was intended to deal with situations
where a person, usually a woman, is the subject of harassing behaviour by a
former spouse or male acquaintance. the offender appears to develop an
obsession, the woman becomes a target, and a potentially dangerous situation
develops, placing the victim at risk for her physical and emotional well-being.
the very unsettling aspect of dealing with these offences in the criminal
justice system is that, undoubtedly, many offenders will be presenting themselves
with no criminal record and with the reputation of being both a good family and
community person. the other unsettling aspect of these cases is that if the
pattern of harassing conduct continues and is not properly dealt with by the
sentence imposed, the result could be very serious physical and/or emotional
harm to the victim. in passing sentence trial judges must, therefore, be wary
of positive pre-sentence reports depicting the offender as a person whose
actions, in respect to the offence, are entirely out of character. the fact an
offender shows any propensity toward this kind of conduct, regardless of his
unblemished past, is cause for great concern and for a very careful and
judicious approach to sentencing. factors such as the absence of a prior
criminal record and expressions of remorse, which must necessarily be
considered on sentencing, should not be given undue weight in the sentencing of
this offence.
the
focus of sentences must be to send a message to the offender, and the public,
that harassing conduct against innocent and vulnerable victims is not tolerated
by society and most importantly, the court must insure, as best it can, that
the conduct of the offender never happens again recognizing that, if it does, a
far more serious offence could be committed. the principles of sentencing must
be applied with this focus squarely in mind.

wall
was cited with approval by our
court of appeal in 2000 in
r. v. bates,
2000 canlii 5709 (on ca)
where
at paragraph
48, moldaver, j.a. (as he then was) and feldman, j.a. stated:
thus,
although were some mitigating factors in the respondent’s favour, the
principles of general deterrence, denunciation and specific deterrence must
take precedence in determining a fit and appropriate sentence in this case,
together with concern for the safety and security of the victims.

in
bates,
the trial judge’s decision to impose a suspended
sentence was varied by the court of appeal to a sentence of 16 months
imprisonment and three years probation.

notwithstanding it’s age,
bates
continues to be a good law
and deterrence and denunciation remain the primary sentencing principles. see
r.
v. nolan,
2019 onca 969
at paragraph
65
and
r. v. sabir,
2018 onca
912
at paragraphs
45 and 46.

in
r. v. vth,
2022 onsc 5668, gomery, j. (as she then was) relied
upon
bates
in imposing a sentence of six months consecutive for one
count of
criminal harassment
against an offender who received a total sentence
of 12 years. the other offences he was sentenced to included incest, making
child pornography, possession of child pornography and sexual exploitation.

this decision makes it clear that the offence is deserving of a
serious and significant sentence in and of its own right, even in a case where
the accused is arguably facing a much more onerous sentence for other offences,
including offences against children.

this is logic that is directly applicable to the circumstances of
the criminal harassment offences perpetrated by kt.

as justice jones pointed out in
r. v. clarke,
2024 oncj 132
at paragraph
32:
criminal
harassment has thus long been recognized as a gendered crime. the vast majority
of its victims are women. sentencing courts must communicate to the public that
the harassment of women who are simply going about their daily lives by men who
feel they can abuse, objectify and/or scare them is inexcusable. such conduct
must be emphatically denounced. offenders who engage in this behaviour will
face significant penalties.
principles
of sentencing in cases of indecent communications contrary to
section 372(2)

the basis for both the criminal harassment offence and the indecent
communication offence are the same: to protect individuals from unwanted
communications.

there are important differences in the elements of the offences,
however.

the crime of indecent communications requires the crown to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused made the communications with intent
to alarm or annoy the victim. criminal harassment, on the other hand,
requires the crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim has been
harassed and that this harassment caused them to fear for their safety or the
safety of anyone known to them:
r. v. berhe
2022 onca 853
at paragraph
20.

criminal harassment is the more serious offence. where the crown
proceeds by indictment, the maximum sentence is ten years. it also commands a
mandatory weapons prohibition. indecent communications, in contrast, has a
maximum sentence of two years. this reflects the fact that criminal harassment
focusses on the fear of the victim, whereas indecent communications criminalizes
communications which harm the victim by annoying her or alarming her. the
degree of harm in the criminal harassment context is more significant than
indecent communications.

that said, the primacy of the sentencing principles of denunciation
and deterrence in criminal harassment, quoted above in relation to criminal
harassment, must also apply to cases of indecent communications because the
legally protected interest is largely the same: freedom from unwanted interference
in the victim’s life.

i also observe that like criminal harassment, indecent
communications contrary to section 372 is a gendered crime and therefore mandates
a denunciatory sentence.
application
of the principles of sentencing in criminal harassment and indecent
communications to kt

the first four charges on information 22-37100396 involve the
offence of
criminal harassment. the fifth charge involves the offence of
indecent communications. each of these five charges involves a different
victim.

the cases have the following features:
a)
kt and each of his victims worked at the same restaurant;
b)
three of the victims received photos or videos of the accused;
c)
three of the victims were sent videos of kt masturbating;
d)
in two of the cases, kt asked the victims to fuck him;
e)
one victim received threatening comments from kt. i was not told
what those comments entailed;
f)
after one victim relented and sent kt photos of
herself, kt threatened to disseminate the photos if she did not send him more
photos. the same victim was offered money for photos;
g)
one victim received an unwelcome visit from kt at her other place of
employment;
h)
one victim was offered money for sexual favours;
i)
one victim went to kt’s house and confronted
kt’s parents about his behaviour. kt was nonetheless undeterred;
j)
kt’s motive for committing these crimes was
retribution for “being mean” to him, “breaking his heart” or getting one victim
in trouble with her husband.

before considering the principles of totality and deduction for
pre-sentence custody, i find that the appropriate sentence for kt for these
offences is as follows:
a)
for each of the criminal harassment counts, 90 days in custody
consecutive;
b)
for the offence of indecent communications, 30 days in custody
consecutive.
principles
of sentencing in cases involving child pornography

those who engage in sexual misconduct against children can expect
severe denunciatory and deterrent sentences:
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc
9.

child pornography cases are extremely serious
and are met with sentences that emphasize the sentencing
principles of denunciation (
criminal code,
s. 718(a)) and general deterrence (
criminal code, s. 718(b)):
r. v.
mccaw,
2023 onca 8
at paragraph
19.

in
r. v. pike,
2024 onca 608,
chief justice tulloch set
out the following six principles with respect to the inherent wrongfulness of
child pornography, which he described as a “global cancer” at paragraph 145:
a)
possession of child pornography is a violation of the dignity of
children.
b)
possession of child pornography is an extreme invasion of the
child’s privacy.
c)
people who possess child pornography inflict severe emotional harm
on children in the following ways:
i)
children suffer
exploitation and violence through the making of the child pornography.
ii)
this exploitation and violence becomes a
“continuing violation” (at paragraph 149) of the child because they learn that
unknown perpetrators access and view the recordings.
iii)
children feel powerless
“because they cannot destroy or control the dissemination of child pornography
that is posted online”. this causes fear that perpetrators will recognise them
and target them.
iv)
children become anxious that individuals
are taking pleasure from their victimization or using the recordings to abuse
other children.
v)
children are humiliated; their self-worth
is undermined. recordings portraying the victim as consenting or enjoying their
humiliation heighten the humiliation. child pornography causes harm to
children that lasts well into adulthood.
d)
people who possess child pornography instigate the
production and distribution of child pornography and, thus, the sexual abuse
and exploitation of children.
e)
possessing and viewing child pornography can incite
perpetrators to commit and facilitate their commission of other sexual offences
against children.
f)
people who possess child pornography perpetuate pernicious
messages that attack children’s humanity and equality. chief justice tulloch essentially
described child pornography as a hate crime against children.

for these reasons child pornography is a “grave offence”. at
paragraph 160, chief justice tulloch stated:
courts must
follow parliament’s direction by placing children and the wrongs and harms that
people who possess child pornography inflict on them at the centre of the
sentencing process. courts can give significant weight to the personal
circumstances and mitigating factors of people who possess child pornography,
and to sentencing objectives such as rehabilitation:
friesen,
at paras.
91-92, 104. but it is all too easy for those considerations, which focus on
the people being sentenced, to overshadow the wrongs and harms they inflict
because their victims are all to often invisible.

sentencing
judges must reject myths that minimize responsibility for possession of child
pornography, including:
a)
possession of
child pornography is harmless and victimless;
b)
possession of
child pornography is accidental or passive;
c)
possession of
child pornography is caused by medical and psychiatric conditions;
d)
possession of
child pornography is an isolated occurrence.

the
chief justice stated at paragraph 161:
these myths cannot conceal an
all-too-obvious reality: people who possess child pornography exploit real
child victims callously, deliberately, and repeatedly. failing to recognize
this reality risks “undermin[ing] the credibility of the criminal justice
system in the eyes of victims, their families, caregivers, and communities, and
the public at large”:
friesen, at para.
43.

with
respect to the mitigating potential of an offender’s mental health, the chief
justice noted at paragraph 164:
….while courts can consider
mental illnesses that contribute to people’s decisions to possess child
pornography (
bertrand
marchand, at para.
128
), they should not assume that
psychiatric conditions like pedophilia compel those people to possess child
pornography. both forms of minimization wrongly excuse people who possess child
pornography from responsibility for their choices and undermine parliament’s
prioritization of deterrence and denunciation:
friesen, at para.
132;
u.s. v. irey,
612 f.3d 1160
(11th
cir. 2010) (en banc), at pp. 1198‑1200, cert. denied, 563 u.s. 917
(2011);
porte,
at paras. 71-72.

at paragraphs 167 to 173 the chief justice
set out the following considerations for assessing the sentence that should be
imposed in cases of child pornography:
a)
the size, level
of organization and ratio of videos to still images, having regard to:
i)
the number of real child victims. a court can infer that a large
collection contains many
victims.
ii)
the degree of organization in the collection. organization demonstrates
that an offender has more interest in the material.
iii)
the ratio of videos to still images. videos are more aggravating than
still images because they are more invasive and a more severe violation of the
child’s privacy.
b)
the seriousness
of the collection’s nature, including whether there are more physically
intrusive activities beyond that inherent in sexual offences. that said judges
must not lose sight of the fact that any recording may cause severe emotional
harm or demonstrate profoundly harmful sexual exploitation.
c)
whether the
collection depicts real children, as opposed to stories, virtual images and
videos that do not depict real children.
d)
how long the
offender has collected pornography, whether there is evidence of collaboration
with other offenders, planning, organization, sophistication and participation
in the child pornography sub-culture, how often the offender has downloaded or
viewed the images.
e)
absence of
evidence of production or distribution, absence of depiction of very young
children, absence of evidence of payment to acquire child pornography are not
mitigating.
f)
good
character, employment and stigma are less significant factors. they receive
only limited weight.
g)
when assessing
remorse and insight, i must focus on whether the accused recognizes and
expresses remorse for wronging and harming real children, or whether the
offender engages in distorted thinking and minimizes or excuses their actions
as harmless fantasies.

chief
justice tulloch noted that until
pike,
the court of appeal had not set a
range of sentence for cases of possession of child pornography. he made it
clear that
the upper end of the range was about four years in the
penitentiary and, in light of the fact that the offence is a hybrid offence,
there is no lower end of the range.

he
found that in order to give effect to the principles established in
friesen,
supra,
and parliament’s decision to raise the maximum sentence in 2015, it
was appropriate to raise the upper end of the range to five years.
application of the child
pornography sentencing principles to kt

the
size of kt’s collection is extremely aggravating. police discovered a total of
5,908 images and videos. 69% of the collection is videos. 31% of the
collection is photos. from the size of the collection, i infer that there are
a large number of real children in his collection.

the
nature of kt’s collection is also extremely aggravating.

a
representative sample of the images, filed by the crown as exhibit 5 indicates that
the images depict children of both genders of all ages engaged in intrusive
sexual acts including vaginal and anal intercourse, fellatio, and masturbation
with ejaculate. some of the sexual acts involve men. some of them involve
women. some of them show that the child is in pain. in some of them the child
is bound.

none
of the images or videos in the representative sample contain virtual images or
stories.

i
do not have any information with respect to how detailed kt’s organization was
or how often kt resorted to viewing it, nor do i have any information with
respect to whether the police found evidence of collaboration with other
offenders, planning, organization, sophistication and participation in the
child pornography sub-culture.

from
the size of the collection, i can infer that kt must have spent a great deal of
time amassing it.

the
size and nature of the collection is so massive and disturbing that the
sentence must deter and denounce kt in the strongest terms. it must also
deter others from committing such a heinous crime.

having
regard to these factors, my assessment of other sentencing factors which are
applicable to kt and the range established in
pike, supra,
i find that
the appropriate sentence, before any deduction for totality or pre-sentence
custody is four years.
principles of sentencing in
cases of child luring, exposure to a person under the age of 16
1.
sentencing principles for
luring

in
r. v. bertrand marchand, supra,
at paragraphs
37 to 45
justice martin
established the following sentencing principles with respect to child luring:
a)
even where the
interactions occur online, the offender’s conduct can constitute a form of
psychological sexual violence that has the potential to cause serious harm,
which is often more pervasive and permanent than physical harm. it is now well
established that sexual offences against children cause significant harm. victims
of luring often suffer negative sexual development, substance misuse and
depressive symptomology.
b)
online
communications allow the offender to “get in the victim’s head” and abuse the
victim remotely which can lead to serious long term psychological consequences.
c)
victims of
luring often feel that they actively participated in their own abuse which
increases self-blame, internalization and shame, which in turn, worsens psychological
harm.
d)
these effects on
victims have “harmful ripple effects” on their families, community and
society. it can destroy trust in friends, families and social institutions.
e)
it may be
helpful to differentiate between contact-driven luring and luring which occurs
entirely online.
i)
contact-driven luring requires the court to consider whether the online
communication caused psychological harm that is separate and apart from any
“hands-on” offence.
ii)
luring
which occurs entirely online arises in situations where the
offender has no intention to engage in hands on offending.
iii)
there is also a hybrid of the two where the aim of the luring is to
commit a designated offence which occurs entirely online. in this case, the
offender uses technology to build a relationship, assert control and
psychologically manipulate young persons. the offender then may also use that
technology to carry out sexual acts.
f)
contact-driven
luring is not necessarily more or less harmful than luring that leads to sexual
abuse which occurs entirely online. the severity of the harm depends on the
goals of the offender, the characteristics of the victim and the dynamic
between the offender and the victim.

it
is open for a sentencing judge to infer the presence of harm, even in
situations where no victim impact statement has been filed. citing
friesen,
supra,
justice martin found that the potential for reasonably foreseeable
serious harm is present even if there is no actual harm, or to put it more
accurately, no evidence of actual harm. see paragraphs 75-76.

sentencing
judges must also consider whether there is evidence of grooming. justice
martin defined grooming this way at paragraph 51:
grooming is a
process which allows the offender to forge a close relationship with a victim
to gain trust, compliance and secrecy for the purpose of eventually engaging in
sexualization and abuse (
rayo, at para. 149). the jurisprudence has
yet to identify a universal definition of grooming. understandably, this is in
large part due to the difficulties in determining where the process begins and
ends, as well as the variety of behaviours that may be involved depending on
the offender, the victim, and the context. indeed, grooming can involve, but is
not limited to “rapport building, incentivization, disinhibition, and security
management” (i. a. elliott, “a self-regulation model of sexual
grooming” (2017), 18
trauma, violence, & abuse
83, at
p. 88). it is “a slow and gradual process of active engagement and a
desensitization of the child’s inhibitions — with an increasing gain in power
and control over the young person” (
rayo,
at para. 139,
quoting m. ospina, c. harstall and l. dennett,
sexual
exploitation of children and youth over the internet: a rapid review of the
scientific literature
(2010), at p. 7).

at paragraphs 52 to 63, justice martin instructed sentencing judges to
bear the following circumstances in mind with respect to grooming:
a)
grooming need not culminate in a sexual act to be harmful.
b)
judges must focus on the character, content and consequences of the
messages as well as whether the communication resulted in the psychological
manipulation of the child.
c)
the presence of grooming may be aggravating with respect to
sentence.
d)
the absence of grooming is not mitigating.

at paragraphs 72 to 73, justice martin set out the following
non-exhaustive list of mitigating factors:
a)
whether the offender pleaded guilty;
b)
whether the offender expressed genuine remorse or gained insight
into the offence;
c)
whether the offender has undertaken rehabilitative steps such as
counselling and treatment;
d)
whether the offender has a prior criminal record;
e)
whether the offender has been honest and cooperative throughout the
sentencing process;
f)
the offender’s age at the time of the offence;
g)
whether the offender had a stable family life;
h)
whether the offender had stable employment;
i)
the presence of addiction and mental health
concerns and evidence of the offender’s progress in overcoming them.

at paragraphs 74 to 87, justice martin set out the following aggravating
factors to the sentence in the case of luring:
a)
the presence of grooming;
b)
the character of the communications between the offender and the
victim, including whether the duration and frequency of the communications were
long-term. it is noted that while a longer period of communications are
aggravating, shorter periods are not mitigating. sending a large volume of
messages or sending messages in a frequent or non-relenting way is aggravating;
c)
whether the communications were sexually explicit and objectifying,
involved graphic sexual content, made use of manipulative communications such
as expressions of love and affection or made use of trickery and lies;
d)
whether the victim was encouraged to share images;
e)
whether the victim was sent explicit images;
f)
whether the offender used a false name, identity
or age;
g)
whether the offender used deceitful tactics such as
encouraging the victim to
erase the communications, discouraging the victim from telling her parents or
other family members, encouraging the use of a platform that erases
communications to avoid detection, or suggesting a more secure platform;
h)
whether
the offender abused a position or relationship of trust, including
parent-child, teacher-child and family friend-child or exploited the role of
confidante;
i)
the exploitation of younger children is aggravating. the
exploitation of adolescent children is not mitigating;
j)
whether the victim was particularly vulnerable, such as the case
of children in care of the children’s aid society;
k)
whether
there was a wide gap in ages between the victim and the offender.

in
r. v. mv,
2023 onca 724, justice paciocco suggested that the upper range
for luring offences should be set at five years. this range was cited with
approval by chief justice tulloch in
pike, supra
and also motivated
chief justice tulloch’s decision to set the upper range for possession of child
pornography at five years.

in
mv,
the court imposed a four-year sentence (later adjusted to three and
a half years to account for totality) for an offender who entered a guilty plea
to one count of
luring. although the plea was entered to one count, the facts
involved two victims who were siblings, aged 8 and 10. the offender
communicated over the internet with the children for three and a half months. the
offender was found in possession of over twenty images and videos of the
children urinating, defecating and masturbating. he also sent them 44 images
of himself. he did not make any attempt to meet the children. he did,
however, share the images with another person.

in
r. v. av,
2025 onca 6, the court of appeal for ontario upheld a five
year sentence for an offender who was charged with luring and invitation to
sexual touching. the child was 11 and 12 at the time of the offences and the
offender was 20 to 21. they met on facebook. she sent him photos and two videos
of inserting a hairbrush into her anus. the offender had a prior record for
child pornography, for which he received a thirty-month penitentiary term.
2. sentencing
principles for exposure to a person under the age of 16 (
section 173(2)
)

with
respect to the offence under
section 173(2)
(exposure to a person under the age
of 18), in
r. v. alicandro,
2009 onca 133, justice doherty described the
gravamen of the offence in this way at paragraph 45:
section
173(2), like s. 172.1, was enacted to protect children against sexually
exploitive conduct. that object is not advanced by an interpretation which
requires that the victim be in the same physical place as the perpetrator. the
harm caused by the prohibited conduct and the danger it poses to young persons
flows from the conduct and the sexual purpose with which the conduct is done.
neither the harm nor the danger depends upon the victim being in close
proximity to the perpetrator. indeed, it could well be argued that the modern
day "flasher" surfing the internet for vulnerable children poses a
more significant risk to children than did his old- fashioned raincoat-clad
counterpart standing on some street corner.

in
r. v. hartle,
 o.j. 7028 (c.j.), justice
lahaie found that denunciation and deterrence were the primary sentencing
considerations for offences contrary to 173(2).

in
r. v. hobin,
2021 canlii 46102
(n.l.p.c.), judge
gorman surveyed pre- and post-
friesen
cases
dealing with section 173(2)
and determined at paragraph 100 that:
the
majority of sentences imposed for breaches of
section 173(2)
of the
criminal
code
have been in the range of five to six months of incarceration, despite
many of the offenders having no prior convictions. this illustrates that the
sentencing judges involved were placing their emphasis on the sentencing
principles of deterrence and denunciation.
application
of the sentencing principles to kt’s offences of luring (om and the unknown
female) and exposure to a person under the age of 18 (om)

kt
has entered pleas to two counts of
luring.

kt
has also entered a plea to one count of exposure to a person under the age of
18 as it relates to om, contrary to section 173.

the
first luring count and the exposure count involves om, a fifteen-year-old girl who
he met on
tik tok.

om
was 15 at the time of the offences and her profile on
tik tok
indicated
her age. i looked at the nature of the communication between kt and om (tab 5
of exhibit 1) and noted the following:
a)
he asked her if
she was a virgin and she replied, “yes”.
b)
he then told her
that he was getting a pizza but would send her money when he got home.
c)
he asked her to
say, “i want your cock k” once they started their video chat.
d)
in another
conversation, he offered to “save up for a couple of months” and get a hotel. 
he offered to “take it slow” and show her how to suck his penis. he offered
her $1200 if he could take her virginity.
e)
alternatively,
he offered to pay her $500 to come to her place and have her give him “a nice
long blowjob”. he stated that he wanted to perform cunnilingus for as long as
she wanted. he told her that she would love what his tongue could do. he told
her that it was his “fantasy to fuck a virgin”.
f)
om agreed
to send him a video of her breasts. kt agreed to this but asked her to say
“fuck my 14-year-old pussy” and watch him masturbate.
g)
records seized
show that kt e-transferred om $210.

police
located images of om’s genitalia and breasts on kt’s devices.

kt
also exposed his penis to om, thereby committing the exposure count.

the
second luring count involves an unknown female under the age of 18. i examined
the communications between kt and the unknown female (exhibit 1, tab 7) and
noted the following:
a)
kt asked the
unknown female if she was a virgin. she replied that she was.
b)
kt asked her to
send him videos of her “naked”. he told her to “get me hard”.
c)
he said that he
won’t save any of the videos that she sent him and he asked her to not save any
he sends too.
d)
she sent him
videos.
e)
he said, “u make
me so horny” and asked her to show him her breasts.

i
make the following findings with respect to the presence of the aggravating
factors outlined by justice martin in
bertrand marchand:
a)
the case
involving the communications between kt and om constitutes grooming as that term
has been discussed in
bertrand marchand.
he offered and paid money. he
offered to take her to a hotel and teach her sexual techniques.
b)
i do not have
much information about how often the conversations between kt and om or kt and
the unknown female took place and over what period of time. from the
screenshots i saw, i cannot find that they were frequent or unrelenting.
c)
the
communications with both om and the unknown female were sexually explicit and
objectifying. they also involved graphic sexual content. kt was obsessed with
is victims’ virginity. he sent om photos of his penis.
d)
in both cases,
the victims were encouraged to send sexually explicit materials to kt. in the
case of om, it was admitted that photos of her were actually received. in the
case of the unknown female, the chat between her and kt makes it clear that
photos or videos were sent (as evidenced by a camera icon in the chat), but
because the female is unknown, the police were not able to identify her as
among the pornography on kt’s phone.
e)
kt did not use a
false name. he did, however, lie about his age to om when he told her that he
was “a bit older” than she is.
f)
the chat
with both victims does not contain any evidence that kt told the victims not to
tell their parents, erase their communications or use a more secure platform. 
in both cases, the conversations took place over
tik tok,
a platform
that is known to this court to have the ability to delete conversations if the
parties have so adjusted their settings. it is a popular application because
it has this feature.
g)
kt was not in a
relationship of trust or a position of authority with either victim.
h)
there is no
evidence that the children were in a position of vulnerability due to being in
state care, of indigenous dissent, poverty or having a mental disability.
i)
when these
offences took place, kt was in his early 30s. the victims were under age 18. 
in other words, he was close to twice their age.

before
accounting for totality and pre-sentence custody, i would impose the following
sentences:
a)
for the offence
of
luring
as it relates to om, two years and six months. i note here that i
would have imposed a three year sentence, but for the fact that i am required
to impose a sentence of at least six months for the exposure charge and both
justice martin in
bertrand marchand
and justice paciocco in
mv
have
been careful to instruct sentencing judges to be careful of double counting of
aggravating factors.
b)
for the offence
of
luring
as it relates to the unknown female, one year consecutive.
c)
for the offence
of exposure to a person under the age of 18 years as it relates to om, six
months consecutive.
application of sentencing
principles to kt’s offence of exposure to a person under the age of 16 –
section 173(2)
in relation to k

from
my review of the crown’s materials (exhibit 1, tab 8), kt’s behaviour in relation
to k is similar to om:
a)
he asked her to
watch him masturbating;
b)
he told her that
he was “still shocked” that she was 15 years old;
c)
he asked her to
stick her tongue out when he started masturbating;
d)
he told her to
talk to him while he was masturbating;
e)
he told her that
he would not save anything;
f)
he offered
to pay her $250 if she flashed and said, “i want your cock, k”.

before
accounting for totality, i would assess this crime as essentially the same as
the offence against om and impose a sentence of six months consecutive.
principles of sentencing for
the crime of making sexually explicit material available to a person under 16
to facilitate commission of an offence

kt
has entered pleas in relation to this offence with respect to two young
persons, c, and kx.

the
facts with respect to c are set out in paragraph 28. the crown also filed one
conversation between kt and c, which is at exhibit 1, tab 4. in the
conversation, kt texted c and asked her to show him her breasts to help him get
hard. otherwise the conversation does not assist me.

the
facts with respect to kx are set out in paragraph 35. the crown also filed one
conversation between kt and kx which is at exhibit 1, tab 9. in the
conversation, kt texted kx and asked her to flash him once. kx said she could
not do that. kt then asked her what she was comfortable with; he suggested
that she send him non-nude pictures and “just watch”. he then offered her a
$100 amazon gift card if she watched and snapped him a few non nude photos. he
told her that she did not have to show or say anything – “just watch”. kx
agreed to this.

the
offences in section 171.1(1)(b) are similar to section 173(2) in that the
actus
reus
involves the accused sending “sexually explicit material” to a person
under the age of 16.

however,
that is where the similarity ends. unlike 173(2), which is designed to punish actual
exposure of the accused’s genital organs to young persons,
section 171.1(1)
(b)
has an added dimension: the accused must send the explicit images for the
purpose of facilitating the commission of another offence, including the
offences of sexual interference, invitation to sexual touching, bestiality in
the presence of a child, exposure to a person under the age of 16 (i.e. the
173(2) offence itself), sexual assault, or abduction.

“sexually
explicit material”, as that term is defined in section 171.1(5) has a broad
definition. it includes photographs, films, and videos that show a person
engaged in sexually explicit activity or material, the dominant characteristic
of which, is the depiction of a person’s genital organs or anal region, or
female breasts. it also includes audio, the dominant characteristic of which
is explicit sexual activity with a person.

most
germane here, it also includes written material, the dominant characteristic of
which, is the description of sexually explicit activity with a person.

recently
in
r. v. w.w.,
2025 onca 115
at paragraph
36, the court of appeal
explained the nature of the offence, finding that, “it is an inchoate crime
that is essentially focussed upon the intention of the accused as he engaged in
reprehensible but not criminal conduct.”

at
paragraph 38, the court of appeal cited with approval, the following extract
from
r. v. alicandro, supra,
at paragraph
20:
by criminalizing conduct that
is preparatory to the commission of the designated offences, parliament has
sought to protect the potential child victims of those designated crimes by
allowing the criminal law to intervene before the actual harm caused by the
commission, or even the attempted commission, of one
of the designated offences occurs.

the
court added:
a)
although it is
an inchoate crime, the offence is not “harm-free”. this is because the offence
targets children “through a grooming process involving the transmission of
sexually explicit material…. that readies them for designated offences yet to
occur.” this “robs them of their childhood entitlement to their sexual
innocence.”
b)
similar to the
offence of
luring, the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused had a specific intention of facilitating at least one of the enumerated
offences.
c)
the commission
of the enumerated offence need not be objectively possible, the accused need
not commit it or have the intention to commit it.
d)
“the crown could
prove the
mens
rea
by showing that the respondent sent the sexually explicit
material with the intention of helping to bring about” an enumerated offence, “or
to make” that offence “easier or more probable to commit”.
e)
one way of doing
so is by grooming the young person or reducing their inhibitions. conduct
framed as a “joke” which serves to “normalize the conduct in the child’s mind
and permit the accused to try and safely test the waters to determine if the
child is yet susceptible to the commission of an enumerated offence” is caught
by the section.
see
w.w., supra,
paragraphs
39, 43-46.

in
the case before me, the offence against c is the most serious of the two. the
communications support facilitation of two offences, exposure and sexual
assault. the reference to the breaking of c’s vagina is highly aggravating.

the
conversation with kx demonstrates the link between the offence, grooming and the
commission of the offence of exposure. when kx told kt that she was not
willing to “flash” him, he asked her to send him “non nude” photos and “just
watch”.

there
is not a lot of judicial consideration of the appropriate sentence for these
offences. in
r. v. allen,
2018 onsc 252, justice ditomaso found that
the minimum sentence survived constitutional scrutiny. he noted at paragraph 21
that:
in
the forefront of the court’s mind during the sentencing deliberations would be
general deterrence, specific deterrence and the moral blameworthiness of the
offender. the need to separate sexual predators from society for the
well-being of children must take precedence over the effects of the conviction
on the offender and the offender’s prospects for rehabilitation.

in
r. v. benson,
2022 oncj 370, justice green would have imposed an 18
month sentence on an offender who made sexually explicit materials available to
a four year old girl. the sentence imposed was a consecutive sentence to a 15
month sentence she would have imposed for breaching his section 161 order. citing
the principle of totality, justice green reduced the sentence imposed to allow
the offender to serve his sentence in the reformatory and also receive a period
of probation. it is noted that the probationary disposition would not have
been available if the accused had been sentenced to a penitentiary term.
application of the
principles of sentencing of 171.1(1)(b) offences to kt

in
this case, these offences are not sophisticated.

with
respect to the offence against kx, it is difficult to imagine an offence that
is less offensive than the facts disclosed here. prior to consideration of the
principles of totality and deduction for pre-sentence custody, i would
therefore impose the minimum sentence of six months, which is to be served
consecutive to the sentences on the other charges.

as
i have pointed out, the offence against c is much more aggravating. prior to consideration
of the principles of totality and deduction for pre-sentence custody, i would
therefore impose a sentence of nine months, which is to be served consecutive
to the sentences on the other charges.
principles of sentencing for
the crime of voyeurism

parliament’s
purpose in enacting the crime of voyeurism is to protect the privacy and sexual
integrity of individuals, “
particularly from new
threats posed by the abuse of evolving technologies.”:
r. v. jarvis,
2019
scc 10
at paragraph
48.

in the recent case of
r. v. riggs,
2024 onsc 2862,
justice goldstein sentenced a 60-year-old offender with some mental health
difficulties and no criminal record on four counts of voyeurism (against one
victim) to 16 months concurrent on each count. the accused took 106 photos
and 49 videos of the complainant, who was his neighbour. the images included
photos and video of the complainant in various states of undress with emphasis
on her breasts. they were taken in her backyard as well as in her bedroom. 
there were also images of the complainant having sex with her boyfriend. these
were taken in her bedroom. justice goldstein stated at paragraph 59:
i
agree with goodman j.’s point
in
jarvis
at para.
81
that the
pervasiveness of smart phones and other electronic devices make it incredibly
easy to commit the offence of voyeurism. as an economist might say, the
barriers to entry for a stalker or a voyeur are so low as to be virtually
non-existent. in this case, the offences appear to have been committed with
a phone and an ipad. general deterrence requires that those who would
invade the privacy of others understand that the offence is not cost-free and
may well result in a jail sentence.

in
r. v. rr
2022, oncj 407, at paragraph
58,
justice jones stated:
deterrence is an important
consideration when sentencing an offender for the crime of voyeurism. a clear
message must be sent to the community that those who would violate the sexual
integrity and personal dignity of their victims by surreptitiously taking
photographs or videos of their bodies will pay a significant price.

at
paragraph 69, justice jones set out a non-exhaustive list of offence-specific factors
that the court should examine in determining where to situate an offender
within the range of sentence:
a)
the
circumstances of the victim at the time of the events – including her age and
whether she was in a position of vulnerability;
b)
the
circumstances of the defendant, including his age and whether he was in a
position of trust towards the victim;
c)
the degree of
invasiveness of the crime including the extent the recordings violated the
sexual integrity of the victim;
d)
the location of
where the crime occurred;
e)
the number of
images or videos taken;
f)
whether
the images or videos taken were ultimately recovered and deleted, and/or
whether they were distributed to other persons including into the wider online
community such that it may exist forever further harming the victim;
g)
the impact on
the victim, including psychological harm; and
h)
whether the act
of voyeurism was committed in conjunction with or otherwise connected to
another criminal offence such as sexual assault.

to
this list, i would add two additional factors:
a)
the degree to
which the offender planned to commit the offence. cases where offenders take
elaborate measures to commit the offence, including the carefully orchestrated use
of hidden devices, are more aggravating. planned offences are more aggravating
than offences committed as crimes of opportunity.
b)
whether the victim
explicitly made it clear to the offender that she was not consenting to being
recorded, and the offender proceeded anyway. this is an aggravating factor. 
lack of it is not mitigating.
application of the
principles of sentencing of voyeurism to kt

in
the case before me, kt surreptitiously took a video recording of himself having
consensual sex with an adult unknown male using his cell phone.

the
videos were taken in kt’s bedroom.

the
victim did not consent to the sex being recorded.

kt
was not in a position of trust or authority with respect to the victim.

the
crime is very intrusive as it involved kt engaging in explicit sexual activity
with the victim.

it
appears as though only one video was taken.

there
is no evidence that the video was ever distributed to other persons including
the wider online community.

the
sexual activity between kt and the victim was consensual. the voyeurism was
not committed in tandem with another offence, such as sexual assault.

there
is no victim impact statement before me. nonetheless, offences such as this
can be extremely psychologically harmful to victims who must live in perpetual
fear that the images shared remain forever on the internet.

the
images were taken after the victim raised the issue of the presence of kt’s
camera and made it clear that he was not consenting to recording.

the
images were taken by kt using his cell phone. there is no evidence of careful
planning or the use of elaborate measures to commit the offence, such as the
carefully orchestrated use of hidden devices. this was a crime of
opportunity.

in
my view the appropriate sentence is 12 months consecutive.
summing up – the statutory
requirement of imposing
consecutive sentences for
child pornography, luring and sexual offences against different children

the provisions of section 718.3(7) require me to impose consecutive
sentences for the following offences committed by kt:
a)
making sexually explicit material available to a person under the
age of 16, contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code;
b)
exposure to om, a person under the age of 16, contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code;
c)
possession of child pornography contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal
code;
d)
communicating with om, a person under the age of 16 for the purpose
of facilitating child pornography, contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal
code;
e)
communicating with an unknown person under the age of 18 for the
purpose of facilitating child pornography contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(a) of
the
criminal code;
f)
exposure to a person under the age of 16 (k),
contrary to
section 173(2)
of the
criminal code;
g)
making sexually explicit material available to a person under the
age of 18 (kx), contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code.

in
bertrand marchand,
justice martin described the consecutive/concurrent
dilemma as it applies to the context of sentencing for luring this way at
paragraph 95 to 98:
generally speaking, “offences
that are so closely linked to each other as to constitute a single criminal
adventure may, but are not required to, receive concurrent sentences, while all
other offences are to receive consecutive sentences” (
friesen, at para.
155; see
also
criminal code, s. 718.3(4)(b)(i)). determining whether
sentences should be consecutive or concurrent is a fact-specific inquiry to be
undertaken in the context of each case (c. c. ruby,
sentencing
(10th
ed. 2020), at §14.13).
luring
is legislatively linked
to listed secondary offences: an offender must communicate for the purpose of
facilitating the commission of one such offence. while there will be cases
where luring stands alone, it often accompanies the actual commission of a
listed secondary offence. but the luring that preceded or produced the offence
is in no way subsumed or supplanted within the secondary offence. this is
because the offence of luring protects a distinct social interest and causes
distinct harms compared to the secondary offences (
rayo, at paras. 130 and 134).
offences constituting
“invasions of different legally protected interests” can be sentenced
consecutively, even if they form part of the same criminal transaction (
rayo, at
para. 136, quoting
r.
v. gummer
(1983),
1983 canlii 5286 (on ca),
38 c.r. (3d) 46
(ont. c.a), at p. 49;
r. v. gillis,
2009 onca 312,
248 o.a.c. 1,
at para.
9;
r. v. morton,
2021 abca 29, at paras.
32‑33
(canlii)
).
parliament intentionally targeted conduct that precedes the commission of the
enumerated sexual offences and seeks to protect children from the possibility
of sexual exploitation facilitated by the internet (
rayo, at paras. 138-39;
reynard, at
paras. 19-20;
alicandro,
at para.
36;
legare,
at para. 25). as set out above, luring can cause distinct harms as a
result of psychological manipulation. as such, in most cases luring will
attract a consecutive sentence (
rayo,
at paras. 133-43;
r.
v. mclean,
2016 skca 93,
484 sask. r. 137, at paras.
50-53;
miller, at
paras. 22‑23). as
noted
in
rayo, the distinct offence of luring may seem to
go unpunished, at least in part, where the luring sentence runs concurrently to
the sentences for the related offences (para. 152).
this is not to say that luring
must always be sentenced consecutively.
unless so mandated by
s. 718.3(7),
sentencing judges retain discretion on this point. however, in exercising their
discretion, judges must remain cognizant of the fact that the offence of luring
constitutes an invasion of a different legally protected interest. the judge is
obliged to explain why the sentence is to be served concurrently with the
penalties imposed for other infractions. the reason for imposing a concurrent
sentence must be provided.
i also note that judges must be mindful not to
double count: where a judge orders that a sentence for luring be served
consecutively to any sentence for a secondary offence, the secondary offence
cannot act as an aggravating factor in determining the luring sentence.
[emphasis
mine]
subtotalling
the sentence i would impose before considering the principle of totality and
before accounting for pre-sentence custody

in summary, before considering the principle of totality and before
accounting for pre-sentence custody, the sentences that i would impose are:
1.
information 22-37100396
a)
criminally harassing ba, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days;
b)
criminally harassing hbc, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days consecutive;
c)
criminally harassing rl, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days consecutive;
d)
criminally harassing ac, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days consecutive;
e)
indecently communicating with ad, contrary to
section 372(2)
of the
criminal
code
–
30 days consecutive;

total sentence is 13 months.
2. information
23-37101038

with respect to this information, the sentence that i would impose
prior to consideration of totality is:
a)
making sexually explicit material available to c, a person under the
age of 16, contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
–
nine
months consecutive;
b)
exposure to om, a person under the age of 16, contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code
– six months consecutive;
c)
possession of child pornography contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal
code
– 48 months consecutive;
d)
luring
(om) contrary 172.1(1) of the
criminal code –
18
months consecutive;
e)
communicating with an unknown person under the age of 16 for the
purpose of facilitating child pornography contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(a) of
the
criminal code
– 12 months consecutive;
f)
voyeurism, contrary to
section 162(1)
of the
criminal
code –
12 months consecutive;
g)
exposure to a person under the age of 16 (k), contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code
–
six months consecutive;
h)
making sexually explicit material available to a person under the
age of 18 (kx), contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
–
six
months consecutive.

total sentence eight years, eight months.

total sentence across both informations: 9 years, 10 months.
the
principle of totality

flowing out of the principle of proportionality is the
principle of totality which is specifically enshrined in
section 718.2
(c)
quoted above. in essence, where consecutive sentences are imposed, the
combined sentence must not be unduly long or harsh.

totality is a principle of sentence, the purpose of which
is to ensure that the total sentence imposed does not extinguish the
rehabilitative potential of the offender:
r. v. angelis,
2016 onca 675
at paragraph
51.

the
application of the principles of totality, proportionality and restraint
require me to ensure that any cumulative sentence imposed does not exceed kt’s
overall culpability. a cumulative sentence which is substantially above the
sentence for the most serious of the offences may offend the totality
principle. even where sentences for individual crimes, viewed in isolation are
appropriate, collectively they may amount to a longer term of imprisonment than
is warranted or which may be crushing:
r. v. saikaley,
2017 onca 374
at
paragraphs
158 to 161.

there
are two ways to pay heed to the principle of totality:
a)
a sentencing
judge may decide a fit sentence for each crime and then consider whether the
total sentence should be reduced to account for totality;
b)
alternatively, a
sentencing judge may, having regard to the principle of totality, decide the
overall fit sentence and then apportion individual sentences to each crime.

although
the latter approach has been preferred in ontario for many years (see
r. v.
jewell,
1995 canlii 1897
(onca) and
r. v. ahmed,
2017 onca 76
), it
is now clear that either method is acceptable:
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc
9
at paragraph
157;
r. v.
owusu-sarpong,
2023 onca 336.

as i will discuss below, in a case such as this, where
the
code
requires me to impose consecutive sentences and minimum
sentences for some offences, the former approach lends better to the sentencing
exercise.

this was also the case in
r. v. bertrand marchand, supra,
a
child luring case, where justice martin held at paragraphs 92 and 93:
i agree with the sentencing
judge’s approach in this case and believe it has benefits over the alternative
manner of simply setting a global amount for multiple offences. this sequential
approach ensures a separate consideration of the fit and appropriate punishment
of each offence. given the separate objectives and distinct criteria for the
luring offence, it was appropriate to examine each offence individually [
translation
] “in order to understand
properly the weight this offence contributes to the offender’s moral
blameworthiness” (
rayo,
at para. 55).
articulating individual
sentences for each offence provides needed clarity and is of great assistance
when one of the challenged punishments are varied on appeal or declared to be
unconstitutional. setting an individual sentence for each offence
provides transparency and allows a judge to weigh the seriousness of each
offence. clearly identifying individual sentences may also prove to be of great
assistance in any subsequent sentencing proceedings should an offender
re-
offend
— for example, by providing sentencing judges with a starting point when
applying the “jump principle” to repeat convictions for the same
offences (
r. v. borde
(2003),
2003 canlii 4187 (on
ca),
63 o.r. (3d) 417 (c.a.), at para.
39
).

the crown submitted that a
global sentence of eight years was appropriate.

with respect to information
22-37100396, the crown proposed a sentence of between 30 and 120 days on each
count concurrent.

with respect to information
23-37101038, the crown proposed a sentence of six years and three months.

these do not add to eight
years.

notwithstanding the crown’s
arithmetical error, in taking a “last look” (which in this case is really a
second last look given the issue of pre-sentence custody) i cannot quarrel with
the argument that the breadth of the offences committed by kt justify an eight-year
global sentence. i find that a longer period of incarceration would crush kt
and zap the need to use the period of incarceration for the purpose of rehabilitating
him.

prior to consideration of
pre-sentence custody, therefore the sentence that i would impose is as follows:
1.
information 22-37100396
a)
criminally harassing ba, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
6 months;
b)
criminally harassing hbc, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days concurrent;
c)
criminally harassing rl, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days concurrent;
d)
criminally harassing ac, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
90 days concurrent;
e)
indecently communicating with ad, contrary to
section 372(2)
of the
criminal
code
–
30 days concurrent.
f)
total sentence: 6 months.
2.
information 23-37101038
a)
making sexually explicit material available to c, a person under the
age of 16, contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code
–
this
offence carries a minimum sentence of six months. i reduce the nine-month
sentence, that i would have otherwise imposed, to the minimum to reflect the
principle of totality. as is statutorily required, this must be served
consecutive to kt’s other offences.
b)
exposure to om, a person under the age of 16, contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code
– this offence carries a minimum sentence of
90 days. i reduce the six-month sentence that i would have otherwise imposed,
to the minimum to reflect the principle of totality. as is statutorily
required, this must be served consecutive to kt’s other sentences.
c)
possession of child pornography contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal
code.
i reduce the 48-month sentence that i would have otherwise imposed
to 36 months consecutive to account for the principle of totality. as is
statutorily required, this must be served consecutive to kt’s other sentences.
d)
luring
(om) contrary 172.1(1)(b) of the
criminal code –
18
months consecutive. i decline to reduce the sentence imposed to account for
totality. as is statutorily required, this must be served consecutive to kt’s
other sentences.
e)
luring
(unknown person) contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal
code
– 12 months consecutive. i decline to reduce the sentence impose to
account for totality. as is statutorily required, this must be served
consecutive to kt’s other sentences.
f)
voyeurism, contrary to
section 162(1)
of the
criminal
code –
12 months consecutive.
to account for the principle of
totality, i reduce the sentence to six months. i decline to order that the
sentence be served concurrently because the offence in question protects a
separate legal interest from those in the other offences. it also makes it
clear that kt’s offending behaviour crosses age and gender.
g)
exposure to a person under the age of 16 (k), contrary to
section
173(2)
of the
criminal code
–
six months consecutive. this crime
carries a minimum sentence of 90 days. to account for the principle of
totality, i reduce the sentence to the minimum. i am statutorily required to
impose a consecutive sentence.
h)
making sexually explicit material available to a person under the
age of 18 (kx), contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
–
six
months consecutive. this is the minimum sentence. i am statutorily required
to impose a consecutive sentence.

total sentence: 7 years, 6 months.
the facts
with respect to kt’s pre-sentence custody – lockdown and overcrowding
1.
lockdown

kt
has been in custody at ocdc since september 14, 2023.

i
have calculated his time served at 569 actual days.

defence
counsel is also seeking additional credit for harsh conditions in custody.

almost
daily i receive “lockdown reports”, such as the report filed by defence counsel
in this case, on consent as exhibit 11. it is authored by staff sergeant scott
munro, who is the security manager at ocdc and dated march 26, 2025.

these
reports are staggering. lockdown is no longer an exception. it is now
routine.

in
kt’s case, as i will discuss below, the report also discusses overcrowding. 
this is the first time i have received a report that openly discusses what
offenders have been telling their lawyers, and their lawyers have been telling
me, for months: overcrowding is also no longer an exception. it is now also
routine.

the
letter details that between his date of admission at ocdc on september 14, 2023
and march 26, 2025, kt has been on lockdown as follows:
a)
62 full days;
b)
23 days where he
was on lockdown for both the morning and afternoon;
c)
24 days where he
was on lockdown for both the afternoon and evening;
d)
43 days where he
was on lockdown for the morning;
e)
13 days where he
was on lockdown for the afternoon;
f)
183 days
where he was on lockdown for the evening.

thus,
of the 569 actual days that kt has spent in pre-sentence custody, for 348 of
those, he has been subjected to some sort of lockdown.

staff
sergeant munro explained what a lockdown or partial lockdown means, stating:
a lockdown can be either the
entire institution or a partial lockdown which is part of the institution. a
lockdown means that a corridor/unit is not unlocked due to staff shortages,
maintenance issues or repairs or security concerns. the reason for the lockdown
will determine if lockdown will be the entire institution or a partial
lockdown. when a corridor/unit is lockdown, all inmates housed in the entire
corridor/unit will not be unlocked as a group to have access to the dayroom,
the shower, telephones or the yard. if it is safe to do so, we will still do
access for inmates one cell at a time so they can have access to the shower and
a telephone. when the institution is not lockdown, the access to the yards is
only done in the morning and afternoon hours.

throughout
his incarceration, kt has been kept in a “pod”. staff sergeant munro
explained:
inmates who are housed in the
pod area will always eat their breakfast, lunch and supper in their cells.
when the inmates are out in the
dayroom, they will have access to the phones, showers, and television. when
inmates are locked from their cells, the television can be seen from the
cells.

the
only bright spot in all of this is an increase in the number of hours when an
inmate will have access to the dayroom.

between
kt’s admission to the institution on september 23, 2023 and september 30, 2024,
“unlock times” allowing access to the dayroom were as follows:
a)
two hours in the
morning;
b)
two and three
quarter hours in the afternoon;
c)
an hour and a
half in the evening.

on
september 30, 2004, “unlock times” were adjusted to allow for:
a)
two hours in the
morning;
b)
four hours in
the afternoon;
c)
two hours in the
evening.
2. overcrowding

kt’s
cell is equipped with one bunk bed and it is designed for two inmates. the
letter indicates that overcrowding has become a significant concern. by my
calculations, from the dates provided by staff sergeant munro, for 456 days of
the 569 days he has spent in custody, kt has been subjected to overcrowding
conditions where there are three people in a cell designed for two.

this
essentially means that one offender must sleep on the floor.

i
am grateful that the ontario ministry of solicitor general keeps such detailed
records that allows for some transparency with respect to the alarming
conditions at the ottawa carleton detention centre.

these
conditions are harsh, deplorable and inhumane. we are now to the point where
the court must be clearer that it will not tolerate subjecting offenders to
them.
3. other relevant
information pertaining to ocdc

the
ocdc is the main remand centre for individuals with charges in renfrew county
who are held in custody before and sometimes after trial. it has been this way
since the misguided decision to close the pembroke jail in 2005.

ocdc
has been notorious for its poor living conditions for years. even before the
pandemic, there were frequent inquests and media reports which highlighted the
deplorable conditions at the institution.

since
the pandemic, the problems have worsened.

the
only other fact that i will point out is that it is known to this court that
offenders serving a sentence or on remand for a period in excess of thirty days
are routinely transferred out to another institution in order to deal with the
problem of overcrowding.

in
the case of ocdc, inmates are most often transferred to the central east
correctional centre in lindsay, ontario, although there have been cases of
inmates being transferred to quinte detention centre in napanee and as far away
as the maplehurst correctional centre in milton. the transfer of such inmates
is particularly problematic for the following reasons:
a)
the distance makes it more difficult for them to have visits with family,
friends and loved ones;
b)
the distance makes it more difficult for them to have access to their
lawyers;
c)
for offenders like kt, there is often a disconnect between the treatment
regime in one institution and the treatment regime available in another.

for
this reason, this court is often asked to permit offenders like kt to have more
frequent remands in order to frustrate the institutional transfer process to
ensure for better access to family and friends, lawyers and better continuity
of health care.

i
note that in this case, despite all of the dismal information with respect to
the conditions under which kt has been housed, there is clear evidence that he
is being medicated and his health care is being managed so that he is better
able to manage some of his psychiatric conditions.

for
this, i commend the health care department at ocdc.

i
have no doubt that had he been transferred out, his condition would have
destabilized and declined. that is my experience with other offenders.
the law with respect to
unduly harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody

in
r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26
the supreme court made it clear that pretrial
custody ought to receive 1.5:1 credit in order to take three factors into
consideration:
a)
first, the fact
that offenders do not receive earned remission for pretrial custody;
b)
second, the fact
that offenders who are housed in remand centres or detention centres often do
not have access to richer rehabilitation programming such as one might find in
a correctional centre or penitentiary; and
c)
third, detention
centres or correctional institutions are often places where there is
overcrowding, inmate turn over and labour disputes. all of these factors lead
to a situation where pre-sentence custody is actually more onerous.

in
r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754
at paragraph
6
the court of appeal
found that additional credit is available where the offender serves their
pre-sentence custody in particularly harsh circumstances, stating:
…in the appropriate circumstances, particularly harsh
presentence incarceration conditions can provide mitigation apart from and beyond
the 1.5 credit referred to in s. 719(3.1). in considering whether any
enhanced credit should be given, the court will consider both the conditions of
the presentence incarceration and the impact of those conditions on the
accused.

in
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344
at paragraph
52, justice doherty made it
clear that credit for harsh conditions in custody cannot “devour” an otherwise
fit sentence. he stated at paragraph 52-53:
the “
duncan”
credit is not a deduction from the
otherwise appropriate sentence but is one of the factors to be taken into
account in determining the appropriate sentence. particularly punitive
pretrial incarceration conditions can be a mitigating factor to be taken into
account with other mitigating and aggravating factors in arriving at the
appropriate sentence from which the “
summers”
credit will be deducted. 
because the “
duncan”
credit is one of the mitigating factors to be taken
into account, it cannot justify the imposition of a sentence which is
inappropriate, having regard to all of the relevant mitigating and aggravating
factors.
often times, a specific number of days or months are given
as “
duncan”
credit. while this quantification is not necessarily
inappropriate, it may skew the calculation of the ultimate sentence. by
quantifying the “
duncan”
credit, only one of the presumably several
relevant factors, there is a risk that the “
duncan”
credit will be
improperly treated as a deduction in the same way as the “
summers”
credit. if treated in that way, the “
duncan”
credit can take on an
unwarranted significance in fixing the ultimate sentence imposed.

unlike
summers
credit,
duncan
credit is not something that is rigidly and
mechanically applied the same way in every case. it depends on the individual
offender being sentenced, the specific circumstances of their pre-sentence
custody, how that pre-sentence custody has affected them and how that credit
relates to the overall fitness of their sentence.

recently
in
r. v. brown,
2025 onca 164
the court of appeal reiterated the
approach taken in
marshall.
in
brown, the court of appeal stated
at paragraph 4:
put
simply, judges must recognize that where an offender has already experienced
particularly punitive conditions during their pre-sentence custody, the
punishment they receive should be reduced to take this into account, but the
degree of mitigation is a matter of discretion in all the circumstances, and
not a matter of mathematical precision.

the
court of appeal in
brown
did not have the benefit of the supreme court
of canada’s recent decision in
john
howard society v. saskatchewan,
2025
scc 6.

in
that case, writing for the majority, the chief justice commented at paragraph
59 on “disciplinary segregation” and “loss of earned remission” as a form of
punishment:
….both
of these punishments have frequently been understood as
exceptionally severe deprivations of liberty for those
already living within a prison.
unlike
most other punishments imposed on inmates, both significantly curtail an
inmate’s freedom of movement while exacerbating or continuing the inmate’s
segregation from society. [emphasis mine].

from what i can see, the nature of the in-custody conditions that
the supreme court was addressing in
john
howard,
differ little from the
conditions that staff sergeant munro described in exhibit 11.

these conditions were sufficient for the supreme court to take the
unusual step of reversing previous holdings to find that the onus of proof in
the case of institutional misconduct should now be subject to the criminal, as
opposed to the civil, standard of proof. this will undoubtedly make it more
difficult for the crown to prove institutional misconduct in a penal setting
where misconduct will lead to severe deprivation of liberty.

in my view, the court must begin to go further to distance itself
from unduly harsh, if not inhumane, conditions in our jails. the overcrowding
and lockdown conditions necessitated by covid-19 are long past. in appropriate
cases -- such as kt -- the court should consider making the amount of
mitigation for harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody more obvious in sentencing
judgments.

marshall
recognises that the imposition
of detailed credit for unduly harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody is not
wrong. it merely mandates that judges make decisions which make the fitness of
the ultimate sentence as the primary consideration.

my respectful view is that more transparency is required from the
court with respect to the effect that unduly harsh conditions in pre-sentence
custody has on the calculation of sentence. sometimes that will not be
possible. sometimes it will be necessary to ignore unduly harsh conditions to
render a fit sentence.

this is not one of those cases.

had kt’s pre-sentence incarceration been subject to infrequent
lockdown and infrequent overcrowding, i would have had no hesitation in giving
the minimum
summers
credit of 1.5:1 for pre-sentence custody. 
infrequent lockdown and infrequent overcrowding have always been a basic aspect
of life in a penal setting.

here, however, the vast majority of the time he has served has been
subject to lockdown and overcrowding, the combination of which must have
affected every aspect of in-custody life. it is the essence of “hard time.”

i therefore calculate kt’s presentence custody credit, including
summers
credit at approximately 2.5:1. in other words, i recognise that high
likelihood that rarely a day went by where kt was not subjected to overcrowding
or lockdown or both. this also recognises that kt is somewhat better-off
having spent his pre-sentence custody at ocdc where he had greater access to
family and friends, better access to counsel and better health care.

i note that i have used this calculation as a guideline.
marshall
and
brown
make it clear that
duncan
is discretionary. how much,
if any, credit an offender is entitled to will vary from one case to the next
depending upon the period in lockdown and/or overcrowded conditions, the
cost/benefit analysis, if any, of having the offender housed in an institution,
and the overall fitness of the sentence. 2.5:1 is a convenient ratio in this
case. every case will be different.

i also note that if i start with the premise that the gross sentence
after deduction for totality is eight years, the remaining sentence is more
than four years.

following
marshall,
in my view, the remaining sentence is amply
fit. it is still a substantial sentence which pays heed to the primacy of the
principles of deterrence and denunciation, separates kt from society and is
sufficiently long to ensure that he has access to rigorous programs aimed at
his rehabilitation.

with respect to denunciation and deterrence, we also must not ignore
that being housed in unduly harsh and difficult conditions is also inherently
deterrent and denunciative.
final sentence imposed on
information 22-37100396

i therefore impose sentence as follows:
a)
criminally harassing ba, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
72 days served, 180 days credit.
b)
criminally harassing hbc, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
suspended sentence, 1 day probation concurrent.
c)
criminally harassing rl, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
–
suspended sentence, 1 day probation concurrent.
d)
criminally harassing ac, contrary to
section 264(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
– suspended sentence, 1 day probation concurrent.
e)
indecently communicating with ad, contrary to
section 372(2)
of the
criminal
code, suspended sentence, 1 day probation concurrent.

pursuant to
section 743.21
of the
criminal code, i make an order
prohibiting kt from having any contact or communication, directly or
indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means with ba, hbc, rl, ac or
ad, or any member of their family.

pursuant to
section 487.051
of the
criminal code,
i make an
order requiring the kt to provide a sample of his dna in the national dna
databank.
section 264
is a secondary designated offence. i find given the
nature of the offences, it is in the best interests of the administration of
justice to make this order.

pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal code, i make a
firearms prohibition order for a period of ten years.

given that kt has been in custody for a substantial period of time,
and still has a substantial period of time to serve, i find it would constitute
an undue hardship for him to pay the victim fine surcharge and i order it
waived.
final sentence imposed on
information 23-37101038

with respect to count 2, communicating with a person under the age
of 16 to facilitate commission of an offence contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(b) i
impose sentence of 72 days served, 6 months credit.

with respect to count 3, exposure to om, contrary to
section 173(2)
of the
criminal code, i impose sentence of 36 days served, 90 days
credit.

with respect to count 6, possession of child pornography contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal code, i impose sentence of 389 days
served, 970 days credit. this exhausts kt’s pre-sentence custody. i impose a
further 125 days in custody.

with respect to count 9, luring om contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(b)
of the
criminal code,
i impose 18 months (540 days) consecutive.

with respect to count 14, luring an unknown person contrary to
section 172.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code, i impose a sentence of 12
months (360 days) consecutive.

with respect to count 24,
voyeurism, contrary to
section 162(1)
of
the
criminal code, i impose a sentence of six months (180 days) consecutive.

with respect to count 26, exposure to k contrary to
section 173(2)
of the
criminal code,
i impose a sentence of 90 days consecutive.

with respect to count 27, communicating with a person under the age
of 18 to facilitate commission of an offence contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(a) of
the
criminal code, i impose a sentence of six months (180 days) consecutive.

the total sentence from todays date is 1,475 days left to serve.

pursuant to
section 743.21
of the
criminal code, i make an
order prohibiting kt from having any contact or communication, directly or
indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means with c, om, kx, k or any
member of their families.

pursuant to
section 487.051, i make an order requiring kt to provide
a sample of his dna for inclusion of the national dna databank. counts 2, 3,
6, 9, 14, 26 and 27 are primary designated offences.

pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal code,
i make a
firearms prohibition order for a period of ten years. this runs concurrently
with the order i imposed on the information 22-37100396.

pursuant to sections 490.012 and 490.013, i make an order
requiring kt to comply with the
sex offender information registration act
for
the rest of his life. in making this order, i am satisfied that kt has been
convicted of offences involving two or more designated offences. i am also satisfied
that those offences demonstrate, or form part of a pattern of behaviour which
shows that kt presents an increased risk of reoffending or committing a further
crime of a sexual nature, particularly in relation to females under 18 years of
age.

pursuant to section 161(a.1) i make an order prohibiting kt from
being within 250 meters of any place he knows c, om, kx, k or any member of
their family to live, work, go to school frequent or any place he knows them to
be. this order will be in place for the rest of his life.

pursuant to section 161(b), i make an order prohibiting kt from
seeking, obtaining or continuing in any employment, whether or not that
employment is remunerated, or becoming a volunteer in a capacity, that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards a person under the age of 16
years. this order will be in place for the rest of his life.

pursuant to section 161(c), i make an order prohibiting kt from a
lifetime order from having contact or communication with any person under the
age of 16 unless kt does so under the supervision of that person’s parent or
guardian and that person’s parent or guardian is aware of kt’s offending
behaviour except for contact during the course of short commercial transactions
or chance encounters in a public place. for greater certainty, it is my
intention that this order will prohibit kt from working in
any
employment, whether or not that employment is remunerated, or being a volunteer
in
any
capacity that involves working with other employees or volunteers
that are under the age of 16 years. this order will be in place for the rest
of his life.

pursuant
to section 161(d), i make an order prohibiting kt from using the internet or
other digital network, unless he does so in accordance with the following
conditions:
a)
his
use of the internet or other digital network is supervised by an adult person
of at least 21 years of age, who is aware of his offending behaviour;
b)
at no
time may he use the internet or other digital network for the purpose of
communicating with any person under the age of 16 years;
c)
at no
time may he use the internet or other digital network to access any social
media applications; and
d)
at no
time
may
he use the internet or other digital network
to access any pornographic websites, regardless of whether those sites are
legal or not.

the
crown may draft an order for the forfeiture of the devices seized by police for
destruction as offence related property. the order should be approved by
defence counsel as to form and content before it is forwarded the to court. i
will remain seized in the event that there is disagreement as to the items that
are subject to this order.

given
that kt has been in custody for a significant period of time and is going into
custody for just over four years, i find it would constitute an undue hardship
for him to pay the victim fine surcharge and i order it waived.

i make a recommendation that
the
correctional service of canada and/or the ontario ministry of the solicitor
general:
a)
classify kt as quickly as possible;
b)
arrange a full and complete further
assessment of kt’s intellectual capacity to be conducted by a duly qualified
psychiatrist and/or psychologist;
c)
arrange a full and complete further
assessment of kt’s risk in the community to be conducted by a duly qualified
psychiatrist and/or psychologist;
d)
ensure that copies of his health care
records pertaining to his period in custody at ocdc are immediately transmitted
to the correctional service so that there is as much continuity in kt’s health
care as possible; and
e)
transfer him as quickly as possible to an
appropriate institution where he can receive the sexual offending, and
psychological and/or psychiatric treatment he desperately needs.
released: april
16, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson

in
r. v. king,
2022 onca 665
at paragraph
183, associate chief
justice fairburn and justice doherty stated at paragraph 183, “
we must remain ever mindful of imposing more demands on an
already overly burdened and complex criminal justice system. the criminal law
is not calling for more complexity. if anything, it is calling out for
simplicity and, most importantly, quality justice delivered with
efficiency:
r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27,
 1 s.c.r. 631, at paras.
3, 27, 45.”