source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj415/2025oncj415.html

a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of
the
criminal
code,
which is concerned with the consequence
of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as
follows:
486.4 
order restricting publication — sexual offences.
—(1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the complainant or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following
offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160,
162, 163.1, 170, 171, 172, 172.1, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272, 273,
279.01, 279.02, 279.03, 346 or 347,
(ii) an offence under section 144 (rape), 145 (attempt to commit
rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156 (indecent assault on male) or 245
(common assault) or subsection 246(1) (assault with intent) of the
criminal code,
chapter c-34
of
the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it read immediately before january 4,
1983, or
(iii) an offence under subsection 146(1) (sexual intercourse with a
female under 14) or (2) (sexual intercourse with a female between 14 and 16) or
section 151 (seduction of a female between 16 and 18), 153 (sexual intercourse
with step-daughter), 155 (buggery or bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166
(parent or guardian procuring defilement) or 167 (householder permitting
defilement) of the
criminal
code,
chapter
c-34
of the revised statutes of canada, 1970, as it read immediately
before january 1, 1988; or
(
b
) two or more offences
being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence
referred to in any of subparagraphs (
a
)(i) to (iii).
(2)
mandatory
order on application.
— in proceedings in respect of the
offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding
judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable
opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the
complainant of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by
the complainant, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 
offence.
—(1) every person who fails to comply with an order
made under
subsection
486.4(1),
(2)
or
(3)
or
486.5(1)
or
(2)
is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. cellupica,
2025 oncj 415
date: 2025 08 05
court file#
23-40000522
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
alyssa cellupica
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on july 28, 29 and 31, 2025
written
reasons for judgment released on august 5, 2025
p. kaur................................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
j. mann............................................................................................... counsel
for a. cellupica
jones j.:
introduction

in april 2022, ms. alyssa cellupica and f.a. were both living in a
shelter in downtown toronto. they were in an intimate partner relationship.
f.a. was a refugee, having sought asylum after arriving in canada from saudi
arabia, where they faced death threats due to their activism.


there, f.a. met ms. cellupica. on two separate dates in april 2022, f.a.
alleges that ms. cellupica sexually assaulted them.

ms. cellupica is presumed innocent. the crown must prove the essential
elements of the charges against her beyond a reasonable doubt.
sexual assault law

for a charge of sexual assault, the crown must prove the
actus reus
and
mens rea. to establish the
actus reus
of the offence, the
crown must prove (1) a touching of the complainant by the accused, (2) that the
touching was of a sexual nature, and (3) the absence of consent to the sexual
touching.

the first two elements are determined objectively and the third element,
the absence of consent, is determined subjectively: see
r. v. ewanchuk,
1999 canlii 711 (scc), at paras.
25-26. the crown must prove that the
complainant, in their mind, did not want the sexual touching in question to
take place: see
r. v. othman,
2025 onca 449, at para.
48.

to establish the necessary
mens rea, the crown must prove that
the accused knew of, or was wilfully blind to, or was reckless about the
absence of the complainant’s consent to the sexual activity: see
r. v.
barton,
2019 scc 33, at para.
87;
r. v. h.w.,
2022 onca 15, at para.
37; and
othman, at para.
49.

consent is defined in
s. 273.1(1)
of the
criminal code
for the
purpose of sexual assault as “the voluntary agreement of the complainant to
engage in the sexual activity in question”.
section 273.1(1.1)
requires the
consent to be present at the time that the sexual activity in question takes
place.
sections 273.1(2)
(d) and (e) of the
criminal code
stipulate that
no consent may be lawfully obtained by an accused person if the complainant
expressed by words or conduct a lack of agreement to engage in the activity, or
if the complainant, having consented to engage in sexual activity, expressed,
by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to continue to engage in the activity.

furthermore, pursuant to
criminal code
section 273.2(c), it is
not a defence to a charge under
section 271
that the accused believed that the
complainant consented to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the
charge, where there is no evidence that the complainant’s voluntary
agreement to the activity was “affirmatively expressed by words or actively
expressed by conduct”.
assessing credibility and reliability

a criminal trial is not a “credibility contest where the trier of fact
must choose whether to believe one side or another”:
r. v. i.w.s.,
2017
onca 409, at para.
14. rather, in a case such as this, the court must apply the
approach to assessing the evidence described in
r. v. w. d.,
1991 canlii
93 (scc):
•
first, if the judge accepts the evidence of the accused, then the
accused must be acquitted.
•
second, if i do not believe the testimony of the accused, i could
still be left with a reasonable doubt, and i must acquit the accused.
•
third, even if the testimony of the accused does not raise a
reasonable doubt, i have to consider all of the evidence including the evidence
adduced by the crown to satisfy myself that the crown has met its high burden
and proven beyond a reasonable doubt all of the essential elements of the
offences.

i
must consider both the credibility and reliability of each witness’s evidence.
credibility relates to the veracity, or the truthfulness of a witness’s
evidence and reliability relates to the accuracy of the witness’s testimony,
including their ability to accurately observe, recall and recount the events in
question:
r. v. h.c.,
2009 onca 56, at para.
41.

in
r. v. a.m.,
2014 onca 769, at paras.
12-14, the court of appeal outlined
certain principles that a judge should consider when evaluating the credibility
and reliability of a witness’s evidence. they include the following (with the
citations removed from the original):
•
one of the most valuable means of assessing witness credibility
is to examine the consistency between what the witness said in the witness box
and what she has said on other occasions, whether or not under oath...
inconsistencies may emerge in a witness' testimony at trial, or between their
trial testimony and statements previously given. inconsistencies may also
emerge from things said differently at different times, or from omitting to
refer to certain events at one time while referring to them on other occasions.
•
inconsistencies vary in their nature and importance. some are
minor, others are not. some concern material issues, others peripheral
subjects. where an inconsistency involves something material about which an
honest witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a
carelessness with the truth about which the trier of fact should be concerned…
•
a trial judge giving reasons for judgment is neither under the
obligation to review and resolve every inconsistency in a witness' evidence,
nor respond to every argument advanced by counsel… that said, a trial judge should
address and explain how she or he has resolved major inconsistencies in the
evidence of material witnesses…
testimony of f.a.

f.a.
testified that they were a refugee claimant from saudi arabia. they arrived in
canada and were placed, alone, at a shelter. there, they met ms. cellupica.
they allege that they experienced two sexual assaults by ms. cellupica. the
parties were in a relationship at the time, even if the nature of that
relationship was not entirely clear during the trial.

for
the first incident, in april 2022, f.a. alleged that ms. cellupica visited them
in their room at the shelter. she kissed and touched f.a, who stated they were
not interested in intimacy at the time. ms. cellupica kept touching them,
despite f.a. stating, “no.” ms. cellupica touched and grabbed f.a.’s breasts
with her right hand. ms. cellupica subsequently used her other hand to reach
into f.a.’s private area. she placed her fingers inside f.a.’s vagina. f.a.
froze when this was happening, as they were unsure how to respond. after some
time, they had to push ms. cellupica’s hand away.

at
that time, f.a. was going through an emotional struggle. although they knew
they had not consented, they tried to tell themselves it was “not that big a
deal” and that they were “okay” with what had happened. later that year, the
incident triggered a mental breakdown. f.a. attempted suicide, and they were
hospitalized near the end of 2022.

f.a.
explained why this incident was so difficult to come to terms with. in f.a.’s
mind, they did not consent to any of this activity and verbally stated, “no.”
yet ms. cellupica acted the next day at the shelter as if she did nothing
wrong. that influenced how f.a. viewed the incident for some time as well. they
wondered if their feelings were inappropriate because ms. cellupica did not
seem concerned with what happened. it took f.a. a long time to come to terms
with what had happened, recognize it was wrong, and acknowledge the need to
report it to the police.

f.a.
provided their first police statement much later that year, in november.

the
second incident happened about a week after the first incident. f.a., ms.
cellupica, and a third person were in f.a.’s room. they were listening to music
and enjoying themselves. ms. cellupica touched f.a.’s breasts, in a “joking
manner,” for at least 30 seconds. this occurred around 7 or 8 pm. f.a. could
not believe this was happening, especially so soon after the first incident,
while their mutual friend was present.

they felt “dissociated” when the touching occurred.

later
that year, possibly as early as july, f.a. decided to stop communicating with
ms. cellupica. however, near the year's end, they exchanged text messages. the
messages themselves were not entered into evidence, but f.a. remembered their
contents. f.a. accused ms. cellupica of sexually assaulting them and forcing
them to do things “multiple times”, “even when [they] said no.” during this
exchange of messages, ms. cellupica sent a message to f.a., in which she wrote
“how does deportation sound?” this was seen as a warning, considering f.a. was
a refugee claimant, and fearful of returning to saudi arabia.
testimony of ms. cellupica

ms.
cellupica confirmed she knew f.a. and was also a resident of the shelter. they
were introduced by eric, a mutual acquaintance. f.a. shared details about their
life with ms. cellupica, including that they were a refugee and an activist. ms.
cellupica learned that saudi arabia, f.a.’s home country, was unfriendly to
lgbtq people, and that was part of the reason they came to canada.

they
started an intimate relationship. the relationship was meant to be open. ms.
cellupica described it as being an “ethical polyamorous” one.

the
relationship ended due to jealousy. they broke up before f.a. left the shelter. 
after that, they saw each other again at the toronto pride parade toward the
end of june. however, they lost touch afterwards.

regarding
the text messages that they exchanged near the end of the year, ms. cellupica
provided her own version of their contents. she agreed with most of the
testimony of f.a. about the messages. however, she testified that she received
death threats from f.a., and denied authoring the message that threatened f.a.
with deportation. that was sent by her boyfriend, without her consent.

regarding
the first allegation, ms. cellupica denied that it occurred. she testified she
experienced a sexual assault herself in the past, and would never touch someone
if they stated, “no.” during cross-examination, the crown asked questions about
whether it might have happened, and i will comment on her responses later in
this judgment.

regarding
the second incident, ms. cellupica agreed she touched f.a.’s breasts, but it
was done as a “joke.” the touching lasted between 30 and 60 seconds and
involved more pressing than squeezing. she denied that the touching was for a
sexual purpose and maintained that, given their relationship, touching breasts
on that day was not necessarily sexual.
position of the parties
i.
defence

ms.
mann submits i should be left with a reasonable doubt about both counts.
however, regarding the second count, she submits that even if i find the breast
touching occurred, i should find that the touching was not sexual in nature. this
occurred when f.a. and her client were playing and dancing to music. while she
does not dispute that the female breast is a sexual part of the body, the
touching that occurred in this case was not sexual when placed in its context.
as a final argument, ms. mann also submits the touching should be considered
de
minimis.

for
the first incident, she submits i should accept her client’s testimony that it
simply did not happen. ms. cellupica was adamant she would not continue
touching someone after they said, “no.” f.a. was not a credible or reliable
witness. their memory problems were obvious, and in cross-examination, various
inconsistencies with prior statements were demonstrated. the most important was
the completely different incident f.a. described in her first statement to the
police when asked to describe the sexual assault, which bore no similarity to
the description of the sexual assaults they provided in court when testifying.

ms.
mann agreed, as a matter of law, that “implied consent” does not exist in law,
and her client’s reliance on that in her testimony does not offer a defence.
she does point to f.a. agreeing that they said in their police statement that
they gave ms. cellupica “the green light” for the first incident, as a form of
evidence that might have informed her client’s view of having consent.
ii.
crown

ms.
kaur submits that f.a. was a credible and reliable witness whose testimony
should be accepted. any concerns about the reliability of their testimony
should not be given undue weight. as a victim of a traumatic experience, it
would be understandably very difficult for f.a. to recount precisely and
flawlessly what happened to them. the assaults were “scarring”, in f.a.’s own
words.

ms.
kaur further submits that while both the crown and defence agree the parties
were in a relationship, ms. mann did not bring a section 276 application and i
must not use any “relationship evidence” for an impermissible purpose.

ms. cellupica’s testimony in large respects, according to
ms. kaur, confirmed f.a.’s allegation. even with respect to the first incident,
ms. cellupica did not rule out the possibility the events occurred. rather, she
appeared to rely on her mistaken understanding that “implied consent” would
permit her touch f.a. as she desired, without active, communicated consent.
that admission actually lends credence to f.a.’s version of events, as it
betrays ms. cellupica’s mindset that she thought she could have her way with
f.a.
analysis and conclusions

the
statement of a complainant that they did not consent to the sexual activity in
question is a matter of credibility to be weighed in light of all the evidence,
including the complainant’s words and actions before and during the incident,
including any ambiguous or contradictory conduct: see
r. v. reimer,
2024
onca 519, at para.
74.

in
r. v. s.b.,
2023 onca 784, at para.
50, the court of appeal held:
… the evidence of other witnesses,
including the accused, about the “totality of the complainant’s conduct” can be
considered to determine whether it is consistent with the complainant’s claim
of non-consent.

importantly,
where the case for the crown rests almost exclusively on the testimony of a
single witness, as it does in this case, that testimony must be rigorously
analyzed in light of all of the evidence presented during the trial. the
position of the defence must also factor into this analysis: see
r. v.
c.(j.),
2000 canlii 1931
(ont. c.a.)

ms.
cellupica faces two separate allegations of sexual assault. the crown chose not
to apply under the similar fact evidence rule to ask the court to engage in
cross-count reasoning. therefore, i must not unlawfully consider evidence
related to one incident when evaluating the other incident, and vice versa:
r.
v. m.(b.),
1998 canlii 13326
(ont. c.a.) at para.
42. the charges must be
assessed separately: see also
r. v. mrs,
2020 onca 667, at paras.
75-82.

i
found f.a. to be a credible and reliable witness. their testimony was logical
and internally consistent. despite a challenging cross-examination, their
testimony remained almost entirely free of any material inconsistencies when
compared with their prior statements. the examples pointed out by ms. mann,
respectfully, i find have limited probative value on mostly peripheral matters.

f.a.
did not exaggerate. they acknowledged their memory issues. notably, f.a. clarified
their answers at several points in their testimony when they appeared worried
their evidence might be misunderstood. for instance, f.a. agreed that the
second incident seemed to have been a joke. during their testimony in chief,
f.a. used hand gestures to show what happened to them. at one point, after ms.
kaur tried to describe the hand motions f.a. made to depict how ms. cellupica touched
their breasts, f.a. clarified they could not be sure which hand ms. cellupica
used. f.a. noticed that ms. kaur’s verbal description of her hand gestures
might have been slightly inaccurate and therefore potentially misleading. while
a minor point, this highlights f.a.'s dedication to giving accurate testimony.

i
recognize that the lack of exaggeration in a witness’ testimony “cannot be used
as a makeweight in favour of a complainant’s credibility”: see
r. v. j.l.,
2022 onca 271, at para.
12;
r. v. alisaleh,
2020 onca 597, at paras.
16-17. however, it remains a relevant consideration.

regarding
the inconsistencies identified by ms. mann between f.a.’s courtroom testimony
and their prior police statements, f.a. testified that although it took them
many months to fully process what happened, the sexual assaults had a profound
emotional impact on them. they were hospitalized at the end of 2022 after a
suicide attempt. they were a highly vulnerable person: a refugee claimant
fleeing saudi arabia, where they feared for their safety due to their gender
identity and online activism. it is understandable that assaults of this
nature, committed by someone they trusted, after they arrived in canada, would
have been devastating for them to experience.

f.a.
did not dispute their memory suffered from some deficiencies. but a trauma-informed
approach to assessing their evidence must be applied. in
r. v. g.m.c.,
2022 onca 2, the ontario court of appeal held at para. 38 that
•
observations made by witnesses in the course of traumatic events
can be difficult to recall and to describe accurately at a later date;
•
a witness cannot be expected to have a faithful memory of minor
incidents that occurred during a traumatic event and the inability to recall a
minor or insignificant event does not detract from the witness’s overall
reliability or credibility; [and]
•
it is human nature to try to make sense out of bits and pieces of
memories about an event, and this may impact the accuracy of a witness’s
testimony concerning events.

f.a.
was in a profoundly difficult situation. they had no ties to anyone in canada
outside the shelter where they were residing, and where they were assaulted. they
had limited means. i accept that it may have taken f.a. time to process what
happened during the assaults, how to deal with them, and come to terms with the
significance of these events. while f.a. admitted to memory problems
surrounding parts of their evidence, f.a. was firm that they remembered the
core details, as these assaults were “life-altering.” there were no
significant inconsistencies in f.a.’s evidence about the assaults, except for the
question of how i should evaluate their account of what they told the officers
during their statement captured on body-worn camera (“bwc”) footage while they
were in the hospital.

ms.
mann pointed to this initial police statement, where f.a. described a
completely different incident when explaining what constituted their allegation
of a sexual assault. in ms. mann’s submission, this was a glaring inconsistency
that demonstrated f.a.’s evidence cannot be trusted. i disagree.

in
that statement, recorded on a police officer’s bwc while f.a. was a patient at a
hospital, f.a. described another incident when asked what happened to them.
that incident involved a washroom at the shelter and the use of a vibrator with
ms. cellupica. at the time they provided this statement, f.a. explained they were
on a new and different medication than what they had used previously. it was “a
very hard” period for f.a., as they had just attempted to commit suicide. f.a.’s
memory at the time was admittedly very poor and they were not in a good state
of mind. the washroom incident that f.a. referenced was difficult to think
about. whether or not f.a. had been assaulted during this incident was not a
straightforward matter for them to internally resolve.

in
january 2023, f.a. was in a much healthier state of mind and had communicated
with social workers about what had occurred when they were residing at the
shelter. when f.a. provided their formal police statement on video to the
interviewing detective, they could better reflect on what happened to them and
determine which events in their mind amounted to a sexual assault. f.a.
explained that they struggled with whether they had genuinely consented to the
incident in the washroom, as ms. cellupica “pushed” them. i took this to mean that
f.a. felt pressured to participate in whatever activities occurred. later, f.a.
acknowledged that they had agreed to the activity, despite any external
pressure placed on them, and thus, they accepted it was not a sexual assault.

i
accept f.a.’s explanation of this event, how they processed it, and why their
view of it evolved over time: see
r. v. mclean,
2025 onsc 810, at para.
50. that explains how they answered the officer’s questions in the december 18,
2022, bwc statement. based on my own observations, f.a. was clearly upset and
emotionally distraught at the time they provided this original statement. f.a.
had difficulty answering the officer’s questions coherently. this contrasts sharply
with the calm, sensible and articulate person i saw testifying in court.

while
not a specific argument raised by ms. mann, i asked ms. kaur during closing
submissions if the death threats f.a. sent to ms. cellupica raise questions
about f.a.’s credibility. during their testimony, f.a. admitted to sending
these messages. i agree with ms. kaur that f.a. was frank about it and
explained that they had informed a police officer about them in january 2023. i
do not believe this undermines f.a.’s credibility. their anger over what they
had experienced was understandable. while sending messages of this nature is
unquestionably wrong, f.a. was honest about their actions.

during
cross-examination, an exchange occurred between f.a. and ms. mann regarding whether
f.a. sent a “series” of text messages to ms. cellupica. f.a. struggled with
this questioning at first, but this appeared to stem from f.a.’s limited
proficiency in english. after the arabic interpreter assisted f.a. with the
words “series” versus “serious” (in english), the matter was clarified. when a
witness testifies with the assistance of an interpreter and english is not
their primary language, a court should approach any superficial deficiencies in
their answers with extreme caution. i find nothing turns on how f.a. answered
these questions.

other
examples that were highlighted to me during cross-examination as
inconsistencies or weaknesses in f.a.’s evidence i found to be of minor
significance. for instance, during cross-examination, ms. mann referred to f.a.’s
january 2023 police statement in which f.a. stated they “gave [ms. cellupica]
the green light.” f.a. agreed that this indicated consent but clarified that
this comment referred to any kissing during the first incident, which they
consistently maintained was consensual. that consent did not apply to the
subsequent touching. i accept this explanation.

f.a.
admitted they could not remember all the details of the assaults precisely.
this is understandable from a trauma-informed perspective. during
cross-examination, it was noted that f.a. was inconsistent about whether the
first sexual assault began 10 or 15 minutes after ms. cellupica entered the
bedroom. f.a. was “not sure” on this point. i do not believe a 5-minute
discrepancy matters at all. it is hardly surprising that someone would not
focus on the exact duration of an assault, or precisely when it began, and
courts should not expect perfect accuracy with respect to a witness’
recollection of such a feature of an assault.

i
also do not find the fact that f.a. testified they told others at the shelter
“goodnight” in the dining room before the assault, but agreed they failed to
mention that in their earlier police statement, to be significant. f.a. did not
believe a question was asked that would have prompted that answer. in addition,
i note that it is not a detail that affects the core of the allegations and has
minimal relevance.

additionally,
i do not believe that how f.a. acted towards the accused, either before or
after the alleged assaults, was in any way inconsistent with them being a
victim of these crimes. there is no strict rule about how someone who has been
sexually assaulted will respond. that f.a. may have had seemingly “normal”
interactions with their abuser while these events were ongoing or afterwards
(such as attending the pride parade together) does not undermine their
credibility: see
r. v. d.r.,
2022 nlca 2, at paras.
39-40;
r. v. kiss,
2018 onca 184, at para.
101.

as
a final observation, i note that what might appear to be “inconsistencies” in
the evidence of a witness who has experienced trauma should not be presumed to
be demonstrative of a lack of credibility or reliability. rather, they may
constitute a predictable and understandable aspect of coping with and
remembering traumatic experiences. inconsistencies should be carefully
scrutinized in the context of the entirety of the evidence presented in a case.
trauma affects each person differently. courts have collectively come to better
understand the effect of trauma on witnesses and must apply those principles in
our decisions: see
g.m.c, supra. the truth-seeking function of a trial court
could be irreparably harmed if these principles were disregarded. memories that
are fragmented, incomplete or sometimes reported in a non-linear manner are not
necessarily untrustworthy. each case will be unique, requiring the court to
assess the witness’s testimony with an open mind. where possible, the testimony
should also be reviewed alongside any external sources of evidence available to
the court to see if those strengthen, or weaken its coherence: see, for
example,
r. v. eze,
2022 onsc 277, at paras. 55-57, and 71.

of
some importance, i found f.a.’s demeanour in court to be that of an honest
witness trying their best to provide frank testimony. at times, they became
emotional and struggled to answer questions, but they always offered responses
they believed were accurate and fair. in
reimer, at para.
93, justice
paciocco, offered the following guidance regarding demeanour evidence:
before i leave this issue, even
though demeanour is a permissible consideration, i would reiterate the caution
that judges should take in considering demeanour in judging credibility:
r.
v. e.h.,
2020 onca 405, 389 c.c.c. (3d) 380, at para.
91;
r. v. rhayel,
2015 onca 377, 324 c.c.c. (3d) 362, at paras.
85-89. in my view, this is
particularly important with emotional upset while testifying, given that
emotional presentation can vary with maturity, culture, personality,
neurodivergence, or even mental health. a judge is apt to lack a baseline for
evaluation as well. in my view, judges should be extremely cautious about
relying on emotional upset as an indicium of truthfulness.

even
with that caution in mind, i find f.a.’s demeanour was that of a genuine and
honest witness, who was understandably having a difficult time remembering all
of the details of what happened to them. reliving these experiences during what
was unquestionably a difficult time in their life was evidently difficult for
f.a.

in
r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7, the supreme court of canada held that, in a
sexual assault trial, where the defence adduces evidence about a possible
motive to lie, “a trial judge is obliged to consider it to give full effect to
the presumption of innocence, and a failure to do so constitutes reversible
error”: see para. 65. during closing arguments, the parties presented different
positions about a possible motive to lie, while recognizing there was no onus
on the accused to establish such a motive. i found no persuasive evidence of a
motive to lie. for the sake of clarity, i do not find that the breakdown of f.a.’s
relationship with ms. cellupica constitutes a motive to fabricate their
allegations. while f.a. was upset about how they felt they had been treated,
this does not mean they would invent a sexual assault allegation. indeed, coming
to such a conclusion, absent something more, would delve into the forbidden
realm of myth-based reasoning. the lack of a known motive to lie (even though
an unknown motive remains possible) can be relevant evidence when evaluating a
witness’s credibility: see
r. v. gerrard,
2022 scc 13;
r. v. a.r.,
2022 onca 33, at para.
7.

it
is also noteworthy that there was substantial corroboration of f.a.’s testimony
in the testimony of ms. cellupica. this includes their shared evidence
regarding the text messages sent at the end of 2022. while corroboration is not
required for a complainant’s testimony in a sexual assault case to be accepted,
independent sources of evidence are often valuable for assessing a witness’s
credibility: see
r. v. brown,
2022 onca 417, at para.
15. evidence can
be confirmatory in a sexual assault trial even if it does not “directly confirm
the key allegations of sexual assault” or “directly implicate the accused”: see
r. v. j.b.,
2022 onca 214, at para.
34. for example, evidence that may
be neutral on the central issue of consent can still be relevant to a trial
judge’s assessment of the complainant’s credibility: see
brown
at para.
22.

ms.
cellupica’s testimony was harmonious with f.a.’s on several points including:
•
that they were in a relationship at the time while residing at
the shelter;
•
ms. cellupica admitted to touching f.a.’s breasts during the
second incident and both agreed she appeared to do it as a joke;
•
ms. cellupica agreed it was “possible” the first incident
occurred, exactly as f.a. described it, but for f.a. telling her “no” or to
stop the touching; and
•
ms. cellupica agreed that the text messages described by f.a.
were sent and received.

on
this last point, i note that the content of the text messages was largely
agreed upon by both witnesses, even though neither side entered the messages as
an exhibit during the trial. these messages may be considered for limited
purposes. in particular, the fact that the complainant made an allegation of
sexual assault to ms. cellupica directly at the end of 2022, after processing
what happened to them, can be lawfully used to support some level of
confirmation of the complainant’s narrative: see
r. v. morin,
2024 onca
562, at para.
36. in
r. v. khan,
2017 onca 114, at para.
31, the ontario
court of appeal stated:
sometimes the circumstances
surrounding the making of the prior consistent statement are such that the
statement assists in assessing the reliability and credibility of a witness’s
in-court testimony, giving prior consistent statements admitted as “narrative”
a more substantive use:
r. v. dinardo,
2008 scc 24 (canlii), 1
s.c.r. 788, at para.
39;
r. v. evans,
1993 canlii 102 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 629, at para.
32.
this is referred to as narrative as circumstantial evidence.

i
caution myself that the text messages cannot be used for the unlawful purpose
of bolstering the complainant’s credibility because they have made the same
allegation more than once. however, i do find that the messages can be used to
assist with assessing the reliability and credibility of f.a.’s in-court
testimony, especially considering the facts of the case and the positions taken
by the parties.

i
accept the evidence of f.a. regarding how they were sexually assaulted. i found
f.a. to be a credible and reliable witness. the memory difficulties they experienced
and the inconsistencies in their testimony, when considered from a
trauma-informed perspective, do not make that testimony untrustworthy or
unreliable. indeed, large portions of it were corroborated by the testimony of
ms. cellupica. the quality of f.a.’s evidence remained high.

regarding
ms. cellupica's testimony, there is little factual dispute with the f.a.’s
evidence concerning the second incident. she admitted to touching f.a.’s
breasts as described by f.a., but believed it was a “joke” and testified it was
not done with sexual intent.

in
r. v. morelli,
2025 oncj 111, justice greene explained what is meant by
an assault being “sexual in nature” at paras. 45-46:
the leading case on whether the
alleged conduct was sexual in nature is
r. v. chase,
1987 canlii 23 (scc), 37 c.c.c. (3d) 97
(s.c.c.).
in that case, the court held a sexual assault is committed
where assaultive conduct violates the sexual integrity of the victim. in
assessing whether or not the touching was of a sexual nature, mcintyre j. in
r.
v. chase, supra,
held that the “test to be applied in determining whether
the impugned conduct has the requisite sexual nature is an objective one”. in
determining this issue, the court may consider “the part of the body touched,
the nature of the contact, the situation in which it occurred, the words and
gestures accompanying the act, and all other circumstances surrounding the
conduct”. mcintyre j. further held that the actor need not have committed the
offence for a sexual gratification for the offence to be made out.
…in my view, the decision in
r.
v. chase
does not preclude a court from finding that in some circumstances
the body part touched will be the most important factor and may very well be
determinative. in my view, it is open for a trial judge to infer that the
touching is of a sexual nature that impacted the sexual integrity of the victim
solely because the body part touched was the genitalia of the victim
particularly where the context of the touching does not provide an alternative
explanation. in other words, absent other evidence, in many cases where the
body part touched is a person’s genitalia, the only reasonable inference will
be that the touching was sexual in nature.

i
agree with my colleague’s analysis and reasoning, and i note that it is equally
applicable when the body part touched is a female person’s breasts. moreover, i
do not accept that touching someone’s breasts as a “joke” somehow makes the
action any less culpable. either one has consent to touch another person’s
body, or they do not. and what occurred in this case was unquestionably sexual
in nature.

ms.
cellupica further testified that she relied on f.a.’s “implied consent” to
being touched. in
r. v. j.a.,
2011 scc 28, the supreme court of canada
stated that there is no defence of “implied consent” to sexual assault: see
para. 47. the relevant provisions of the
criminal code
require nothing
less than conscious, ongoing consent to ensure that a person is not exploited.
it is not enough for an accused to believe that a complainant gave implied
consent. an accused must take reasonable steps to confirm communicated consent
for all sexual activity.

i
conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the touching occurred exactly as f.a.
described, and ms. cellupica could not rely on any supposed belief in “implied
consent.” i also do not find that her characterization of the breast grabbing
as being a “joke” makes the assault somehow non-sexual in nature. nor could
this possibly be properly construed as
de minimis.


i
therefore find ms. cellupica guilty of count two.

a
detailed examination of ms. cellupica’s testimony is necessary to determine my
verdict on the first count of sexual assault. there were several aspects of ms.
cellupica’s testimony that i found highly troubling. she continually relied on
“implied consent” to justify her actions, which, as previously explained, is
not only a legally incorrect view of consent but also demonstrates that she did
not consider the need to obtain active, informed consent when interacting with
f.a. rather, as she stated, “i can do it unless she says no.” that was a remark
she made about the first incident, and f.a.’s allegation that she had touched
their breasts and inserted her fingers into f.a.’s vagina. ms. cellupica also
testified that she had implied consent to touch f.a.’s breasts specifically.
this attitude, which demonstrates that ms. cellupica did not perceive a need to
obtain active, communicated consent for each sexual act, confirms f.a.’s
description of how ms. cellupica approached them and dismissed the significance
of the events the next day.


ms.
cellupica offered highly convenient and, in my view, unbelievable explanations
for some of her actions. for example, she blamed her boyfriend at the time for
sending the texts to f.a. threatening them with deportation, after f.a. had
texted allegations of being sexually assaulted. that would be a boyfriend she
alleged was sexually assaulting her regularly. yet when she was later alone and
capable of clarifying to f.a. that she did not personally send those text
messages, she did not. she could have told f.a. it wasn’t her, but rather this
man who was responsible. this would have taken little effort. her testimony in
this regard was unworthy of belief and illogical.

she
agreed that she received angry, threatening messages from f.a. however, in her
account of how their relationship ended, there is no logical reason for these
death threats to have been sent. according to her version, nothing went “wrong”
in their polyamorous relationship that would justify this level of anger. i
understand that the burden is not on the accused to prove anything, and the
defence does not need to explain the complainant's actions. the burden of proof
in a criminal trial never shifts. nevertheless, when evaluating the plausibility
of the defence evidence, i can consider the full context in which it exists. in
this case, the text messages from f.a. were sent without any clear reason, and
the threatening messages from her phone, about deportation, were conveniently
attributed to a malicious boyfriend. i do not accept this testimony.

furthermore,
during her direct testimony, ms. cellupica stated that the first incident did
not happen. however, during cross-examination, she agreed with ms. kaur that
she could not rule out the possibility that nearly all aspects of it did occur
– including kissing, breast touching, and vaginal penetration with fingers. she
only contested that she would have continued acting after f.a. told her, “no.”
otherwise, she agreed that the events were indeed “possible.” this is
inconsistent with her overall denial in direct testimony and marks a
significant change in her account of the first allegation.

similarly,
during her testimony in chief before the lunch break on july 29, she testified
that the second incident “possibly” occurred. after lunch, she continued her
testimony and described this second incident in surprising detail. she recalled
standing in front of f.a. and pressing her hands against f.a.’s breasts for 30
to 60 seconds. the level of detail she remembered indicates that the second
incident was not just possible; it actually happened, and she remembered it.
this also revealed internal inconsistency and a careless attitude towards the
truth. while this case involved separate counts alleging different sexual
assaults, a court can consider all of the evidence presented at trial when
making general credibility findings about a witness, including the accused.
this is especially true when the different counts involve incidents that took
place close in time: see
r. v dueling,
2024 ykca 7, at paras.
45-6.

during
cross-examination, ms. kaur asked ms. cellupica why she did not call the police
after receiving the threatening texts from f.a. i place no weight on this line
of questioning. in retrospect, i should not have allowed it. the accused has a
right to silence that exists at all times in relation to the police: see
r.
v. smockum,
2024 skca 81, at paras.
58 to 61. there was no obligation on
ms. cellupica to contact the police, and her failure to do so cannot influence
my decision. although the crown could have questioned her about why she did not
seek help or advice after receiving the texts, that question was not asked, and
i cannot speculate on what her answer might have been.

nonetheless,
considering the rest of ms. cellupica’s testimony and its context within the
other evidence i accept, i do not find it trustworthy. nor does it raise a
reasonable doubt in my mind.

having
accepted f.a.’s evidence about this incident, i find as a fact the following
occurred on a date in april 2022:
•
f.a. and ms. cellupica were both residing at the shelter;
•
they were in an intimate partner relationship;
•
one evening ms. cellupica entered f.a.’s room and sat on the bed;
•
she began kissing f.a. on consent;
•
she then touched f.a.’s breasts both over and under her clothing
without consent and did not take any steps to obtain communicated consent,
relying on her belief in “implied consent”;
•
she moved one of her hands to touch f.a.’s lower body area and
inserted her fingers into f.a.’s vagina without consent;
•
f.a. told her they were “not interested”, “no” and “stop”, but
ms. cellupica persisted;
•
f.a. “froze” when this happened, and was unsure of what to do at
first;
•
f.a. had to push ms. cellupica’s hand away;
•
ms. cellupica later attempted to laugh this off and acted as if
nothing inappropriate had happened.

i
find ms. cellupica guilty of count one.
iii.
released: august 5, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

f.a.’s preferred pronouns were “he/they”.

neither side called this witness to testify.

de minimis non-curat lex
is often translated as “the law does not
concern itself with trivial things.”

ms. mann did not bring a section 276 application to adduce any form of
“relationship” evidence. in
r. v. goldfinch,
2019 scc 38, the supreme
court held that this form of evidence will be inadmissible if it is sought to
be relied upon for a twin-myth purpose. while i allowed both sides to present
some general evidence of the relationship for narrative purposes, no other use
of this evidence may be considered.