source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj592/2025oncj592.html

warning
the
court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the
file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code of canada.
this
subsection and subsection 486.6 of the
criminal code,
which is concerned
with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection
486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 (1)
subject to subsection
(2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any
information that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published
in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way;
486.6 (1)
every person who fails
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), (2) or (3) or 486.5(1)
or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court
of justice
citation:
r. v. ellis, 2025
oncj 592
date: 2025.11.13
court file no.: toronto #
23
48105007
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
hadel ellis
reasons for
judgment
heard on: september
3, 4 and october 2, 2025
released on november
13, 2025
mr. d. pyper.........................................................................................
counsel for the
crown
mr.
s. peters........................................................................................... 
counsel for mr. ellis
band j.:
i. introduction and issues

in
early april 2023, js met mr. ellis on the day that she, her mother and sister
moved into a unit in the condominium building where mr. ellis was living. a day
or two later, they met in the gym and spent some time in the pool room, where mr.
ellis pulled js into the pool against her wishes. then, they went up to his
unit where js alleges that mr. ellis sexually assaulted her by lifting her top
and sports bra, touching her breasts with his hands and then sucking on her
nipple without her consent.

a
short trial took place before me in which js was the only witness. the crown
proceeded summarily. as is his right, mr. ellis chose not to testify or call
any evidence.

at
trial, mr. ellis conceded identity, the date of the incident, the jurisdiction
of the court and the authenticity of security video footage from the
condominium. there is no suggestion that js communicated consent to the sexual
touching by words or actions. as such, there is no suggestion that mr. ellis
took reasonable steps to confirm her consent.

there
are two central issues in this trial. the first is whether the crown has proved
beyond a reasonable doubt that the sexual conduct took place as js described
and without her consent. this question turns on the credibility and reliability
of her testimony. the second issue is whether the crown has proved
mens rea
beyond a reasonable doubt: that is, that mr. ellis knew that the js did not
consent, or that he was wilfully blind or reckless regarding the absence of
consent.
ii. positions of the parties

on
behalf of the crown, mr. pyper submits that js was a credible and reliable
witness and that the
actus reus
has been proved beyond a reasonable
doubt. mr. ellis did not testify and the defence of honest but mistaken belief
in communicated consent is not available to him. that being so, in view of the
totality of the circumstances, i should have “little difficulty” finding that mr.
ellis was at least reckless regarding the absence of consent to the sexual
touching that took place in his unit. mr. pyper relies on
r. v. h.w.
2022
onca 15
and
r. v. degale
2024 onca 720
as a framework for this argument.
mr. pyper also argues that the events in the pool and in mr. ellis’s unit
constituted a single ongoing transaction. as such, it is open to me to use the
evidence that mr. ellis pulled js into the pool without her consent to help me determine
his state of mind at the time of the sexual touching that happened later, in
his unit.

on
behalf of mr. ellis, mr. peters submits that js was not a credible witness for
two principal reasons: first, because of her conduct in the pool; second, because
she displayed a strong
animus
in relation to mr. ellis at trial. he
opposes the crown’s “single transaction” argument for two reasons: first, the
conduct is too different in kind, time and place; second, the underlying
inference the crown seeks – that mr. ellis is the kind of person who does not
take no for an answer – does nothing more than invite propensity reasoning. as
for the
mens rea, he argues that i must be cautious. on the facts, this case
and
degale
are “light years apart.” in this case, he argues, js had been
participating, albeit with hesitation, in physical contact in and around the
pool as well as in the unit. what is more, when she got up to leave, mr. ellis
did not try to continue. a reckless person would have tried to go further.

without
formally conceding lack of consent as part of the
actus reus, he
acknowledged that it is very difficult to challenge in view of js’s testimony.

a
summary of js’s testimony will put the issues and the parties’ positions in
their proper context.
iii. summary of js’s testimony

js
is a 22-year-old woman who is interested in a career as a music artist. she
recalled that mr. ellis told her that he was 38 or 39 years old. he appeared to
me to be at least that age. she and her mother and sister moved into the
condominium building in early april 2023. on that day, she and her sister met mr.
ellis, who approached them and struck up a conversation about trading in
stocks. he suggested that they move to the business room to continue to talk.
there, they talked for approximately 40 minutes. he talked about himself and
asked them about themselves. he seemed nice. he made himself look like he had
money. js had a positive first impression of him and felt that he might be a
potential mentor to her in the music industry.

she
saw him again in the gym one or two days later, on the morning of april 4. they
greeted each other, and 15-20 minutes later, he came and introduced her to one
of her neighbours. he then suggested that he and js be “workout buddies.” it
was then that js felt things began “getting weird.” he commented on a hole in
her shorts and told her that he wanted to buy her stuff. he mentioned having a
friend who worked at lululemon. he also commented on her stretch marks but told
her not to be insecure about them. she explained that mr. ellis talked a lot
and described conversation with him as “information overload.” after about 30
minutes in the gym, he suggested that they go to the pool room. they did so and
remained for over an hour.

she
sat on the edge of the pool. he went into the water and stood by her, trying to
convince her to get in. she had no intention of doing that, because she was in
her gym clothes and also on her period. in cross-examination, she testified
that her period may not have been on her mind at the time, but that she
remembers now that it was a factor. he told her about things he wanted to do
for her – like taking her to sit courtside at a raptors game – and told her
that she was thinking too small about the size of the audiences she could
perform for. he noticed that the headphones she had were in bad shape and
offered to give her a new pair or a best buy gift card that he had on hand. she
appreciated the offer because hers were broken, and she was using her sister’s.

at
one point, he asked her for a kiss. she did not kiss him. he asked for a hug.
she placed her arms around his neck as he stood between her knees. then, he
pulled her into the pool despite the fact that she resisted. once she was in
the pool, he suggested team building exercises. he held her afloat as she lay in
the water stomach side down. she was already wet, so she just went along with
it. in cross-examination, she rejected the suggestion that mr. ellis was
teaching her how to swim. she knew how to swim.

after
the pool, they went up to his unit. he told her that he had two: a penthouse
and another unit on the 9
th
floor. he pressed the buttons for both floors,
but they got off on the 9
th
floor and went to his unit. her plan was
to get the headphones or gift card.

once
inside, mr. ellis gave her dry clothes to change into and took hers. she
understood that he was going to put them in the dryer. she changed in the
washroom. he performed a facial on her, using expensive products. they went to
the bedroom, which she described as the only place to sit, because there was lots
of stuff all over the living room area.

they
sat on the bed. he “talked and talked and talked.” mostly about himself and
money. he showed her his watch collection. he told her that he had been unable
to get the image of her body out of his mind. they got some alcohol, and each
had a small shot. it did not have much of an effect on her. he kept trying to
have her sit on his lap. she did so, but would get up again, only to have it
happen again. she mentioned feeling uncomfortable because she had a boyfriend. she
felt guilty. while they were sitting on the bed, he talked to her about some
surgery that she could have, such as a little bit of work on her breasts. he
said they were pretty but that she should consider a little lift. he appeared
to use this as an excuse to lift up her shirt and sports bra and touch her
breasts as if he were a doctor. then, he put his mouth on her breast and sucked
on her nipple. she did not consent to any such touching. she felt that her body
language had been hesitant and closed off. during the incident, which lasted
20-30 seconds, she felt frozen. she pulled her bra and top down and got up. she
felt awful and had a lot of mixed emotions. she was confused and felt like she
was in shock.

she
realized that he had actually put her clothes in the wash and that they now had
to be put in the dryer. he told her that he had some things to do and began to
show her his neckties. he also told her that he had a proposition for her: she
would be his “eye candy,” and he would provide for her. he said he would walk
her back to her unit. she did not want that, so she told him that she was going
to go back to the gym. she also had to pee. she had not wanted to use his
washroom as she was on her period. he accompanied her to the gym and waited while
she went to the washroom. then, she began to use some gym equipment. he
introduced her to another neighbour and left. she went up to her unit and
cried. she texted her best friend and talked to her sister and mother. they
contacted the concierge and police were called.

in
hindsight, js felt that mr. ellis had been grooming her by selling her a dream.
he talked and talked about money and his connections, and she had no time to
think.
iv. applicable legal
principles
on the burden of proof

the
crown bears the entire burden of proving mr. ellis’s guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. that burden never shifts to mr. ellis.
in
r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc),
 3 scr 320
at
para.
36, the supreme court of canada explained that reasonable doubt is not
based on sympathy or prejudice; rather, it is based upon reason and common
sense; it is logically connected to the evidence or absence of evidence; it
does not involve proof to an absolute certainty; it is not proof beyond any
doubt nor is it an imaginary or frivolous doubt; and more is required than
proof that the accused is probably guilty.

in
r. v. g.(m.)
(1994),
1994 canlii 8733 (on ca),
93 c.c.c. (3d) 347, at para.
23, leave to appeal to
s.c.c. refused, s.c.c.a. no. 390, the ontario court of appeal wrote that
“[p]robably the most valuable means of assessing the credibility of a crucial
witness is to examine the consistency between what the witness said in the
witness box and what the witness has said on other occasions, whether on oath
or not.” the court went on to explain that
[i]nconsistencies
vary in their nature and importance. some are minor, others are not. some
concern material issues, others peripheral subjects. where an inconsistency
involves something material about which an honest witness is unlikely to be
mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a carelessness with the truth about
which the trier of fact should be concerned.
on the elements of sexual
assault

in
r. v. chase,
1987 canlii 23 (scc),
 2 scr 293, at para.
11, the supreme court of canada
explained that sexual assault is
an assault within any one of the
definitions of that concept in
s. 244(1)
of the
criminal code
which
is committed in circumstances of a sexual nature, such that the sexual
integrity of the victim is violated. the test to be applied in determining
whether the impugned conduct has the requisite sexual nature is an
objective one: "viewed in the light of all the circumstances, is the
sexual or carnal context of the assault visible to a reasonable observer…. the
part of the body touched, the nature of the contact, the situation in
which it occurred, the words and gestures accompanying the act, and all other
circumstances surrounding the conduct, including threats which may or may not
be accompanied by force, will be relevant… the intent or purpose of the person
committing the act, to the extent that this may appear from the evidence, may
also be a factor in considering whether the conduct is sexual. if the motive of
the accused is sexual gratification, to the extent that this may appear from
the evidence, it may be a factor in determining whether the conduct is sexual.
it must be emphasized, however, that the existence of such a motive is simply
one of many factors to be considered, the importance of which will vary
depending on the circumstances. (
internal citations omitted.)

the
absence of consent is established subjectively; that is, by reference to the
state of mind of the complainant at the time of the sexual touching:
r. v. ewanchuk,
 1 scr 330, at para. 26. a complainant’s statement that they did not consent
“
is a
matter of credibility to be weighed in light of all the evidence including any
ambiguous conduct. the question at this stage is purely one of credibility, and
whether the totality of the complainant’s conduct is consistent with [their]
claim of non-consent” (at para. 30). therefore, “[i]t is open to the
accused to claim that the complainant’s words and actions, before and
during the incident, raise a reasonable doubt against [their] assertion that [they],
in [their] mind, did not want the sexual touching to take place” (at para. 29).

the
crown must also prove the requisite
mens rea
beyond a reasonable doubt:
that is, that mr. ellis knew that js was not consenting, or was wilfully blind
or reckless as to the lack of consent. however, as the ontario court of appeal
has instructed, in cases where the complainant’s lack of consent is proved
beyond a reasonable doubt and the defence of honest but mistaken belief in
communicated consent is displaced or unavailable, a finding that the
mens
rea
has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt may be a “virtual certainty.”
in such cases, a trial judge is permitted to instruct the jury that “they
should have little difficulty in concluding that the accused knew or was wilfully
blind to the fact that the complainant was not consenting or was reckless and
chose to take the risk”:
see
degale, supra at paras.
16-18; see also
r.
v. el-akhali
2025 onca 229
at para.
21.
on both incidents constituting a
single transaction

in
r. v. eze,
2022 onsc 277, madam justice presser had occasion to
determine when more than one incident, separately charged, can amount to a
single transaction such that the evidence regarding one is admissible regarding
the other without resort to a similar fact application. her honour summarized
by stating that “[i]ncidents that are sufficiently connected by time, place and
circumstances, or that refer to a continuing course or a pattern of conduct may
comprise a single transaction within the meaning of s. 581(1).”
v.
analysis
single transaction

i
am not satisfied that the pool and bedroom incidents can be viewed as a single
transaction. they are too disparate in time and location. they took place after
js spent time changing and mr. ellis had given her a facial. more importantly,
they are too different in kind. the pool incident was not sexual and was arguably
playful. what happened in the bedroom was very different. i make no use of what
happened in the pool in determining whether the crown has proved the requisite
mens
rea
in this case.
js’s credibility
and reliability

while
js did not have a strong appreciation for courtroom decorum, and swore more
than most witnesses tend to, i found her to be a credible witness who was doing
her best to tell the truth about what happened to her. granted, her memory was
not perfect. but perfection is not the standard. when it came to the core of
her complaint, her testimony was detailed, compelling and unshaken.

on
the video footage from the pool area, before the two get out of the pool, mr.
ellis is standing near the railing that is attached to the steps. js walks
around him to climb the steps, holding his hand in the process. i did not find
that this contradicted her testimony as to her lack of interest in mr. ellis’s
advances. in the circumstances, her conduct was ambiguous at best. it did not
affect her credibility in my mind. as for her reaction to being pulled into the
pool, and her participation in what followed, i would say the same. i accept
that she just went along with it.

similarly,
i accepted her testimony that she knew how to swim and that what mr. ellis was
doing was akin to team building exercises. her body was in an awkward position,
with her back very arched and her head held high above the water. her hands
were stirring the water gently, rather than stroking like one does when
swimming. it looked like someone trying to keep their head above water while
being held near the surface. i found her potential inconsistency as to whether
or not her period was a reason why she did not want to enter the pool to be
inconsequential. further, i believed that it was a reason why she did not use
the washroom in mr. ellis’s condo.

it
is true that js displayed
animus
toward mr. ellis at trial. unsolicited,
she called him a “groomer.” when the topic of consent was raised, she referred
to him as a “creep,” an “old man,” or an “old ass man.” i found that these
utterances were consistent with js’s personality and manner of speaking. more
importantly, they seemed to me to be genuine expressions of her feelings about
being assaulted, and not the sort of
animus
that gave rise to concerns
about her credibility.
the
actus reus

i
believed js and have no trouble finding that the sexual touching took place as
she described it and that she did not consent to it. the two were virtually
strangers, and mr. ellis was 16 or 17 years older than her. in light of all the
relevant circumstances, i find that the crown has proved the
actus reus
of sexual assault beyond a reasonable doubt.
the
mens rea

this
is a case in which proof of the
actus reus
beyond a reasonable doubt
makes proof of the requisite
mens rea
a virtual certainty. js and mr.
ellis had been acquainted for only a few hours; mr. ellis was close to twice
her age, and he dominated the conversation, making multiple offers and
propositions, and talking mostly about himself and his connections. on the
basis of js’s evidence, and in the absence of any defence evidence, the only
reasonable inference is that mr. ellis knew that js was not consenting or was
wilfully blind or reckless as to her lack of consent. i have no difficulty
making that finding beyond a reasonable doubt. the argument that a reckless
person would have pushed on is unpersuasive and likely conjures myths or
stereotypes.
vi.
conclusion

for
these reasons, i find mr. ellis guilty of sexually assaulting js on april 4, 2023.
released: 
november 13, 2025
justice
patrice f. band