source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj340/2025oncj340.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. vanhartskamp,
2025 oncj 340
date: 
2025 06 24
court
file: toronto #24 50001102-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
tracey
vanhartskamp
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on april 9 and june 12, 2025
written
reasons provided on june 24, 2025
p. kelly.................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
m. murphy............................................................................. counsel
for ms.vanhartskamp
jones j.:
introduction

on november 20, 2024, abdalla manahil was pushing her toddler in a
stroller on a subway train approaching kennedy station, where she encountered
tracey vanhartskamp. the two women had never met before. for reasons that
remain unclear, ms. vanhartskamp became agitated and assaulted ms. manahil
while threatening her and her young child. the offences were captured on
surveillance video and witnessed by other passengers.

on april 9, 2025, in
gladue
court, ms. vanhartskamp entered
guilty pleas to one count of assault under
section 265
of the
criminal code,
and one count of uttering death threats under
section 264.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal
code.

this is another example of needless violence committed against an
innocent person on public transit. in this case, as in many others, the actions
of the accused were accompanied by hateful and cruel language meant to
intimidate the victim. yet this is also a case that highlights how canada’s
assimilationist policies devastated an individual, her family, and her
community, causing lasting intergenerational trauma.

this is my decision on the appropriate sentence for ms. vanhartskamp.
agreed facts

on november 20, 2024, at approximately 10 a.m., ms. manahil was
travelling with her toddler in a stroller on a subway train, heading towards
kennedy station. ms. vanhartskamp approached ms. manahil and struck her on the
right shoulder. she told her she wanted her cellphone and attempted to take it
out of her hand.

ms. manahil stood up and pushed the stroller along the train to put some
distance between herself and the accused. ms. vanhartskamp followed her and
raised her hand near ms. manahil’s child as if to indicate she might strike
her. ms. vanhartskamp then stated, “if i see you on this train a second time,
i’m going to kill you. i have a knife.” a witness observed this confrontation
and informed the police that she also heard the accused state, “go back to your
country”, and “you people come here, have your babies, then send them back.”

ms. vanhartskamp believed that ms. manahil may have been taking a photo
of her with her phone. she told ms. manahil that “if you take a picture of me,
i will kill you.”
background of the offender

a lengthy
gladue
report was provided to the court prior to the
sentencing hearing, which had been completed over 20 years prior. it was
supplemented by a letter authored by ms. a. assinewe, a
gladue
case
worker from aboriginal legal services of toronto. the letter updated the
contents of the original
gladue
report with detailed information about
recent developments in ms. vanhartskamp’s life. for this judgment, i have
summarized their contents.

ms. vanhartskamp is 49 years old. she supports herself through odsp but
struggles to afford basic necessities. she uses a food bank whenever possible.
after her arrest, she was detained in custody. on may 28, 2025, justice dunphy
of the superior court of justice released her on bail subject to the terms of a
release order. she is currently living with her younger sister, priscilla, in
oshawa. in the future, she hopes to move back to an apartment she previously had
in toronto.

ms.
vanhartskamp is a member of the attawapiskat first nation and one of thirteen
siblings. her parents were survivors of residential schools. she was
apprehended by child welfare authorities almost immediately after her birth and
taken from her indigenous family as part of the 60s scoop. at the age of six,
she was adopted by rosemary vanhartskamp and tony vanhartskamp and relocated
from her home community to brockville, ontario. her foster parents made efforts
to involve her and her brothers in cultural activities, treating them with the
best intentions. however, she remained largely disconnected from her indigenous
identity. she did not know her ancestral language and had no ties to
attawapiskat until much later in her life. this led to a sense of cultural loss
and confusion regarding her identity. the significance of indigenous canadians
regaining that sense of culture is discussed in the royal commission on
aboriginal peoples (1996).


before
being adopted by her foster parents, she experienced both physical and sexual
abuse in a group home. this trauma has continued to affect her, manifesting
itself in depression and anxiety. at 14, she ran away from her foster home and
started using substances to cope with her trauma. she acknowledges that her
criminal activity is partially linked to her drinking and drug use. she is
currently on methadone as part of a treatment plan.

furthermore,
as a child, she was diagnosed with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (“fasd”). fasd
is a lifelong disability. it affects, among other features of daily living,
learning, memory, communication skills and emotional regulation.

seven
of her siblings have passed away. all the deaths, except for one, were due to
addiction-related causes. two of her sisters continue to struggle with substance
addiction and live in northern ontario. her sister kimberley was murdered last
year while she was pregnant. that case remains unsolved. it has had a traumatic
impact on ms. vanhartskamp and her family.

ms.
vanhartskamp has been the subject of terrible violence herself as well. she was
the victim of a near-fatal stabbing on june 21, 2002, by her then partner,
robert linklater. he was convicted of aggravated assault for this attack. years
later, he was convicted of murder against another woman: see
r. v. linklater,
2009 onca 172.

in
2023, she was the victim of a car accident that left her with serious injuries
requiring ongoing rehabilitative programming. she continues to suffer from
vertigo and memory loss. she is receiving treatment from physical therapists at
sunnybrook hospital and is also connected to the daughters of the earth program
at the thunder woman healing lodge society. this program is designed for
indigenous women who have encountered the criminal justice system and aims to
support participants in their healing journey through culturally appropriate
teaching.

the
crown presented ms. vanhartskamp’s prior criminal record, which begins in 1996.
it includes 14 entries for crimes of violence. however, there is a considerable
gap in the record between 2016 and 2023. on august 11, 2023, ms. vanhartskamp
was convicted of two counts of assault, one count of uttering threats, and one
count of failing to comply with a release order. she received a suspended
sentence with two years of probation. those are the only convictions other than
the index offences in the last 10 years.

ms.
vanhartskamp expressed remorse for her actions during the sentencing hearing.
she explained that she is working to overcome her problems with addiction but
struggles day to day. she hopes to reconnect with her family and take the
necessary steps forward for her rehabilitation. her younger sister priscilla is
a source of love and support. she recognizes that she needs help and is
committed to doing what is necessary to stop offending.
victim impact statement

ms.
manahil declined to provide any input for the sentencing hearing, expressing a
desire to move past the incident.

a
witness to the events, ms. olive ellis, provided a victim impact statement. she
wrote that she was “deeply shaken by what transpired.” as a black immigrant,
she felt “an overwhelming fear that i too could become a victim simply because
of my identity. the aggressor’s actions were entirely unprovoked, and it was
painfully evident that her words and behaviour stemmed from a place of hate and
discrimination.”

ms.
ellis further explained that her sense of safety while commuting has
“drastically changed,” and she no longer feels protected on the ttc. as a
result, she tries to avoid using the ttc as much as possible. the fear of
facing a similar attack “weighs heavily” on her mind.

the
canadian victims bill of rights act,
s.c., 2015, c. 13, s.2, defines a
victim as “an individual who has suffered physical or emotional harm, property
damage or economic loss as the result of the commission or alleged commission
of an offence.” i am satisfied that ms. ellis was a victim of these offences as
well, even if she was not directly targeted by ms. vanhartskamp’s actions.
positions of the parties

on behalf of the crown, mr. kelly seeks a one-year jail sentence
followed by a period of probation. he submits that the explicit racial
component of these crimes constitutes a significant aggravating factor. there
is simply no place in canadian society for such conduct. the victim was a
racialized person, completely defenceless, and concerned for the safety of her
child.

in the crown’s view, the accused’s conduct demands that the court stress
the sentencing principles of both general and specific deterrence. mr. kelly
noted that ms. manahil’s young child had to witness her mother being the victim
of an unprovoked attack. this was not only harmful to the child but also
intensified ms. manahil’s vulnerability. even if she had wished to respond to
ms. vanhartskamp by defending herself, doing so would have put her child’s
safety at risk. the victim, as mr. kelly put it, was “completely exposed.”

he characterized ms. vanhartskamp as a violent individual with a nearly
unbroken criminal record. she has long surpassed the phase where the courts
prioritize rehabilitation as a sentencing principle.

ms. murphy submits that the appropriate sentence is to acknowledge her
client’s pre-sentence custody, followed by a suspended sentence with probation.
her client is continuing to recover from addiction as well as the trauma she
has faced and still faces in her life. the road to recovery is rarely
straightforward, and ms. vanhartskamp has made significant progress in recent
years despite these offences.

ms. vanhartskamp, according to ms. murphy, embodies all the concerns
associated with our indigenous peoples that are well documented in the
jurisprudence. she has potential for long-term recovery through programs
specifically designed to assist indigenous women. if she were incarcerated, she
would lose access to both the spiritual and physical recovery programs that she
currently accesses regularly.

ms. murphy candidly acknowledged that reconciling the racialized nature
of ms. vanhartskamp’s offences with her own history of being mistreated was
challenging. her client understands what it feels like to be a victim of
discrimination and prejudice. her family was shattered by the racially driven
policies of the canadian government.

ms. murphy offered a partial explanation, but not an excuse, for her
client’s behaviour. she asked me to consider that this incident came right on
the heels of the murder of ms. vanhartskamp’s sister. her client was in a very
bad place mentally and emotionally at the time. she also subjectively believed
that ms. manahil was filming her right before she committed her offences, which
may have further upset her.
sentencing law – general principles

proportionality
is the central principle of sentencing. a sentence must be proportionate to
“the gravity of the offence committed and the moral blameworthiness of the
offender”: see
criminal code
section 718.1;
r. v. suter,
2018 scc
34, at para.
4. there is no doubt that ms. vanhartskamp’s moral culpability for
these offences is significant. she assaulted and threatened a defenceless woman
and her child without any justification. an innocent bystander witnessed her
actions and was also deeply affected. ms. vanhartskamp’s use of hateful
language enhances the objective gravity of these crimes, which, even without
that factor, was already substantial.

i
agree with mr. kelly that crimes of this nature require the court to emphasize
general and specific deterrence, as well as denunciation.
section 718.04
of the
criminal code
states that a sentencing court shall give primary
consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence for an offence
that “involved the abuse of a person who is vulnerable because of personal
circumstances – including because the person is aboriginal and female.” ms.
manahil was new to the country, simply minding her own business, while using
public transit with her young child in a stroller. she was extremely
vulnerable, and this was an unprovoked assault.

furthermore, section 718.01 of the
criminal code
states that “[w]hen a court
imposes a sentence
for an offence that involved the abuse of a person under the age of 18 years,
it shall give primary consideration to the objectives of denunciation and
deterrence of such conduct.” ms. manahil’s child was also a victim of these
offences.
aggravating factors

section
718.2
(a)(i) of the
criminal code
states that it is an aggravating factor
if an offence was motivated by “bias, prejudice, or hate” based on specific
immutable characteristics. these characteristics include race, national or
ethnic origin, colour, religion, and sex. for this section to apply, the crown
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the offence was motivated by one of
the listed factors. ms. murphy did not dispute that the crown had met its
burden in this case.

in
r. v. woodward,
2011 bcca 251, the british columbia court of appeal
emphasized the significance of this section, noting that when a court is
convinced it applies, it constitutes a major aggravating factor. in
r. v.
bissonnette,
2022 scc 23, the supreme court of canada determined that an
offence motivated by bias, prejudice, or hate is not merely a crime against an
individual victim; it is also a crime against their community and, indeed, all
of canada: see para. 144.

as
i informed the parties during the sentencing hearing, i recently decided a case
with similar facts to this one: see
r. v. grant,
2025 oncj 231. i
provided them an opportunity to make submissions regarding this area of the law
based on how i decided
grant. i will not repeat in this decision what i
wrote in
grant, but i adopt my reasoning and analysis of the applicable
law from that earlier reported decision, in addition to what i have included
here.

section 718.2
(a)(ii.1) of the
criminal code
states that it
is an aggravating factor if the offender abused a person under the age of 18
years. ms. murphy suggested that the child may have been too young to fully
comprehend what she experienced. i do not find this argument persuasive. in
barendregt
v. grebliunas,
2022 scc 22, at para.
143, the supreme court of canada
stated that even exposing children to family violence can have long-term
detrimental impacts on their development and places them at risk of emotional
and behavioural problems throughout their lives. i see no reason not to apply
analogous reasoning to an unprovoked, random, hate-based attack on a child and
her mother by a stranger. time will tell what impact this incident had on ms.
manahil’s child’s emotional health and development. while it is impossible to
determine the depth of that impact at this time, that does not mean i should
ignore the entirely foreseeable consequences of committing these offences in
the presence of a young child when determining an appropriate sentence.

at
a minimum, ms. vanhartskamp’s offences inflicted significant psychological harm
on ms. manahil and anyone else who witnessed them, including ms. ellis. this
harm was unquestionably severe, and this constitutes another aggravating
factor: see
criminal code
section 718.2(a)(iii.1).

finally,
many courts have held over the years that committing a crime of violence on
public transit is an aggravating factor: see
r. v. elie,
2015 onsc 300,
at para.
20;
r. v. deeb,
2013 onsc 7870, at para.
27;
r. v. brown,
2009 canlii 9760
(s.c.j.) at paras.
46-7. in
r. v. cheong,
1998 canlii
31290
(s.c.j.), justice watt (as he then was) held that one’s sense of personal
security may never recover from being the victim of a violent crime in this
setting: see para. 22. ms. ellis’ victim impact statement provides direct
evidence of this tragic reality in this case.
gladue
principles and mitigating factors

ms.
vanhartskamp pleaded guilty, sparing ms. manahil and the other witnesses from
having to testify, which warrants consideration. the offences were captured on
video (albeit lacking an accompanying audio track), and there were also
independent witnesses to the events. thus, the case against ms. vanhartskamp
was very strong. this is therefore a mitigating factor of moderate weight.

ms.
vanhartskamp is an indigenous canadian.
section 718.2
(e) of the
criminal
code
encompasses the values of restorative justice. in
r. v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc), the supreme court explained that the “concept and
principles of a restorative approach will necessarily have to be developed over
time in the jurisprudence, as different issues and different conceptions of
sentencing are addressed in their appropriate context”: see para. 71.

as
previously noted, an offender’s degree of moral culpability is central to the
proportionality analysis required in any sentencing decision. the “constrained
circumstances of aboriginal offenders may diminish their moral culpability,” as
explained by the supreme court in
r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, at para.
73. a sentencing court must therefore consider the individual circumstances and
life history of an indigenous offender when assessing their moral culpability:
see
r. v. rabbit,
2023 abca 170, at paras.
53-56;
r. v. davis,
2025 bcca 113, at paras.
29-35.

ms.
vanhartskamp has lived a life marked by intergenerational trauma, addiction,
and almost unfathomable tragedy. she has lost siblings to addiction and to
violent crimes. she has endured terrible abuse herself, including a violent
domestic assault that nearly took her life. her family members and community
have fallen victim to both the residential school system and the child welfare
system.

the
intergenerational harm caused by both the residential school system and the historical
overuse of the child welfare system is well documented in our jurisprudence:
see, for example,
reference re an act respecting first nations, inuit and
métis children, youth and families,
2024 scc 5. for generations, indigenous
families and communities were torn apart by these government policies. for ms.
vanhartskamp, the harm she experienced tragically included being a victim of
childhood physical and sexual abuse due to her placement in the foster system.
in
r. v. mcknight,
2024 bcca 394, the british columbia court of appeal
held that “evidence of a contributory link between the appellant’s childhood
sexual victimization and later offending” can attenuate an offender’s moral
culpability: see para. 25. i have no difficulty concluding that ms. vanhartskamp’s
experience with physical and sexual abuse, stemming from her removal from her
indigenous community and placement in the child welfare system, led her down a
path of alcohol and substance abuse that explains much of her offending
behaviour to this day.

it
is also vital to appreciate ms. vanhartskamp’s diagnosis of fasd as a
mitigating factor. in
r. v. j.p.,
2020 skca 52, the saskatchewan court
of appeal held that a “combination of
gladue
factors and fasd will often
serve to reduce an offender’s moral culpability in the context of a
consideration of the proportionality principle”: see para. 65. i find that ms.
vanhartskamp’s challenges with emotional regulation and processing feelings of
frustration were integral to the commission of these offences, which are some
of the hallmarks of fasd.

i
recognize that “
gladue
principles do not apply in a mechanical fashion,
nor do they require reductions in sentences for offences committed by
aboriginal persons”: see
r. v. weese,
2016 onca 449, at para.
26. in
cases of violent crimes, especially those committed by recidivists, there will sometimes
be little difference between the terms of imprisonment for indigenous and
non-indigenous canadians: see
gladue
at para.
79. in that regard, the
sentence proposed by the crown was entirely reasonable given the violent and
hate-filled nature of these offences, even when considering ms. vanhartskamp’s
personal circumstances and status as an indigenous canadian.

yet
ms. vanhartskamp has made progress over the last decade towards remaining on a
pro-social path. the principle of restraint must be given considerable weight
when sentencing an indigenous offender who has clearly been affected by the
systemic impact of colonization and the associated intergenerational trauma: see
r. v. wesley,
2025 onca 51, at para.
91. i also accept ms. murphy’s
submission that the offences occurred proximate to the murder of ms.
vanhartskamp’s sister, and that her mental health and emotional state would
almost certainly have been significantly impacted when she learned of this
terrible event. that too, offers some mitigation for her conduct.
conclusion

many
of the sentencing principles in this case strongly support a jail sentence. the
crown's position aligns with recent authorities of this court. for example, in
r.
v. gobin,
2025 oncj 266, justice townsend sentenced an offender to one year
in jail for hateful conduct directed towards jewish canadians.

however,
other principles pull in the opposite direction, towards allowing ms.
vanhartskamp to serve a sentence in the community. i find that she is motivated
to address her difficulties with substance addiction and process her trauma
while rebuilding connections with her surviving family members. she has taken
genuine and meaningful steps in that direction, including contacting anishnawbe
health toronto, where she is awaiting an intake appointment for counselling.
she also hopes to see a psychiatrist there. additionally, she has the love and
support of her younger sister, priscilla, who attended the sentencing hearing
and will play an active role in supporting her in the future.

ms.
vanhartskamp wants to change. i agree with ms. murphy that her client’s healing
journey will continue to be a long and complex one, with both successes and
failures along the way. but that does not mean i should assume it cannot
succeed or that she is not committed to living a crime-free life.

in
r. v. davis,
2025 bcca 113, at para.
37, the british columbia court of
appeal wrote the following about the need for courts to embrace a different
approach to sentencing indigenous canadians:
incarceration rates for indigenous
offenders will not be reduced significantly if sentencing judges simply reduce
the term of imprisonment they would otherwise have imposed in order to account
for
gladue
factors. serious consideration should always be given to the
imposition of a conditional sentence in all cases where the statutory
prerequisites are satisfied.

if
the courts are truly committed to the values that animate
gladue
and its
progeny, we must be willing to embrace the principles of restorative justice
and think creatively when crafting sentences for our indigenous peoples, even
for offences that otherwise appear to demand a custodial disposition. rather
than impose an additional five-month jail sentence as requested by the crown,
given that ms. vanhartskamp has already served time in jail and been released
successfully back into the community, i will impose a conditional sentence
order (“cso”) instead. i agree with mr. kelly that this case demands a further
custodial sentence, and the quantum of sentence identified by the crown is
entirely appropriate. however, by allowing ms. vanhartskamp to serve that
sentence in the community, she can continue to engage with the therapeutic programs
that have already made a difference in her life. i also note that ms.
vanhartskamp has successfully completed a lengthy cso in the past. i am
satisfied that the criteria of
section 742.1
of the
criminal code
are
met.

i
will note 136 real days credited for 204 days (summers). that amounts to just
over six months of time served. i impose a six-month cso today, followed by a
year of probation. the terms of the cso and probation order will include the
recommendations outlined in the
gladue
report and update letter.

in
addition, i impose a section 110 order for 5 years and a dna order for both
offences.

i
will waive the victim fine surcharges given ms. vanhartskamp’s personal
circumstances. it would cause her undue hardship to pay the fines.
released: june 24, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

“urban realities” in the report of the royal commission on aboriginal peoples:
perspectives and realities, vol. 4. (ottawa, government of canada, 1996), at
387-389 (available online:
https://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/aboriginal-heritage/royal-commission-aboriginal-peoples/pages/final-report.aspx
)