source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj535/2025oncj535.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. fraser, 2025 oncj 535
date: 
2025 10 08
kenora
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
justin fraser
before
justice evelyn j. baxter
heard
on september 8, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on october 8, 2025
roxanne derouard............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
phaedra olinyk...................................................... counsel
for the accused justin fraser
baxter j.:

the following are my reasons for sentence on the
guilty plea entered by mr. fraser to one count of sexual assault contrary to
s.
271
of the
criminal code. mr. fraser entered his guilty plea while
participating in kenora’s mental health court.

the crown proceeded by way of indictment, and
mr. fraser elected to be tried in the ontario court of justice. mr. fraser
entered his guilty plea on december 4, 2024, and engaged in up front work by
participating in mental health court. gladue and pre-sentence reports were
requested/ordered and prepared before the sentencing hearing commenced.

mr. fraser admitted the following facts, after
which i made a finding of guilt. on september 10, 2022, the victim, k.w. and
her friend, h, were at a kenora hotel bar. later that night on september 11,
both females were outside the bar, and mr. fraser showed up. mr. fraser was
known to k.w. as they used to date. after leaving the bar, the trio went to
k.w.’s apartment with mr. fraser. at some point the friend left, and k.w. woke
up at 8 am to discover she was naked and lying in bed with mr. fraser. he told
her they had unprotected sex that night. k.w. told him to leave. he got upset
and called her offensive names. he gathered his belongings and left. k.w.
called her friend and was advised to go to the hospital to be examined. k.w.
does not recall the night as she was intoxicated and could not give consent for
the sexual intercourse.

the dna testing could not exclude mr. fraser as
a donor to the mixture of the vaginal swab of k.w. the testing means there was
a 6.8 billion times chance they were the only possible dna donors.

in this case, the crown seeks a reformatory
sentence of two years less one day, 18 months probation, a dna order, s. 109
prohibition for 10 years, no contact order and a 20-year soira order.

the defense seeks a conditional sentence of two-years
less one day and joins the crown on all the ancillary orders.

gladue, pre-sentence, and diagnostic reports
were filed to assist in this matter. in addition, a victim impact statement
was filed.

mr. fraser is now 26 years of age. he was 23 at
the time of the offence. he does not have a criminal record.

the crown’s justification for the sentence it is
seeking is based on the aggravating factors present. the victim is indigenous,
and the offence had a profound impact on her. s. 718.04 also directs, because
of the victim’s indigeneity, denunciation and deterrence are primary
considerations the court must take into account in sentencing.

mr. fraser’s particular intellectual and mental
health challenges are acknowledged by the crown, and along with his gladue
factors, are matters to be considered by the court when analysing the principle
of rehabilitation. while proportionality is the fundamental sentencing
principle, the primary principle here is denunciation and deterrence.

in this case the crown argued, mr. fraser did
not control his alcohol consumption, and he did not take steps to ensure he
obtained the victim’s consent before engaging in sexual activity with her. 
while his iq is “borderline” he knows right from wrong and can make decisions.

the crown argued in an invasive or penetrative
sexual assault, a cso is not fit or appropriate as it could undermine the
public’s confidence in the justice system and go against the directives of
parliament and higher courts. in this case actual custody is warranted. the
crown took all of mr. fraser’s circumstances into account when they opted for a
reformatory rather than a three-year prison sentence, which is below the range
outlined in
freisen
and other cases.

the crown referred the court to the superior
court of ontario decision in
r.
v.
stinson,
2025 onsc 3190
to indicate
a cso in that case was unfit. the crown also distinguished
r.
v.
trudeau,
2024 oncj 119
(upheld on appeal
2025 onsc 982
) noting mr. trudeau’s
intellectual and other challenges were worse than those of mr. fraser, thereby disqualifying
mr. fraser from a cso, in the crown’s submission.

defense counsel acknowledged a cso should be
given only in rare circumstances, and this is such a case. this is a serious
sexual assault. mr. fraser is taking responsibility, and admits he was very
intoxicated and does not recall all details, and it is his position he has no
defense.

defense asked the court to consider mr. fraser’s
reduced moral culpability, the mitigating factors, and the reports provided. she
also submitted a cso can achieve the principles of denunciation and deterrence. 
mr. fraser has been in mental health court for nearly two years and has been on
release for nearly three years without new charges to date. he is well
supervised and supported with his worker and other programs and services. mr.
fraser is a person who cannot live independently. the court is also to
consider the principles of restraint and rehabilitation, particularly for a
young indigenous man with no criminal record.
reports

the reports generated to assist in the
sentencing will be summarized below. i reviewed the gladue report, pre-sentence
report, and assessment by psychiatrist, dr. klassen (april 12, 2024).

according to the gladue report, mr. fraser is a
member of wauzhushk onigum first nation. he was born to his mother when she
was just 16 years of age. he has no relationship with his father. he has no
deep connections to his family. he is estranged from his mother who suffers
from her own challenges with her having lost her eyesight and suffering from
substance use issues. she is believed to be unhoused in london.

mr. fraser’s great-grandmother had been sent to
residential school at shoal lake (later to become the cecilia jeffrey irs in
kenora), and mr. fraser’s grandfather was sent to st. mary’s irs at wauzhushk
onigum where he suffered sexual and physical abuse.

it appears from the information gathered by the
gladue writer, mr. fraser’s mother consumed alcohol while she was pregnant with
him. his mother has had struggles with alcohol since her teen years resulting
from significant trauma she experienced at that time in her life.

it was reported mr. fraser harbours anger toward
his mother. he has younger siblings but does not have much of a relationship
with them. mr. fraser was placed in care before he was a year old. he has no
connection to his father’s family or community of wabeseemoong. it appears he
has significant abandonment issues. his father passed away in 2021.

mr. fraser left school at age 13 because he
found it boring. he noted he has adhd. when he was young, the medication made
him feel like a “zombie”. he has no interest in continuing his education. mr.
fraser described himself as “…the lights are on but nobody’s home” (gladue
report, page 8).

mr. fraser said he started drinking at age 12
and does occasionally use cannabis. he prefers beer and drinks whenever he can
afford to buy it. he cannot recall any periods of sobriety but says he can
control his drinking when he needs to. he said he doesn’t drink to blackout
anymore, and drinks more casually. he expressed he does not need to go to
rehab, because if he needs to stop drinking, he will just stop.

mr. fraser has a limited employment history. he
may have a job at a local hotel once his charge is dealt with. he worked at
the hotel prior to the charge before this court but had a conflict with a
co-worker (the victim here, i am to understand), and he lost the job.

mr. fraser has no real connection to his culture
and did not express any interest in learning.

with respect to the charge here, mr. fraser
noted he was “hammered…close to being blackout drunk”. (gladue report, page 12)

the psr focussed on mr. fraser’s family history,
which provided significant detail about the intergenerational trauma he
carries. mr. fraser was not able to provide a lot of detail or information to
the writer. he was raised by his maternal aunt and uncle under what appears to
be a form of kin placement or customary care agreement. he was discharged from
the child welfare agency’s care, but mr. fraser voluntarily signed himself into
care after his aunt and uncle divorced. he had a relatively stable upbringing
with them.

mr. fraser lived in a group home until age 18
when he began to receive assistance from the kenora association for community
living (kacl) and is financially supported by ontario disability support
program (odsp). he lives in his own apartment but is supervised and supported
by kacl and a personal worker.

in school mr. fraser was diagnosed as having
some behavioural issues, and he was delayed in his “receptive and expressive
language skills” with a “mild articulation delay”. fasd was suspected but not
confirmed. he left school in grade 9.

the kacl worker confirmed to the psr writer mr.
fraser has been diagnosed with adhd, alcohol-related neurodevelopmental
disorder (arnds), oppositional defiant disorder (odd), suspected autism and a
language disorder. in addition, mr. fraser is connected with services with
developmental service ontario. he did not engage well or long enough with
counselling services while awaiting the completion of his charge in mental
health court.

mr. fraser noted he does not have any friends,
except his “bar” friends. he identifies as bi-sexual with strong attraction to
males. he has not had any long-term relationships but was involved with the
victim prior to the offence, but the relationship did not last. his mental
health and cognitive challenges prevent him from forming relationships or to
setting goals for himself. as a result, mr. fraser has a lot of free or
unstructured time in his day-to-day life.

dr. klassen’s assessment of mr. fraser includes similar
personal and family history as the other reports. an earlier report of another
doctor, dr. stambrook, dated january 6, 2017, concluded mr. fraser has an iq of
72 with borderline intellectual function and superimposed language-related
disability. the other diagnoses noted above are confirmed; however, a
diagnosis of fasd could not be located in the records, but the arnds diagnosis
may support a finding of fasd.

dr. klassen noted in his assessment of mr.
fraser that he functions at the 21
st
percentile on the culture-fair
test of intelligence (toni-4). his academic skills are at a grade 4 level,
which is the basis for his dso funding. mr. fraser can be impulsive when under
duress or intoxicated.

dr. klassen described mr. fraser as alert,
oriented, and he was able to develop some rapport with him. he did not note
any significant disturbances or the presence of psychosis. he does have
attachment issues. mr. fraser has more vulnerabilities than he demonstrates but
is also “crisp and linear in his thinking”.
victim impact statement

a victim impact statement was read into the
record by the crown. k.w. did not attend court for the sentencing hearing. 
the statement was brief, but k.w. indicated she is in fear of encountering mr.
fraser while out and about. she is seeking professional help and is grateful
for her support network of family, friends and co-workers. she is prioritizing
her mental health and trying to move on from this incident and other trauma she
alluded to in her statement.
jurisprudence

the court was referred to some jurisprudence to support
the sentence being suggested by the parties.

the crown relied on
r.
v.
stinson,
2025 onsc 3190, to show a cso in this case would not be an appropriate sentence
for mr. fraser. however, i agree with defense in that this case is not on
point with the case at bar. the
stinson
decision involves a sentence
appeal by the crown. the facts of the sexual assault in that case are not the
same type of sexual assault in the instant case. there was significant
physical and sexual violence and a forcible confinement toward the victim. mr.
stinson did not exhibit the same type of personal challenges mr. fraser has. 
the offences in
stinson
were in an intimate partner context.

the only similarity is that mr. stinson was
indigenous, and a gladue report was prepared. at the time of sentencing mr.
stinson had done up front work and was over one year sober.

on the other hand, the
stinson
decision
is helpful in instructing a sentencing judge about the availability of a
conditional sentence for indigenous offenders in sexual assault cases. the
principles of sentencing are clearly set out in terms of the rarity of cso in
such cases. where the crown proceeds by way of indictment, the range of
sentencing starts at 3 to 5 years. while noting a range is just that – a range,
it is a tool for judges to know where to start. departing from the range is
entirely appropriate in certain circumstances (see paragraph 20).

paragraph 17 of
stinson
is also helpful
in terms of understanding the principle of proportionality: proportionality is
determined both on an individual basis, that is, in relation to the accused him
or herself and to the offence committed by the accused, and by comparison with
sentences imposed for similar offences committed in similar circumstances. individualization
and parity of sentences must be reconciled for a sentence to be proportionate:
s. 718.2
(a) and (b) of the
criminal code.

clearly, as set out in the
criminal code,
denunciation and deterrence are of paramount consideration in sexual assault
cases, especially in cases where an indigenous woman is the victim.

i also note at paragraph 26 of
stinson
that gladue factors can reduce an offender’s moral culpability, but the factors
do not render a conditional sentence proportionate when a sentence fails to
consider denunciation and deterrence.

in
r.
v.
trudeau,
2024 oncj 119,
upheld by the superior court of justice, wolfe j.’s analysis of the sentencing
principles to be considered and applied for indigenous offenders who have
committed sexual assault is an excellent overview and is one with which i
certainly agree and adopt in my reasoning and analysis in the present case.

in paragraphs 54 and 55, the court considered
the reduction of an offender’s moral culpability because of a cognitive
disability. while mr. trudeau’s intellectual challenges appear to be more
severe than that of mr. fraser, i note mr. fraser’s other diagnoses are of
significance when analyzing his moral culpability. nonetheless, the
observations made in
trudeau
are valid.

i was also referred to
r.
v.
nanibush
 oj no. 498, for the instruction regarding conditional sentences and the directive
provided in
r.
v.
proulx,
2000 scc 5.
nanibush
involved an
indigenous offender, and the victim was a young indigenous female under the age
of 18. it was an offence committed in the context of an intimate partner relationship.
the court acknowledged the youthfulness of the offender, that he was indigenous,
had no criminal record, pleaded guilty (expression of remorse) and who had
gladue factors. the 12-month conditional sentence imposed by the sentencing
judge was upheld.

i referred to
r.
v.
chakasim,
2025
oncj 171, simply to review the sentencing principles the court applied to an
indigenous offender who struggled with fasd, substance abuse issues, poverty
and unstable housing. see paragraphs 21 to 33.
analysis

turning now to mr. fraser and the sentence to be
imposed on him.
the sentencing provisions of the
criminal code
instruct protecting society, contributing to respect for the law and helping to
maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society are the goals of sentencing. (see
s.718)

imposing just sanctions that address the
applicable or relevant sentencing principles contained in the
criminal code
ensure sentencing judges are crafting fit and appropriate sentences. these principles
include denunciation, general and specific deterrence, rehabilitation, making
reparation to victims of crime, and promoting a sense of responsibility in
offenders and an acknowledgment of the harm they have caused the community, and
specific victims in our community. (see s. 718(a) – (f))

ultimately, the fundamental goal of sentencing
is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence
committed, and the degree of responsibility of the person who committed it. 
(see s. 718.1) this means that, for the sentence i impose to be appropriate,
it must be tailored to mr. fraser’s circumstances, and the circumstances of the
offence he committed.

sentencing is not an exact science. it is a
very individualized task that necessarily takes into account any relevant
aggravating or mitigating factors present that are helpful in arriving at a fit
and appropriate sentence. (see s. 718.2(a)) this also includes features of
mr. fraser’s background, features of the crime he has committed, the timing of
his guilty plea, and any other evidence i have received during this sentencing
hearing. it would also include any legal direction, whether found in the
criminal
code, or provided by the higher courts, regarding aspects of this case that
i must consider.

listing the applicable aggravating and
mitigating features assists me in evaluating this case properly and imposing a
sentence that is just and appropriate. i find the following aggravating and
mitigating features of this case:

the aggravating factors:
•
this is a serious sexual assault involving
vaginal penetration. the victim was not capable of consenting to sexual
activity given her level of intoxication.
•
mr. fraser did not use protection.
•
k.w. is anishnaabe-kwe, making her a statutorily
vulnerable victim.
•
the sexual assault had a serious, ongoing impact
on her.
•
mr. fraser did not control his alcohol intake.
•
mr. fraser hasn’t fully engaged in
rehabilitation to address his substance use issue.

the mitigating factors:
•
mr. fraser has no criminal record.
•
he is a youthful indigenous offender; in that he
was 23 at the time of the offence.
•
he has pled guilty, thereby sparing the victim
the trauma of a trial and avoiding the cost of a trial.
•
he has significant gladue factors.
•
he has participated in mental health court for
about two years, albeit not to the level that others do, but he did what he was
capable of.
•
he has been on a strict release for nearly 3
years with no new charges.
•
he has significant intellectual, mental health
and substance use challenges which reduce his moral blameworthiness.
•
he is not capable of living fully independently
and is supported by services and a worker in kenora who has daily involvement
with him.
•
no weapon was involved, and no additional
physical violence was used in the commission of the offence.

having regard to the materials, submissions, the
jurisprudence and the directives in the
criminal code, i find mr.
fraser’s moral blameworthiness is reduced. this is not a fact situation
involving a child like that in
freisen
where the supreme court of canada
ascribed a high moral blameworthiness to perpetrators of sexual assault on
children. in addition, all sexual assaults are serious acts of violence that
can have deep, lasting and profound impacts on victims. that is clearly
acknowledged here.

the circumstances of the offence committed here
are not similar to the facts in the
stinson
case. that case can be
distinguished on its facts, and the finding by the superior court that a cso
was not fit or appropriate given the level of violence, the unlawful confinement
and the mindset of the offender. in the instant case, there is no evidence of
any additional violence. while sexual assault is inherently violent and
violating, mr. fraser did not commit any additional violence, did not use a
weapon and did not commit any additional offences against k.w. in the
commission of the index offence.

like the
trudeau
case, mr. fraser has
similar challenges in his community, family and personal backgrounds and in his
diagnoses – actual and suspected. in fact, i note mr. trudeau did not suffer
from the same type or amount of mental health diagnoses, and his psychological
report outlining his cognitive deficits was much more dated than mr. fraser’s.

in examining proportionality and parity, mr.
fraser’s circumstances and the circumstances of the offence are more in line
with the
trudeau
decision than not, except for the fact the crown in
trudeau
proceeded by summary conviction, thereby reducing mr. trudeau’s jeopardy. here,
mr. fraser’s jeopardy is higher given the indictable proceedings allow a
maximum sentence of 10 years imprisonment pursuant to
s. 271
of the
criminal
code.

with respect to parity, mr. trudeau received a
cso of 18 months duration, while the defense here is seeking a two-year, less one
day cso for less serious facts than those in
trudeau.

in
nanibush, a 12-month cso for a penetrative
sexual assault on a victim under the age of 18 was upheld on appeal. it was an
offence committed in an intimate partner situation. the offender there was a
young indigenous male who had a number of gladue factors but no apparent
intellectual or mental health challenges.

courts have sentenced offenders for sexual
assaults that cover a range of seriousness with a range of sentences, both
custodial and non-custodial. for penetrative sexual assaults, the sentence
range starts at 3 years imprisonment. ranges are helpful in informing judges
of how certain cases are to be dealt with in certain circumstances, but ranges
are also not set in stone. ranges are guidelines, and judges have the
discretion to determine fit and appropriate sentences according to law and the
offender’s particular circumstances. where circumstances warrant, a judge can
go below or above a range. (see paragraph 20 in
stinson
)

parliament and the courts have determined sexual
assault requires a judge to prioritize denunciation and deterrence (general and
specific). in many instances, incarceration is the most appropriate sanction
for certain offenders based on the facts of the cases.

it is settled law a cso can achieve the goals of
denunciation and deterrence in appropriate cases. it is also settled that in
gladue
the supreme court questioned the effectiveness of imprisonment as sentences for
indigenous people. the overincarceration of indigenous people is canada is a
continuing issue, and it does not appear the remedial sentencing provisions of
the
criminal code
and other judgments are having the intended impact. 
(see paragraph 32 of
trudeau
)

when sentencing indigenous offenders, the
sentencing principle of restraint is important, and more so when dealing with
an indigenous offender who has a reduced moral blameworthiness because of their
gladue factors and other relevant personal circumstances. restraint also
addresses the attempt to remedy or correct the injustices indigenous people
have suffered in canada since colonization. parliament had this in mind when
s. 718.2
(e) of the
criminal code
was enacted.

paragraph 35 of
trudeau
reads: “that said,
s. 718.2
(e) is not about artificially reducing incarceration rates but rather
is a direction to sentencing judges to ‘abandon the presumption that all
offenders and all communities share the same values when it comes to sentencing
and to recognize that, given these fundamentally different world views,
different or alternative sanctions may more effectively achieve the objectives
of sentencing in a particular community (
ipeelee, at para 74)’”

further, the emphasis on the seriousness of an offence
above all the other sentencing principles can render the remedial nature of
s.
718.2
(e) ineffective and can result in using jail as a default position, which
is contrary to the supreme court’s guidance in
ipeelee
and
gladue. 
(see paragraph 38 of
trudeau
)

paragraphs 26 and 27 in
chakasim
are also
apropos:
 the ontario
court of appeal explained in
r.
v.
king,
2022 onca 665, that
judges, when exercising their discretionary power, must be aware of the
realities of the indigenous peoples who appear before them. the court wrote
the following at para. 170:
…by this,
we mean the historical and present-day treatment of indigenous people that
continues to perpetuate patterns of discrimination and has resulted in “lower
educational attainment, lower incomes, higher unemployment, higher rates of
substance abuse and suicide, and of course higher levels of incarceration for
aboriginal peoples”:
ipeelee, at para. 60. failing to recognize these
realities can lead to further discrimination against indigenous people and
undermine efforts to apply the law impartially and equitably.
 furthermore,
the supreme court of canda has directed trial judges to consider the potential
impact of a proposed sentence on the individual before them. regarding
indigenous canadians, in
r.
v.
hilbach,
2023 scc 3, the supreme
court noted that “the effects of a sentencing measure may be particularly
severe when circumstances affecting indigenous offenders are considered”: see
para. 45.

the supreme court in
r.
v.
proulx
2000 scc 5 (canlii), 1 scr 61, set
out four criteria for a conditional sentence:
a. the
offender must be convicted of an offence that is eligible for a conditional
sentence;
b. the court
must impose a term of imprisonment that is less than two years;
c. the
safety of the community would not be endangered by the offender serving the
sentence in the community, and
d. a conditional
sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of
sentencing set out in ss. 718 to 718.2.

in this case, the first two criteria are met. 
the crown has concerns mr. fraser cannot meet the third and fourth criteria.

i find mr. fraser would not be a danger to the
community at large with a conditional sentence that contains conditions to
ensure his liberty is curtailed, and that he is properly supervised. as it is,
mr. fraser has a support worker with kacl who interacts with him daily. it was
noted by his worker he cannot live fully independently. with a conditional
sentence supervisor working with mr. fraser and his support workers at kacl, i
am satisfied the community safety can be maintained. moreover, he has been on
strict release conditions for three years and has not attracted any new
charges.

as for the fourth criteria, the very purposes of
the sentencing provisions of the
criminal code
would be met with a
conditional sentence, especially because mr. fraser is a young indigenous
offender. denunciation and deterrence can be achieved with a conditional
sentence. sending an offender such as mr. fraser to a real jail could have the
exact opposite effect given his challenges and disabilities. he may come out
of jail far worse than he is now with regular exposure to other offenders who
may indoctrinate him with troublesome notions and behaviours, which may be
contrary to the principle of rehabilitation.

following a cso, a probation order will assist
in continuing to monitor and support mr. fraser in his rehabilitation and to
prevent him having contact with k.w. in addition to the ancillary orders
requested, community and k.w.’s safety are further addressed.

therefore, i will place mr. fraser on a
conditional sentence order for two years, less one day.
a
conditional sentence is a custodial sentence that is served in the community
rather than an actual jail.

following the completion of the
conditional sentence, you will be placed on probation for 18 months.

in addition, you are to provide a
sample of your dna to the ontario provincial police service within seven days.

you will be subject to a s. 109
weapons prohibition order for a period of 10 years starting today.

finally, you are required to
comply with the reporting provisions of the soira for a period of twenty years.
 i thank counsel for their submissions, and i truly hope
k.w. finds healing and strength to move forward in her life.
released: october
8, 2025
signed:
justice e j baxter