source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj462/2025oncj462.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. gonzales trejos, 2025 oncj 462
date: 
2025 09 08
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 4810 8745
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
greis gonzales trejos
before
justice christine mainville
heard
on august 6 and 7, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 8, 2025
angela lepsa....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
mark o’brien.................................................................................. 
 counsel for the accused
mainville j.:

ms. gonzales trejos is charged with impaired
driving and having operated a vehicle with a blood alcohol level over the legal
limit of 80 mg per 100 ml of blood.

she alleges that her rights were violated by the
police during their investigation of this matter, and as a result seeks the
exclusion from evidence of her breath samples, statements to the police, and
observations made of her. these allegations focused on the police’s failure to make
a breath demand under
s. 320.28(1)
of the
criminal code, and delay in
the implementation of her right to counsel. as a result, she argues that her
rights under ss. 8, 9 and 10(b) of the
charter
were violated.

defence counsel acknowledges that if i decline
to exclude any evidence under s. 24(2) of the
charter, the crown will
have proven all elements of both offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt. this
case thus turns entirely on the
charter
application before me. the
evidence from the
charter
voir dire was blended with the trial.

i heard from three witnesses at trial: the two
arresting officers, pc astapov and pc syrydiuk, and the breath technician, pc wiggermann.
the crown also proved that ms. gonzales trejos’ blood alcohol level was 230
mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood within two hours of driving.

for the reasons that follow, i find a violation of sections 8, 9 and
10(
b
) of the
charter. due to several considerations, the section
24(2) analysis ultimately leads me to conclude that the
breath readings
and some observations and statements of ms. gonzales trejos to the police
should be excluded from evidence.
facts

shortly after midnight on march 2, 2024, officers
astapov and syrydiuk observed a car making a u-turn on ellesmere road, in
toronto, a short distance in front of them. the car continued to drive in front
of them and at one point swerved out of its lane before returning into the
lane. they activated their emergency lights to conduct a traffic stop, given
their concerns about the driving.

the car turned onto the upcoming side street and
came to a stop close to the middle of the road, rather than close to the curb,
which the officers found odd. pc astapov engaged with the driver, ms. gonzales trejos,
who was the sole occupant of the vehicle. as pc astapov was speaking with her, pc
syrydiuk observed two empty or near-empty bottles of jameson in the passenger
footwell.

the officers decided that they had grounds to
make a demand for breath samples to be provided in an approved screening device
(asd). the defence does not dispute that they had sufficient grounds to do so. pc
syrydiuk read the asd demand and ms. gonzales trejos complied. she failed the
test such that the officers had grounds to arrest her for driving with alcohol
in her system over the legal limit.

pc astapov proceeded to arrest ms. gonzales
trejos at 12:32 am. shortly thereafter, pc syrydiuk began reading her rights to
counsel. when he paused to ask whether she understood, she conveyed that it was
a lot to take in, so he went over it again in an effort to explain her rights
in plain language. in doing so, he stopped short of reading the entirety of
what is contained in his police memo book with respect to a detainee’s right to
communicate with counsel, and failed to ask whether she wanted to communicate
with a lawyer now. pc syrydiuk instead went on to caution ms. gonzales trejos,
never asking if she wished to speak to a lawyer. he also did not read any
breath demand or make any informal demand that ms. gonzales trejos attend the
station to provide samples of her breath into an approved instrument (ai),
despite that being the intention.

ms. gonzales trejos did request to use her
phone. pc astapov informed her that she could not use it at that time as she
was under arrest but retrieved that and other items from her vehicle. pc syrydiuk
did tell her that she would have an opportunity to contact a lawyer.

though they had not asked whether she wanted to
speak with a lawyer at that time, both officers assumed that she did. pc
syrydiuk testified to his belief that she did wish to communicate with counsel,
and he acted with a view to facilitating that.

despite that being their understanding, the
officers testified that they did not afford ms. gonzales trejos the opportunity
to speak with counsel at the roadside given that they could not provide her
with the privacy needed for such a call. they explained that they had their body-worn
cameras (bwcs) turned on and the in-car camera (icc) on as well. though they
could turn them off entirely or turn off the audio, they did not think that
appropriate given that ms. gonzales trejos was in custody under their care. in
such a circumstance, they asserted that the cameras should be recording.

officers astapov and syrydiuk called for backup
and other officers attended the scene around 12:37 am to deal with ms. gonzales
trejos’ car. after informing them of key information regarding the arrest and
next steps, the two arresting officers had a further conversation with the
backup officers, during which time they all muted their bwc microphones. neither
pc astapov nor pc syrydiuk could recall what they discussed during the few
minutes when the microphones were turned off.

a male then approached the scene on foot. he was
believed to be ms. gonzales trejos’ boyfriend, who resided nearby. indeed,
shortly after being pulled over by the police that evening, ms. gonzales trejos
received a call on her cell phone and mentioned to the person on the other end
of the line that she had just been pulled over and would call them back. she
had told the police that she was on her way to her boyfriend’s house and that
he lived nearby. the male asked about the car and whether he could speak to ms.
gonzales trejos. he was told that he could not speak with her at that time.

officers astapov and syrdiuk left for the
station with ms. gonzales trejos at 12:43 am. they arrived at 12:59 am and
waited in the sally port until the booking sergeant was ready for them. around 1:17
am, the officers accompanied ms. gonzales trejos who was paraded before the staff
sergeant. it is only at this time that ms. gonzales trejos was asked by the
sergeant if she wished to speak to counsel. she responded in the affirmative. the
booking process ended around 1:32 am.

ms. gonzales trejos was then placed in an
interview room where she was put in touch with duty counsel. it is unclear when
the call to duty counsel was first placed, but she began communicating with
counsel at 1:46 am. at 2:02 am, she was brought to the breath room to provide
breath samples.

the breath tech officer, pc wiggermann, also did
not make any formal breath demand of ms. gonzales trejos. he explained that his
practice is to ask whether it has been done, and to not repeat it if it has. in
this instance, pc astapov advised him that the demand had been done. it had not
been, but pc astapov explained that he had no reason to believe that his
partner had not made the demand. pc syrydiuk was not present when the breath
technician asked about any earlier demand.

the breath tech officer also did not ask the
arresting officers about their grounds for the arrest, nor were these grounds
conveyed to him. pc astapov testified that he had conveyed his grounds given
that that is standard as it is needed to continue the process. he said it was
standard practice for breath technicians to ask officers why the person is being
brought before them. he did not however have any specific recollection of this
having occurred. in fact, pc wiggermann testified that he did not ask about any
indicia of impairment or even whether the person had been driving, or what if
any observations had been made by the arresting officers. he testified that he
does not ask these questions as a general rule because he does not want to get
into an argument with officers about their grounds. he testified that this has
happened before, and it can happen that the officer will become aggressive with
him.

pc wiggermann testified that he would only have asked the
officers if they had grounds and if an asd test had been done.
he made no note of any answers to these questions in this case. the breath room
video, which was filed in evidence, shows that he merely asked whether the
breath demand had been given. it does not show him asking the officers about
their grounds or whether an asd test was performed. i find that this
information was not provided to pc wiggermann.

pc wiggermann otherwise did not make any
observations of ms. gonzales trejos relevant to grounds, prior to obtaining the
breath samples. indeed, the only indicia of alcohol consumption or intoxication
that he noted was that she had watery bloodshot eyes, but he also noted that
she had clearly been crying. he did not observe any slurred speech, unsteadiness
on her feet, or the smell of alcohol.

ultimately, ms. gonzales trejos provided a first
breath sample at 2:09 am, and a second one at 2:32 am. rounded down to the
nearest multiple of 10 as required, the results were respectively 240 and 230
mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood.

upon completing the second test, and a comment
being made about when she would be released, ms. gonzales trejos conveyed that
duty counsel told her she would be able to leave within an hour and a half. pc
wiggermann responded that that was wrong, that it was up to the sergeant. he
then added that it was typical of that particular lawyer to make wrong
promises. ms. gonzales trejos then repeated what she had just been told, asking
“did you say that is typical?”.

when questioned about this comment, pc wiggermann
explained why he felt that that that counsel was always wrong. when questioned
about whether his comment would tend to undermine the detainee’s trust in the
lawyer’s competence, he minimized the issue, indicating that she had not hired
that lawyer personally given that he was speaking about duty counsel. he added
that duty counsel should not have made such a promise. he only then went on to
acknowledge that he shouldn’t have made the comment.
analysis
the failure to make an approved
instrument demand and seizure of breath samples

the police seized samples of ms. gonzales
trejos’ breath without a warrant. for a warrantless search and seizure to be
reasonable and compliant with s. 8 of the
charter, it must be done
pursuant to law. an unlawful seizure will amount to a violation of a person’s
constitutionally protected right to be free from unreasonable searches and
seizures, pursuant to s. 8 of the
charter:
r. v. guenter,
2016 onca 572, at para.
85.

section 320.28(1)
of the
criminal code
authorizes the warrantless seizure of breath samples as follows:
320.28
(1)
if a peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
a person has operated a conveyance while the person’s ability to operate it was
impaired to any degree by alcohol or has committed an offence under
paragraph 320.14(1)(b), the peace officer may, by demand made as soon as
practicable,
(a)
require
the person to provide, as soon as practicable,
(i)
the
samples of breath that, in a qualified technician’s opinion, are necessary to
enable a proper analysis to be made by means of an approved instrument,
…
and
(b)
require
the person to accompany the peace officer for the purpose of taking samples of
that person’s breath or blood.

in short, for the seizure to be lawful, the
police need to make a demand requiring the person to provide breath samples
into an approved instrument, and where applicable, requiring them to accompany
the police for that purpose. the demand needs to be made as soon as practicable,
and the person is to provide the breath samples as soon as practicable.

“as soon as practicable” means within a
reasonably prompt time under the circumstances. the key question is whether the
police acted reasonably:
r. v. vanderbruggen, (2006)
2006 canlii 9039 (on ca), 208 o.a.c. 379, at
para.
12. while the crown does not need to call evidence of what occurred
during every minute of the investigation, it does have to show that the tests
were taken within a reasonably prompt time:
vanderbruggen, at paras.
12-13 and 16;
r. v. burwell,
2015 skca 37, at para.
18;
r. v. newton,
2013 onsc 644, at para.
18.

finally, the officer making the demand must have
reasonable grounds to do so. absent the necessary subjective and objectively
reasonable grounds to believe, the demand will be invalid and there will be a
breach of the detained person’s s. 8 and 9
charter
rights to be
protected from unreasonable search and seizure, and from arbitrary detention:
r. v. bernshaw,
1995 canlii 150 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 254, at para.
51;
r. v. shepherd,
2009 scc 35, at para.
13;
r. v.
padavattan,
2007 canlii 18137 (on sc), at para.
20;
r.
v. dhaliwal
(2005), 16 m.v.r. (5th) 165 (s.c.j.), at para. 23.

given the warrantless search and the accused’s
assertion that her
charter
rights were violated, the crown bore the
burden of establishing, on a balance of probabilities, that these requirements
were met:
r. v. gundy,
2008 onca 284, at para.
50.

the demand has the effect of compelling the
person to provide breath samples and informs them of their obligation to do so.
indeed, in the absence of a lawful demand, a person has no obligation to
comply. the demand also informs them that they are under detention during this process
and are accompanying the officer for that reason.

beyond this, the purpose of the above
requirements is to ensure that there is a proper basis for detaining a person,
and to ensure that people are not detained for longer than is reasonably needed
for the state to obtain evidence:
r. v. deruelle,
1992 canlii 73 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 663,
at para.
15. as further explained in
r. v. ruck,
2013 oncj 527, at para.
53, the “as soon as practicable” requirements are concerned with “the
deprivation of liberty that detention to accommodate the test entails. it is
exceptional to require citizens to forfeit their liberty to accommodate police
investigations. while it is necessary to do so, the period of deprivation
should not be unreasonably long, given its purpose.”

it is undisputed that
no
formal breath demand was made in this case, whether by either of the arresting
officers or by the breath technician. the crown however submits that ms.
gonzales trejos was informally notified of the demand and of the reason for her
attendance at the police station. i disagree.

first, ms. gonzales trejos was never notified at
the scene of her arrest and prior to being brought to the police station that
she would have to provide breath samples there and was accompanying the
officers for that purpose. upon arrest, nothing was stated regarding an approved
instrument test.

as indicated, no breath demand was read by
either officer. the most the crown could point to was a passing comment made by
pc syrydiuk in response to a question asked by ms. gonzales trejos. she
questioned why she was being arrested for over 80 when the asd device only
showed that she had failed. she asked what she blew, and pc syrydiuk responded that
that is what they would be finding out at the station.

i find this wholly insufficient to demand that
ms. gonzales trejos provide breath samples into an approved instrument, and to
follow the police to the station for that purpose.

firstly, the statement implies that they would
obtain or provide her with the test results at the station. it was not made
clear that ms. gonzales trejos would in fact have to provide additional breath
samples, into a different type of instrument. she was not informed that this is
why she needed to accompany the police to the station.

while the breath demand need not be in any
particular form, it does need to be made clear to the driver that he or she is
required
to give samples of his or her breath:
r. v. torsney,
2007 onca 67 (canlii), o.j. no. 355
(c.a.), at para.
6;
r. v. ghebretatiyos,
 o.j. no. 4982 (s.c.j.),
at para. 20.

the crown relied on
r. v. commisso,

o.j. no. 817 (sup. ct.)
in support of its position. in that case, the trial
judge found that the driver knew based on his conversation with the officer
that he was required to provide two additional samples of his breath into a
machine and that he would be charged if he refused to do so: para. 6. the
reviewing court accepted that it is insufficient for the driver to understand
this – the words used by the police must have conveyed this requirement: para.
6. nevertheless, that test was met in that case based on the information
conveyed by the officer: see paras. 7-8.

in this case, ms. gonzales trejos was only
informed that she was under arrest and being transported to the station. she
was not told that she would have to undergo further tests or provide further
breath samples. she was certainly not told that she would be required to do so,
nor was she informed of the consequences of refusing to comply. pc syrydiuk’s
off-hand comment did not convey the necessary information to be functionally
equivalent to a formal demand. if there is any uncertainty on this point, it is
dissipated by the fact that ms. gonzales trejos conveyed to the police upon
arriving at the station that she did not know why she had been arrested, given
that “it was a failure”, “there was no number, nothing” – in respect of the
over 80 charge. i will return to this below.

upon arriving at the station, ms. gonzales
trejos was made to wait in the sally port for over 15 minutes. once brought
into the booking hall, the staff sergeant asked the arresting officers why she
had been brought to the station. pc astapov referenced public safety and the
need to prevent the continuation of the offence, but not the fact that she was
there to provide breath samples. it was only when questioned about that by the
staff sergeant that he acknowledged she was also there to provide a suitable sample.

but as acknowledged by pc syrydiuk, the staff
sergeant at that time was speaking to the arresting officers – he was not
addressing ms. gonzales trejos. he also simply referenced “a suitable sample”. i
question whether a layperson would understand that to mean providing samples of
one’s breath. in fact, it was immediately after this comment that ms. gonzales
trejos was asked whether she understood why she had been arrested, and she
conveyed that she didn’t given the absence of any readings. prior to this, she clearly
did not understand that she needed to provide breath samples into an approved
instrument and that she was accompanying the officers to the station for that
purpose.

it is true that after this, the staff sergeant
explained to her that she was “brought here to provide a suitable sample”, and
she indicated that she understood. however, even if she understood at that
point in time that she was there to provide a breath sample, she was never told
that she was required to do so.

in any event, to make a valid demand, the
officer making the demand must have reasonable grounds to do so. he or she must
also do so as soon as practicable upon acquiring those grounds:
guenter,
at paras.
80, 86, 89-90;
padavattan, at para.
20.

the staff sergeant in this case could not make a
valid demand as he did not personally have any grounds to believe that an
offence had been committed: no grounds had been conveyed to him by the
arresting officers.

and any informal demand he could be said to have
conveyed as an agent for the arresting officers was not done as soon as
practicable after those officers formed their grounds to make the demand. by
then, ms. gonzales trejos had been transported to the police station and made
to wait before being paraded. this discussion took place more than 45 minutes
after her arrest.

in
r. v. dzaja, (2003) 173 o.c.a. 14, the
court of appeal deemed that the breathalyser test was not done “as soon as
practicable” given a 33-minute wait between being paraded and connected to duty
counsel because the officer was doing paperwork. the analysis is a functional
one and does not turn on the number of minutes that passed. but the delay
before any informal breath demand here was not justified and could not be said
to have been as soon as practicable. there had been plenty of opportunities to
make the demand had the officers thought of it.

what about the breath technician? in some
instances, the breath demand that is typically made by the breath technician
can serve to remedy an earlier failure to make a proper demand:
guenter,
at paras.
80, 86, 89-90.

in this case, ms. gonzales trejos was again not
read any breath demand by the breath technician. instead, pc astapov wrongly
informed the breath technician pc wiggermann that a demand had already been given.
i accept that he was not looking to mislead the breath technician but rather
assumed that his partner had read the demand. this however was most imprudent,
considering that he never witnessed such a demand being made, he never asked pc
syrydiuk to make the demand, he was never informed by pc syrydiuk that the
demand had been made, and he never asked pc syrydiuk to confirm his assumption
that the demand had been made, prior to or after conveying erroneous
information to pc wiggermann.

did pc wiggermann nevertheless convey to ms.
gonzales trejos the essential elements of the demand? he did at that point
explain that she would be providing two samples of breath into the device,
though she again was not told that she had an obligation to do so. i again find
this insufficient to constitute an informal demand for breath samples, as
required by s. 320.28 of the
code.

in any event, if this information can be characterized
as an informal demand, it was not done pursuant to any reasonable grounds to
believe that ms. gonzales trejos had committed an offence – which, again, is a
prerequisite to a valid demand. indeed, in cases where the breath technician’s
demand has been accepted as a valid substitute for an earlier faulty demand,
the demand was made as soon as practicable after the breath technician acquired
grounds. but in this case, pc wiggermann never acquired grounds to obtain
breath samples from ms. gonzales trejos.

as set out above, pc wiggermann never asked the
arresting officers about their grounds, and these were never conveyed to him. he
in fact indicated that it was now his general practice
not
to inquire.
he did not even know whether ms. gonzales trejos had had care and control of
any motor vehicle, or that she had failed the asd test. while he could perhaps presume
all these things by her mere presence before him, in my view this is
insufficient to meet the statutory prerequisites for him making the demand.

in sum, there was a complete failure to abide by
the requirements of s. 320.28 in this case. the breath samples were thus seized
unlawfully. as a result of the unlawful seizures, section 8 of the
charter
was clearly violated.

in the course of closing submissions, defence
counsel suggested that there was an independent violation of s. 8 as a result
of the breath technician seizing the breath samples without personally having
any grounds to do so.

but a
s
explained by
justice wilson
in
r. v. debot,
1989 canlii 13 (scc),
 2
s.c.r. 1140, at pp. 1166-67, the police officer who decides that a
suspect should be searched is the person who must have reasonable and probable
grounds for believing the suspect is committing an offence: “that officer may
or may not perform the actual search. if another officer conducts the
search, he or she is entitled to assume that the officer who ordered the search
had reasonable and probable grounds for doing so.”
i have no reason to think the
debot
principle does not apply to
the circumstances of this case.

a violation of section 9 of the
charter
however follows from
the unlawful seizure of breath samples. indeed, given that ms. gonzales trejos’
detention at the station was ostensibly for the purpose of complying with a
lawful demand to provide suitable breath samples, but there was no such demand
and no valid search for her to participate in, her detention for that purpose
was not authorized by law. it was therefore arbitrary and in violation of ms.
gonzales trejos’ rights under s. 9 of the
charter.
implementation of the right to
counsel

upon arrest, section 10(
b
) of the
charter
guarantees that a person will be advised of their right to retain and instruct counsel
without delay. it also guarantees that they will be afforded the opportunity to
do so without delay, should they choose to exercise that right.

providing the detainee with a reasonable
opportunity to exercise their right “without delay” means “at the earliest
practical opportunity” or “
at the first
reasonably available opportunity”. while the ultimate burden to prove a
charter
violation rests on the defence, the burden is on the crown to show that a given
delay was reasonable in the circumstances:
r. v. taylor,
2014
scc 50, at paras.
24-25 and 32.

the defence submits that ms. gonzales trejos was
not afforded the opportunity to speak with counsel without delay, in particular
because there was no consideration given to the possibility of enabling a call
with counsel at the roadside, following her arrest.

a preliminary issue arises because the police’s
duty to enable a call with counsel is only triggered where the person requests
to speak with counsel or otherwise invokes their right. in this case, ms.
gonzales trejos was never asked whether she wished to speak with counsel after
she was informed of her right to do so.

asking the detainee if they would like to speak
to counsel is standard practice – it is in fact a question that is included in police
officers’ notebooks as part of the language recited when informing a person of
their right to counsel. the import of that question goes without saying. officers
cannot presume waiver of the right where someone remains silent in the face of
being advised of their right to counsel – they have a duty to ensure that any
waiver is informed and unequivocal. at minimum, they must ask the person
whether they wish to invoke their right, to understand whether they are waiving
it or not. in some sense, ms. gonzales trejos was effectively denied the
opportunity to invoke her right.

in any event, despite not having asked, both
officers in this case assumed that ms. gonzales trejos wanted to speak with
counsel. she did ask for her phone on two occasions after her arrest. the crown
asks me to infer that this was not for the purpose of trying to reach counsel,
but rather to reach her boyfriend whom she communicated with upon being pulled
over.

i cannot make that inference, nor do i need to
make any inference about who she intended to call in order to adjudicate this
matter. the fact of the matter is that both officers took for granted that she
wanted to speak to counsel, and pc syrydiuk accepted that they were under a
duty to facilitate that, from the time of her arrest. it would be wrong to
conclude that this duty wasn’t triggered on the basis that the officers didn’t
know for certain because they failed to ask, as the crown acknowledges they
should have done.

if they were uncertain about her wishes, they
would have asked. and i can only infer that ms. gonzales trejos would have responded
in the affirmative, given that that is what she did once asked at the station. she
also had several questions for the officers and expressed confusion on a few
occasions. she would no doubt have valued getting advice from counsel if
afforded that opportunity. both officers assumed as much – that she had
effectively invoked her right to speak with counsel.

the officers therefore had a duty to implement
that right without delay.

both officers testified that they did not afford
ms. gonzales trejos the opportunity to speak with counsel at the roadside given
that they could not provide her with the privacy needed for such a call, given
that their bwcs and the icc were recording. though they provided this explanation
in their testimony at trial, both agreed that they did not turn their minds to
whether it would have been possible to accommodate a call to counsel prior to
arriving at the station. it was simply not something that they would enable,
based on their training.

in
taylor, at paras.
24, 27-28, the
supreme court held that a police officer does not need to
provide their own cell phone to a detainee to facilitate access to counsel, but
they nevertheless have “a constitutional obligation to facilitate the
requested access to a lawyer at the first reasonably available opportunity”.

the court in that case addressed the assertion that access to counsel
had to be delayed because the accused was at the emergency ward. it stated, at
para. 33:
not everything that happens in
an emergency ward is necessarily a medical emergency of such proportions that
communication between a lawyer and an accused is not reasonably possible.
constitutional rights cannot be displaced by
assumptions
of
impracticality. barriers to access must be proven, not assumed, and proactive
steps are required to turn the
right
to counsel into
access
to
counsel.

similarly, whether access to counsel at the
roadside ought to be facilitated will depend on the circumstances of the
particular case. in many circumstances, the police will be justified in
delaying a call to counsel until the person is at the police station.

in
r. v.
rover,
2018 onca 745,
the court of appeal recognized
the need to delay providing access to counsel in some circumstances based on
police or public safety, or to preserve evidence. but it added that officers need
turn their mind to the specific circumstances of the case, and there should be
a reasonable basis for concluding that the delay is necessary: paras. 24-27,
32-34.

in many cases, safety and security
considerations will preclude the feasibility of communicating with counsel at
the roadside: see, for instance,
r. v. bernard,
2018 onsc 5134, at paras.
29 and 31;
r. v. roberts,
2015 onsc 7974, at para.
130. both officers here
agreed that they did not have such concerns: ms. gonzales trejos was
cooperative and fully compliant. i also note that there was no traffic in the
vicinity, or anyone around beyond the backup officers and ms. gonzales trejos’
acquaintance. the fact that they were waiting on a small quiet street and not
at the scene of an accident, as was the case in both
bernard
and
roberts,
is also relevant to the analysis.

the officers did point to the fact that when a
person is in their custody, as ms. gonzales trejos was, they should be
recorded. in my view, this consideration cannot carry the day in all cases.
while it is most sensible and indeed important for the police to ensure that
their recording equipment is activated when they have someone in their custody,
the s. 10(
b
) case law suggests that there is no bright line rule,
including when it comes to ensuring privacy for a call to counsel.

in
r. v. pileggi,
2021 onca 4, at paras.
75-78, the court held that the police are not expected to provide access to
counsel on scene where the accused cannot reasonably be afforded privacy in a
secure environment. but the presence of a cellular phone or smartphone is a
factor to consider in this analysis.

in
r. v. george, (2004)
2004 canlii 6210 (on ca),
187
c.c.c. (3d) 289 (ont. c.a.), the court found that although the right to counsel
is suspended pending a roadside asd test, where that test is delayed because
the asd is not on scene, such that no valid demand can be made, the police may
have a duty to implement the right to counsel at the roadside:
see also
r.
v. kalyanaramier,
2020 oncj 348, at paras.
22-26;
r. v. johnson,
 o.j. no. 1245 (prov. ct). while the holding in that case may be impacted
by the supreme court’s later
decision in
r. v. breault,
2023 scc 9, which
speaks to the consequences of not having an asd on scene, i take the case to speak
to a broader point: that in some circumstances, the police may have a duty to
implement the right to counsel at the roadside. the actual length of the delay
must be
considered:
george, at paras.
33, 41-42 and 56.
see also
r. v. cote
(1992),
1992 canlii 2778 (on ca),
70 c.c.c. (3d) 280 (ont. c.a.).

in
george,
the
officer was aware that there would likely be a delay of fifteen to twenty
minutes before the screening device arrived. the court stated, at para. 42,
that:
in the face of that
information, it was incumbent upon the officer to take reasonable steps to
facilitate the respondent detainee’s right to consult counsel. such steps
would involve asking the detainee whether he had a cellular telephone. in
this case, the evidence is that the respondent would have used his cellular
telephone and called his lawyer.

the court, added,
at para. 55, that “
i
n
cote, arbour j.a. explicitly stated
that the ready availability of a telephone was a relevant factor for the court
to consider in determining whether a detainee had a realistic opportunity to
consult counsel during the period of delay between the issuance of the demand
and the production of the breath sample.”

there is ultimately no black and white rule
about whether roadside contact should be facilitated for the police to
discharge their obligation to enable communication with counsel without delay.
it will depend on the facts of each case. but to discharge their constitutional
duties, it does appear essential for officers to
consider
the
possibility of providing access to counsel at the roadside, where appropriate:
rover;
r. v. tremblay,
2021 qcca 24, at
paras.
42, 52 and 77-78.

in
freddi v. r.,
2021
qcca 249, the quebec court of appeal held at para. 40 that:
[p]olice
officers are not obliged to let detained persons call their lawyer, at the
scene, with a cell phone. they must, nevertheless, take that possibility into
account in determining when the first reasonable opportunity to allow the
detained person to have access to counsel occurs. their duty is to consider the
overall circumstances when making their decision, and purely theoretical
reasons unconnected to the case will not suffice.

in this case, the police were well aware that ms.
gonzales trejos had a cell phone. she used it in front of them and requested
it. she would have been able to use her phone in the secure environment where
she was, in the back of the police cruiser. the officers agreed that they could
have turned off the audio to the icc, and to their bwcs. this could have
reasonably afforded her the privacy needed to speak to counsel, all the while
addressing the concern raised by the officers that they should be recording
individuals who are in custody under their care: see in this regard
freddi,
at para.
49.

while the police can in some circumstances rely
on the inability to reasonably afford privacy in a secure environment to delay
the right to counsel, as found in
pileggi, it surely cannot be the case
that roadside conversations with counsel can never occur now that virtually
every police scout car is equipped with an in car camera. in some
circumstances, in particular where there are no concerns regarding the deletion
of evidence or the police requiring the detainee’s phone for evidentiary
purposes, where there are no security concerns that preclude officers from
leaving the accused alone inside their scout car, with the audio off, and where
there is no chaos at the scene, it may be possible to accommodate this.

as
in
tremblay, however, the
issue here is not that ms. gonzales trejos was not permitted to use her cell
phone to call a lawyer. the issue is that the two officers did not even
consider this possibility, although it was their responsibility to do so. again,
like
in
tremblay, they did not consider this possibility because of a systemic
issue: they are not trained or directed to consider this possibility. rather,
they operate on the rule that the opportunity to contact counsel is to be
provided at the police station. that is not the law.

the duty to facilitate access to counsel arises immediately after
the detainee has asked to speak with counsel, which means at the first
reasonably available opportunity. the overall circumstances should be taken
into account:
rover, at paras.
24-27.

as stated in
freddi, at para.
43, “[t]he prosecution's
burden requires a demonstration of fact on a case-by-case basis, as the
respondent concedes, not hypotheses or an unwavering rule in the nature of a
directive.”

courts have been more inclined to find that a
roadside call with counsel should be facilitated in cases where the detainee
cannot immediately be transported to the station. for instance, in
r. v.
lumby,
(2020) o.j. no. 2203, the police were waiting at the scene for someone
to attend to take charge of the detainee’s children who were sleeping in the
vehicle. like here, ms. lumby was cooperative and there was no one else around
other than the children.

in this case, the officers delayed their
departure for the station as they could not leave ms. gonzales trejos’ vehicle
in the roadway where it was located. they called for backup so that other
officers could attend and arrange for the vehicle to be towed or moved.

once the backup arrived, and after they had
conveyed the necessary information they needed to convey, they had a
minutes-long muted discussion with the officers, before being interrupted by
the male who knew ms. gonzales trejos. no one was able to account for what that
conversation was about, given the muted bwcs. they could not recall the topic
of discussion and pc syrydiuk agreed that they could have been talking about
anything, including sports – he simply could not say. pc syrydiuk also
acknowledged that were it not for this conversation, they could have gotten to
the station earlier.

the officers ultimately began transporting ms.
gonzales trejos to the station just over 10 minutes after her arrest. while not
a significant amount of time in itself, it ultimately led to her not having the
opportunity to contact counsel until well over an hour after her arrest. once
at the station, the officers and ms. gonzales trejos had to wait just under 20
minutes before being able to parade her before the booking sergeant. the
officers would have been able to expect some delay at the station before being
able to access the booking hall, as is common and occurred here. it is unclear
whether there was some delay in the police placing a call to duty counsel
following the booking, as they did not have a record of that time. ultimately,
she was connected to duty counsel at 1:46 am, over an hour after being advised
of her right to counsel and effectively invoking that right.

i am satisfied based on all the above
circumstances that the crown has not discharged its burden of showing that
access to counsel was facilitated at the earliest reasonable opportunity.

the facts in this case are very similar to those
in
tremblay, at paras.
24-25. in that case, there was a violation of the
accused’s right to counsel following a 54-minute delay to speak to counsel at
the detachment, in contrast to the limited time it would have taken to
implement the right using her phone at the roadside.

i therefore find a violation of ms. gonzales trejos’s
right to counsel under s. 10(
b
) of the
charter.

before she could speak to counsel, the
booking sergeant questioned ms. gonzales trejos regarding whether she had
consumed alcohol that night. in response, she provided information about
how many drinks she had had and when.

i will turn to the issue of whether
this self-incriminating statement, together with the breathalyzer evidence and
observations made of ms. gonzales trejos, should be excluded pursuant to s.
24(2) of the
charter.

before doing so, however, there is a further
issue that arose in this case that touches on ms. gonzales trejos’ right to
counsel – that of the breath technician disparaging duty counsel to whom she
had just spoken.

where a detainee requests a particular counsel,
disparaging comments about the lawyer are likely to undermine the relationship
between solicitor and client, which amounts to a serious breach of s. 10(
b
):
r. v. burlingham,
1995 canlii 88 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 206, at para.
14.

here, ms. gonzales trejos did not request a
particular counsel, but she had already spoken to a particular counsel. that
counsel was disparaged by the breath technician. in my view, this would have
had the effect of undermining the accused’s confidence in the advice she had
received from that lawyer and is equally problematic.

ms. gonzales trejos was still in custody and
would have been operating based on the advice she had received from counsel. to
undermine that would have the effect of placing the accused back in position of
effectively not having received any advice from counsel. indeed, pc
wiggermann’s comment would have the effect of creating doubt about the reliability
of the advice received.

the comment did not merely have to do with
apparently incorrect information ms. gonzales trejos had been given about when
she would be released. the officer’s comment undermined the lawyer altogether.
the comment caught her attention, and she questioned the officer about it. i
can infer that her trust in that counsel and everything he conveyed to her
would have been shaken because of the officer’s statement.

though the facts are very different, the issue
of undermining the legal advice given by counsel was considered by the supreme
court in
r. v. dussault,
2022 scc 16. at para. 46, the court held that
the consequence of such conduct by the police is that it triggers a police duty
to provide the detainee with a second opportunity to consult counsel. failing
to discharge that duty will result in a breach of the right to counsel.

the same reasoning ought to apply here. while
the police undermined counsel’s advice after the breath samples had been taken
and towards the end of ms. gonzales trejos’ detention, it is a serious matter.
as cited in
dussault, at para.
56, doherty j.a. in
rover
described the right to counsel as a “lifeline through which detained persons
obtain legal advice and the sense that they are not entirely at the mercy of
the police while detained.” as in
dussault, ms. gonzales trejos was not
given an opportunity to re-establish this lifeline. this occasioned a further
breach of her s. 10(
b
) right.
exclusion of evidence under s. 24(2)

the defence seeks the exclusion from evidence of
the seized breath samples, ms. gonzales trejos’ statement, and certain observations
made of her, pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.

in
r. v. mccolman,
2023 scc 8, the supreme court considered
s. 24(2) in the context of a drinking and driving case. it wrote, at paras. 53
and ff., that:
section 24(2) requires
that evidence obtained in a manner that infringes the
charter
rights
of an accused be excluded from the trial if it is established that “having
regard to all the circumstances, the admission of it in the proceedings would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute”. the
s. 24(2)
analysis
is an objective one, evaluated from the perspective of a reasonable person, and
the burden to persuade a court that admission of the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute rests on the party seeking
exclusion:
grant, at para. 68.
section 24(2) is focused
on maintaining the long-term integrity of, and public confidence in, the
justice system. accordingly, the exclusion of evidence under s. 24(2) is
directed not at punishing police misconduct or compensating the accused, but
rather at systemic and institutional concerns:
grant, at
para. 70. in
grant, this court explained that the
s. 24(2) analysis engages three lines of inquiry: (1) the seriousness of
the
charter
-infringing state conduct; (2) the impact of the breach
on the
charter
‑protected interests of the accused; and (3)
society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits. courts are
tasked with balancing the assessments under each of these lines of inquiry, but
as recognized in
grant, “[t]he balancing mandated by s. 24(2)
is qualitative in nature and therefore not capable of mathematical precision”:
para. 140.
trial courts must evaluate each
of the three lines of inquiry thoroughly. a cursory review of the
grant
test
prevents appropriate appellate review and transforms s. 24(2) from a
contextual inquiry into a bright-line rule.

the crux of the analysis here is whether the admission of the
evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute, having
regard to all the circumstances. this is measured by evaluating and balancing
the following three factors, known as the “
grant
factors” pursuant to
r.
v. grant,
2009 scc 32:
(1) the
seriousness of the
charter
-infringing state conduct, (2) the impact of
the breach on the
charter
-protected interests of the accused, and (3)
society’s interest in an adjudication of the case on its merits.
(1) seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
conduct

as stated in
mccolman, at paras.
57-59:
the first line of inquiry focuses on the extent
to which the state conduct at issue deviates from the rule of law. as this
court
stated in
grant, at para.
72, this line
of inquiry “requires a court to assess whether the admission of the evidence
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute by sending a message
to the public that the courts, as institutions responsible for the
administration of justice, effectively condone state deviation from the rule of
law by failing to dissociate themselves from the fruits of that unlawful
conduct”. or as this court phrased it
in
r. v. harrison,
2009
scc 34,
 2 s.c.r. 494, at para.
22: “did [the police conduct] involve misconduct from which
the court should be concerned to dissociate itself?”
in evaluating the gravity of the state conduct
at issue, a court must “situate that conduct on a scale of culpability”:
r.
v. paterson,
2017
scc 15,
 1 s.c.r. 202, at para.
43. as justice doherty observed
in
r. v. blake,
2010
onca 1,
251 c.c.c. (3d) 4, “the graver the state’s
misconduct the stronger the need to preserve the long‑term repute of the
administration of justice by disassociating the court’s processes from that
misconduct”: para. 23. to properly situate state conduct on the “scale of
culpability”, courts must also ask whether the presence of surrounding
circumstances attenuates or exacerbates the seriousness of the state
conduct:
grant, at para.
75.
were the police compelled to act quickly in order to prevent the disappearance
of evidence? did the police act in good faith? could the police have obtained
the evidence without a
charter
violation? only by adopting a holistic analysis can a court
properly situate state conduct on the scale of culpability.
… s
tate
conduct that is not particularly serious may nonetheless heavily impact the
accused’s
charter
-protected interests. conversely, state conduct
that is egregious may minimally impact the accused’s
charter
-protected
interests.

while there was a complete failure to make the necessary
demand and thus a clear breach of s. 8, the
police conduct in this case
was certainly not egregious.

officers
astapov and syrydiuk were on their first impaired investigation. they omitted
to read the breath demand, or anything akin to it. but this was an oversight by
inexperienced officers, not done in bad faith.

and
the delay in implementing ms. gonzales trejos’ right to counsel once at the
station was largely attributable to waiting to be paraded and the booking
process. the delay before being transported to the station was not overly
prolonged.

still,
there are a constellation of factors here that increase the seriousness of the breaches,
such that i cannot characterize it as benign.

first is the fact that there were many points at which the failure
to make the breath demand could have been remedied to some extent, or its
impact minimized, yet this was not done. detainees will usually be informed of
why they are attending the station either informally, or at a minimum once they
are brought to the breath room and engage with the qualified breath technician.
indeed, these technicians generally reiterate the earlier demand, whether it
has already been provided or not. this safety valve can remedy a
charter
violation arising from prior officers overlooking the breath demand.

yet here, pc wiggermann does not make the demand as a matter of
general practice, if he is informed that it has been given. even if he did, he
does not generally query the grounds for the breath demand, or ensure he has
formed his own, such that any demand he made could meet the legislative
requirements of s. 320.28. the reason for this practice is concerning: he has
stopped querying officers so as to not engage in an argument with them. in his
experience, some officers apparently perceive that they are being challenged on
their grounds. he agreed that officers could sometimes become aggressive. he
therefore no longer asks.

this set of circumstances, which raises questions and creates a
scenario by which it is more likely that detainees’ rights will be breached and
not remedied in any way, enhances the seriousness of the breaches in the
present case.

another concern is that pc wiggermann was advised that the breath
demand
had
been made, which was not true. while i do not find that pc
astapov purposely sought to mislead pc wiggermann, he had no knowledge that
this had been done or any basis for representing as much, and he never sought
to have this information verified or confirmed by pc syrydiuk, even after the
fact.

in
guenter, the court found that there was no breach of s. 8 because the
breath technician had remedied the earlier failure to make a breath demand and
had made a valid demand as soon as practicable and based on reasonable grounds.
in that context, the court found, at para. 98, that if there was a breach, it
was not a serious one.

however,
those facts are quite different from the ones here. in
guenter, a demand
was made – two in fact. the issue was merely delay. here, no formal or informal
demand was made whatsoever. had the failures only been the inadvertent ones of
the inexperienced arresting officers, i would have agreed that the breach was
not especially serious. pc syrydiuk was inexperienced and made
a mistake. he was upfront about it and testified honestly. his error was an
oversight, and he wasn’t present when assurances were later given to the breath
technician that the demand had been made.

but pc astapov did not take care to ensure the demand had been made
by his colleague, before conveying to the breath technician that it had been
done. he had no reason to believe it was, especially since he himself had only
told pc syrdiuk to give ms. gonzales trejos her rights to counsel. there had
been no discussion about any breath demand being administered. while he did not
know his answer to be false, he also did not know it to be true. were it not
for this lack of care and erroneous information being provided to the breath
technician, the breath demand would likely have been made at that time, thereby
at least remedying the breach to some extent.

the
above failures were never remedied by the actions of the experienced breath
technician in this case. and they very easily could have been if this
experienced officer had not adopted the practices he has adopted, for
questionable reasons. instead, he has adopted a practice of not receiving the
arresting officers’ grounds, and of not reiterating a breath demand if it is believed
to have already been done. this carries some risk, which materialized here.

there was some carelessness in some of the officers’ evidence before
the court as well – testifying to something based on an unverified assumption
that turned out to be incorrect, without any qualification to their answer.

this lack of care on the part of officers charged with important
duties and whose word is put forward under oath to be relied upon, is of
concern and again weighs in the balance when assessing the seriousness of the
violations here.

there was also more than one violation in the present case.

as it pertains to the s. 10(
b
) violation, the officers not
only did not turn their minds to implementing ms. gonzales trejos’ right to
counsel at the roadside, they operated as they did based on their understanding
– on the basis of their training – that the right to counsel should invariably be
implemented at the police station.

moreover, pc astapov believed, again based on his training, that the
right to counsel had to be relayed and implemented “as soon as practicable”. this
is an erroneous understanding of the constitutional requirement that the right
to counsel is to be provided “without delay”.

yet providing the right to counsel without delay is a well-established
concept that matters. as stated by the supreme court in
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33, at para.
42, the words “without delay” in s. 10(
b
) of the
charter
mean that officers have an obligation to inform the detainee of their right to
counsel “immediately”, subject to concerns for officer or public safety or
reasonable limitations prescribed by law or otherwise justified under section 1
of the
charter. similarly, the implementation of the right to counsel
should generally not be delayed unless justified by
a risk that evidence will be destroyed, public safety,
police safety, or some other urgent or dangerous circumstance:
rover, at
para.
33.

the failure by officers to properly understand the applicable
standard is a recurring issue: see
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50, at paras.
27-28, 32; and decisions from this jurisdiction including
r. v. nufio,
2023 oncj 255, at paras.
76-79.

while pc astapov equated “as soon as practicable” with “as soon as
possible”, in my assessment the belief that the standard is “as soon as
practicable”, rather than “without delay”, informs the general practice of
waiting until the accused is brought to the station, searched, and paraded,
before efforts are made to put them in touch with counsel. while that will
often be the earliest time the police can reasonably implement the detainee’s
right to counsel, the law is clear that in many cases it can be accommodated
earlier, and in such cases it should be.

here, the officers never turned their mind to it at least in part
because that is not what they were taught.
when
a routine police practice or directive unduly restricts a right, it tends to
make the infringement more serious:
r. v. paterson,
2017
scc 15, at para.
44;
rover, at paras.
39-40;
tremblay, at paras.
65-66, 68;
freddi,
at para.
73. as stated in
rover, at para.
34:
the effective implementation of
the right to counsel guaranteed by s. 10(b) depends entirely on the police. the
police must understand that right and be willing to facilitate contact with
counsel. the practice under which the officers involved in this case operated
demonstrates a disregard of a fundamental constitutional right.

a
lack of understanding of the law and constitutional rights by
the police does not constitute good faith:
r. v. le,
2019 scc 34,
at para.
147. as stated by the supreme court in
tim, at para. 85:
good faith on the part of the
police, if present, would reduce the need for the court to dissociate itself
from the police conduct (see
grant, at para.
75;
paterson,
at para.
44
). good faith cannot be claimed if the
charter
breach
arises from a police officer’s negligence, unreasonable error, ignorance as to
the scope of their authority, or ignorance of
charter
standards
(see
grant, at para.
75;
buhay, at
para. 59;
le, at para. 147;
paterson, at
para.
44
).

the police were therefore not operating in good faith in this case.
the s. 10(
b
) violation was the result of immutable practice rather than
the circumstances of the case.

i also make note of the fact that part of the constellation of
factors that resulted in a s. 10(
b
) violation here includes the muting
of the officers bwcs. at the time, officers astapov and syrydiuk believed that
their policy permitted them to mute in such circumstances. the courts have
found that doing so is generally wrong and inappropriate. if done in bad faith,
it can amount to a violation of section 7 of the
charter: see
r. v. sherif,
2024 onsc 4098, at paras.
86 and 96;
r. v. azfar,
2023 oncj 241, at para.
35;
r. v. dunn,
2023 oncj 562, at paras.
44-45. while no such breach was established here, the
contribution of the bwc muting to the s. 10(
b
) breach is aggravating to
some extent.

while not every minute of delay in implementing the right to counsel
needs to be accounted for, the fact that i am unable to account for some of the
time on scene when the officers’ bwcs were muted supports my finding that the
officers were not doing what they could to ensure that ms. gonzales trejos’
right to counsel was implemented at the earliest opportunity.

finally, i consider as part of the s. 10(
b
) violation pc
wiggermann’s actions in undermining the trust between ms. gonzales trejos and the
counsel she had spoken to, and in then minimizing this issue in his testimony
before the court. unlike officers astapov and syrydiuk, pc wiggermann is not
inexperienced, yet he had minimal insight into how problematic this was even
after the fact.

some of the above issues were not one offs. rather, they occurred as
a matter of standard practice for these officers. it thus cannot be chalked up
to the two arresting officers’ inexperience.

in light of the accumulation of breaches and above-noted concerns, i
would qualify the seriousness of the breaches as moderate.
impact on the protected interests

the supreme court in
mccolman
explained at para.
66
that:
the second line of inquiry is aimed at the concern that
admitting evidence obtained in violation of the
charter
may
send a message to the public that
charter
rights are of little
actual avail to the citizen. courts must evaluate the extent to which the
breach “actually undermined the interests protected by the right
infringed”:
grant, at para.
76. like the first line of
inquiry, the second line envisions a sliding scale of conduct, with “fleeting
and technical” breaches at one end of the scale and “profoundly intrusive”
breaches at the other: para. 76.

the minimally intrusive means by which breath samples are obtained generally
favours the admission of the evidence: see,
grant, at paras.
106-111;
r. v.
manchulenko,
2013 onca 543, at paras.
93 and 100; and
tremblay, at para.
71. i must however account for the
entirety of the circumstances, including the cumulative impact of the different
violations that occurred in this case:
r. v. zacharias,
2023 scc 30, at
para.
57.

ms. gonzales trejos was unable to communicate with counsel until
over an hour after her arrest. during that time, she had not been told why she
was being brought to the station (other than she was under arrest) as no breath
demand had been made. she was emotional and had raised questions about her
arrest. indeed, she frequently questioned why she was being arrested for “over
80” and expressed confusion and uncertainty as to the reasons for her arrest. she
was disconnected from the outside world and clearly eager to connect with
someone, asking to use her phone and being quite emotional while in the police
cruiser. she also viewed the arrest and detention as “a lot” – expressing that
on more than one occasion. she also expressed feeling intimidated by the actions
of the officers towards her.

to be sure, i do not find the officers’ actions to have been
untoward. but the focus of the analysis here is on ms. gonzales trejos’ reasonable
perception and the impact the violations had on her.

she expressed concern about the officers being much larger than her
yet restraining her physically in the police station. she questioned the
necessity of their actions and of the way she was being treated. she was
crying, confused, fearful, and felt intimidated.

this is precisely what early access to counsel
is meant to address. persons who are detained by state authorities are
at a disadvantage in their dealings with the state; they are deprived of
liberty and risk incriminating themselves. the right to counsel is therefore
crucial and enables detained persons not to feel entirely at the mercy of the
police. as set out above, it is a lifeline that is not only meant to provide
legal advice and guidance, “but also the sense that they are not entirely at
the mercy of the police while detained. the psychological value of access to
counsel without delay should not be underestimated”:
rover, at paras.
44-46; see also
tremblay, at
para.
73.

instead, ms. gonzales trejos was deprived of all outside contact for
over an hour, despite the fact that she had requested her phone and also
requested to speak with her presumed boyfriend who had attended the scene and
very well could have assisted her with getting in touch with a lawyer.

moreover, ms. gonzales trejos provided breath samples in the face of
an unlawful demand. she would have been within her right to refuse to provide
the samples. instead, she was put in a situation where she was compelled
by the police to comply with their requests and give evidence against herself
when she was not legally required to do so. duty counsel would
not have been aware that no demand had been made. i agree with counsel’s
submission that this would impair counsel’s ability to provide proper advice.

ms. gonzales trejos was also unlawfully detained for the purpose of
obtaining these breath samples. she was deprived of liberty and made to
participate in this unlawful investigative step.

there was some evidence that she was also brought to the station to
prevent the continuation of the offence, and that she would potentially have
remained in custody based on her readings, at least if she could not be
released to a responsible adult. leaving aside the fact that she could not have
been detained based on her readings when the police had no authority to obtain
those readings, i cannot find that she would have remained in custody in light
of her level of intoxication given that she was released to someone who was at
the station waiting for her and had been present on scene from just after her
arrest. i therefore can only find that ms. gonzales trejos’ detention for the
purpose of providing breath samples that she was not lawfully required to
provide resulted in a prolonged detention.

finally, ms. gonzales trejos was conscripted to give
self-incriminating evidence prior to accessing counsel. indeed, the staff
sergeant questioned her about her consumption of alcohol, the timing of same
and over what period she had been drinking. she provided answers to all these
questions, when she had no obligation to do so, and before obtaining legal advice.

i therefore find that these violations had a very real impact on the
accused, as established by the evidence. i would characterize this impact as
moderate but tending toward the more serious end of the spectrum.
(3) impact on the administration of justice

on the last prong of the
grant
test, the court in
mccolman
stated:
 
 the third line of inquiry asks whether the
truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process would be better served by
admission of the evidence, or by its exclusion. this inquiry requires courts to
consider both the negative impact of admission of the evidence on the repute of
the administration of justice and the impact of failing to admit the
evidence:
grant, at para.
79. in each
case, “it is the long-term repute of the administration of justice that must be
assessed”:
harrison, at para.
36.
 
 under this third line of inquiry, courts should consider factors
such as the reliability of the evidence, the importance of the evidence to the
crown’s case, and the seriousness of the alleged offence, although this court
has recognized that the final factor can cut both ways:
grant, at
paras.
81
and 83-84. while the public has a heightened interest
in a determination on the merits where the offence is serious, it also has a
vital interest in maintaining a justice system that is above reproach:
para. 84.
…
 
 in light of the reliability and importance of the evidence as well
as the seriousness of the alleged offence, the third line of inquiry pulls strongly
in favour of inclusion. admission of the evidence in this case would better
serve the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process and would not
damage the long-term repute of the justice system.

these considerations favour admission of the evidence in this case
as well, as they tend to do in most cases. the breath samples are essential to
the crown’s case and are highly reliable.

the offence is also a serious one – in particular given ms. gonzales
trejos’ high readings.

the
third line of inquiry under
grant
favours the admission of the evidence
as to do so would promote the public's interest in having the case adjudicated
on its merits.
final balancing

i am left with two factors that pull in favour of exclusion, albeit
moderately so, and one that pulls quite strongly in favour of admission of the
evidence.
in
r. v. mcguffie,
2016
onca 365
at para.
63, justice doherty wrote that “[i]f the first and second
inquiries make a strong case for exclusion, the third inquiry will seldom, if
ever, tip the balance in favour of admissibility”. see also
le, at para. 142.

in the present circumstances, however, i am faced with a much less
obvious contrast.

recently,
in
tim, at para. 85, the supreme court acknowledged
that “[e]ven where the
charter
infringement is not
deliberate or the product of systemic or institutional abuse, exclusion has
been found to be warranted for
clear violations of well-established rules
governing state conduct
’ (
paterson, at para.
44; see also
harrison,
at paras.
24-25
).” [emphasis added.]

this is the case here. ultimately, my determination that the
evidence ought to be excluded turns on the cumulative impact of the breaches,
that is, the fact that no breath demand or its equivalent was made at all, in a
context where ms. gonzales trejos also wasn’t provided access to counsel for
over an hour and the officers did not turn their minds to providing earlier
access – based on general practice – in circumstances where this could in all
likelihood have been accommodated.

of
import are the institutional concerns this case raises as it relates to early
access to counsel and the long-established standard to be met in that regard,
and to the breath technician’s general practices. as set out in
grant, at
para.
70, the s. 24(2) analysis is directed at such concerns.

i therefore exclude the evidence of the breath tests and ms.
gonzales trejos’ statements to the police regarding her consumption of alcohol
that evening. given the unlawful detention that resulted from the absence of
any breath demand, i also deem it appropriate to exclude the recorded
observations of ms. gonzales trejos from the police station.
released: september 8, 2025
signed:
justice mainville