source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj362/2025oncj362.html

w
ar
ni
n
g
the
court
hearing
this
matter
directs
that the
following
notice
be
attached
to
the
file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection
486.4(1)
of
the
criminal
code.
this
subsection
and
subsection
486.6(1) of the
criminal code,
which is concerned
with
the consequence of
failure to comply
with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4
order restricting publication — sexual offences.
— (1)
subject to
subsection
(2),
the
presiding
judge
or
justice
may
make
an
order
directing that any information that could
identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any document or
broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(a)
any
of
the
following
offences:
(i)
an
offence
under
section
151,
152,
153,
153.1,
155,
160,
162,
162.1,
163.1,
170,
171,
171.1,172,
172.1,
172.2,
173,
213,
271,
272,
273,
279.01,
279.011,
279.02,
279.03,
280,
281,
286.1,
286.2,
286.3,
346
or
347,
or
(ii)
any
offence
under
this
act,
as
it
read
from
time
to
time
before the day on which this subparagraph
comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an
offence
referred
to
in
subparagraph
(i)
if
it
occurred
on
or
after
that
day;
or
(b)
two or
more offences
being dealt with in the same
proceeding,
at least one of which is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(a)
at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the
age of eighteen years and the victim of the right to make an application for
the order; and
(b)
on application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such
witness, make the order....
486.6
offence
— (1)
every
person who fails to comply with an order made
under
any
of
subsections
486.4(1)
to
(3)
or
subsection
486.5(1)
or
(2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario
court
of
justice
citation:
r. v. atta, 2025 oncj 362
date:
2025
07
03
toronto
region
b
e
t
w
e e
n:
his
majesty
the
king
— and — kelvin
atta
before
justice
f.m.
finnestad heard on may 2,
2025
reasons
for
sentence
released
on
july
3,
2025
mr.
bloch............................................................................................... counsel
for
the
crown
ms.
shafran............................................................. counsel
for
the
defendant
kelvin
atta
finnestad,
j.:

on october 16, 2024, kelvin atta
was found guilty of an october 2022 sexual assault on ms. s-s. sentencing was
adjourned so that the defence could produce a forensic psychological report,
which was dated april 20, 2025, or six months later. submissions were heard and
the matter adjourned for this decision. it is thus that sentence is now to be
imposed over a year since the first days of trial.

the offence of which mr. atta was
convicted involved two acts of forced intercourse on the premises of an adult
high school, at which both parties were attempting to complete their grade 12
credits. ms. s-s was 17. mr. atta, aged 19, had come to canada from ghana the
year before, and was doing this education in a language that was not his first.
while there was no additional violence, mr. atta pressed intercourse on an
unwilling ms. s.-s. during what began as a friendly meet-up in the school gym
and moved to a changeroom.
position of the parties

the crown proceeded by way of
summary conviction and sought a sentence of 18 months, with 2 years of
probation and various ancillary orders. the defence sought a conditional
sentence of imprisonment of 9 – 12 months, to be followed by probation. no
issue was taken with the requested ancillary orders.

where the crown proceeds by
summary conviction, the maximum of 18 months is not reserved for the “worst
offence, worst offender” scenario. the sentence should be proportionate to the
offence and the offender in all the circumstances.

a conditional sentence of
imprisonment is available within the sentence range proposed by both parties. once
an appropriate sentence is determined, it is necessary to determine whether a
conditional sentence would meet the principles and purpose of sentencing.
factors in aggravation and mitigation

the aggravating factors are as
follows. ms. s-s was 17 years old. the offence involved two completed acts of
forced intercourse, which was a significant violation of her physical and
sexual integrity. her evidence and her brief victim impact statement indicated
long-term consequences of these acts. she testified to having difficulty
returning to school afterwards. she described becoming emotionally closed off
and “having my guard up in every way”. she struggled with depression and feels
like she still has a healing process in front of her.

two neutral factors are as follows.
there was no physical violence beyond that implicit in forced intercourse. this
absence of an additional aggravating factor does not constitute a mitigating
factor. similarly, the fact that mr. atta had a full trial does not constitute
an aggravating factor but denies him the mitigation that would have arisen from
the indication of remorse implicit in a guilty plea.

the mitigating factors are as
follows. mr. atta was 19 years old at the time. he was a newcomer to canada
with some of the struggles that involves. he was expelled from the school as a
result of this offence. he had no criminal record before these charges, nor has
he incurred any new charges in the 2.5 years he has been on bail. the
psychological report filed described cognitive and functional impairments but
indicated no evidence of mental illness or personality disorder. he has no
substance abuse issues he has a social support network including friends,
family and a girlfriend of over 8 months. letters were filed by some of those
people in his support. he appears to have otherwise led a pro-social life.
mr. atta’s background

mr. atta was born in ghana to a
family in which he had 16 siblings, all of whom now live in canada. his parents
separated years ago and his mother still lives in ghana. he reported that his
mother had described him as a “slow learner” and that he struggled in school in
canada. however, he achieved both grade 11 and 12 credits, thanks in part to a
teacher who provided some after school one-on-one help for several months. he currently
lives with his father and youngest brother. the family seems to be supportive
and law-abiding, and despite some financial and other challenges, has provided
a relatively secure upbringing for mr. atta and his siblings.

mr. atta has a peer support group of about 5 friends
who are other ghanaians he met in canada. he was in a relationship for about 2
years with a woman, which apparently ended “due to his busy work schedule”. he
has been in a relationship with another woman for the past 8 months or more.
she is a 19-year-old studying psychology, holding down a part-time job and
managing her own hair business. she wrote an articulate and supportive letter,
which was filed as an exhibit on sentence.
defence materials filed on
sentence

the psychological assessment
report filed was written by psychologist dr. n. vitopoulos. she spent 8 hours
interviewing mr. atta with the assistance of interpreters. he often began the
sessions alert but became tired and inattentive when they exceeded an hour. she
noted that due to the language difficulties, “many assessment tools that are
frequently used in court-related assessment could not be used. in particular,
standardized measures of intellectual functioning and cognitive abilities could
not be conducted, and there are no statistical norms upon which (his) data
could be accurately and appropriately interpreted. this is also the case with
other psychometric tools typically used in forensic assessment, thus, as a
result, this assessment relies heavily on interview, observational and
historical data to draw inferences on (his) cognitive functioning,
socio-emotional functioning and understanding of his legal involvement”. this
significant limitation is highlighted again at a later point in the report and
concluded “this provisional diagnosis should be interpreted with caution and
re-assessed if culturally and linguistically appropriate tools become
available”. this is important as the major finding of the report was that mr.
atta suffers from deficiencies in intellectual functioning and cognitive
abilities, two areas about which caution is repeatedly urged.

in the assessment process mr. atta
described difficulties in concentration and attention, and needing information
repeated multiple times before he could absorb new concepts. despite these
self-reported and observed difficulties, school documentation did not identify
concerns related to attention or concentration in particular, although they did
disclose significant academic difficulties.

dr. vitopoulos noted that over the
course of the assessment mr. atta required regular assistance from others to
complete basic tasks, including calling for transportation, handling money and
following directions in unfamiliar environments. he was “confused at how to
physically open a simple rotating knob once a clinician found him, even after
having been to the office multiple times”.

in his evidence at trial, it was
clear that mr. atta was able to do his homework on his cellphone, knew how to
use google translate for both oral and written communication, and had a
facility with snapchat both in written communications and telephone use within
the app. he did not present as a person who did not know how to use a doorknob.

dr. vitopoulos concluded that despite limitations
preventing a more comprehensive assessment, mr. atta “presented with cognitive
and functional impairments which appear to significantly impact his ability to
understand and navigate daily life”.

i would note that this was not manifested during his
trial; there were no indications that interpreters had difficulty making mr.
atta understand the questions he was asked, that they had to repeat or simplify
questions, or that his answers were confused or simple. however, i would note
my impressions during the trial process suffered from the same challenges the
assessment did, in that all communications to and from mr. atta passed through
interpreters.

i accept that observations of the
psychologist suggested that mr. atta has some cognitive and functional
impairments. he clearly had academic difficulties which were documented.
however, i also accept that he is able to interact with same and older-aged
peers and has a supportive circle of friends, and that he has maintained
relationships with two women over a significant period of time. the current
relationship appears to be with an intelligent, articulate and ambitious young
woman. letters of support written by two of his friends were impressive in the
message of understanding and support they conveyed, but also in being both intelligent
and articulate. none of the three letters filed referred to his having
cognitive difficulties, or of the relationship being between intellectual
unequals. clearly, while there are apparently some limitations, mr. atta does
not function at the level of a child and is capable of sustaining adult
relationships of both platonic and romantic natures.

in conclusion while i share
concerns about the value of the assessment that was done, i accept that mr.
atta had academic limitations of longstanding, and that he presented to the
psychologist as having some cognitive impairments. while i have reservations
about those conclusions, i am not prepared to discount them entirely on the
basis of my own limited observations and the information i have been provided about
mr. atta’s background and life circumstances.

quite understandably, mr. atta
exhibited anxiety about his future as a result of this conviction.
crown submissions

mr. bloch noted that where the
crown proceeds by way of indictment, sentences for forced intercourse fall
within the range of 3 – 5 years. where the crown proceeds by summary
conviction, the maximum is not reserved for both worst offender and worst
offence. the supreme court of canada
noted in
r v solowan,
2008 scc 62
that a fit sentence on a summary conviction offence is neither a function nor a
fraction of the sentence that might have been imposed had the crown proceeded
by indictment. the sentence should not be “scaled down” from the maximum on
summary conviction simply because the maximum would not have been imposed had
the crown proceeded by indictment. rather the fundamental purpose of sentencing
is that the sentence imposed must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.

the principle of restraint in s.
718.2(d) means that an offender should not be deprived of liberty if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances. those must be
reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or
the community. any sentence i impose must have these principles in mind and
consider the objectives of denunciation and deterrence, separation from society
where necessary, rehabilitation, making reparations for harm done, and
promoting a sense of responsibility and acknowledgment of the harm done. all
alternatives to incarceration that are consistent with this should be
considered.

the crown referenced the ontario
court of justice decision in
r v l.h.,
2024 oncj 103, noting
circumstances with similarities to that of mr. atta, in that the victim simply
stopped resisting after it proved futile. the crown proceeded summarily in that
case of forced intercourse. the accused in
l.h.
was 25 years old with no
record, despite having a turbulent and difficult childhood. he entered a guilty
plea. like mr. atta he had a support system, no substance abuse issues, a good
work ethic and a willingness to take counselling if directed. the sentencing
judge found that notwithstanding the strongly mitigating factors present, a
sentence of 18 months was appropriate. it was noted that while l.h. was a first
offender, a conditional sentence would not be proportionate to the gravity of
the offence, nor adequately fulfil the principles of denunciation and
deterrence. the seriousness of the offence, the significant violation of the
victim’s sexual and physical integrity and the impact on the victim required a
custodial sentence, notwithstanding that the accused was a first offender with
no identifiable risk to the community.

in
r v s.w.,
(
2024)
o.j. no 1224
and
r v
r.s.,
2023 onca 608, both referenced by the crown, the court of appeal for
ontario dealt with crown appeals from conditional sentences imposed on a sexual
assault where the crown proceeded by indictment. in both cases the court found
conditional sentences to be unfit as not falling within the sentencing range
appropriate for such offences, which was 3 – 5 years. while these must be
considered in the context of indictable offences, some principles emerge with
respect to sexual assault sentences generally.

in
r.s.
at para 24 the
court noted that while conditional sentences are now available for charges of
sexual assault, proportionality remains key to sentencing. further, at para 27
that “it may be that, in some circumstances, a conditional sentence is
appropriate for sexual assault at the lowest end of the range of wrongful
conduct. but there is no basis to suppose that it is appropriate for sexual
assault at the higher end of that range”.

the court of appeal noted in
s.w.
that “forced penetration”
refers to a lack of consent and does not require a further element of violence
in an offence that is inherently violent. justice fairburn was cited as noting
in
a.j.k.,
2022 onca 487
at para
74
that sexual assaults are “serious
acts of violence”. that decision made clear that in cases of sexual assault
sentences, denunciation and deterrence are paramount. at para 22 of
r.s.
the
court of appeal noted that “the evolution of the law is plainly in the
direction of better appreciating the profound physical and psychological harm
caused by a sexual assault.” sentencing decisions which pre-date
a.j.k.
are
to be considered with caution.

the crown position in light of
these sentencing principles, was that the maximum sentence available on summary
conviction was called for. while a summary conviction proceeding is reserved
for offences at the lower end of the range of wrongful conduct, forced
intercourse is at the upper end of the range for such prosecutions.
defence submissions

ms. shafran referred to the decision of the ontario
superior court in
r v browne,
(2021)
o.j. no 5258. in that case the
accused briefly inserted a vibrator into the victim’s vagina or anus while she
was unconscious or asleep. the decision dealt in large part with whether
justice nakatsuru’s decision in
r v r.s.,
2021 onsc 2263
was in error.
justice nakatsuru had found the
criminal code
sections prohibiting
conditional sentences for sexual assault to be unconstitutional and of no
effect. he found a conditional sentence to be both available and appropriate,
imposing a conditional sentence of 2 years less a day. justice macarthur
followed justice nakatsuru’s decision in her own finding that a conditional
sentence was both available and appropriate, and imposed a conditional sentence
of two years less a day for browne.

since that time the
criminal
code
was amended to make conditional sentences available for sexual
assault.

since that time the sentence imposed in
r.s.
was
found to be manifestly unfit by the court of appeal, noting that the conditional
sentence imposed was inadequate to give effect to the primacy of denunciation
and deterrence, and finding a sentence of 3 years to be appropriate.

since that time
the decision in
r
v a.j.k.,
(
supra
) was rendered by the court of appeal. in light of
the comments made by the court in that case, and in
r.s.
about the
precedent value of cases which precede it, i think it highly unlikely that the
decision in
browne
would withstand appellate scrutiny today. i do not
find that decision of the 2021 trial level ontario superior court to be an
appropriate precedent on sentence in 2025, given the development of the law
since that time..

the defence cited the decision of
the ontario court of justice in 2017 in
r v s.c.,
(2017)
o.j. no 6867.
in that case a 56-year-old man put a finger in the vagina of a sleeping friend.
the crown sought a sentence of 9 months and the defence a conditional sentence
of 6 – 9 months. a 12-month conditional sentence was imposed. i do not accept
this 8 year old decision as representing the current law in canada with respect
to sentencing for forced acts of intercourse.

the defence filed a decision of the ontario court of
justice from 2022,
r v cacdac,
(2022)
oj no 4770. while this decision
was released after that in
ajk
it makes no reference to the principles
discussed therein and relies exclusively on a number of sentencing decisions
which predate it. it refers to the sentencing range set out
in
r. v smith,
2015
onsc 4304, which was specifically re-considered in
ajk.
the sentencing
judge distinguished a number of cases cited by the crown wherein
non-conditional sentences of imprisonment were imposed, noting that those
sentences were imposed after trial. a significant factor cited by the
sentencing judge in this case of the vaginal insertion of the accused’s finger,
was the fact that a guilty plea had been entered. i do not consider this
decision to reflect the current state of the law of sentencing with respect to
forced acts of intercourse, let alone those where there was no indication of
remorse.
conclusion

i consider the fact that mr. atta is a youthful first
offender. his prospects for living a pro-social life are good. he has some
intellectual challenges and struggles with school. notwithstanding this he
wants to continue with his education and find good employment. i do not find
him to be a danger to the public. nonetheless this is one of the most serious
offences which may be prosecuted on summary conviction..

a sentence of the maximum of 18 months is not
inappropriate. however in giving consideration to the mitigating factors set
out, including the difficulties he may experience in prison which may be
disproportionate to those experienced by others, including his youth, some
cognitive difficulties and reduced english language abilities, i am persuaded
that a sentence of 16 months can be imposed on this summary conviction offence
and still reflect the harm done to the victim, and to hold mr. atta
accountable.

the issue then becomes whether it
is appropriate to order that the 16 months be served as a conditional sentence
of imprisonment. i consider that the least restrictive sentence should be
imposed which is reasonable in the circumstances, and consistent with the harm
done to the victim and the community by this offence.

the court of appeal has noted that
the offence of sexual assault encompasses a broad range of unlawful acts. a
conditional sentence may be appropriate for offences at the lowest end of the
range of unlawful conduct. two acts of forced intercourse with a 17-year-old
are not at the “lowest end of the range of unlawful conduct”. they are at the
upper end, if not the actual ultimate, of unlawful conduct that would be
prosecuted by summary conviction.

this offence has had a significant
impact on ms. s-s. it was a serious violation of this teenager’s physical and
sexual integrity.

i find that in this case a
conditional sentence of imprisonment would fail to meet the requirement for a
conditional sentence set out in s 742.1(a), that such be consistent with the fundamental
purpose and principles of sentencing set out in section 718 to 718.2. it would
not be proportionate to the gravity of the offence, nor adequately meet the
need for denunciation and deterrence. it would not be consistent with the law
of sentencing for forced sexual intercourse as that has developed over recent
years, with an increased awareness of such as an act of violence, and one with
profound consequences for the victim. the seriousness of the offence and the
violation of her sexual and physical integrity require a custodial sentence and
would not be reflected in a sentence to be served in the community.

mr. atta is sentenced to 16 months
imprisonment.

this will be followed by two years
of probation. the only conditions of such beyond the statutory conditions are
to report within 2 working days of release and thereafter as required, to take
assessment and counselling as directed by his probation officer, to sign
releases as necessary to monitor his compliance, and to have no communication
directly or indirectly with ms. s-s, including not to be within 50 m of
anywhere he knows her to live, work, go to school or happen to be.

pursuant to s 110 he is prohibited
from possessing any weapons for a period of 10 years.

an order is made that mr. atta comply with the
requirements of the sex offender information registry act for a period of 10
years

as this is a primary designated offence, an order is
made for the taking of bodily samples for forensic dna analysis
released: july 3, 2025
signed: justice f.m.
finnestad