source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj605/2025oncj605.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(2.1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
to
(3), read as follows:
486.4 (2.1)
victim under 18-other offences-
subject to subsection (2.2),
in proceedings in respect of an offence other than an offence referred to in
subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18 years, the presiding judge
or justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify
the victim shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way.
(2.2)
mandatory order on application
— in proceedings in respect of an offence, other than an offence referred
to in subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18 years, the presiding
judge or justice shall
(
a
) as
soon as feasible, inform the victim of their right to make an application for
the order;
(
b
) on
application of the victim or the prosecutor, make the order; and
(
c
) if
an order is made, as soon as feasible, inform the victim of the existence of
the order and of their right to apply to revoke or vary it....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of subsections 486.4(1) to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. h.a.,
2025 oncj 605
date: 
2025 11 10
court
file no.: hamilton 24-47100254
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
h.a.
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on february 13 and may 7, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on november 10, 2025
morgan ross....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
tariq khan........................................................................... counsel
for the defendant, h.a.
fiorucci j.:
overview

for almost two years, the defendant, h.a.,
repeatedly assaulted her two young sons. the assaults were captured on a video
camera installed in the living room of the family home. they included the use
of weapons such as a couch, a plate and a thermos on the younger boy.

h.a. entered guilty pleas to nine offences:
three assaults with a weapon and six assaults. however, she admitted that there
were 54 videos of her assaulting the children in various ways. in march of
2022, when h.a.’s husband, the father of the children, reported the assaults to
police, the boys were 9 and 5 years old. h.a. is being sentenced for a
prolonged period of abuse of her young children.

the crown seeks a penitentiary sentence of 3
years and ancillary orders. the defence says that a jail sentence of less than
two years is appropriate, and that h.a. should be permitted to serve her jail
sentence in the community on a conditional sentence of imprisonment (cso).

these reasons explain why i impose a cso of two
years less one day followed by two years of probation.
circumstances of the offences

between july 26, 2020 and february 24, 2022, h.a.
committed multiple assaults against her two sons, a.z. and z.z.

the assaults occurred within
the family residence. the offences came to the attention of the authorities on
march 18, 2022, when the children’s father, s.z., contacted the hamilton police
service expressing serious concerns for the safety of the children.

s.z. had initially learned from the children
that h.a. was using physical discipline. after reporting the matter to the
children’s school, the children’s aid society of hamilton attended the home but
received no disclosures from the children. following this visit, h.a.
threatened self-harm in the presence of the family.

s.z. subsequently reviewed footage from a
previously installed video camera in the living room and discovered multiple
recordings of h.a. physically assaulting the children. he immediately reported
the matter to police and provided the video evidence.

a search warrant was obtained, and investigators
reviewed approximately two years of footage, identifying 54 separate incidents
of physical abuse. the assaults included slapping, hitting, shaking, kicking,
pushing, and throwing the children. there were instances where weapons such as
a plate, a thermos, and a couch were used.

the following is a summary of the facts
pertaining to the nine offences to which h.a. entered guilty pleas:
count #13: july 26, 2020:
h.a. and z.z. were on a living room couch while she spoon-fed him. h.a.
stood up from the couch, grabbed z.z. by the back of his shirt and threw him
off the couch. he landed on his behind. z.z. followed h.a. in the kitchen where
she forcefully washed his hands. z.z. grasped his right elbow as a result of
his arm being overextended at the sink.
count #11: august 7, 2020: h.a. was feeding z.z. while the two of them were sitting on the
living room couch. with her left hand, h.a. delivered an open-palm strike to
the left side of z.z.’s head. shortly thereafter, h.a. stood up from the couch,
grabbed z.z. from the back of his shirt and delivered two additional open palm
strikes to his back as he fell off the couch. h.a. slapped him once more on the
back before picking him up off the ground by his shirt and dropping him onto
the ground. he landed on his buttocks. z.z. cried throughout the interaction.
count #10: august 26, 2020: h.a. forcefully fed z.z., while he cried at the table. she is then
observed to push him in his chair which rocks side-to-side before he falls off
and onto the floor. z.z. got up and ran from the dining room table. h.a.
followed him, led him back to the dining room table, and continued to
force-feed him.
count #9: september 15, 2020: h.a. struck z.z. on his left shoulder with a metal thermos that
she retrieved from the pantry, causing z.z. to clutch his shoulder and retreat
away from the pantry crying.
count #8: october 5, 2020: h.a. struck z.z. with her right hand on his back while he was
standing on a dining room chair. moments later, she struck a.z. with her right
hand.
count #4: july 25, 2021: z.z. was attempting to avoid his brother by running around the
kitchen island. h.a. used her left hand to grab z.z. by his left shoulder/upper
arm. she then used her right hand to throw z.z. to the ground, causing him to
hit his chin on the tile floor. h.a. tended to z.z. momentarily before running
to a.z. and delivering two strikes to his upper back using open palms. h.a.
then returned to z.z., grabbing him by the right forearm and throwing him into
the living room area. she then delivered an open-handed strike to a.z. using
her left hand.
count #3: august 29, 2021: z.z. accidentally knocked a plate off the kitchen island. h.a.
picked the food up off the floor and then used the plate to hit z.z. on the top
of his head. z.z. cried and held the top of his head. h.a. consoled him by
picking him up and rubbing his head while he cried.
count #1: february 24, 2022: h.a. grabbed z.z.’s hair and shook him by
the head three times, which caused z.z. to cry and grab the top of his head in
pain. h.a. then chased z.z. around the kitchen and living room, moving
furniture to block his path of escape. she pushed the couch against him which
caused z.z. to cry and grasp his right leg/knee.
count #2: february 24, 2022: after striking z.z. with the couch, h.a. approached a.z., who had
been seated at the dining room table throughout the interaction between her and
z.z. h.a. slapped a.z. twice on the head and back with each hand. a.z. returned
to the dining room table touching his back.
impact on the victims

s.z. and the two boys provided victim impact
statements. s.z. struggles to support the boys through their sadness. he
reports that the children have been in trauma counselling for the past two
years. s.z. acknowledges that the boys miss their mother. he struggles
emotionally as he watches his children deal with the changes in the home with
their mother being gone. s.z. says that a.z. has a hard time when people at
school functions ask him where his mother is, and z.z. cries and expresses his
thoughts and worries at bedtime.

in his victim impact statement, a.z. says the
situation has impacted him emotionally. he says he is bullied a lot at school
for not having his mother at functions and activities. a.z. also feels like
they are being judged by their relatives for not having their mother. he speaks
of how his grades slipped and his social life was affected. a.z. speaks of
missing his mother, her meals, their bonding time and watching movies and
playing board games with her.

z.z. says he feels nervous and sad. he speaks of
how he was nervous when there was fighting, but also misses his mom because she
is gone. he drew a picture of the family in his victim impact statement,
including himself, his brother and both his parents.
circumstances of the offender

h.a. is a 44-year-old canadian citizen who immigrated to canada
from pakistan in 2011 following an abusive marriage that resulted in her
hospitalization. she arrived on a visitor’s visa and later obtained refugee
status, becoming a canadian citizen in 2016. she is the eldest of four siblings
and maintains contact with her family, who reside in pakistan, the united
kingdom, and the united states. she described her childhood as “normal,” though
she recalled instances of maternal violence when she or her siblings refused to
eat, suggesting early exposure to problematic parenting practices.

h.a. has three children: an adult daughter from her first
marriage and her two younger sons from her second marriage to s.z., who are the
victims of these offences. in 2022, h.a. lost access to the victims in the
present offences. initially, she had supervised visitation, but this ceased
after she missed several weeks due to work obligations. child welfare records
indicate concerns about her lack of cooperation and failure to appreciate the
seriousness of her actions. any future access to her children will require
supervised visitation and further assessment.

h.a. has a longstanding history of mental health challenges,
including major depressive disorder diagnosed in 2013 and bipolar disorder
diagnosed in 2024. she has experienced postpartum depression and has been
intermittently compliant with psychiatric treatment over the years. her medical
records indicate multiple consultations with psychiatrists and general
practitioners, and she has been prescribed medications such as cipralex and
nortriptyline. she has also been referred for mental health assessments and has
participated in psychotherapy sessions.

in 2023, h.a. completed a personal support worker certificate
through a professional college in brampton, funded by a provincial initiative.
she briefly worked in retirement homes and a coffee shop but lost employment
due to the pending charges. she is currently unemployed and reliant on social
assistance, though she continues to seek work and expresses a strong desire to
re-enter the workforce.

because of extreme financial difficulties, since february 2025,
she has been residing at a transitional shelter operated by sakeenah canada,
where she has actively participated in various educational and wellness
programs, including parenting workshops, financial literacy, and anger
management. h.a. has consistently attended therapy and counselling sessions and
is described by her caseworkers as cooperative, motivated, and committed to
personal growth.

between november and december 2022, h.a. participated in and
successfully completed a
“women’s
approach to anger management program”
at the hamilton urban core
community health centre. on august 17, 2023, h.a. completed a three-session
virtual parenting education program titled
“building
your parenting toolkit”
through mcmaster children’s hospital. she
has also completed a ministry of labour worker health and safety awareness
training module for which she was issued a certificate on august 25, 2023.

h.a. has no prior criminal record and no known history of
substance abuse. she has complied with her bail conditions and has demonstrated
appropriate behaviour during her interactions with probation services. she
describes herself as timid and lacking confidence, but also as someone who
enjoys helping others. letters of support from friends and community members
describe her as kind, generous, and caring.

dr. farrukh akhtar, a psychiatrist, provided a letter dated
december 20, 2024, detailing h.a.’s progress with treatment and psychotherapy.
dr. akhtar sets out in this letter that h.a. came to him with complaints of
restlessness, irritability, frustration, thoughts of suicide, and a history of
childhood trauma. dr. akhtar diagnosed h.a. as suffering from bipolar disorder.
treatment from april 20 to december 20, 2024 included medications and
psychotherapy sessions daily. in dr. akhtar’s opinion, the medications and
therapy sessions played a very crucial role in emotional healing and h.a.
gradually gaining more control over her anger.

dr. naila furqan, h.a.’s family physician, provided letters dated
august 1 and september 4, 2025, which state that h.a. has been compliant in
taking her antidepressant medications which has controlled her depression and
anxiety symptoms and stabilized her mood.
positions of the parties

the crown seeks a global 3-year jail sentence, a
dna order, a
section 110
criminal
code
weapons prohibition
order for 10 years and a
section 743.21
order prohibiting h.a. from contacting
or communicating with the child victims while serving her jail sentence. the crown says that a jail sentence of this duration is necessary
to satisfy the primary principles of denunciation and deterrence applicable to
child abuse cases.

the defence says that a sentence of less than
two years is appropriate and that permitting h.a. to serve her sentence in the
community on a cso would not endanger the safety of the community and would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing. the
defence does not dispute the appropriateness of the dna and weapons prohibition
orders.
general principles

the principal purpose of the criminal law, and
in particular sentencing, is the protection of society.

this is reflected in the
sentencing provisions in part xxiii of the
criminal code.
section 718
says that the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society,
and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives,
to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe
society. these goals are to be achieved by imposing just sanctions. those just
sanctions
are to have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done to
victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims or
to the community; and
(f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders,
and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.

in
r. v. nasogaluak, the supreme court of
canada (scc) observed that the objectives of sentencing are given
sharper focus in s. 718.1 by the fundamental principle of
proportionality, which mandates that a sentence be "proportionate
to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the
offender".

in
r. v. lacasse,
the scc described proportionality as the cardinal
principle of sentencing; “the more serious the crime and its consequences, or
the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility, the heavier the sentence
will be”.


individualization is central to the
proportionality assessment.

as chief justice wagner wrote
in
parranto
“[w]hereas the gravity of a
particular offence may be relatively constant, each offence is ‘committed in
unique circumstances by an offender with a unique profile’”.


section 718.2(b) states that a sentence
should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances. this is known as the principle of
parity.

the principles of individualization and parity,
while important, are secondary principles.

chief justice lamer, writing for the scc, in
r. v. m.(c.a.),
said this:
it has been repeatedly stressed that there is no such
thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime… sentencing is an inherently
individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate sentence for a
similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a fruitless exercise of
academic abstraction.


in
parranto, chief justice wagner said
that “
parity, as an expression of
proportionality, will assist courts in fixing on a proportionate sentence”.

he went on to say:
courts cannot arrive at a proportionate sentence based
solely on first principles, but rather must "calibrate the demands of proportionality
by reference to the sentences imposed in other cases".


in
r. v. friesen,

the scc emphasized that children are the future of our country and are also
among the most vulnerable members of our society.
section 718.01
of the
criminal
code
instructs that when a court imposes a sentence for an offence that
involved the abuse of a person under the age of eighteen years, it shall give
primary consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence of such
conduct.

the principle of restraint is contained in
ss. 718.2
(d) and (e)
of the
criminal code
mandating that an offender should not be deprived
of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the
circumstances, and all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are
reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or
to the community should be considered for all offenders, with particular
attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders.
aggravating and mitigating
circumstances

section 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code
instructs
that a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender.
aggravating circumstances

i have identified the following aggravating
circumstances. first, dealing with the statutorily aggravating factors. h.a.
abused her two biological sons, members of her immediate family:
s.
718.2
(a)(ii). when she committed these offences, between 2020 and 2022, the
children were very young:
s. 718.2
(a)(ii.1). h.a., in committing the
offences, abused a position of trust or authority in relation to both victims.
the breach of trust was a significant one given the mother-son relationship:
s.
718.2
(iii).

section 718.2(a)(iii.1) deems it aggravating that an offence had
significant impact on the victim considering their age and personal
circumstances. the offences in this case profoundly impacted h.a.’s sons as
evidenced by their victim impact statements and the statement filed by their
father. while the children’s victim impact statements provide limited details
about the effects of the ongoing abuse at the hands of their mother, the
emotional and psychological effects on the victims are apparent in the
statements.

like the circumstances in
r. v. r.h.,

h.a.’s offences encompass a
pattern of assaultive conduct. the duration and frequency of the assaults h.a.
committed against both of her sons is an aggravating circumstance.

she committed the offences
over a period of approximately two years and used weapons to commit some of the
offences. the videos which have been made exhibit 3 on the sentencing hearing
are troubling to watch. they depict h.a. abusing her defenceless children. in
the videos, the children often cower from h.a. in fear. the youngest, z.z., is
often seen crying and trying to escape from h.a.

defence counsel repeatedly suggested that the
assaults perpetrated by h.a. were the result of her attempts to force feed her
children which was coming from a place of nurturing and could be explained by
her own experiences as a child. there were perhaps some incidents which
involved the children interacting with food in or around the time that h.a.
assaulted them but for the most part the assaults are properly characterized as
h.a. striking the victims, sometimes with weapons, out of anger and
frustration. like the offender in
r.h., h.a.’s conduct could not be said
to be excessive discipline, and it is difficult to accept defence counsel’s
submission that h.a. was a nurturing parent when she physically abused the
children in the fashion depicted in the videos.
mitigating circumstances

there are several mitigating circumstances. h.a. entered guilty
pleas to the offences. she accepted responsibility for her actions and
expressed remorse. she spared the victims and any other witnesses the emotional
toll of a trial. the judicial resources necessary for the trial were preserved
and can be committed to other matters in a busy jurisdiction.

although h.a.’s guilty pleas were not early pleas and they were
entered in the face of a strong crown case with video evidence of the offences,
they are an expression of remorse. the crown says that h.a.’s guilty pleas are
an indication of some remorse, but the mitigating effect is attenuated by h.a.
deflecting blame for her behaviour in the pre-sentence report to reasons such
as her children were not eating, she was not taking her medications, she was
not able to work, and her husband was controlling.

i find that h.a.’s guilty pleas are a true expression of her
remorse and acceptance of responsibility and are consistent with the sentiments
she expressed in her allocution to the court at the conclusion of the
sentencing hearing. i find her to be genuinely remorseful for the offences she
committed against her children. h.a.’s and defence counsel’s reference to
factors which inform her state of mind at the time, which may have contributed
to her commission of the offences, does not equate with h.a. failing to
appreciate the wrongfulness of her conduct.

h.a. has no prior criminal record. she has a significant history
of mental health challenges including major depressive disorder dating back to
2013. in 2024, she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. from the medical and
psychiatric records filed, i infer that h.a.’s mental health challenges
persisted throughout the period during which she committed the offences between
2020 and 2022. in order for mental health issues to be considered as mitigating
factors, there must be some connection between those matters and the criminal
conduct at issue.

i find that the connection does exist on the record before me.

although general and specific deterrence remain primary
principles in sentencing for child abuse, in this case the principles must be assessed
in the context of an offender whose mental health issues contributed to her
behaviour and played a role in her commission of the offences.


h.a. has made significant progress in addressing her mental
health challenges and has taken active steps to deal with her anger and
parenting issues. the programming she has engaged in since being charged with
these offences demonstrate that she has insight and is committed to improving
herself and becoming a better parent.

the author of the pre-sentence report noted that child welfare
records indicated concerns about h.a.’s lack of cooperation and failure to
appreciate the seriousness of her actions. the child welfare records were not
part of the record before me on the sentencing hearing. there is no information
about when those comments were made in the child welfare records. for instance,
it is unknown whether these concerns were present before h.a. engaged in the
programming and psychotherapy that i referred to earlier in my reasons.
furthermore, without the child welfare records, this court cannot assess the
context in which those comments and observations were made.

i am satisfied that through the programming and psychotherapy
that h.a. has undertaken, she has gained insight into the wrongfulness of her
conduct and the effects these offences have had on her children. her commitment
to bettering herself and the programming she has completed are positive
indicators of her prospects of rehabilitation.

h.a. also took steps to advance her education while awaiting
disposition of these charges by obtaining her personal support worker
certificate. she has tried to maintain employment but has been unable to do so.
her desire to re-enter the workforce and become a contributing member of
society is also an indicator of her prospects of rehabilitation.

the support letters filed demonstrate that h.a. has been able to
lead a pro-social lifestyle and has some support in the community beyond her
own family. crown counsel noted that the letters from these individuals do not refer
to h.a. being charged with the child abuse offences for which she is being
sentenced and that they should, therefore, be given little to no weight. in my
view, the crown has raised a valid concern about the letters filed. the absence
of any reference to the charges in the letters suggests that these individuals do
not know or were not told about the incidents of physical violence against her
children. however, the letters do demonstrate that h.a. does have positive relationships
in the community and has the capacity to be a valued friend, neighbour, and
parent. h.a. has the support of her family and others as she continues to work
on her own betterment and rehabilitation.
analysis

in
r. v. proulx, the scc addressed how, in some
circumstances, a conditional sentence rather than a jail sentence may
sufficiently address the principles of denunciation and deterrence. the court
in
proulx
said the following:
finally, it bears pointing out that a conditional
sentence may be imposed even in circumstances where there are aggravating
circumstances relating to the offence or the offender. aggravating
circumstances will obviously increase the need for denunciation and deterrence.
however, it would be a mistake to rule out the possibility of a conditional
sentence
ab initio
simply because aggravating factors are present. i
repeat that each case must be considered individually.


the scc also noted that, “[t]he stigma of
a conditional sentence with house arrest should not be underestimated”.

however, the scc also acknowledged that, “there may be
certain circumstances in which the need for denunciation is so pressing that
incarceration will be the only suitable way in which to express society's
condemnation of the offender's conduct”.


as for deterrence, in
proulx,
the scc stated that “[i]ncarceration,
which is ordinarily a harsher sanction, may provide more deterrence than a
conditional sentence”.

the scc cautioned that
“judges should be wary, however, of placing too much weight on deterrence when
choosing between a conditional sentence and incarceration”, pointing to the
empirical evidence which suggests that the deterrent effect of incarceration is
uncertain.


the scc went on to say, “[m]oreover, a conditional sentence can
provide significant deterrence if sufficiently punitive conditions are imposed
and the public is made aware of the severity of these sentences”.

there may be circumstances in which the need for deterrence will warrant
incarceration which “will depend in part on whether the offence is one in which
the effects of incarceration are likely to have a real deterrent effect, as
well as on the circumstances of the community in which the offences were
committed”.


to support its position that a 3-year jail sentence is
appropriate, the crown relied on the ontario court of justice case of
r. v.
r.p.,

and the unreported
ontario superior court of justice decisions of justice byrne in
r. v. n.-v.,

and justice mcwatt
in
r. v. n.f.


in
r.p.,
the accused was
convicted of four counts of assault against her six-year-old stepson, including
assault causing bodily harm and multiple assaults with weapons. the crown
proceeded summarily and sought a
4-year
custodial sentence, emphasizing the
separate dates of
abuse
and advocating for
consecutive sentences
to reflect the
gravity and duration of the offences. the
defence proposed a conditional sentence,
arguing that a term of less than two years served in the community would be
appropriate.

justice wright rejected the conditional sentence, finding that
the
statutory
requirements were not met,
and that
denunciation and
deterrence
were paramount in this case. he noted numerous
aggravating factors,
including the
abuse of a vulnerable child,
breach of trust,
use
of multiple weapons, and
lasting physical and psychological harm
to
the victim. while acknowledging the accused’s lack of prior record and some
rehabilitative potential, justice wright found
no evidence of remorse
and
limited
mitigating factors.

ultimately, he imposed a
3-year jail sentence,
structured through a combination of
consecutive and concurrent terms: 18 months
for assault causing bodily harm, 12 months for assault with a belt
(consecutive), 6 months for assault with a stick (consecutive), and 3 months
for assault with a hand (concurrent). the sentence was deemed necessary to
effectively denounce r.p.’s
conduct
and
deter similar offences,
particularly given the seriousness and repeated nature of the abuse.

the case of
r.p.
has the aggravating factor of significant
injuries which is absent in h.a.’s case. the most serious injuries in
r.p.
included injuries to the victim’s pubic area and scrotum caused by burning with
a heated implement. there were also injuries to the child’s back caused by a
looped belt and significant bruises to his buttocks caused by striking with a
stick and hand.

r.p.
also has the absence of the mitigating factor of
remorse which i have found to be present in h.a.’s case. the 3-year
penitentiary sentence imposed by justice wright in
r.p.
followed a finding
of guilt after a trial, for an offender who lacked remorse and had caused
significant injuries to the child victim.

the crown’s reliance on justice byrne’s decision in
n.-v.
was
limited to the principles to be applied in the sentencing of child abusers. the
crown acknowledged that the facts in
n.-v.
are distinguishable from h.a.’s
case.
n.-v.
is not a comparator case that assists in arriving at a
proportionate sentence for h.a. however, i do adopt the sentiments of justice byrne
that assessing the emotional trauma of child abuse is difficult and impossible
to quantify and that the breach of trust falls at the highest end of the
spectrum when the offender is the biological parent of the child victim.


in
n.f., justice mcwatt imposed a 20-month jail sentence for
assault with a weapon and aggravated assault after findings of guilt in a judge
and jury trial. again,
n.f.
lacked the mitigating factor of remorse. the
injuries to the child were serious burns by a hot iron. the child had recovered
from the injuries by the time of sentencing.

the defence relied on justice garg’s decision in
r.h.

justice garg imposed an 18-month conditional sentence followed by two years of
probation for a mother convicted of assaulting her young son over a nearly
three-year period. the abuse began when the child was one-and-a-half years old
and continued until he was four, involving repeated strikes with kitchen
utensils, including a spatula. although the parties jointly proposed a
suspended sentence with probation, justice garg found that such a disposition
failed to reflect the offender’s moral blameworthiness, the child’s
vulnerability, and the seriousness of the harm caused.

justice garg emphasized that child abuse offences require
sentences that prioritize denunciation and deterrence. he found several
aggravating factors: the prolonged pattern of abusive conduct, the use of
weapons and striking out of anger, the significant emotional and psychological
impact on the victim, and the grave breach of trust inherent in a mother abusing
her child. the offender did not plead guilty or express remorse, which
diminished her rehabilitative potential. while she suffered collateral
consequences from cas involvement, including separation from her children, the
court declined to treat this as mitigating.

nonetheless, justice garg acknowledged some mitigating factors:
the offender had no prior criminal record, had been employed as a personal
support worker, and had taken steps to improve her parenting through
programming. he concluded that imprisonment was necessary but could be served
in the community through a conditional sentence, given the offender’s reduced
risk profile and the principle of restraint. the conditional sentence included
nine months of house arrest and six months of curfew, followed by probation and
ancillary orders.

in
r.h., justice garg also addressed the statutory and
jurisprudential requirements for sentencing in child abuse cases. he cited
friesen
to underscore the
need for denunciation and deterrence in offences involving vulnerable victims.
he considered aggravating factors under
s. 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code, including the
victim’s age, the breach of trust, and the significant impact on the victim.

on the issue of whether imprisonment could be served in the
community, justice garg applied the criteria under
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code, concluding
that a conditional sentence was appropriate because the term was under two
years, community safety was not endangered, and the sentence aligned with
sentencing principles.

h.a.’s case includes many of the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances in
r.h.
however, in
r.h., the offender did not
plead guilty or express remorse, which diminished her rehabilitative potential.
as stated, i find that h.a.’s guilty pleas are a sincere expression of her
remorse, which is an indicator of her rehabilitative potential.

i find that incarceration is necessary to address h.a.’s moral
blameworthiness and the harmfulness of her conduct. the sentence must emphasize
denunciation and deterrence. many of the observations justice garg makes at
paragraphs 28 to 35 of
r.h.,
about the offender and the offences and the
need for incarceration, apply to h.a. and her offences. the significant breach
of trust over a prolonged period of abuse of her two children, at times using
weapons, requires a sentence of imprisonment.

i am satisfied that h.a.’s term of imprisonment can be served in
the community.
i conclude that:
(i)
the appropriate term of imprisonment is less than two years;
(ii)
serving a conditional sentence would not endanger the community; and
(iii)
a conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose
and principles of sentencing.

the mitigating circumstances persuade
me that a conditional sentence is appropriate.
i have considered the
principle of restraint, which has contributed to my finding that a cso is
appropriate in h.a.’s case.

h.a. has been released on an undertaking for these offences for a significant
period without breaching any of the conditions, including the no contact
conditions involving her children. in the interim, she has participated in
programming and psychotherapy, has been compliant with her medications and has
taken steps to advance her education. i find that a conditional sentence would
not endanger the community.

the deterrent and denunciation required for h.a.’s offences leads
me to find that a cso of maximum duration with onerous conditions is required.

i find that, given the mitigating factors, this is a case where a conditional
sentence can provide significant denunciation and deterrence by imposing
sufficiently punitive conditions.
the sentence

for the foregoing reasons, i impose a two-year less a day cso on h.a.
which permits her to serve the sentence of imprisonment in the community. she
must comply with the following cso conditions:
(1)
keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
(2)
appear before the court when required to do so by the court.
(3)
remain in ontario unless you have prior written permission from the
court or the supervisor to leave the province.
(4)
notify the court or supervisor in advance of any change of name or
address, and promptly notify the court or supervisor of any change in
employment or occupation.
(5)
report in person or by telephone to a supervisor immediately and after
that, at all times and places as directed by the supervisor or any person
authorized by a supervisor to assist in your supervision.
(6)
cooperate with your supervisor. you must sign any releases necessary to
permit the supervisor to monitor your compliance and you must provide proof of
compliance with any condition of this order to your supervisor on request.
(7)
live at [address redacted], and do not change that address without
obtaining the consent of the supervisor in advance.
(8)
you shall report to your conditional sentence
supervisor for the purpose of arranging your enrolment in the gps program
provided by the recovery science corporation (rsc).
(9)
after completing the intake process with your conditional sentence
supervisor, you shall go directly to your approved address and observe a term
of complete house arrest until the required gps unit is installed. there are no
exceptions to this house arrest condition.
(10)
you shall be subject to the gps monitoring program for
the entire length of this conditional sentence order.
(11)
you will be subject to gps monitoring by recovery
science corporation (rsc) and agree to abide by all of its rules and protocols
by providing your signature on the gps rules and protocols which will be
attached to this conditional sentence order as schedule “a”. these rules and
protocols form part of this conditional sentence order.
(12)
the home confinement condition will be in effect for the first 12 months
of the order. remain in your residence at all times except:
i. between 1 p.m. and 4 p.m.
every saturday in order to acquire the necessities of life;
ii. for any medical
emergencies involving you or any member of your immediate family (spouse,
child, parent, sibling);
iii. for going directly to and
from or being at school, employment, court attendances, religious services and
legal or medical or dental appointments, including appointments with a
psychiatrist;
iv. for going directly to or
from and being at assessment, treatment, or counselling sessions;
v. you will confirm your
schedule in advance with the supervisor setting out the times for these
activities;
vi. with the prior written
approval of the supervisor. the written approval is to be carried with you
during these times;
vii. for carrying out any
legal obligations regarding compliance with this conditional sentence order,
including reporting as directed;
viii. to attend at central
police station, 155 king william street, hamilton, to provide dna samples if
they are not obtained in the courthouse today.
(13)
following your home confinement, for the balance of the order, remain in
your residence, or on the property of your residence, at all times daily
between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. except:
i. for any medical emergencies
involving you or any member of your immediate family (spouse, child, parent,
sibling);
ii. with the prior written
approval of your supervisor. the written approval is to be carried with you
during these times.
(14)
do not contact or communicate in any way, either directly or indirectly,
by any physical, electronic, or other means, with a.z., z.z., or s.z. and do
not be within 100 metres of any place where you know a.z., z.z., or s.z. to
live, work, go to school, frequent or any place you know them to be, except:
i. pursuant to a family court
order made after today’s date, or for the purpose of conducting or defending family
court proceedings;
ii. in the presence of or through
legal counsel;
iii. for purposes of attending family
mediation with an accredited family mediator or professional mediator service
provider; or
iv. with the consent of hamilton child
and family supports (formerly the children’s aid society of hamilton), who will
be informed of the circumstances surrounding the commission of these offences
as outlined in these reasons for sentence.
(15)
do not be in the company of persons under the age of 16 years, unless
another adult is present.
(16)
do not seek, obtain or continue any paid or unpaid activity that
involves being in a position of trust or authority towards a person under the age
of 16 years.
(17)
do not possess any weapon(s) as defined by the
criminal code
(for
example: a bb gun, pellet gun, firearm, imitation firearm, crossbow, prohibited
or restricted weapon, firearm part, ammunition or explosive substance or
anything designed to be used or intended for use to cause death or injury or to
threaten or intimidate any person).
(18)
you shall attend and actively participate in all assessment, counselling
or rehabilitative programs as directed by your supervisor and complete them to
the satisfaction of the supervisor for, including but not limited to, anger
management, parenting and life skills. you shall sign any release of
information forms as will enable your supervisor to monitor your attendance and
completion of any assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as
directed. you shall provide proof of your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.

the cso will be followed by a 2-year probation
order. in terms of ancillary orders, i require h.a. to provide a sample
of her dna and, pursuant to
s. 110
of the
criminal
code, i prohibit
her from possessing any firearm, cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted
weapon, prohibited device, firearm part, ammunition, prohibited ammunition or
explosive substance for 10 years. pursuant to
s. 737(2.1)
of the
criminal code,
i waive the victim surcharges, being satisfied that the imposition of the
surcharges would cause undue hardship to h.a. given her financial circumstances
and mental health challenges, as detailed in the pre-sentence report and the
other materials filed.
released: november
10, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
schedule “a”: gps rules and protocols - for conditional sentence
orders
1.
i agree to 24-hour gps monitoring
by the government-funded gps monitoring program in accordance with the conditions
of the conditional sentence order.
2.
i agree to follow the conditions
of the conditional sentence order including those conditions with respect to
electronic monitoring, and the rules and protocols included here in schedule
“a”.
3.
i agree that i will follow all
instructions of the gps monitoring staff, police authorities, and ministry of
the attorney general staff, and maintain the gps monitoring equipment.
4.
in
the
event of a
malfunction
of the
gps
monitoring
device
or an
issue
regarding
the
proper
maintenance
and/or proper
functioning
of the
gps monitoring
device, i
will
follow
the
instructions received
from the
monitoring
company to
troubleshoot, repair or exchange
the
device
and
if
so
instructed, attend
the
nearest
police
service, until
the
issue
regarding
the
gps monitoring
device
has been
resolved.
5.
i understand that in the event of
any breach of my requirements, or
damage
to the equipment, immediate notification will be made by the monitoring service
to the police, and/or
ministry of the attorney general staff to
be addressed accordingly. this may result in apprehension and re-
incarceration.
6.
i will wear the monitoring device
and will not attempt to remove, tamper with, or otherwise interfere with the
operation of the device, or any related equipment.
7.
i
give
my
consent
for
the
monitoring
company
to
release
my
monitoring
information,
both
real
time
and
historic,
and
my
other
personal
information,
to
the
relevant
authorities
including
probation
and
parole
officers,
police
services,
for
purposes
of
investigating
and
enforcing
compliance
with
this
order.
recipients
of
my
information
might
include
any
and
all
police services,
any
prosecutorial
authority
and
any
court having
jurisdiction
respecting
enforcement
of
this
order.
recipients
may
also
include
sentence
administration
authorities if
i
am
serving
any
form
of
sentence
during
the
currency
of
this
order.
i
understand
that
my
information
may
be
released
under
this
paragraph at
any
time,
any
number
of
times,
without
judicial
authorization
and
without
additional
notice
to
me.
i
waive
any
expectation
of
privacy
i
have
against
the
release
or
sharing
of
my
information
as
described
in
this
paragraph.
8.
i authorize the monitoring service
to record any or all phone calls or other communications between myself and the
monitoring service.
9.
where applicable, i will promptly answer my telephone,
regularly check and immediately reply to telephone messages, text messages,
email messages or other communications relayed to me from the monitoring
service and/or their agents. i will cooperate fully with instructions received.
10.
i will attend when and where
directed by the monitoring service for any purpose associated with the
monitoring of the gps conditions.
11.
i will promptly answer the door
and allow the monitoring service representatives and/or their agents to enter
the home with or without an appointment for the purpose of inspecting or
maintaining
the monitoring equipment and, if desired for the safety of its staff, with
police accompaniment.
12.
i will
charge
the
gps monitoring
device
2
hours continuously every day. a vibration
will
be
felt when
the
device
battery is getting
low. when
a
critical
battery alert is received, the
siren
on
the gps monitoring
device will
be
activated
and
continue
to
alarm
until
i begin
charging. if this protocol is not adhered
to, local police
will
be
called
to
intervene, which
could
result in
apprehension
and
re-
incarceration. do not
charge when
sleeping.
13.
i will not swim while wearing the
gps monitoring device and i will never immerse it in water. showers are
recommended over baths – if a bath is necessary, the bracelet must be kept out
of the water.
14.
if and when i feel two (2)
vibrations consecutively, i understand that this is a signal that i must
contact the recovery science corporation immediately at 1-877-595-2573.

when the offences were reported in march of 2022, a.z. was 9 years old and z.z.
was 5 years old.

sentencing, tenth edition,
clayton ruby, lexisnexis
canada inc., 2020, toronto, on, chapter 1, p. 2, §1.2.
r. v.
morrissette
et al.,
 s.j. no. 269 (sask. c.a.), at para. 3.

r. v. nasogaluak,
2010
scc 6, at para.
40.

r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at para.
12.

r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46,
at
para.
12.

ibid,
at para. 12.

ibid,
at para. 10.

r. v. m.(c.a.),
1996 scc 230, at para. 92.

r. v. parranto, supra,
at para.
11, citing
r. v. friesen,

s.c.j. no. 100,
2020 scc 9, at para.
32.

r. v. parranto, supra,
at para.
11, citing
r. v. friesen, supra,
at
para.
33.

r. v. friesen,
supra, at para.
1.

r. v. r.h.,
2025 oncj 163.

r. v.
friesen, supra,
at
paras.
131 – 133.

r. v. barham,
2014 onca 797, at para.
8;
r. v. fabbro,
2021 onca
494, at para.
25.

r. v. batisse,
2009 onca 114, at para.
38;
r. v. dedeckere,
2017
onca 799, at para.
14;
r. v. robinson
(1974),
1974 canlii 1491 (on ca), 19 c.c.c. (2d) 193, at 197.

r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5,
at para.
115.

ibid,
at para. 105.

ibid,
at para. 106.

ibid,
at para. 107.

ibid,
at para. 107.

ibid,
at para. 107.

ibid,
at para. 107.

r. v. r.p.,
2023 oncj 299.

r. v. n.-v.
(april 12, 2023), toronto, cr-20-10000249-0000 (ont.
s.c.j.).

r. v. n.f.
(july 29, 2023), toronto, c57468 (ont. s.c.j.).

r. v. n.-v., supra, at paras. 22-23.

r. v. r.h., supra.

see
r. v. hamilton,
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca), o.j. no. 3252, 72 o.r. (3d) 1, 186 c.c.c.
(3d) 129 (ont. c.a.), at para.
96; see also
r.h., supra,
at para.
38.

r. v. proulx, supra,
at para.
106.