source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj574/2025oncj574.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. armaleo, 2025 oncj 574
date: 2025 11 03
court file no.: windsor
24-81102661
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
danielle
armaleo
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 18 august
2025
reasons for
judgment released on 3 november 2025
mitchell witteveen.............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
laura joy..................................................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

the
applicant danielle armaleo seeks a remedy for what she says are violations of
her rights as guaranteed by the
charter of rights
and freedoms. she says the
warrants authorizing the search of her vehicle and home should not stand as
they were based, at least in part, on information obtained in searches that violated
her co-accused’s charter rights. she further argues she has her own reasonable
expectation of privacy in the phone and phone number that were the focus of those
impugned searches. the crown argues she does not have standing to make that
argument as she cannot argue another party’s charter rights and had no such
reasonable expectation.

this
ruling will deal only with the standing issue. for the reasons that follow, i
find the applicant does not have standing to attack the issuance of the
underlying warrants that came before the warrants for her vehicle and home.
summary of the investigation

the
following is a summary of the investigation and the allegations against the
applicant and her co-accused xavien williams.

project
jaguar was an investigation of suspected drug trafficking undertaken by the
windsor police service in may 2024. xavien williams was the target of the
investigation. in the course of the operation, the police obtained a
transmission data recorder (tdr) warrant and a tracking warrant related to the
cell phone number 519-817-9915. this number was identified as being used by
williams by multiple confidential sources.

the
location-based services data obtained through the tracking warrant told police
where that cell phone was located. this permitted them to conduct physical
surveillance, which they did on several days. in the course of that
surveillance, williams was seen on three occasions:
(1)
2
may 2024: williams was seen entering and exiting the residence at 10687 atwater
crescent, windsor;
(2)
6
may 2024: williams was seen driving a black dodge durango, license plate dbdn
355 and entering the atwater residence; and
(3)
8
may 2024: williams was seen driving the durango.

on
the basis of this information and the evidence obtained to that point in the
overall investigation, the police sought and obtained search warrants for the
atwater residence and the durango. the applicant was a resident of the atwater
residence and the registered owner of the durango. it is the searches of these
locations that she claims were constitutionally deficient.

the
search of the atwater residence revealed large quantities of multiple controlled
substances, scales, ammunition, over-capacity magazines, a bulletproof vest,
and currency.

williams
has elected not to challenge the validity of the tdr or tracking warrants.
the position of the applicant

through
counsel, the applicant submits that she has standing to challenge the validity
of the tdr and tracking warrants issued early in the investigation. those
warrants, she says, were invalid in that they did not provide sufficient
evidence to support their issuance.

as
i see it, going by the applicant’s factum and submissions made in court, she
makes two arguments. first, that she should have standing to argue the breach
of williams’
s. 8
charter
rights because that breach went on to impact her own
charter rights. i take this argument from paragraph 54 of the applicant’s
factum

second,
she argues that apart from williams’ rights, she had her own reasonable
expectation of privacy in the information obtained through the tdr and tracking
warrants. this should permit her to argue their validity.

i
will address each argument in turn.
issue 1: can the applicant argue a breach
of williams’
charter
rights?

the
question of whether a person can argue the breach of another’s
charter
rights
has been around since the dawn of the charter itself. in the trial decision of
r.
v.
rowbotham
 13 w.c.b. 105 (h.c.j.), justice ewaschuk,
then of the ontario high court, considered the issue:
 the accused
george kononow has moved for the exclusion of evidence of a large quantity of
hashish seized from the trunk of a car apparently used by david stone and
michele burke, both of montreal. mr. kononow had no possessory interest in the
car, although both he and robert young had apparently intended to purchase the
hashish found in the trunk of the car. at the time of seizure, neither kononow
nor young had yet taken possession of the hashish.
 the
question then to be decided is whether an accused has standing to challenge a
search or seizure although his personal rights have not been violated. mr.
kononow claims he has standing on the basis that the evidence may be admissible
against him as part of the conspiracies charged should the jury find by his
acts and declarations that he is a member of the alleged conspiracies.
* * *
 in r. v.
taylor et al., delivered january 26, 1984 (b.c.s.c.), mr. justice toy decided
that the wording of s. 24(1) dictates that
charter
rights and freedoms are
personal and accrue only to those persons whose rights and freedoms have been
directly infringed and denied.
 prior to the
charter, it was undoubted that an applicant to quash a search warrant lacked
standing to do so unless he or she established ownership or possessory interest
either in the things seized or in the premises searched: model power v. regina
(1981),
1981 canlii 4923 (on ca),
21 c.r. (3d) 195 (ont. c.a.)
and beach v. a.g. can.
(1978),
1978 altascad 399 (canlii),
8 alta.
l.r. (2d) 379 (c.a.). potential prejudice, in itself, was not sufficient to
give the applicant standing to attack the seizures, in the event criminal
proceedings were initiated and the evidence was tendered.
 in the united
states, standing to challenge infringements of constitutional rights is also
based on the concept that constitutional rights are personal rights which may
not be vicariously asserted. thus in respect of fourth amendment rights against
unreasonable search and seizure, it is the particular defendant's right to
"a reasonable expectation of privacy" which must be infringed and not
that of some other person: rakas et al. v. illinois (1978), 439 u.s. 128
(s.c.). merely to be prejudiced by the use of the evidence is not sufficient to
grant standing to an applicant seeking to exclude that evidence.
 i agree
with mr. justice toy's conclusion in r. v. taylor et al., supra, that
charter
rights and freedoms, save for declarations of legislative invalidity, are
personal rights. having regard, however, to the supreme court of canada's
judgment in hunter et al. v. southam, (released september 17, 1984), i would
extend the grounds for standing. in addition to the invasion of a person's
proprietary and possessory interests, i would add that a person has standing to
apply for a remedy where "his reasonable expectation of privacy has been
invaded".

that
a
charter
right can only be argued by the person claiming the violation was
affirmed by
the supreme court of canada in
r.
v.
edwards
1996 canlii 255 (scc),
 1
s.c.r. 128
at paragraphs
34 and 45.

it
is clear, then, that the applicant cannot assert the breach of williams’
charter
right.
issue 2: did the applicant have her own
reasonable expectation of privacy in the cell phone?

the
alternative position of the applicant is that she had her own reasonable
expectation of privacy (rep) in the cell phone. if she did, she would have
standing to argue against the authorization that allowed it to be tracked.

in
edwards, justice cory referred with approval to justice mckinlay’s
majority decision from the court of appeal for ontario. justice mckinlay
stated that
edwards
had to show his personal right to privacy had been
infringed when police searched the apartment belonging to his girlfriend.

justice
cory also cited justice dickson (as he then was), speaking for the supreme
court of canada in
hunter
v.
southam
inc.
1984 canlii 33 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 145,
who said there was no need to show a property interest in the thing searched. 
a claimant need only show a reasonable expectation of privacy in the object of
the search. this follows the court’s logic that section 8 protects people, not
places. it protects the privacy interests of the person, regardless of their
legal relationship to the thing searched.

has
the applicant shown a rep in the cell phone and number? as that question must
be answered by considering the totality of the circumstances, i will assess her
connection to the objects of the tdr and tracking warrants.

as
part of their investigation, police were told by multiple confidential
informants that the phone number 519-817-9915 was being used by williams. 
police confirmed this was at the time an active cell phone number administered
by rogers communications. based on this information, police obtained tdr and
tracking warrants for the number and the phone itself.

at
this point in the investigation, the applicant’s name had not yet come up in
any context.

the
tracking data allowed police to undertake visual surveillance of williams on
the dates noted above. this led police to seek and obtain a tracking warrant
for the vehicle he was using, which was the dodge durango. a query with the
ministry of transportation revealed the applicant was the registered owner of that
vehicle. to that point, the applicant’s name had not appeared in any of the
authorization applications. notably, she was not mentioned in the tdr or
tracking warrant applications.

to
help show a rep in the phone, the applicant cites the case of
r.
v.
macinnis
 o.j. no. 2937 (s.c.j.). in that case, macinnis sought standing to
challenge the admissibility of his common-law partner clark’s cell phone
records. ultimately, justice ferguson found a rep existed and allowed macinnis
to challenge the evidence.

that
case, however, was clearly different from the one before me.

at
paragraph 9, justice ferguson alludes to a period of time where the crown
alleges joint use of clark’s cell phone. there is no allegation or evidence
that the applicant ever used the phone connected to williams.

at
paragraph 14, justice ferguson stated:
there
is evidence that clark was a subscriber for a cell phone. the phone
records
obtained as the result of the search warrant show a pattern of use during the
period of the alleged offences which the crown contends supports an inference
that macinnis was using it in the course of the offences. in fact, the crown
contends that the clark cell records in combination with other police
information indicate that macinnis was using her cell phone on the first day it
was activated.

there
is no evidence of joint use of the phone, or that the applicant was in
actuality the main user, before me.

finally,
at paragraph 17:
the statement from
mcmullin indicates that on a number of occasions knight
[a
co-defendant]
would call mcmullin on clark's cell and then later knight and
macinnis would meet mcmullin…
the
evidence does establish that macinnis in fact controlled clark's cell phone on
those occasions.

in
the present case, there is no evidence the applicant ever had any dealings with
the phone in question, save for one possibly important exception. over the
course of eight days, the tdr data shows 63 contacts between the applicant and
the phone. on this basis, the applicant argues the phone was effectively
shared property between her and williams. this, she says, gives her a rep in
the phone and its data.

the
difficulty with this argument, as i suggested to counsel during submissions, is
that if calling a particular number was enough to give the caller a rep in the
receiving phone, anyone who might have called the phone in the relevant time
period could conceivably argue
charter
standing. while calling the phone is
certainly some evidence that the applicant was aware of the phone and wanted to
communicate with the person in control of it, those contacts are not sufficient
to show the phone number or the phone itself were shared property. an example
illustrates why that is. if, during a period of stock market volatility, a
client calls her broker repeatedly over the course of a week, does the broker’s
phone become shared property? surely not.

a
distinction must also be made regarding what exactly was gained by the tdr and
tracking warrants. at no time did police obtain substantive information about
what may have been said or written in any calls or messages made or received by
the target phone. this is an important distinction. had we been discussing
the admissibility of the substance of messages exchanged by the applicant and
williams, for example, there would likely have been a rep in the messages even
if they were on the target phone. instead, we are only dealing with the
numbers to and from which contact was made, and physical locations obtained by
tracking the phone.
cases such as
r.
v.
marakah
2017 scc 59,
which considered rep in a “text message conversation” (see paragraph 5) are
therefore distinguishable.

as
to the use police put the tdr and tracking data to, counsel argued those
warrants brought the applicant to police attention. i respectfully disagree. 
it was not the warrants that ultimately brought the applicant to police attention. 
it was the actions of williams. all the warrants did was allow police to view
the traffic on the phone and track its location. when they tracked that
location, they saw williams in the applicant’s vehicle and coming and going
from her residence. the acquisition of the applicant’s identity did not come
from the warrants but from what they saw williams doing.

in
conclusion on this issue, i return to the
edwards
decision.
at
paragraph 45, subparagraph 6 justice cory provided a list of seven factors to
be considered when examining the totality of the circumstances to determine
whether a rep exists. that list was trimmed down to four
factors in
r.
v.
spencer
2014 scc 43. at paragraph 18 of that decision, justice
cromwell stated:
the wide variety
and number of factors that may be considered in assessing the reasonable
expectation of privacy can be grouped under four main headings for analytical
convenience: (1) the subject matter of the alleged search; (2) the claimant’s
interest in the subject matter; (3) the claimant’s subjective expectation of
privacy in the subject matter; and (4) whether this subjective expectation of
privacy was objectively reasonable, having regard to the totality of the
circumstances: tessling, at para. 32; r. v. patrick,
2009 scc 17,
 1
s.c.r. 579, at para.
27; r. v. cole,
2012 scc 53,
 3 s.c.r. 34, at para.
40. however, this is not a purely factual inquiry. the reasonable expectation
of privacy standard is normative rather than simply descriptive: tessling, at
para. 42. thus, while the analysis is sensitive to the factual context, it is
inevitably “laden with value judgments which are made from the independent
perspective of the reasonable and informed person who is concerned about the
long-term consequences of government action for the protection of privacy”:
patrick, at para.
14;
see also r. v. gomboc,
2010 scc 55,
 3 s.c.r. 211,
at para.
34, and ward, at paras. 81-85.

using
his honour’s four factors, i note the following.

the
subject matter of the search is the tdr and tracking data. it is not personal
information like internet service provider subscriber data or the content of
text messages. it is information focused on a cell phone linked to someone
other than the applicant.

aside
from the agreement that there were 63 contacts between the applicant’s phone
and the target phone over an eight-day period, i have heard no evidence of the
applicant’s interest in the tdr or tracking data. she was not named or
directly implicated in any of williams’ alleged misconduct. given that it was
conceded in argument that williams and the applicant were in an intimate
relationship at the time, the number of contacts is not objectively remarkable
in any event.

i
see no evidence of the applicant’s subjective expectation of privacy in the
traffic on the target phone or its physical location. she has not demonstrated
any sort of connection to the phone other than by calling it. she has not
shown a subjective expectation of privacy.

finally,
had there been a subjective expectation of privacy, or if i am wrong in finding
there was none, it could not be said to be objectively reasonable in all the
circumstances. a reasonable person, conversant in the importance of an
individual’s privacy in the face of government intrusion, would not extend a
rep to information as disconnected from the applicant as someone else’s tdr
data and phone locations.
result

to
show standing to attack the tdr or tracking warrants, the applicant must
establish on a balance of probabilities that she has a personal
charter
right
that is affected by their issuance. she cannot argue the charter rights of
another person. the right she says is jeopardized must be her own. she must
establish her own reasonable expectation of privacy in the information in
question.

taking
all the circumstances into account, i find she has not met this onus. the
applicant has not established a reasonable expectation of privacy in the
information obtained through the warrants. she is therefore precluded from
attacking their validity.

given
the result, it is unnecessary for me to consider the question of excision.

finally,
and to be clear, nothing in this ruling should be taken as limiting the
applicant’s ability to challenge the search warrants for the durango or the
atwater residence. as they were her vehicle and her residence, she is well
within her rights to challenge those authorizations. the effect of this ruling
is that any such challenges cannot include attacks based on the alleged
invalidity of the tdr or tracking warrants.
released: 
3 november 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt