source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj570/2025oncj570.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. patry, 2025 oncj 570
date: october 3, 2025
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
coby patry
before justice h. borenstein
reasons for judgment on
garofoli
delivered october
3, 2025
a. pinnock....................................................................... counsel
for the crown
j. goldlist................................................... counsel
for the accused coby patry
borenstein j.:
introduction

in the fall of november 2023,
a proven confidential informant (“c.i.”) told their handler of a male named
coby who was selling cocaine in toronto. the c.i. told the handler the male
drove a black acura and provided the licence plate number. the c.i. had
provided accurate information to the police multiple times in the past
resulting in arrests and seizures of drugs.

drug squad officers ran the
acura’s plate and it came back registered to coby patry, the accused, with the
listed address of #812, 40 teesdale. coby patry’s driver’s licence was also
registered to that address. records show coby patry had been stopped three
times driving the acura in 2019, 2020 and 2021, and the associated address
during those stops was the same apartment at 40 teesdale. the m.t.o. driver’s
licence photo of coby patry was obtained and shown to the c.i. who confirmed he
was the male in the acura who trafficked drugs.

officers attended the
apartment complex of 40 teesdale and spoke with tchc liaison officer whalen.
they learned unit 812 was rented to coby’s mother candice patry since 2002 when
coby patry would have been about 1 year old, and that coby patry was listed as
the roommate on building records. the ito incorrectly implied coby was on the
lease rather than as the roommate on other building records. there was one fob
registered to the apartment but whalen said there was a discrepancy as that fob
was used by someone else. unit 812 had one underground parking spot but no
specific car was registered to that spot.

officers also viewed cctv
footage which showed coby patry leaving the 8th floor of the building at 8:30
at night on november 15th and go to the acura which was parked in front of the
building in the outdoor parking lot listed as” visitor’s parking”. he returned
to 40 teesdale just after 1:00 a.m., parked in that same area and entered the
building using a security fob. he then took the elevator to the 8th floor. his
car was still parked there at 8:00 p.m. fob records and cctv footage showed
coby patry enter the building at 2:37 in the morning on november 18. again, he
entered with a fob and took the elevator to the 8th floor.

on the strength of this
information, d.c. pena, swore an information to obtain (“ito”) that he believed
coby patry was trafficking drugs, lived in apartment 812, 40 teesdale and
evidence relating to drug trafficking and proceeds of crime would be found in
the apartment. the police obtained the search warrant for apartment 812, 40
teesdale place as well as the black acura.
execution of the
search warrant

at 6:00 in the morning on
november 20, 2023, tps executed that search warrant.

police found coby patry,
asleep in a bedroom. he was arrested and the apartment was searched. located in
that bedroom were:
827.3
grams of cocaine in a desk drawer;
25.7
grams of mdma in the same drawer;
301
grams of marijuana on the closet floor;
$6,360
canadian. in another drawer of that desk;
a
digital scale covered in cocaine and a vacuum sealer in the desk;
dozens
of empty zip lock bags and elastic bands;
documents
including a passport and ymca card in the name of coby patry were in the desk
drawer; and
a
glock semi-automatic 9 mm handgun with the serial number defaced and a magazine
with four rounds of ammunition on a shelf in a metal case that was made to look
like a book.

nothing of relevance was found
in the acura.

as a result, patry is charged
with the numerous possession for the purpose of trafficking charges, possession
of proceeds of crime and multiple firearms offences.

patry alleges the search
violates section 8 of the
charter.

patry submits there were no
reasonable grounds to believe he was the coby referred to by the c.i., no
reasonable grounds to believe he resided in apartment 812 and no reasonable
grounds to believe evidence would be found at that apartment.

as a result, he submits the
search warrant could not have been granted and the search violated section 8 of
the
charter. he submits the evidence seized should be excluded pursuant
to s. 24(2).

search warrants are
presumptively valid. coby patry bears the onus of establishing the
charter
breach and any remedy sought.

for the reasons that follow, i
disagree with the defence submission. the warrant was valid. there were
reasonable grounds to believe coby patry was trafficking drugs, that he resided
or occupied unit 812, 40 teesdale place and that evidence of the offences would
be found in the apartment.
the ito

d.c. pena swore the ito on
november 18, 2023. the search was conducted at 6:00 a.m. november 20th. i have
already summarized much of the relevant information contained in the ito in the
introduction to this decision. i will expand somewhat here.

d.c. pena had been a tps
officer for 15 years. in february, 2023, he began working in plainclothes and
undercover with the organized crime enforcement - drug squad investigating drug
purchases.

pena set out the history of
this investigation.

appendix d was partially
redacted to protect the c.i’s identity. the crown seeks to rely on step six of
garofoli. therefore, the defence was provided with a judicial summary
describing the redacted information in general terms. a limited cross-
examination of the affiant pena and the sub-affiant brykczynski was permitted.
any errors in the ito must be excised from the ito in assessing this application.

before turning to the cross-examination,
i will review the information in appendix c and the redacted appendix d as
supplemented by the judicial summary. the issuing justice of course had
available all the unredacted information. much of the information i will now
review is the same as referred to in the introduction of this decision.

appendix d indicates that d.c.
ghazarian was the handler of the c.i. on a date that has been redacted in the
ito but described in the judicial summary as within 90 days of the issuance of
the warrant, the c.i. told ghazarian:
they
know an individual (not the applicant) who lives in toronto who has been
dealing cocaine, fentanyl and methamphetamine for a number of years.
the
c.i. has been buying cocaine from the 3rd party for a number of years and
details the amounts they pay for various quantities of cocaine.
the
c.i. contacted the 3rd party within 90 days of the issuance of the warrant to
purchase cocaine.
the
3rd party and a male driving an older model black acura with a licence plate recorded
by the c.i. had an interaction involving specific drug related activity. this
interaction included information relating to the “teesdale apartment complex”.
the
c.i. learned the male driving the acura was named “coby”, that coby deals
powder and crack cocaine as well as fentanyl and methamphetamine.
the
c.i. advised that the cocaine appeared to be a high-quality product.
the ito further
indicated:
the
c.i. was well entrenched in the drug culture and had been using drugs for a
specified but redacted period of time.
the
c.i.’s motivation for providing the information was provided to the issuing justice.
the
c.i. was told there would be no consideration given if the information provided
was inaccurate and did not result in any seizures and arrests.
the
c.i. was advised it was a criminal offence to provide false information.
the
issuing justice was advised the c.i. provided the police with reliable
information eight times in the past resulting in seizures of cocaine, fentanyl
and proceeds of crime as well as arrests of individuals. the justice was
provided the details of those previous instances.

in appendix c, pena described
the police checks conducted on november 17, 2023 which connected patry to the
acura and to unit 812, 40 teesdale place. those checks were the following:
the
acura with the licence plate described by the c.i. was registered to coby patry.
the associated address for the acura was 812, 40 teesdale place.
patry
had been stopped for traffic offences while driving that acura in 2019, 2020
and 2021. on each of those occasions, the registered address was the same
teesdale address.
an
m.t.o, search conducted november 17, 2023 revealed coby patry had a valid
driver’s licence. his registered address was the same teesdale address.

on november 17, 2023, d.c.
brykczynski attended the teesdale building and spoke to tchc field intelligence
officer whalen. whalen’s employer was responsible for providing security at 40
teesdale.

whalen provided brykczynski
with documentation related to the lease of apartment 812 and indicated it had
been rented to coby’s mother candice patry since 2002. candice was described as
the primary leaseholder “in addition to her son coby”. whalen sent brykczynski
an email with a screenshot of a toronto community housing record which
described coby patry as the ‘roommate’. that screenshot was included in
paragraph 23 of the ito.

whalen told brykczynski that
an underground parking spot was registered to unit 812 but no specific car was
registered to the parking spot.

there was only one fob
associated with unit 812 but whalen indicated there was a “discrepancy” as
records show another male unrelated to the unit was using that fob. whalen
advised the fob inventory would clarify matters but was not then readily
available.

brykczynski reviewed the
building’s cctv footage. he saw patry and a female leaving the 8th floor at
8:27 p.m. november 15, 2023 and enter the acura parked in front of the building
in a parking lot described as “visitor’s parking”.

patry was seen on video
returning to the building alone at 1:02 a.m. he parked in the same outdoor area
and entered the building using a fob. he took the elevator and returned to the
8th floor and walked down the hallway toward unit 812. cameras do not extend
all the way to the apartment door.

brykczynski saw the acura
still was parked in the same spot at 8:00 p.m. that night.

brykczynski met with whalen
again and learned, based on patry’s entry at 1:03 a.m. with a fob, that he was
using a temporary service fob to access the building. based on that fob’s
records and as confirmed by cctv footage, brykczynski saw patry enter the
building at 2:27 a.m. on november 18, 2023 and take the elevator up to the 8th
floor.
cross-examination

a limited cross-examination of
the affiant pena and the sub-affiant brykczynski was permitted. any errors must
be excised from the ito in assessing this application.
d.c. pena

the affiant swore he believed
coby patry occupied in unit 812 and disclosed the various police checks done at
teesdale. included in the ito are the following two statements:
paragraph
9 – “following a thorough police investigation that included database checks,
police were successful in confirming the male’s identity as coby patry
(d.o.b.2001-06-08). additional follow up completed by investigators at 40
teesdale place confirmed patry is currently registered and residing at the
premises in unit #812
and, at paragraph 23,
“whalen
provided documentation related to the tenant/lease holder for unit #812 at 40
teesdale place, toronto which identified candice patry as the primary
leaseholder, in addition to her son coby”.

coby was one year old when his
mother rented the apartment. he was not on the lease.

d.c brykczynski
was the
officer who dealt with whalen. he did not look at the lease. he received an
email from whalen describing coby patry as living in unit 812 as the roommate
of candice patry. that is the email and information he passed on to pena. the portion
of the email was included in the ito.

the cross-examination revealed
coby patry was not on the actual lease as the leaseholder. he was noted on the fob
inventory record as the roommate. i find this error inadvertent. the screenshot
describing patry as the roommate was included in the ito.

accordingly, reference to coby
patry being on the actual lease as a tenant must be excised from the ito.

with those matters clarified
and the information about patry being on the lease excised, i turn to the ito
and the question whether the search warrant could reasonably have issued.
grounds for a
cdsa
search warrant

section 11 of the
cdsa
permits a justice to issue a search warrant where the justice is satisfied
there are reasonable grounds to believe an offence has been committed and there
is a controlled substance, precursor, anything in which those items are
contained or concealed, any offence related property or anything that will
afford evidence in respect to that offence in that place.

as stated by the ontario court
of appeal in
sadikov
(para. 81)
the
statutory standard – “reasonable grounds to believe” – does not require proof
on the balance of probabilities, much less proof beyond a reasonable doubt. 
the statutory and constitutional standard is one of credibly-based probability
[citations omitted]. the ito must establish reasonable grounds to believe
that an offence has been committed and that there is evidence to be found at
the place of the proposed search:
hunter, at p. 168. if the inferences
of criminal conduct and recovery of evidence are reasonable on the facts
disclosed in the ito, the warrant could be issued:
r. v. jacobson
(2006),
2006 canlii 12292 (on ca),
207 c.c.c. (3d) 270 (ont. c.a.), at para.
22.
the
authorizing justice makes his or her decision about whether to issue the
warrant from the evidence included in the ito as a whole, approaching the
assessment on a common sense, practical, non-technical basis. the justice,
like the trier of fact at a trial, is also entitled to draw reasonable
inferences from the contents of the ito:
r. v. vu,
2013 scc 60, at
para.
16;
r. v. shiers,
2003 nsca 138,
219 n.s.r. (2d) 196, at para.
13;
and, at para. 52.

the legal question when
reviewing a search warrant is not whether the reviewing judge would have issued
the warrant. it is whether the issuing justice could reasonably have, meaning,
could the justice reasonably conclude reasonable grounds existed to believe an
offence was committed and evidence of the offence would be found in the place
to be search.

in paragraph 84-85 of
sadikov,
the court held:
the
scope of warrant review is narrow. the review is not a de novo hearing of the
ex
parte
application. the reviewing judge does not substitute his or her view
for that of the issuing judge: [citations omitted]. the standard is whether
there is sufficient credible and reliable evidence to permit a justice to find
reasonable and probable grounds to believe that an offence has been committed
and that evidence of that offence would be found at the specified time and place
of search:
morelli, at para. 40. said in another way, the test is
whether there was reliable evidence that might reasonably be believed on the
basis of which the warrant could – not would – have issued:
morelli, at
para. 40;
araujo, at para. 54; and
garofoli, at p. 1452.
the
reviewing court does not undertake its review solely on the basis of the ito
that was before the issuing judge. the reviewing court must exclude erroneous
information included in the original ito, but may also consider, within limits,
additional evidence adduced on the
voir dire
to correct minor errors in
the ito. amplification evidence corrects good faith errors of the police in
preparing the ito, but does not extend to deliberate attempts to mislead the
authorizing judge:
morelli, at para. 41; and
araujo, at para.
58. evidence relied upon to amplify the record must be evidence available to
investigators at the time the ito was sworn, not information acquired later:
morelli,
at para. 43.
the debot criteria

it is well established that,
where the ito is based largely on information from a c.i., the issuing justice
must consider whether the information in support of the warrant is compelling,
credible and corroborated. a weakness in one of those areas may be overcome by
strength in another.

in this case, the information
provided that coby was a drug dealer was specific and detailed. it was not
ambiguous. it was compelling. further, it was credible. the c.i. has a proven
track record of providing reliable information to the police eight times. the
issuing justice was advised of their motivation and issues affecting
credibility.
the specific attacks
on the warrant by patry

patry submits there was no
reasonable grounds to believe he was the coby referred to by the c.i. as the
drug trafficker or that he occupied unit 812 or that evidence would be found
there.

i disagree.

the c.i. spoke of a coby in a
black acura with a particular licence plate who was trafficking cocaine with
some connection to teesdale.

the police ran the acura’s
licence plate and it came back registered to coby patry with a registered
address of apartment 812, 40 teesdale place. further, the c.i. identified the
m.t.o. photo of coby as patry as the coby in question. that information is
enough to establish a reasonable belief that the coby referred to was coby
patry. showing one photo would undermine an identification procedure but, in
this case, there was the name coby and the car, plate and the area.

there were also reasonable
grounds to believe coby patry resided or occupied unit 812.

coby patry owned a black
acura. it was registered to unit 812, 40 teesdale. his driver’s licence was
also registered to that address. those searches were done just before the
warrant was issued. he was stopped three times in 2019, 2020 and 2021 and that
same address was on his licence and registration. his mother lived at the
apartment. patry was listed on the fob record as a roommate. further, coby
patry was seen on video leaving the 8th floor at 830 at night on november 15th
getting into the acura parked in the visitor’s outdoor parking in front of the
building. he returned just after 1:00 am on the 16th and parked the car in the
same area. he entered the building using a fob and went up to the 8th floor.
his car remained parked there at 8:00 p.m. he also was seen entering the
building with the fob at 2:37 a.m. on november 18th. he was seen returning to
the building just after 1:00 a.m. on that day and just after 2:30 a.m. on
another suggesting he lived or at least was sleeping in the apartment. all
those factors lead to the reasonable inference he resided or occupied apartment
812. that he parked out front in the visitor’s designated spot does not detract
from those inferences. many people likely choose to park outside for various
reasons including convenience, preference or perhaps they don’t have an
available spot underground. it does not in itself make them visitors.

there was also a reasonable
basis for the belief that evidence would be found in apartment 812.
reasonable belief
evidence would be found

at this point in the analysis,
there are reasonable grounds to believe coby patry traffics cocaine, possessed
proceeds of crime and resides, or at a minimum, occupies, unit 812, 40 teesdale
place.

the
cdsa
authorizes
searches for drugs, containers, any offence related property or anything that
will afford evidence in respect to the offences in question. the offences here
are trafficking cocaine and proceeds of crime.

appendix a listed the items to
be searched for; illicit drugs, materials used for their packaging and
weighing, debt lists, canadian currency as proceeds of crime and cell phones
used in the sale of the illegal drugs.

the question is whether there
were reasonable grounds to believe any or all of those items would be found in
coby patry’s residence.

pena swore (paras. 40-44) he
believed evidence would be found in patry;s apartment. he had not been told
specifically that drugs or evidence would be found in patry’s apartment but he
inferred it and set out the underlying facts and basis for his belief in the
ito.

he believed patry, as an
active cocaine trafficker, would be in possession of a stash to meet his
customers’ demand. he did not believe dealers would likely deposit their
proceeds of sales into the bank for fear of attracting suspicion. cocaine and
money were valuable commodities. he believed it was likely a dealer would keep
those valuable items in a secure place under restricted access such as their
home or car.

a police officer or affiant is
entitled to draw reasonable inferences from the facts presented in the ito to
support his or her belief and an issuing justice is entitled to assess the
reasonableness of those inferences and belief. indeed, in many cases, there is
no direct evidence of an important fact or an item’s location but it is based
on a belief flowing from the presented facts and the court assesses the reasonableness
of the belief. a minor example would be observations of short meetings and
something exchanged supporting a belief of a drug transaction. in other words,
an affiant is entitled to draw reasonable inferences and an issuing justice can
assess those inferences based on the information presented in the ito.

turning to whether pena’s
belief that items would be located in patry’s residence was reasonable, justice
goldstein in the 2024 case of
zaringhalami,
2024 onsc 6700
grappled with
a similar issue. while the facts of that case are different, i quote his
analysis as it relates to these legal principles. at paragraph 36-37, justice
goldstein writes:
the
crux of the defence argument is that there was no evidence that there were
drugs at 155 leameadow road. nothing in the surveillance evidence, the database
searches, or the informant information suggested that mr. zaringhalami kept
drugs at that address. mr. chartier argues that there was only this conclusory
statement made by dc pinto in the ito:
larger
quantities of drugs are commonly kept at the residence or storage unit because
the dealer does not want to be in possession of large quantities of product for
various reasons like being stopped by the police or being robbed of their product.
i believe that drugs are being stored in the residence located at 155 leameadow
road, thornhill, on, as zaringhalami has been observed here and has it listed
as his home address.
mr.
chartier argues that this is a conclusory statement by a police officer with
less than one year on the drug squad (although dc pinto had been an officer for
several years by then). respectfully, i cannot agree. many judges have made the
exact same observation. they have made that observation because it accords with
common sense. drugs are valuable and drug dealers want to store them in a safe
place.

in the 2024 ontario court of
appeal decision in
ifesimeshone,
2024 onca 834, an officer believed the
accused trafficked narcotics and had two residences. the information came
largely from c.i.’s. police confirmed the accused lived at a residence and
obtained a search warrant. the search yielded large quantities of narcotics. 
the trial judge made several findings to conclude the search warrant could not
have been granted. one of the trial judge’s findings was there was no
information or connection between the residence and drug trafficking to justify
a search of that residence. the court of appeal overturned the trial judge. as
it relates to whether there was a reasonable basis to believe drugs or other
evidence would be found at the residence, i excerpt part of the court of appeal
judgment (at paras. 34-36)
the
crown also argues that the trial judge erred in finding that there was an
insufficient nexus between the alleged offences and the places to be searched
by, in effect, requiring direct evidence of drug activity at the vaughan
location.
….
it
is an error to hold that, in effect,
direct evidence
was required to
establish a link between the vaughan address and drugs that would be evidence
of the commission of offences. reasonable inferences may be relied on in the absence
of direct evidence. the question was whether the ito set out facts sufficient
to allow the issuing judge to reasonably draw the inference that evidence of
drug trafficking would be found at that location:
r. v. kalonji,
2022
onca 415,
162 o.r. (3d) 283, at paras.
22-25;
r. v. vu,
2013 scc 60,
 3 s.c.r. 657, at paras.
16-18. in my view, it did.
and at paragraph 37, the
court held:
the
location in vaughan could be reasonably inferred to be the respondent’s
residence, or one of them. moreover, two days before the issuance of the search
warrants, police conducted surveillance at that location, after confirming with
on-site management that the respondent was the registered tenant. they saw one
of the respondent’s vehicles parked in the underground parking garage of the
vaughan location. later they observed him drive out of the underground parking
garage, park his vehicle in the parking lot of another building in toronto,
exit his vehicle, walk toward the front driver side of another vehicle in the
parking lot, and then walk away after a “quick interaction” with the other
driver. the confidential source whose information included “[f]irst-hand
information about accused’s recent drug trafficking practice, including type of
drug”, described the respondent as conducting drug transactions from his
vehicles. it was therefore a reasonable inference, available to the issuing
judge, that evidence of drug trafficking would be found at the respondent’s
vaughan residence.

the same applies here. there
was a reasonable basis to infer that patry is a drug dealer, that he resides in
unit 812, 40 teesdale and that evidence of those offences, particularly
valuable items such as money and cocaine, as well as other items such as a cell
phone and the other items sought in the ito, would be kept securely with him in
his residence. for these reasons it was a reasonable inference that an issuing
justice could draw and the application is dismissed
reasons delivered: 
october 3, 2025
signed: justice h. borenstein