source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj413/2025oncj413.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following
offences:
(i) an offence under
section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1,
172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03,
280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any offence under
this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which this
subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences
being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence
referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at the first
reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and
the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made
by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. r.k., 2025 oncj 413
date: july 29, 2025
toronto
region
ontario
court of justice
b
e
t
w
e
e
n:
his
majesty
the
king
—
and
—
r.k.
before
justice
michael
waby
reasons
for
judgment
released
on
july
29,
2025
ms.
mcphedran........................................................................................................... for
the
crown
ms.
izakelian............................................................................................................. for
the
accused
waby m.
overview

r.k. is the uncle of two of
the complainants and the brother-in-law of the third. the offences are alleged
to have been committed as against his young niece, s.s., his young nephew, d.s.
and his adult sister-in-law, m.s.

the accused was originally
charged on an information with a total of 14 offences. on consent, amendments
were made to the date range for counts 1, 2 and 14 on the information.
subsequent to this, mr. k. was arraigned only on counts 1, 2, 5 and counts 10,
11, 12, 13 and 14.

with respect to his niece, mr.
k. faces a total of 5 counts, namely touching for a sexual purpose, sexual
assault, forcible confinement, assault simpliciter and assault by choking.

with respect to his nephew, he
faces one count of assault and with respect to his sister-in-law, he faces one
count of assault and one count of uttering a threat to cause death or bodily harm.

the allegations cover a time
span that principally ranges from december 1, 2020 to july 31, 2021 with the
exception of the assault allegation against d.s., which is alleged to have
occurred between september 1, 2008 to july 31, 2021. the trial was conducted
over the course of several days spread over several months and commenced in
january, 2025 and concluded in june of this year.

it is alleged by the crown
that the offences arose in course of mr. k. effectively assuming the
de
facto
role of father to his brother’s family and in the accused exercising
a sustained, controlling and violent course of conduct with respect to his
niece, nephew and sister-in-law and engaging in sexually predatory and
assaultive behaviour with respect to his niece.

mr. k. pleaded not guilty.
overview

the case for the crown is
advanced through the testimony of the complainants s.s., d.s. and m.s. mr. k.
testified in his defence and called no additional evidence or witnesses, with
the exception of a photograph of the interior of his motor vehicle being
entered as an exhibit.

identity is not in issue in
this case and nor is the fact that the accused is the uncle of s.s. and d.s.
and the brother-in-law of m.s.

it is common ground between
the parties that the crown’s case stands or falls on my findings of credibility
and reliability on the whole of the evidence tendered at this trial.

the test that governs the
analysis of credibility in this context is proof beyond a reasonable doubt. it
was explained by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. w.(d.)
(1991),
1991 canlii 93 (scc),
63
c.c.c. (3d) 397 (s.c.c.)
and other case
law as follows.
if i believe mr. k.’s evidence, i
must acquit him.
even if i do not believe his
evidence but i am left in reasonable doubt by it, or any of the other evidence,
i must acquit him.
finally, even if i am not left in
doubt by his evidence, i still must consider it and all of the evidence and ask
myself, on the basis of the evidence that i do accept, whether the crown has
proven guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

proof beyond a reasonable
doubt goes hand-in-hand with the presumption of innocence which is a
fundamental principal of our system of justice.

the burden of proof in a
criminal trial always rests with the crown. the burden of proof is a heavy one.
it is proof beyond a reasonable doubt in relation to each of the offence’s
essential elements. a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched, or frivolous
doubt. it is not a doubt based on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone
involved in this trial. it is a doubt based on reason and common sense and is
logically derived from the evidence or the absence of evidence.
r. v.
lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 320,
118 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at para.
39

i may accept some, all, or
none of a witness’ evidence.

to be clear, it is not
sufficient that on the whole of the evidence i am satisfied that mr. k. is
probably
guilty and a criminal trial is not a credibility contest. even if i believe
the accused is probably guilty or likely guilty, that is not sufficient. in
those circumstances, a judge must give the benefit of the doubt to the accused
and acquit because the crown has failed to satisfy the court of the guilt of
the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.

in
r. v. j.h.s.,
2008 scc 30,
the supreme court qualified the
w.(d.)
instruction with an additional
prong, partly in recognition that a trier of fact “may believe some, none, or
all of the testimony of any witness, including that of an accused” (para. 10).
this prong is that where the trier of fact is unable to decide whom to believe,
the accused is entitled to an acquittal (paras. 11-12).

put another way, it reflects
that the trier of fact must not treat “conflicting testimonial accounts” as a
credibility contest, in the sense of deciding whether they accept one or the
other. “the main point is that lack of credibility on the part of the accused
does not equate to proof of his or her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt”:
j.h.s.,
ibid
at para.
13.

the burden
never
shifts
to the accused to establish their own innocence, and the onus always lies with
the crown to prove every essential element (
r. v. j.h.s.,
2008 scc 30 (canlii),
2008 s.c.c.
30,
 2 s.c.r. 152, at para.
13
). it is also important to note that a more
stringent level of scrutiny cannot be applied to the defence evidence than is
applied to the crown’s evidence.
summary
of relevant evidence
evidence
of s.s.

s.s. was 16 years of age at
the time of giving her evidence and was 12-13 years of age and in grade 7 at
the time of the allegations in which she is the complainant. following
unopposed crown applications, s.s. testified via cctv and pursuant to 715.1 a
portion of her evidence in-chief comprised a video statement she provided to
police on july 20, 2023 when she was aged 14.

at the time of the
allegations, s.s. resided with her mother (m.s.), father, older brother (d.s.)
and her grandmother in a condominium block in scarborough in the city of
toronto. s.s. and her brother gave evidence that her father has significant
disabilities that include both an inability to hear or speak. in a separate
condo unit on an upper floor lived her uncle, the accused mr. k., his wife and
two children, a daughter and a son.

prior to the allegations she
made against the accused, s.s. described her relationship with mr. k. as pretty
good, with some minor disagreements although nothing serious. she testified
that she did not see her uncle as a bad person although this changed in light
of what she alleges occurred as she grew older and post puberty. prior to the
allegations, s.s. gave evidence she would see her aunt and the accused
regularly.

s.s. testified that, unbeknownst
to the accused, during covid, she and her female cousin t.s., the daughter of
the accused, began communicating with each other privately on a now
discontinued digital communication platform called google hangouts. mr. k.
became aware of them using google hangouts and was angry and stopped and
forbade their use of it. s.s. gave evidence although t.s. had suggested that
they use google hangouts, she appeared to be blamed to them doing so.

s.s. gave evidence that the
accused told her and her parents it was a bad thing
t
hat she and
her cousin had done and that s.s. was a bad person and needed to be punished.
she testified to heated family discussions at which the accused was yelling
about this issue. the accused threatened to hit s.s. and told her mother m.s.
to do so too. although s.s. was not ultimately physically punished, mr. k.
advised her she would have to write some 200 lines each day for a month stating
that she would not lie to him and would be honest.

s.s. gave evidence that the
accused and his wife found out about google hangouts on or around december 3,
2020 when s.s. was aged 12. s.s. testified that in her police statement she
summarized what had happened over the course of the 6 months. it was her evidence
that she believed the first incident involving the accused occurred in december
2020 and the last one occurred in july 2021. she described the first incident
being “a kiss in the car” at scarborough town centre and the last incident
being when mr. k. assaulted her at the underground storage lockers in their
condo building.

s.s. testified that after the
google hangouts incident between december 2020 and january 2021, the accused
came over to her family’s condo unit regularly during the period of punishment
he had imposed. during this timeframe, it was the evidence of s.s. that the
accused regularly checked her homework with her when alone in her bedroom and
having placed a chair in front of the door to prevent her leaving and others
entering. he also checked that she was not talking to people on-line or using
the internet and asked her if she knew how people had sexual intercourse.

s.s. gave evidence that during
this timeframe mr. k. attended her home on a daily basis. some 2-5 times when
the accused attended her condo and was alone with her in her bedroom, s.s.
testified that he touched her vagina under her underwear. s.s. testified that
that the accused wanted to put his finger inside her vagina but she would not
let him and she moved away from him each time to prevent this happening.

s.s. testified to a number of
instances of sexual assault and assault by the accused on her over the relevant
timeframe. these commenced with the accused attempting to kiss s.s. on the lips
when he had taken her and her brother to scarborough town centre. s.s.
testified that her uncle dispatched her brother on errands for him. the accused
was alone in the car with s.s. in the back seat and the accused in the driver’s
seat.

s.s. gave evidence that this
was during the month the accused was punishing her with lines and that she sat
quietly as she “didn’t want to piss him off”. the accused asked her why she was
being so quiet and told her to come closer to him. the accused then grasped the
side of her face and tried to kiss her on the mouth, she pulled away and he
wound up kissing her cheek instead.

s.s. went on to testify about
a series of inappropriate sexual touching on the part of the accused towards
her in her bedroom. this occurred when he attended at her home and took her
into the master bedroom under the auspices of checking her homework and her
laptop. she testified that the accused would tell her and her brother to open
their lap-tops and show him what they were working on and when schoolwork was
due.

s.s. gave evidence that she
would typically be alone in the master bedroom with the accused while her
brother was outside the closed door and the rest of her family was in the
nearby sitting room, often watching television. she gave evidence that
typically during these encounters the accused would then make her sit on his
lap and would pull her towards him by the wrist. he would subsequently reach
under her skirt to touch her vagina. it was s.s.’s evidence that she would try
to stand up and that often the accused would hold her firmly by the waist to
stop her getting off his lap. it was her evidence that the accused held her
down on his lap but not enough to hurt her. she described the accused sitting
on the chair that he had placed in front of the inside of the bedroom door
because he did not want anyone walking in.

s.s. gave evidence that
although the accused often told her and her family she was a bad person, the
accused would also praise her before he touched her sexually and told her that
she “wasn’t like everyone else in the family.” she described the accused
putting his finger under her clothing and on, or nearly inside, her vagina.
s.s. testified that that she would try to push the accused hand away and he
would tell her to stop and that this was for her own good. it was her evidence
that she was 13 years old when this behavior occurred.

s.s. gave evidence that the
sexual assault on her occurred over the course of approximately 6 months. that
the accused attended almost daily from early december to late january or early
february during what she termed the course of her “punishment” and that after
this, the accused stopped coming over in person but then began to constantly
take her out with him in his car.

in summary, s.s. testified
that on an almost daily basis during part of covid, her uncle would collect her
from home at weekends or after school and drive around with her in his car.
s.s. also gave evidence that on at least one occasion during this timeframe,
she had seen the accused hit and kick her mother when her mother, m.s. had
tried to stop the accused taking s.s. out of her home.

s.s. and the accused would
regularly attend the same plaza and often visit a tim horton’s there. during
the course of a number of these instances, s.s. testified that she and the accused
would eat food in the car. she was in the rear seat and the accused was in the
driver’s seat. she described the accused being on his phone for lengthy periods
of time while they were parked in the plaza and sometimes, he would read
booklets that she believed related to cars.

s.s. gave evidence that during
this timeframe, and when she had finished eating the accused would often then
join her in the back seat of his car. she testified that she did not want to
sit in the front with him as she did not feel comfortable doing so. it was her
evidence that she often ate slowly to defer the accused climbing into the back
seat with her and that sometimes the accused would become impatient with her
and tell her to hurry up.

it was her evidence that on a
number of these occasions the accused would ask her to let him “touch her” and
that although she tried making excuses to avoid him touching her, in the end
she just gave in because she was scared about what the accused would do if she
continued to disagree. the behaviour s.s. described included the accused
placing his hand inside her pants and trying to “finger her” and touching her
chest under her shirt.

s.s. gave evidence that
sometimes the accused would complain about the clothing she was wearing as it
made it difficult for him to touch her and that on occasions, he would tell her
to remove her pants but she was not comfortable doing so. s.s. testified that
that on weekends the accused would often arrive by 7:00 or 8:00 a.m. and remain
out with her until much later often until 9:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. and sometimes as
late as 11:00 p.m. on school days, he would be waiting outside of school to
pick her up once her classes had finished.

s.s. gave evidence that her
mother and the accused argued about how long the accused was keeping her out of
the home and that it was impacting her health, behaviour and her schooling and
that after this, the accused started keeping her out later, sometimes until
11:00 p.m. s.s. described these lengthy encounters as essentially comprised of
the accused driving around for long periods of time, parking in the plaza,
getting food and then sexually assaulting her.

s.s. testified that at some
point during this timeframe, the accused told her he wanted to rape her and
that doing so would help give her more confidence and to be more brave. he told
her he was “going to put his dick in her.” s.s. testified that that she did not
understand what the accused meant by this act making her more confident but
that the accused repeatedly told her it was going to happen,

s.s. gave evidence that
sometimes she cried when the accused said these things to her and he would tell
her she was stupid and tell her that it was not a bad thing he wanted to do to
her.

s.s. then testified to what
was referred to at trial at “the orange skirt incident”. in summary, s.s.
estimated that this incident occurred in june of 2021 and that the accused gave
her one of his daughter’s skirts to wear and told her that he was “going to put
his dick inside her”. s.s. said she became upset and described the accused as
getting mad. as a result of this, she removed her pants and put on the orange
skirt that the accused had given her and did this shortly before the accused
parked at the plaza. she testified that she first saw the skirt in a carrier
bag in the rear of the car and assumed the accused had previously retrieved it
from the trunk.

s.s. gave evidence she
believed that the accused’s motor vehicle was parked behind a dollarama in the
plaza and that there did not seem to be anyone else around. the accused then
got in the back of the vehicle next to where she was seated, he removed his
pants and hovered above her and tried to place his penis inside her vagina.
s.s. described being very upset and trying to push the accused away as he was
hovering over her. it was her evidence the accused repeatedly told her he was
doing this to make her brave and that she had to do this type of thing.
eventually, after several attempts to penetrate her the accused gave up and she
described him as being very upset with her and told her if she was not going to
let him do this, then he was going to drive her home. s.s. gave evidence that
accused seemed further upset when she agreed and did not suggest otherwise.

in her evidence about this
incident, s.s. gave evidence that the seats of the motor vehicle were pushed
back and that there was space for the accused to hover over her while he held
on to the top of one of the rear passenger seats for balance. he then placed
one of his feet over her two legs. s.s. described feeling very scared and
crying and having a panic attack and struggled to breathe. she described trying
to move away from the accused but not having much room to do so. she gave
evidence that the accused had his pants down and close to his knees and that he
told her to take off her underwear.

she testified that that she
saw the accused’s penis as he tried to position it inside her but she resisted
and she described his penis as on or almost in her vagina.

s.s. further testified about a
family trip to whitby to spend time with her other uncle and his family in
which her family and the accused family all visited and stayed overnight. s.s.
recounted an incident where she woke up at some point and believed she felt the
accused touching her although she accepted she could not be sure where on her
body this had occurred although the accused was close to her face and she had
been sleeping in a room with other family members when this occurred. after a
family argument, s.s. and most of her family subsequently left. s.s. testified
that this incident occurred in or around june 2021 and that it was the last of
the times when she believed the accused touched her sexually.

s.s. then testified that that
at some point in july 2021, not long after the family trip to whitby, the
accused attended at her home in toronto and knocked on the door. she gave
evidence that the accused then told her to come with him and he took her down
to the locker area in the condo building where the residents store surplus
items. she described the accused as being very angry and swearing at her.

s.s. testified that she felt
something bad was going to happen and that she had not wanted to go with the
accused but he told her if she did not, he would come into her home and drag
her out and he would kill anyone who stopped him. when they got around the
corner to where the accused storage locker was, it was s.s.’s evidence that
after berating her for some time while seated, the accused stood up and slapped
her across her face several times and then choked her with his hands for a few
seconds during which time she struggled to breathe.

after this, the accused threw
a bottle of water at her and yelled at her saying that she had ruined
everything for him and that she was worthless. s.s. described this incident as
occurring on or around july 4, 2021 when she was 13 years old and testified
that it was a particular date that she remembered. she gave evidence that she
did not tell her mother or family about this incident as she was afraid of the
accused and what he might do to her or her family. s.s. testified that also
about how the accused seemed to dislike her brother very much.

s.s. gave evidence that
approximately one year after this last incident, in approximately august 2022,
she and her family had moved to a new address. during the course of a heated
family argument in which she said she was being blamed for causing problems in
the family, she became upset and then told her mother and grandmother about the
abuse that had happened. she pointedly told them it was unfair of them that to
paint her as the bad person in the family when the accused had sexually abused
her.

it was her evidence that the
family discussed reporting the incidents to the police but her grandmother and
mother were worried about telling the police as it would mean the accused’s
children would not have a father anymore and it would be embarrassing for them
and the family. s.s. subsequently also told her uncle and aunt in whitby about
what had happened and they asked her why she had not told them about this and
she replied that she was afraid for the family. she also provided some
information to a school counsellor. subsequently, the matter was then reported
to police.

s.s. testified that the last
time she saw the accused, he followed her and her mother home from school to
their condo and she panicked and slammed the door in his face and did not open
it despite his repeated knocking.
evidence of m.s.

m.s.’s evidence, which was
provided with the assistance of a tamil interpreter, can be summarized as
follows. she was born in sri lanka and arrived in canada in 2006 and lived with
her husband, mother-in-law, daughter and son in their condo building. the accused
and his family moved to canada and into the same condo building in
approximately 2007. m.s. described getting to know the accused through his
marriage to her sister-in-law. she described their relationship as not a close
one but one in which they respected him in the position of a father figure,
including towards her own children.

m.s. gave evidence the accused
helped her children with their schooling, he spoke to their teachers and at
school meetings and picked the children up from school and helped them with
their homework. she testified that during covid he would come over to their
home regularly to check her children’s laptops to see if they had done their
school-work. this was done in the bedroom in the condo that she shared with her
daughter s.s.

she gave evidence that when
the accused was checking her daughter’s home-work, he would be in the bedroom
with her by himself and when he checked her son's homework he would also be in
there by himself. she testified that when he was in the room with the children,
no one else would be allowed in. on these occasions, m.s. described the bedroom
door being closed and other family members typically being in the living room.

m.s. gave evidence that the
accused regularly took her son and daughter out to help him with shopping or
when he had appointments. it was her evidence that he mostly took her children
out separately and this happened during covid when “people couldn’t mingle” she
described the accused mostly taking out her daughter s.s. on a daily basis between
december 2020 and june 2021 the last week of school.

m.s. testified that there was
a family discussion at the whitby house where all of the family jointly scolded
the accused for taking the children out of school after they found out classes
had been missed and homework was not completed. she testified that in the
period of time that the accused was daily taking out her daughter they would
regularly leave at around 7:00 or 8:00 a.m. and often not returned before 9:00
or 10:00 p.m.

she gave evidence that when
her daughter was out of the house with the accused, she did not see her all day
and she described feeling concerned about her daughter and her studies. m.s.
testified that she spoke to the accused about this but the accused would not
listen to her and got angry used abusive words towards her.

m.s. testified that the
accused choked her on four to five different occasions in her condo unit after
she told him he could not take out her daughter. she gave evidence that this
happened in january, february and march of 2021 and on the last occasion, it
occurred when she tried to stop him taking her daughter out and the accused
pushed her over, kicked her and struck her over her head and shoulder. she
testified that on this occasion that he choked her she had difficulty breathing
although she did not lose consciousness, she described “my eyes were blurred
and i felt like i was flying in the air.”

m.s. gave evidence that the
accused told her he would hit her again if she told his wife what was
happening. on two or three occasions, her own children saw the accused hit her.
when asked if she remembered whether the accused said anything, m.s. testified
the accused spoke angrily and used bad words and said “i’ll kill you and throw
you away. i’ll squeeze you to death and take the child out anyway.” she gave
evidence that she felt afraid for herself and what would happen to her children
and that she felt the accused was capable of doing what he said.

m.s. gave evidence that
because her english is very poor and because she was not allowed to get herself
educated when she came to canada and given her husband’s disabilities, this was
why the accused did so much in respect of her family. she testified that her
children were not allowed to be close to her and that they had to listen to the
accused and that this all began to happen when her son was in grade 9 and her
daughter was in grade 7.

it was her evidence that the
accused told her she should not be interfering with the children or talk with
them, that it was her role to cook and feed them and take them to school but
nothing else. she described these rules being made for her by the accused. she
also testified that the accused during this time frame had told her children
not to talk to her and described a period of some three months when s.s. was
“kept away from me”. she gave evidence that the accused regularly questioned
her as to whether she had spoken to the children and she gave evidence that it
was only after they no longer had anything to do with the accused that they
really spoke properly again. m.s. testified that the accused would hit her if
he learned she had spoken to her children when he had told her not to.

m.s. gave evidence that
sometimes the accused would scold her daughter in front of her and tell s.s not
to speak to her mother whom he called a prostitute. from january to june of
2021, m.s. described her daughter as seeming sad and angry a lot of the time
and “acting as if she had got lost before finally coming back to us.” she
testified that during this timeframe her daughter had cut her wrists and her
school grades had dropped significantly.

in cross-examination, m.s.
testified that when she noticed the cuts on her daughter’s wrists, she spoke to
her about it but s.s. did not want to discuss it. she testified that after they
moved to oshawa in april 2022, there was an argument between her and her
daughter which got emotional. m.s. questioned her daughter about her changed
behavior and it was in this conversation that her daughter disclosed to her the
abuse she alleged at hands of her uncle.

in cross-examination, m.s.
testified that when the accused came over to the condo he would take a chair
from the living room or tell the children to bring him a chair from the living
room and leave it in the bedroom. she testified that the accused would leave
his walker inside the entrance to her home remove his shoes and then tell the
children to get the chair.

when asked by ms. izakelian if
she had seen the accused choke her daughter or hit her, m.s. testified she did
not see that happen herself but recalled her daughter having been crying and
saw what she described as signs on her neck, although she was confused as to
when this has been.

m.s. also testified about the
family trip to whitby. she gave evidence that she had seen the accused and her
daughter using the lawnmower together but agreed she had not thought anything
unusual about it at the time. she accepted that she had not mentioned this in
her original police statement. m.s. rejected the defence suggestion that the accused
had not driven s.s. to whitby along with his own family. she testified further
as to her recollection of the events during the family to visit to whitby.

in cross-examination, m.s.
agreed the accused had been involved in a car accident in 2018 and had attended
rehab and physiotherapy appointments afterwards although she testified that he
was not seriously injured and that his attendance at the appointments and use
of the walker was a pretense.

m.s. rejected the defence
suggestion that in the two years following the accident the accused was unable
to drive and testified that he was driving throughout that entire period. her
evidence was that the accused used the walker because of his civil law case and
that he was afraid of being followed by the insurance company. she testified
that whilst he walked slowly when he was outside of the house he did not do so
when he was inside the home. it was her evidence that the accused had told her
that he was using the walker because people were watching him. she accepted, in
cross-examination, that she had not told the police about the accused
pretending in this way.

m.s. testified that the
accused did not seek her permission to take her daughter from the house when he
wanted to take her out and nor did he seek permission from her husband. she
testified that she had been under the control of the accused for the last 18
years and testified that “he wasn’t like this at first but he changed.” when
asked why she simply did not open the door to the accused if she was afraid of
him, m.s. testified that she felt threatened, and the accused had said he would
kill her children if she did not do as she was told. she also testified that
that the accused had a key to her condo.

m.s. denied the defence
suggestion that over the years she had regular fights with her daughter. it was
her evidence that they had no serious arguments before 2021 and she rejected
the defence suggestion that the accused never attended school meetings and the
suggestion that his ability in the english language is the same as hers.

she testified the accused can
speak english as well as he speaks tamil. she agreed that the accused told her
he did not want s.s. and his daughter talking in private after the incident on
google hangouts. she testified that the accused kept his children away from her
after this incident and she felt he was isolating her. she further testified
that when the accused was in the bedroom with either of her children if she
wanted to use the washroom when he was inside there, she had to knock on the
door and mr. k. accused her of checking up on him.

she rejected the defence
suggestion that she only knew about the chair because she was told about it by
s.s. and testified that there was a space through the door where she could see
the leg of the chair. it was her evidence that when he went into the bedroom,
the accused always closed the door and when she wanted to use the washroom the
accused had to move the chair away from the door to facilitate this.

m.s. denied that she asked the
accused to come over to speak to the children to motivate them. she denied the
accused only took out s.s. five to six times during the relevant timeframe. she
testified that the accused took control of both families and her family did not
have a car.

m.s. denied in
cross-examination that she had stopped speaking to s.s. because she was upset
with her over the google hangouts. she testified the reason they stopped
speaking was because of the accused.

m.s. rejected the defence
suggestion that in 2015 she gave some jewellery to the accused because he was
having financial issues. m.s. also firmly denied the defence suggestion that
she made romantic advances to the accused which he rejected in 2015 and again
in 2021. m.s. denied that she had demanded any jewellery back from the accused
or that the accused told her he could not give her the jewellery back as he had
pawned it and did not have the money to redeem it. she also denied the defence
suggestion that she told the accused she loved him and that when he rejected
her, she got upset. she further denied that the accused had stopped speaking to
her and her family in april of 2021 of his own accord but did agree that the
last thing she told the accused in the last conversation they had was words to
the effect of “time/s will change.”

m.s. testified that the first
time the accused had assaulted her was after s.s. had reached puberty and the
accused started taking her out and she believed it may have been around
december. when asked to describe this assault, m.s. testified the accused
pushed her in the washroom and she fell down. he told her to shut her mouth.
she agreed that she had not mentioned this first incident to the police when
she spoke to them and when asked how many times the accused assaulted her, m.s.
testified “he used his hands on me many times i don’t know how many times i
cannot count it, it was numerous.” she agreed that the assaults always happened
in her home.

m.s. agreed that although she
testified that she was scared for her life and her children she had not
contacted the police earlier about this and said that was because she did not
know what to do although she accepted, she had a phone in her condo.

m.s. rejected the defence
suggestion that the accused did not threaten her or assault her at any point.
she rejected the defence suggestion that the accused did not have control over
her and her family or that he took s.s. out everyday, often keeping her out
late during the relevant time frame.
evidence of d.s.

when testifying d.s. was 21
years old and he gave evidence that he is 4 years older than his sister s.s. in
december of 2020, he testified that he was in grade 12 and would have been 17
years of age. d.s. testified that his uncle had assaulted him physically on a
number of occasions including once when he was 10 or 11 years of age where the
accused slapped him and hit his head against a concrete wall. d.s. could not
recall whether his mother and sister were present but believes that they may
have been.

d.s. testified that this
assault occurred in the basement area where the storage lockers for residents
were located and that he was slapped to the head several times. he described
the back of his head hurting for a while afterwards. d.s. gave evidence that
this was not the first time his uncle had hit him. the first time was when he
was taken to the locker area and hit by his uncle when he was in elementary
school when he had stolen something from the school.

he testified that his uncle
was in charge of discipline as his mother did not speak english and his father
could not speak or hear. he testified that this control included his uncle
making d.s. call him when he got up in the morning to tell him when he was
leaving for school and that he had to call his uncle when he got home from
school. he testified on a number of occasions his uncle made him kneel all day
in his condo without food and water and that he was not allowed go to the
washroom without his permission as a punishment for him not calling him when he
was told to.

d.s. recalled his mother and
grandmother calling his uncle to ask permission for him to use the washroom but
his uncle did not pick up and they had to leave voicemail messages. he gave
evidence that he was subjected to the kneeling punishment by his uncle four or
five times. he also testified that on two or three occasions he and his sister
were also told to write lines by his uncle and that his uncle would regularly
come to their apartment and check their schoolwork on google classrooms when he
was in grades 11 and 12. he testified that this would happen in the bedroom or
living room for him but when his uncle checked his sister’s homework, he did it
with her separately and in the bedroom with the bedroom door closed.

d.s. testified his uncle
regularly went to school meetings and parent teacher meetings at the school on
their behalf and sometimes he would take d.s.’s mother with him. he described
the language that was spoken in the interviews as english and d.s. gave
evidence that the accused’s ability in the english language as good. he
testified that his uncle was in charge of their contact with the school because
his mom does not speak english and his father cannot speak.

it was d.s.’s evidence that if
his mother spoke up to the accused, he would discipline her and him and he
further “my mum would get hit if she spoke up.” he had seen the accused hit his
mother multiple times on different days and estimated he had seen this happen
more than 20 times. he testified that in addition to assaulting his mother, the
accused would also verbally abuse her, call her a prostitute and other profane
names.

d.s. testified he recalled the
first time he saw his uncle hit his mother was when she tried to stop his uncle
doing something and his uncle said she would not stop him and he would be happy
to go to jail. d.s. was unable to give a date for when this incident occurred
and was not prepared guess.

d.s. also testified about the
family trip to whitby and his recollection of the events that occurred whilst
the families were there. this included a recollection of the accused and his
sister using the lawnmower and that the accused had driven his sister to whitby
with his family.

when asked when the last time
was that he saw the accused hit his mother, d.s. testified it was following an
argument when he came over to the condo and it happened in the master bedroom.
he gave evidence that “something happened in whitby” but he was not sure what
it was. after this is when he last saw the accused hit his mother. d.s.
testified on this occasion he was sitting on the bed, the accused was yelling
at his mom. the accused told him to step out of the room and as he was doing
this, he saw the accused hit his mother with his hand and she stumbled. it was
his evidence his uncle hit his mother across the left side of her face and that
he both saw and heard the blow.

when asked if there were any
other occasions on which the accused assaulted him, d.s. replied “i don’t know
the number there were multiple situations if i was late home from school he
would come to our house and he would take me to our master bed-room and i’d be
hit mostly with his hand sometimes he bent me over and elbowed me or kneed me
in the back or slapped me in the back with both hands.” d.s. estimated this
occurred a couple of times every two months and he also recalled that one
occasion the accused had slammed the door of the empty property locker against
him.

when asked about the last time
he had seen the accused, d.s. testified it was about a week after the trip to
whitby when the accused told him he wanted to meet him at the storage lockers.
he testified his sister was there, the accused kept yelling at him and saying
him and his sister were ungrateful for everything he did for them. he gave
evidence that the accused was slapping d.s.’s face with both his hands back and
forth, he gave evidence the accused hit him an estimated 4 to 5 but does not
recall any obvious injuries following this.

when asked how he would
describe his relationship with the accused, d.s. testified “personally i never
liked him, he would always discipline us, me and my sister and my mom i've
always disliked him and the role he has in our life has been pretty
consistent.”

d.s. agreed there were
occasions where he attended at appointments with the accused and testified that
he did not know why the accused brought him but sometimes he helped him open
doors and helped him get his walker out of the car. d.s. testified that his sister
went out alone with the accused a lot more often. generally, several times per
week. he described this as happening mainly during covid after his sister hit
puberty and when he was in grades 11 and 12 and that sometimes she would be out
for six hours or maybe longer. he testified they often leave at 9:00 to 10:00
in the morning and a few times returned as late as 10 or 11 p.m., although it
was more normally 7:00 to 8:00 p.m.

when asked whether he had
noticed any changes in his sister's personality, d.s. testified that she used
to be fun until they had been told not to speak to each other, although they
continued to do so secretly and their relationship did not change. however, he
noticed that the more she hung out with the accused, the more his sister stopped
speaking to their mother.

in cross-examination, d.s.
provided further evidence of his recollection of the events that occurred
during the family visit to whitby. he testified that whilst other family
members left earlier, he stayed in whitby for approximately 2 weeks with his
other uncle. when asked about the incident involving the accused and his sister
on the lawnmower, d.s. testified that the accused was showing his sister how to
use the lawnmower and that the way he appeared to be showing her struck him as
odd but agreed he did not say anything and nor did he speak with his sister
about it.

he also agreed that he did not
mention in his police statement anything involving his sister and the accused
using the lawnmower. d.s. testified he was asked multiple things about what he
had seen or been through with him and he just did not remember that one
incident because there were multiple contacts.

d.s. rejected the suggestion
that he had memory issues and testified that the family found out about the allegations
against his sister after they had moved from scarborough in april 2022. he
testified that his sister told their mother about what had happened and had not
been specific with him about details. he agreed with the defence suggestion
that he did not like the accused and that he disliked him more since he had
heard what his sister had said the accused had done to her.

when asked if he would pick
his sister’s side over the accused, d.s. replied yes he would and agreed he
would do anything to support his sister. when asked if his sister had told him
about the incident in the car, d.s. replied yes, i remember her telling me that
the accused said “if she let him fuck her she wouldn’t be raped.”

when asked whether he and his
sister had talked more about the allegations since he originally learned of
them, d.s. testified they had not and he never brought it up because his sister
was very sensitive about it. he also denied talking about it with his mother.
when asked by defence counsel if he had any suspicions about his uncle, d.s.
testified “i had my thoughts but he’s my uncle and i wouldn’t think he’d do
something like this. it didn’t cross my mind he would do this kind of wrong and
sexually assault my sister”.

d.s. agreed he had never seen
the accused touch his sister inappropriately or say anything sexually
inappropriate to his sister.

d.s. agreed that when he was
outside of home the accused used a walker and sometimes attended with the
accused at his physiotherapy appointments. when it was put to him that the
accused had difficulty walking, d.s. replied “that's what he told me.” d.s.
testified that the accused told him he did not want people to see him outside
of his car and when he went to appointments, he would always say to him “they
could be watching” and he would appear paranoid about his surroundings.

d.s. disagreed with the
defence suggestion that the accused had not taken his sister in his car to
whitby along with his own family. he agreed that he did not like helping his
uncle and felt forced to do so. d.s. rejected the defence submission that his
uncle wanted him and his sister to do well in school and testified that he
believed checking their laptops was all part of the control of them by him
although he agreed occasionally his uncle would make motivational comments
about their schooling.

d.s. rejected the suggestion
that the accused did not check his homework and testified that his uncle would
tell him and his sister bad things about his mother that he knew were not true
to try and make her seem like a bad person. he rejected the defence suggestion
that his uncle had never gone to a pta meeting for him and testified that he
had been doing so since they were in kindergarten through to high school and
that he sometimes brought his mom or dad.

in cross-examination, d.s.
testified that his parents seemed to have no say about the decisions that the
accused made. he testified that sometimes he would get the walker from his
uncle's vehicle and sometimes his uncle would get it. he further testified that
when they were in whitby, he did not see his uncle using a walker or a cane and
that his uncle was doing yard work without either of these things.

d.s. expressly rejected
suggestions that he never saw the accused assault his mother and testified he
saw it on a number of occasions, including the accused kicking her d.s.
testified that the only time he saw the accused assault his sister was when he
slapped her that was the only time he saw him touch her. in re-examination,
d.s. agreed that after the lawnmower incident that he thought was suspicious in
whitby, he had spoken with his mother about it.
evidence of r.k.

the evidence of mr. k. can be
summarized as follows. he is 59 years of age, was born in sri lanka and is a
canadian citizen and has no criminal record. he previously worked as an uber
driver until he had a car accident in 2018 and has not worked since as a result
of the injuries he says he sustained in that accident.

it was his evidence that he
attended a pain clinic for approximately 2 years after the accident and then
from december 2020 was in rehab and physiotherapy. he reported his injuries
including lower back pain, neck pain and damage to his shoulder.

the accused testified that he
required the use of a walker and walked very slowly and needed it for balance
for quite some time. he currently uses a cane instead of the walker. it was his
evidence that he used the walker even when he was indoors.

he testified that he lived
with his wife, son and daughter in the same condo building his wife’s elder
brother, his wife and their two children and his wife’s mother but they lived
in a separate unit. he testified that he owns a 2003 nissan murano which he
used as his vehicle and which he testified did not have significantly tinted
windows. it was not in issue that the accused has a storage locker in the condo
building that he lived in.

when asked to describe his
relationship with his wife’s family, he described it as good although he
testified that it subsequently changed. when asked about his relationship with
s.s. and d.s., he also described this as good but said that it also
subsequently changed. he attributed this to s.s. secretly contacting his
daughter on google hangouts without his knowledge.

the accused gave evidence that
as soon as he found out about this secret contact he told his daughter to stop
and spoke to s.s. and her family the following day. it was the accused’s
evidence after this conversation, his relationship with the family changed, he
testified that s.s. then avoided him a lot and he could see in her face that
she disliked him.

the accused denied punishing
s.s. following this conversation and testified he would not do such a thing as
he is her uncle, not her parent. but he agreed he instructed her parents to
make sure this did not happen again. when asked why he did not want his
daughter contacting s.s. privately, he testified that he did not believe s.s.
was doing well in school and he thought there would be improper messages sent
between them and he wanted to protect his daughter.

the accused also denied that
between december of 2020 and july 2021 he had been responsible s.s. and her
brother d.s.’s well-being. he testified he was only responsible for his own
children. he also testified that he never attended any parent teacher meetings
for s.s. or d.s. and it was his evidence that their mother attended and used
some of the parents who spoke english there to communicate with the teachers
not him.

he gave evidence that the only
time he ever picked up s.s. from school was when he was asked to do so by her
mother when she knew he was available. he only did this when requested and he
believed that this had all occurred before his accident in 2018 and did not
picked up s.s. or d.s. after this.

when asked if he assisted his
own children with their homework, he testified he did not and that it was his
wife who takes care of that as he does not have much time in the day to do so.
he also gave evidence that his english is not good enough and although he
speaks some conversational english, it wasn’t enough to teach his children
with. the accused denied he had the ability to review homework by his children
to see if it was complete and denied teaching any school subjects or checking
the homework or computers of either d.s. or s.s.

the accused testified that
after the google hangouts conversation, his relationship with d.s. changed as
well and that before this, d.s. used to speak to him a lot and he would take
him out to drive during the day. after the google hangouts issue, the accused
gave evidence d.s. refused to do this with him anymore and the way he responded
to him seemed angry and sad.

he testified that he had never
made s.s. or d.s. write lines as a punishment although he accepted he had done
that with his own children. he testified that s.s. knew this and believed she
had made-up her evidence based upon this story she had heard.

when asked whether he had
taken s.s. out of the house every day between december 2020 and april 2021, the
accused denied that this had happened and he testified that he would only have
taken her out if his children or d.s. were not available to help him and if her
mother had said it was allowed. he testified that he wanted to be very formal
about any requests for the children helping him but so he always went through
their mother.

he testified the purpose of
taking s.s. out was to help him at his medical appointments and to help with
shopping and with his walker. he estimates that he only took s.s. out a total
of five or six times and he agreed that he took her to get food on these
occasions as he did not want to take her for a free ride given she was helping
him. he agreed that whenever s.s. was in his car she always sat in the rear
passenger seat. he stated that this was for safety reasons and he was very
careful following the accident and he wanted to keep s.s. safe.

he estimated he had taken d.s.
out approximately 8 to 10 times during this time frame to assist him with
medical appointments and shopping. he gave evidence that he treated d.s. and
s.s. both equally. however, after the google hangouts conversation, he
testified d.s. refused to take food from him. the accused estimated the longest
period of time he was out of the house with either of the children was 4 to 5 hours
although sometimes it could have been less. when asked whether there were other
cars in the plaza or car park when he went there with the children, he
testified there were other cars and lots of movement. he estimated the pain
clinic was approximately 15 minutes driving distance from his home.

the accused testified when he
spoke to d.s. and s.s. to motivate them, he did so in the master bedroom but
that the door was always open. he denied the suggestion that he no longer used
the walker once he was inside the residence. the accused denied that he had
spent time hanging around in the parking lot talking to s.s. or that he
sometimes dropped her off as late as 11:00 p.m.

he testified that he did not
make rules for s.s. or her family to follow and that he did not control them.
he denied directing who they could speak with and testified that he has his own
family and own problems it does not have time to take care of their family too.

the accused testified that at
the beginning of april 2021 he had an argument with m.s. at her home and that
after this conversation, their relationship changed. it was his evidence that
she had told him she was unhappy in her marriage and that she liked him and
that he did everything for her.

the accused told m.s. he was
in some financial difficulty and needed a loan and that m.s. gave him some
jewellery and told him to pawn it to get the money to help him. he further
testified that she told him they would get the jewellery back and go and live
together in some distant place. the accused testified that he was shocked when
it became clear m.s. wanted to use the money from the jewellery he had pawned
to set up a new life for them and gave evidence that in 2015, she had also told
him of her love for him.

the accused testified that he
told her this was not a good thing and that she had her own family and he could
never agree to what she asked and she must not speak like that again. it was
his evidence that he had pawned the jewellery although he now realizes he
should not have done that.

the accused testified that
during the argument in april 2021, m.s. declared her love for him and told him
to return her jewellery to her. he gave evidence that when he told her he could
not do that as he did not have the money to redeem it, she became angry and
said to him “times will change”. the accused took this utterance as some kind
of threat and testified that he now realized their true meaning following the
allegations being made against him.

the last time he saw d.s.,
m.s. or s.s. was at the whitby house in june of 2021 and he attended at the
request of the grandmother who invited them to a housewarming party. it was his
evidence that he still required the walker when at the whitby house and that he
did not drive s.s. to whitby in his car with his family.

he further testified that no
one was talking to his family for the time they spent there and that he was
shocked and upset that everyone was avoiding them. he denied any interactions
with s.s. during his time in whitby, said they only stayed overnight because
his wife suggested they should stay as the children were happy. it was his
evidence they left at around 11:30 a.m. the following day.

the accused testified that
there was an argument before they left in which he was asked why he was blaming
s.s. for the google hangouts issue and that he was told to leave or the family
would call the police. he testified that the situation looked bad and he did
not want to fight so he gathered his family and left. it is his evidence that
after the visit to whitby he has not seen or spoken to s.s., d.s. or m.s.
since. he denied touching s.s. at any point during the time they were together
in whitby. he testified that they had taken along a lawnmower over as a
housewarming gift but he had never used it. he denied that s.s. had ever
slammed her door on him when he was trying to speak to her.

the accused denied ever
assaulting or sexually assaulting s.s. in any way. he further denied ever
threatening s.s. or yelling at d.s. or assaulting d.s. at any location
including his storage unit in the condo building. the accused described these
as false accusations. he further denied that he had ever assaulted m.s. in her
home or anywhere else, nor had he ever threatened her in anyway. when asked if
he had ever yelled at m.s., he testified that he only spoke to her sternly once
about the google hangouts behavior and he did not shout or use strong words.

when asked again if he had
ever inappropriately touched s.s., the accused replied “i feel sad to hear
that. i’m a loving uncle i didn't do it”. in cross-examination by ms. mcphedran
about the allegations, the accused testified that they were a planned lie and
that s.s. had made these up because of the google hangouts incident. he gave
evidence that he had been working before the accident in 2018 and aside from
working as an uber driver he had also been employed driving a shuttle bus to
the hospital as well as working in a bakery supervising packaging.

he testified that most of the
people working under him were tamil but he sometimes spoke english. he agreed
with the crown that his english was conversational although he testified that
there were a couple of words he did not understand. he accepted he had been
learning english since grade 6 in sri lanka and did not take any english classes
in canada when he arrived here in 2007. the accused testified that he took his
citizenship test in english and accepted he also had passed his driving test
too.

the accused agreed that his
brother-in-law was unable to speak and that m.s. had a very limited education.
he agreed his english and education are better than hers and that his
mother-in-law also only spoke a few words of english. when asked about his
injuries following his car accident, the accused testified that he was released
after an examination the same day and did not stay overnight at the hospital.
he attended medical appointments and submitted he was not able to drive before
the start of 2020.

the accused gave evidence that
in addition to s.s. and d.s. sometimes his wife or daughter attended with him
for appointments. he gave evidence that his son did not come with him as he had
suffered a significant head injury when he was young and his wife was very
protective of their son.

when asked by the crown why
his wife would not be available to attend with him since she was not working,
the accused testified that was because she was taking care of the house and did
not have time. the accused agreed in cross-examination he had begun a lawsuit
after the accident and that his sole income was from ontario disability support
program (“odsp”) and he described his financial circumstances as manageable
although he did not have enough money to redeem the jewellery. he accepted the
lawnmower that his wife purchased as a housewarming gift for the whitby visit
cost $500.

when asked whether he had seen
his brother's family regularly before december 2020, the accused testified he
saw them “if the necessity arose” and he did not go unless they asked him to.
it was his evidence was “i have a family and kids and mind my own business.” he
testified that that he only ever helped his brother’s family if he had the time
but he was very busy and his priority was his family.

it was the evidence of the
accused that he stopped being close to s.s. because he believes she has an
inferiority complex. he denied imposing any rules on m.s., s.s. or d.s. about
who they could speak to and when. the accused reiterated in cross-examination
his shock at m.s. expressing her love for him and asking to start a new life
with him although he agreed that when she first did this in 2015, he did not
treat their relationship differently afterwards.

it was the evidence of the
accused because s.s. disliked him, she and her brother came to court and told
lies in this case as did their mother m.s.
law and analysis

it is abundantly clear that
there are vastly different accounts of what took place with respect to the
various allegations before the court. in short, it is the position of ms.
mcphedran for the crown that, notwithstanding any inconsistencies in the
evidence of the three complainants, separately and collectively they presented
as credible and reliable witnesses and that the court can be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt of the guilt of mr. k. with respect to all counts on which the
accused was arraigned.

ms. izakelian submits that the
crown’s case rests on a fabrication by the three complainants who have
conspired against mr. k. she submits this conspiracy is motivated by him
spurning the unwanted advances of his sister-in-law, m.s. and is further
underpinned by animosity over the non-return of her jewellery which had had
previously pawned to repay outstanding debts he owed.

ms. izakelian submits that in
addition to this s.s. was motivated to lie about the accused because she held
him responsible for her poor relationship with her family in the aftermath of
the google hangouts incident. defence counsel submits that mr. k. was a
credible and reliable witness and that at the very least his evidence should
leave the court in a reasonable doubt as to guilt and that the crown witnesses
were inconsistent and unreliable in their evidence.
child witnesses

i
am mindful that courts should not assume a credibility gap in a complainant, or
indeed an accused person, in sexual assault cases because of inconsistencies in
their evidence around minor issues which may have a legitimate explanation.
furthermore, two of the complainants in this case were young persons at the
time of the allegations, s.s. was and d.s. was 17. when providing their
statements to police, they were approximately and 18 years old and at the time
of giving evidence, s.s. was 16 or 17 and her brother was 21.

ms. mcphedran provided helpful
case law with respect to the approach that the court should take when
considering the testimony of children in criminal cases. these included
r.
v. w.(r.
), 2 s.c.r. no. 122,
r. v. o.m.,
2014 onca 503
and
r.
v. a.b.,
2023 onca 254.

a central principle flowing
from the case law is that while the evidence of children is still necessarily
subject to the same standard of proof as the evidence of adult witnesses in
criminal cases, it should be approached not from the perspective of rigid
stereotypes but on a common sense basis taking into account the strengths and
weaknesses which characterize the evidence offered in the particular case,
r.
v. w.(r.).

the courts have recognized for
some considerable time children may experience the world differently from
adults and it is not surprising that details important for adults such as time
and place may be missing from their recollection. in
r. v. b.(g.),
1990 canlii 7308 (scc),

2 s.c.r. 30
at pp. 54-55, wilson j. recognized this when she said “while
children may not be able to recount precise details and communicate the when
and where of an event with exactitude this does not mean they have misconceived
what happened to them and who did it.’’

as c.j. machlachlin
articulated in
r. v. w.(r.),
“it is also neither possible nor desirable
to state hard and fast rules as to when a witness’s evidence should be assessed
by reference to adult or child standards to do so would be to create a new
stereotypes potentially as rigid and unjust as those which the recent
developments and the laws approach to children’s evidence have been designed to
dispel. every person giving testimony in court of whatever age is an individual
whose credibility and evidence must be assessed by reference too criteria
appropriate to their mental development, understanding and ability to communicate.”
collusion and fabrication

i accept that the absence of
evidence of a demonstrated motive to fabricate must be distinguished from
affirmative proof of no motive to fabricate. as the court noted in
r. v.
l.(l),
2009 onca 413,
244 c.c.c. (3d) 149
at para.
44, citing
r. v. b.
(r.w.),
24 b.c.a.c. 1 (c.a.)
at para. 28
“it does not logically follow that
because there is no apparent reason for a witness to lie the witness must be
telling the truth.”

in
r. v. batte
2000 canlii 5751 (on ca),
2000 49
o.r. (3d) 321,
145 c.c.c. (3d) 449, the court confirmed that “the presence or
absence of a motive to fabricate evidence is only one factor to be considered
in assessing credibility.” the only evidence in this case with respect to any
unwanted advances being made or jewellery being pawned comes is the
uncorroborated evidence of mr. k. and this is expressly rejected by m.s.
similarly, s.s. rejects the suggestion that she had fabricated these
allegations against the accused because he was angry at her for secretly
communicating with his daughter on google hangouts and because of this alone
her relationship with her family consequently deteriorated.

while the courts need to be
vigilant in the face of inconsistencies in witness evidence and the risk of collusion,
i find the inconsistencies in this case are not indicative of collusion but
reflect the individual and broadly similar recollections of the individual
crown witnesses. i accept that at least two theories are advanced by the
defence to support their claim of fabrication. nevertheless, i do not accept
the evidence of mr. k. that the entirety of the allegations made by s.s.
against him are explained and motivated by his response to the google hangouts
issue and s.s.’s family treating her poorly because of it. nor does his
evidence on this raise a reasonable doubt in my mind. similarly, i do not
accept that the allegation against him by m.s. are the product of her
unrequited love and a financial debt the accused claims he owes her.

it is important to note that
there is no onus on the accused to prove anything in a criminal trial and my
findings are based not upon any reversal of the burden of proof but on my
assessment of the totality of the evidence and following my consideration and
assessment of the reliability and credibility of each individual witness in
this case.

i accept that following
lengthy cross examination, a number of inconsistences were identified by ms.
izakelian, principally in the testimony of s.s. and m.s. i accept that s.s. was
inconsistent with respect to issues including parking levels on which the
accused car may have been parked and notably also on some dates and times with
respect to the allegations. indeed, s.s. testified in-chief and in
cross-examination that she could not recall a number of specific dates or times
across the 7-month timeline of the central allegations involving her.

i also accept that the
evidence of s.s. with respect to details surrounding the whitby visit was also
sometimes vague and confusing and ii included information that was not
previously provided to the police. this included the “lawnmower incident”. i
note that this incident does not form one of the charges against the accused
but appreciate the issue defence counsel has raised with respect to consistency
and s.s. and her family not previously raising this issue of concern to the
police.

nevertheless, within the
context of the allegations before the court, i find it unremarkable that either
s.s. or d.s. or m.s. initially failed to mention this particular contact. i do
accept their evidence, that at some point on this visit, the accused did use
the lawnmower while in the close company of s.s. i do not find that there is
any basis for me to infer that their evidence on this point was a product of
collusion by s.s., her brother or mother.

i also note that s.s. was
candid in her evidence that she could not recall where the accused was touching
her when she awoke in the “whitby incident.”. i also note that she did not try
and guess or speculate on this issue which in my view enhanced her credibility.
overall, the evidence from all witnesses with respect to much of what
transpired in the visit to whitby and the 16 family members that were present
was often varied and confusing.

nevertheless, from a
credibility perspective, i note that s.s., d.s. and m.s. were all consistent on
the accused using the lawnmower without any apparent difficulty as well as the
fact that he drove s.s. to whitby and that s.s. did not travel with her family.

i also accept that s.s.
variously described the accused touching her on or inside her vagina when she
says he was touching her and that these are different descriptions. when
pressed by defence counsel, she described his actions as being “going up
against the edge and almost inside”. i do not find her language as being
indicative of a troubling inconsistency on the part of this young witness,
particularly in light of the credible clarification and explanation she did
provide.

s.s. described in a credible
and compelling manner the grooming behaviour that the accused engaged in.
especially his pattern of behaviour in which he demeaned and criticized her and
then subsequently praised her by telling her she was special and different and
in him seeking to position himself as a mentor to her, including in matters
sexual.

the accused behaviour as
alleged manifests itself through a range of coercive and controlling behaviour,
includes controlling who m.s., s.s., d.s. could speak to. it also included
direction of when and where they go, when they are supposed to return, checking
in with him and facing consequences for failing to comply with his
instructions, e.g. d.s. being punished and made to kneel for extensive periods
of time as part of his punishment regime and s.s. testifying that her family
was instructed by the accused not to speak to her for several months.

sister and brother testified
to having to speak secretly, i find this this is a credible and compelling
piece of evidence with respect to the claims that the accused sought to
reinforce his control and influence over the family through isolating s.s. in
the manner alleged and the evidence on this was consistent and credible from
all three crown witnesses.

s.s. testified that that when
her mother mentioned to the accused’s wife that she had been speaking with s.s.
during this timeframe, the accused would learn of it and would yell at them.
despite defence suggestions to the contrary, i find nothing remarkable about
incidents of shouting or assault occurring in the semi-public areas of the
condo building. none of the witnesses, including the accused testified that
that any other building occupant was notably present during these incidents.
these locations were deliberately chosen by the accused to afford what he
believed was a sufficient degree of privacy to act as he did. this extended to
the even more secluded storage locker areas on the lower floors.

s.s. presented as an
articulate 16-year-old. understandably, the experience of giving evidence was
not one she always found an easy one. nevertheless, i found that she answered
questions honestly and without guile. she was reluctant to speculate and freely
acknowledged that she could not recall a number of specifics details such as
times or dates with respect to the allegations. she was also willing to make
legitimate concessions where appropriate.

she could not recall in detail
how she spent large portions of the time in the car driving around with the
accused that did not form part of the allegations of sexual assault. i find
this may well be unremarkable for an adult witness where the allegations
involve a frequent pattern of behaviour punctuated by lengthy portions of very
little of substance apparently happening. for a young witness, it is even less
remarkable.

while i accept s.s. may have
struggled on occasion to articulate these specifics as well as she may have
wished, i do not find her credibility is meaningfully undermined by this
particular lack of specificity. similarly, mindful of her age and the
surrounding circumstances and frequency of the allegations concerning her, i do
not find that her lack of recall on specific dates is concerning. she was
consistent in terms of the overarching timeframe in which these allegations
occurred and the temporal landmarks she used to anchor them. in this case,
those include the stage at which the covid pandemic was at, her grade in school
and when and where she was living.

the reality is that i found
s.s. to present as a very credible witness who was unshaken in the core nature
of the allegations that concerned her. she was candid in her description of the
sexual abuse she alleged and she painted a picture of grooming and control by
the accused that i found credible and reliable.

compelling examples of her
evidence aside from that relating to the core allegations included, her eating
slowly in the car with the accused to defer the anticipated abuse, the extent
of her fear of the accused and the reasons for it, her frequent failed attempts
to physically resist him and the manner of them and the specific utterances by
the accused that she testified to regarding his claim that sex with her would
make her confident and brave in an attempt to break down her resistance.

despite the submissions of ms.
izakelian and her thorough cross-examination, i do not find that s.s.’s
evidence or credibility was meaningfully undermined as suggested in a number of
regards. specifically, i do not find that i find s.s. credibility was
undermined by any inherent improbability or implausibility flowing from the
allegations that sexual assaults occurred s.s. bedroom whilst family members
were present in an adjoining space.

s.s.’s evidence was clear that
when this occurred, not only was the bedroom door always closed, but the
accused had placed a chair against the inside of the bedroom door on which he
sat preventing entry or exit from the room. similarly, behaviour of the type
alleged against the accused is not inherently improbable simply because it is
alleged to have occurred in the parking lot of a plaza. predatory sexual
behaviour of the nature alleged often occurs in a variety of circumstances and
places at which many people might blanche. it would be an error to conclude
that consensual or non-consensual sexual activity is less likely to have
occurred simply because it is alleged to have taken place in a motor vehicle.

sadly, sexual abuse of young
persons by adults, especially by those in a position of trust or control is not
confined to the privacy of secluded indoor spaces. s.s. testified that the
sexual assault occurred in the car occurred when they were parked at the rear
of a dollarama and that there was no one noticeably nearby. she alleges that
the accused climbed into the back of the car when he pulled down his pants to
join her and repeatedly tried to penetrate her. the fact that this is alleged
to have happened over several minutes in the back of the car in the plaza in
the circumstances she describes is not inherently implausible.

nor did i find anything in her
description of the mechanics of this “orange skirt” incident undermined her
credibility. her evidence of the movement of the seats is entirely consistent
with the accused leaning against the rear seating and that seating moving or
being compressed by the weight or pressure of the accused holding on to it
while the accused “hovered above her” as she described. whether or not the rear
seating in the accused suv was capable of moving back or not through a separate
mechanical operation does not in my view undermine a 13-year old’s credible
recollection of the central aspects of this alleged incident.

i also do not find s.s.’s
credibility is undermined by her evidence around the accused physical movements
and actions she described in the rear of the car during this alleged sexual
assault. i am satisfied that the accused was physically capable of performing
the largely unremarkable movements as alleged in the rear of his suv. i am
satisfied of this notwithstanding any genuine physical injuries he may have
suffered in 2018.

i accept that s.s. was at
times inconsistent and apparently confused with respect to the first time she
saw the “skirt” in the car and how it got there but i am satisfied that
throughout her evidence on this, she provided a satisfactory and credible
answer and that it did not undermine her account of the underlying incident.

both crown and defence accept
that there were inconsistencies during the course of the evidence of m.s. i
agree. these also often related to dates, and times. however, overall despite
this, i found m.s. to be a very unsophisticated witness rather than one
inherently lacking in credibility or reliability.

she speaks little, if any,
english and presents largely as an isolated figure within the family as well as
the broader community. her world appears to revolve around her relationships
within her family and her significantly disabled husband. i accept that sadly
she was ill-equipped educationally, linguistically or socially to more actively
participate in life in canada, even after a significant number of years.

on the totality of the
evidence before me, i am satisfied that this included her inability to engage
in any meaningful way with the teachers and the schooling of her two children
which i am satisfied was a role increasingly and willingly played by mr. k. and
which facilitated his increasing control over the family as a whole and the
three complainants in particular.

m.s. was clear and consistent
as to the abuse she suffered at the hands of the accused and was, in my view,
unshaken with respect to the assault and choking she alleged the accused
inflicted on her as well as the threats he made against her. she described the
impact it had on her and why. i accept that she was confused and inconsistent
on when she may have seen marks on her daughter’s neck and i disregard her
evidence in this regard as being unreliable.

i do, however, accept ms was
credible and reliable with her evidence as to the self-harm her daughter
engaged in, its timing and the overall change in s.s.’s personality during this
timeframe. i note the observations provided by her son too corroborate her
evidence in this regard with respect to his sister’s change in personality at
this time and this corresponding with s.s. spending more time with the accused.

i accept that the evidence of
m.s. and indeed d.s. differed from s.s. with some details about the frequency
and timing of the accused taking out s.s. from the house. s.s. described it
being a daily event, m.s. and d.s. described it being very frequent but not
necessarily on a daily basis. this inconsistency does not in my view diminish
their overall credibility and certainly does not undermine the specific act of
sexual assault that s.s. alleged occurred in the “orange skirt” incident or the
sexual touching in the home. i am satisfied that the accused regularly attended
at the condo in a pattern of behaviour to take s.s. out for frequent and
lengthy periods of time that often resulted in them returning late and to the
concern of m.s.

i also note that m.s. was
unshaken on her rejection of the suggestions that she was fabricating her
evidence for the reasons alleged by the accused. she was also consistent in her
evidence that related to the control the accused exercised over her and her
family and i find that her actions were consistent with someone who felt
subject to that substantial control. given her lack of english and sense of
isolation, it is not surprising that she did not call the police earlier with
respect to the behaviour of the accused nor simply refuse to admit him to her
home.

i found d.s. to present as a
very articulate young man who presented his evidence in a composed,
undemonstrative and honest fashion. he did not deny his feelings of hostility
towards the accused and, given his evidence that is unremarkable. so too is the
support he testified to feeling for his sister, this does not taint his
evidence but is part of the credible and candid account that i found d.s.
presented. he was unwilling to speculate, gave clear and precise answers and
made reasonable concessions when appropriate, as with both s.s.

i did not find him to be
combative or evasive, including in cross-examination and he sought
clarification where appropriate. he was remarkably unemotional about the abuse
he spoke about and sadly at times appeared to consider some of the punishment
or assaults he testified to as inevitable part of his young life. he did not
seek to embellish his evidence, including as it related to any injuries he
suffered. he also corroborated the abuse that his mother testified to at the
hands of the accused and notably did not seek to develop a supporting narrative
of the abuse his sister alleged but was candid that he did not observe this
behaviour, which is as the accused intended.

d.s.’s evidence also
corroborated that of s.s. and m.s. with respect to the accused either
retrieving a chair or having one brought into the bedroom each time he went
into the bedroom with s.s. at the condo. i also accept the evidence of m.s.
that there were occasions on which she sought to use the washroom and had to
wait while the accused moved the chair from in front of the bedroom to enable
this to happen.

the limited conversations the
parties testified they had and when and the mere fact that parties live under
the same roof and share a familial relationship is not sufficient to establish
collusion nor to raise a reasonable doubt in this case. it was natural and
almost inevitable that in such circumstances related parties may have some
discussions about their experiences and their acknowledgement of this on the
facts of this case do not undermine their credibility or reliability. to have
not done so may well have had the reverse affect.

for clarity, in the case
before me, it is not my finding that a motive to fabricate is legally
irrelevant in assessing the credibility of m.s. or the other crown witnesses. i
find that no such motive existed. given my previous findings with respect to
credibility and reliability, i reject mr. k.’s evidence with respect to the
claim that m.s. held any
animus
towards him because he spurned her
advances or owed her money.

i do not believe or accept any
such advances were made by her in 2015 or 2021. i also reject the evidence of
the accused that the allegations are also in part motivated by any outstanding
debt in respect of pawned jewellery. i also do not find that there was
collusion on the part of the three complainants in respect of the various
allegations.

with respect to the submission
that s.s. was motivated to fabricate, in whole or in part, her allegations
because she was upset at the accused for getting her into trouble with her
family after the google hangouts incident, i acknowledge that spectre may have
existed but based upon my consideration of all of the evidence, i am satisfied
that s.s. did not fabricate any of her allegations based upon the ulterior
motive that defence counsel suggests.

i find that s.s. was not
motivated to make the allegations she did because of anything relatively
trivial and related to the google hangouts incident but was motivated to make
them because they occurred and she eventually felt able to disclose them to her
family and then the police.

i have considered the various
inconsistencies in the evidence of the crown witnesses and find that they do
not relate to the core events that are alleged but rather to various
surrounding circumstances of the core allegations. i am satisfied that the inconsistencies
in the evidence of s.s. and d.s. are understandable and reasonably explicable
given their youth and the passage of time and the frequency of the conduct that
was alleged. similarly, as indicated, i found m.s.’s evidence to be highly
unsophisticated rather than deceitful. i would also note that discrepancies of
the type alleged to be substantial by defence counsel, would reasonably be
expected to have been eliminated in any effective conspiracy between the crown
witnesses.

i accept that mr. k. was
consistent in his denial of the allegations against him. it is also appropriate
to make reasonable allowances for witnesses for whom english is not their first
language and i have done so for both m.s. and mr. k. however, it is clear that
the accused has far greater proficiency in english than m.s.

nevertheless, in contrast to
s.s., m.s. and d.s., i found the evidence of mr. k. to be that of an
increasingly evasive witness. even making appropriate allowances for the use of
an interpreter, mr. k. became unwilling or unable to credibly answer simple
questions put to him by the crown and frequently retreated into lengthy
unresponsive answers in cross-examination. while courts obviously need to be
careful about the weight they place on the demeanour of any witness, i found
the intermittent displays of emotion by mr. k. when asked probing questions by
the crown to be contrived and unconvincing.

aside from the evidence from
s.s., d.s. and m.s. as to the accused manufacturing or exaggerating his
injuries to facilitate an insurance claim following his car accident, i note
that on the accused’s own evidence was that his injuries did not result in any
extended hospitalization. any hospital treatment he did receive at the time did
not extend beyond an apparently routine examination following the accident an
da same day release.

i accept that injuries from a
motor vehicle accident can manifest themselves in variety of ways for those
involved, even without a period of hospital admission or any notable hospital
treatment in the immediate aftermath. i also accept that the accused and s.s.,
d.s. and m.s. agreed that the accused attended medical appointment for
rehabilitation, physiotherapy and pain management in the period after the
accident. it is not the province of this court to express medical opinions nor
is it qualified to do so.

nevertheless, on the evidence
of the accused and that of the crown witnesses, i do find that mr. k.
deliberately overstated the extent of any injuries during the relevant
timeframe and that his mobility was no bar to performing any of the allegations
before the court. this undermines his credibility and reduces the reliance that
i place on it.

given the nature, breadth and
length of his employment history in canada, the fact that he is a licensed
driver and sat his citizenship test in english and the evidence of the crown
witnesses, i find that the accused deliberately understated his lack of
proficiency in the english language. i find he did this to create a false
impression of his inability to provide academic support to s.s. and d.s. and
his own children as well as an inability to liaise with the schools and
teachers on their behalf. the conclusions i draw in no way conflict with the
accused’s right to have the benefit of an interpreter at his trial and i draw
no adverse inference from him so doing.

as someone who was not working
and claimed no other obvious calls upon his time apart from medical
appointments, i also found the accused’s claim that he did not have the time to
assist either his own children or those of his sister-in-law to lack
credibility. aside from finding that he had the ability, in either english or
tamil to assist them, he clearly had the time available to attend their home
and to spend considerable amounts of time driving s.s around during the day and
evening. he provided no credible evidence as to how he filled his days. i do
not accept the accused’s evidence that he did not actively involve himself in
the education of s.s. and d.s. nor do i find the explanations he proffered to
be credible.

i now turn to the offence of
forcible confinement count.
section 279(2)
criminal code
provides
that anyone who without lawful authority confines, imprisons or forcibly seizes
another person is guilty of an offence.

forcible confinement essentially
deprives an individual of the liberty to move from point to point. this offence
requires the confinement to have occurred for a significant period of time.
where the accused prevented the complainant from leaving a room by, for
example, momentarily grabbing her hair, this temporal element was not made out
and a conviction could not be supported,
r. v. palmer-coke
(2019),
373
c.c.c. (3d) 2018 (ont. c.a.).

ms. mcphedran submits that the
offence of forcible confinement is clearly made out on the evidence before the
court. she submits that the placement of the chair directly in front of the
door not only served to prevent the sudden and unwanted entry of any family
members while the accused was assaulting s.s. but clearly demonstrated to s.s.
that she was unable to leave the bedroom until he chose to remove the chair and
allow her to leave and that there was a clear and significant element of
psychological compulsion that was self-evident. s.s. testified to this and was
unshaken on her evidence on this point. i also note the corroborative evidence
of her brother and mother on the issue relating to the use of the chair by the
accused.

i do not accept ms.
izakelian’s submission that the evidence of the complainants, particularly s.s.
on this issue, is not credible or reliable. i find the contrary to be the case.
i am satisfied of the totality of the evidence before me that the accused used
a chair to secure the bedroom door from unwanted visitors when he was in the
bedroom with s.s.

i also find that he positioned
the chair by sitting on it in front of the door and by so doing he intended to
prevent s.s. from leaving the bedroom. it is also clear from her evidence that
s.s. felt unable to leave the room because of this and for the duration of these
encounters. it is also clear from the evidence before the court that the
accused intentionally presented himself as an immovable physical barrier to
s.s.

it is important to note that
each count on an information falls to be considered on its own merits. this is
the case whether an information contains one count or many. for each count, the
crown must prove each essential element of each alleged offence. the mere
existence of multiple allegations does not render any count inherently more
plausible in this case.

i have considered the evidence
of the three complainants both individually and collectively as well as that of
the accused, mr. k.

in addition to the various
findings i have made with respect to credibility and reliability in this case,
i also note doherty j.a’s comments in in
r. v. j.j.r.d.
at para. 53,
where he held, “outright rejection of an accused evidence based on a considered
and reasoned acceptance beyond a reasonable doubt of the truth of conflicting
credible evidence is as much an explanation for the rejection of an accused
evidence as is a rejection based on a problem identified with the way the
accused testified or the substance of the accused evidence.”

having considered the totality
of the evidence, i reject the evidence of the accused and i do not find that
his evidence raises a reasonable doubt as to his guilt with respect to any of
the counts before the court.

i find that the crown has
proven mr. k. guilty of all 8 counts beyond a reasonable doubt and accordingly
i find him guilty on each count.
released: july 29, 2025
justice
michael waby