source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj321/2025oncj321.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. mohamed, 2025 oncj 321
date: 
2025 06 11
court
file no.: toronto
4810
998 24 48107273-00
4810
998 24 48107272-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
rooble osman
mohamed
before
justice seth weinstein
heard
on may 6, 7 and 8
reasons
for judgment released on june 11, 2025
laura petryshen................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
magdalena wyszomierska.................................. counsel
for rooble osman mohamed
weinstein j.:

on february 22, 2024, mr. mohamed was driving
erratically northbound on the don valley parkway (“dvp”). he was pulled over by
pc clarke who detected an odour of alcohol on mr. mohamed’s breath. as a result
of the odour and the erratic driving, pc clarke made an asd demand.

mr. mohamed registered a fail on the asd and was
placed under arrest. as pc clarke attempted to effect the arrest, mr. mohamed
pulled away and ran northbound along the shoulder of the highway. pc clarke
gave chase and saw mr. mohamed throw a dark object over the guardrail. he was
arrested a short time later. when searched incident to arrest, pc clarke
located several items in mr. mohamed’s pocket, including a bag containing white
powder that he suspected to be cocaine.

shortly after the arrest, the canine unit was
called to search the area where mr. mohamed was seen to throw the dark object.
within a few minutes police located a loaded semi-automatic glock handgun partially
covered in debris underneath a tree shrub.

mr. mohamed was eventually transported to the
station where he provided two breath samples registering 130 mg of alcohol per
100 ml of blood.

as a result, mr. mohamed has been charged with
the following offences:
a)
impaired driving.
b)
over 80.
c)
careless use of a firearm.
d)
possession of concealed prohibited handgun.
e)
possession of concealed ammunition.
f)
possession of a restricted firearm.
g)
resisting arrest.
h)
escape lawful custody; and
i)
possession of cocaine.

mr. mohamed elected to be tried before me and
pleaded not guilty on all counts. he filed a
charter
application seeking
to exclude the firearms, ammunition as well as the breath samples from evidence
because the police delayed the implementation of his 10(b) rights to counsel
for approximately 95 minutes. the matter proceeded as a blended
voir dire
on the
charter
application and a trial on the merits.

at the conclusion of the evidence, the crown
acknowledged that it had insufficient evidence in support of the possession of
cocaine count and invited an acquittal with respect to that charge. moreover,
counsel for mr. mohamed acknowledged that the crown had met his onus with
respect to the resist arrest and escape lawful custody charges and invited me
to find mr. mohamed guilty of those two counts.

in light of these positions, i am left to
determine the following issues:
a)
whether mr. mohamed’s s. 10(b) rights were violated and, if so,
whether the evidence of the firearm, ammunition and the breath samples should
be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.
if the evidence
is excluded, the parties agree that the
charter
application is
dispositive of all the firearms related charges and the over-80 count.
b)
however, if the evidence is admissible, i must then go on to
consider whether the crown has proven mr. mohamed’s guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. to that end, counsel for mr. mohamed has acknowledged that if the breath
samples are admitted, there would be sufficient evidence to establish mr.
mohamed’s guilt on the over 80 count.

it is the position of the defence that having
regard to the 10(b) violation, the reputation of the administration of justice
would be brought into disrepute if the firearm, ammunition, and breath samples were
admitted into evidence. alternatively, if the evidence is admissible, counsel
submits that the crown has failed to prove mr. mohamed’s guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. with respect to the firearms and ammunition counts, it is
submitted that the crown has failed to prove that the only reasonable inference
to be drawn from the circumstantial evidence is that mr. mohamed was the person
who discarded the loaded glock. finally, it is submitted that the crown has
failed to prove that mr. mohamed was impaired by alcohol while driving along
the dvp.

the crown submits that the police complied with
s. 10(b) of the
charter. the crown argues that the first possible and
safe opportunity to connect mr. mohamed with counsel was at the police station
and that the delay to accomplish that was reasonable in the circumstances.
alternatively, if there was a breach, it should not result in the exclusion of
evidence as the breach was not serious and had little impact. finally, the
crown submits that it has proven all offences beyond a reasonable doubt. the
only reasonable inference to draw from the totality of the evidence is that mr.
mohamed threw the loaded glock as he attempted to evade arrest by the police.
overview of the relevant facts

the
following is a summary the salient evidence as it relates to the relevant
issues.
the initial stop

at
approximately 2:44 a.m. pc michael clarke was on general patrol northbound on
the dvp when he saw a grey honda fit weaving in its lane. he followed the car
and observed it continuing to weave with its speed fluctuating. he eventually
turned on his in-car camera which captured this driving conduct.

suspecting
that the driver might be impaired, pc clarke activated his emergency lights. at
2:46 a.m., the honda fit pulled over on the shoulder just north of the lawrence
avenue on ramp. pc clarke then approached the car to speak to the driver. the
entirety of pc clarke’s interactions with the driver were captured on his body worn
camera.

pc
clarke approached the driver’s side window and observed four people in the car,
all of whom he described as being incredibly nervous. pc clarke testified that
when the driver rolled down the window, he was immediately met with a strong
odour of cannabis. he also said that the driver had watery eyes and a blank
stare.

mr.
mohamed was identified as being the driver and provided his licence and
insurance. when mr. mohamed exited the car, pc clarke immediately noted a
strong odour of alcohol. at that point he formed a reasonable suspicion that mr.
mohamed had alcohol in his system and made an asd demand.
the arrest and flight from police

mr.
mohamed registered a fail on the asd and was arrested for over-80. however,
when pc clarke took out his handcuffs, mr. mohamed pulled away and ran
northbound.

as
pc clarke gave chase, mr. mohamed reached towards his front and threw an object
over the guardrail. although the throwing motion is captured on pc clarke’s
body cam, the object is not visible. moreover, pc clarke could not describe the
shape or size of what was thrown. however, he recalled that the object was
black.

as
pc clarke continued the chase, he unholstered his taser and told mr. mohamed to
stop. mr. mohamed slowed down and pc clarke was able to pull him to the ground.
he was arrested at approximately 2:51 a.m.

when
mr. mohamed was searched incident to arrest pc clarke seized a dime bag with a
white substance as well as a paper with black substance which he believed to be
heroin. he also found keys, a mask, and a scale.

at
some point during the chase and arrest of mr. mohamed, the honda fit with the
other three passengers fled the scene.
rights to counsel

mr.
mohamed was provided with rights to counsel at 2:55 a.m. and indicated that he
wanted to speak to duty counsel. at 2:56, pc clarke provided a caution and made
the breath demand. mr. mohamed was then placed in the back of pc clarke’s
cruiser. at this point, two other officers, sergeant mcqueen and police
constable tran, arrived on scene.

after
placing mr. mohamed in his cruiser, pc clarke called for the canine unit to
search for the discarded item. as pc clarke waited on scene to assist the
canine unit, he spoke with sergeant mcqueen and pc tran. he also spent time in
his cruiser inputting information on the computer that he said was necessary
before he could transport mr. mohamed to the station.

the
canine unit, led by officer scott aikman, arrived at approximate 3:02 a.m. pc
clarke spoke to officer aikman and pointed out the general area to search. as
pc aikman conducted the search, pc clarke spent a few more minutes in his
cruiser inputting information on his computer before speaking again with
officers tran and mcqueen.

at
approximately 3:22 a.m., pc clarke was told that a firearm was found in the ravine.
at 3:25 a.m., he told mr. mohamed that he was under arrest for possession of firearm
and again advised him of his rights to counsel. mr. mohamed repeated that he
wished to speak to duty counsel. they left the scene at 3:26 a.m. and headed to
traffic services where the closest breath technician was working.
implementation of rights to counsel

pc
clarke arrived at the station at 3:46 a.m. however, there was a delay in
parading mr. mohamed because there was a computer problem. as a result, pc
clarke did not implement rights to counsel until 4:27 a.m. mr. mohamed eventually
spoke to duty counsel and then complied with the breathalyzer demand,
registering two truncated readings of 130 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood.

pc
clarke testified that rights to counsel should be read immediately and that if
counsel is requested, it should be implemented “as soon as is practicable.” he
acknowledged that he had a work issued phone that he could have provided to mr.
mohamed at the scene. however, he stated that toronto police service policy
mandated that rights to counsel be implemented at the station. he explained there
are concerns about privacy in the cruiser and so unless the accused is being released
from the scene, he always implements rights to counsel at the station where the
accused can be placed in a private room.

although
he knew that he would need to remain on scene to assist the canine unit, pc
clarke stated that he never turned his mind to having another officer take mr.
mohamed to the station so that rights to counsel could be implemented sooner.
discovery of the firearm

officer
aikman testified that he received a call at 2:51 a.m. to attend the northbound
dvp just north of lawrence avenue. he was met by pc clarke who advised of the
circumstances surrounding mr. mohamed’s arrest and the location of where he
believed items had been thrown.

officer
aikman retrieved his dog, lokie, and commenced the search of the area which he
described as being approximately twenty feet in width. the area was also filled
with what officer aikman described as being tightly knitted shrubbery and thorny
bushes.

officer
aikman began the search by walking lokie around the edge of the roadway before
going down into the more intimate area of the bush. officer aikman said that
the thick bushes made it challenging to navigate. as they made their way
northbound through the thick bushes, officer aikman said that he noticed a
black item on the ground, partially covered with leaves. he looked closer and saw
that it was a firearm with a magazine housed in the butt of the gun. there was
also a laser point or flashlight under the barrel.

officer
aikman estimated that the firearm was down the lower incline, eight to ten feet
east of the guardrail. his immediate reaction when he found the firearm, was
“how did it get there?” officer aikman explained that given the thickness of
the bushes, he could not figure out how the firearm could have landed in that
area.

after
locating the firearm, officer aikman instructed officers to continue searching.
he explained that the thickness of the bushes made it a challenging area to
search and that it was possible lokie might have missed something. to his
knowledge, no other search was ever completed.

the
firearm was seized and found to have one round in the chamber and six rounds of
ammunition in the magazine. a certificate of analysis was filed confirming that
the firearm was a glock, 43, 9mm luger caliber semi-automatic handgun with
seven cartridges of 9mm luger caliber ammunition.
the
charter
application
was there a breach of mr. mohamed’s 10(b)
rights?

section 10(b) of the
charter
requires
that the police inform a detained person of their right to counsel immediately
upon detention. there is also a constitutional obligation to facilitate the
requested access to a lawyer at the first reasonable opportunity:
r. v.
suberu,
2009 scc 33
at para
38;
r. v. willier,
2010 scc 37
at paras.
29-33.

it is well established that the right to consult
counsel without delay exists because those who are arrested or detained require
immediate legal advice that cannot otherwise be accessed because of the
detention:
r. v. noel,
2019 onca 860, at para.
23;
r. v. rover,
2018 onca 745, 143 o.r. (3d) 135, at para.
34.

when access to counsel is not immediately
provided, the burden is on the crown to demonstrate that the delay was
reasonable:
r. v. samuels,
2024 onca 786, at para.
24. although there
are circumstances that might justify delay, concerns of a general non-specific
nature are not justified. the police must turn their minds to the specifics of
the situation they face and conclude, on a reasonable basis, that the
circumstances justify some delay in granting access to counsel. even then, they
must take reasonable steps to minimize the delay:
r. v. rover
at para
27.

i accept that it was impracticable for pc clarke
to implement rights to counsel at the roadside following his arrest. pc clarke was
faced with a dynamic and evolving situation. he had completed what turned out
to be a high-risk arrest with an uncooperative detainee. he had also just
observed mr. mohamed discard something during the chase. it was entirely
appropriate for mr. clarke to prioritize waiting and assisting the canine unit
in its search for the discarded item.

pc clarke provided two other reasons for not
providing rights to counsel at the scene: (1) tps policy requires that he take a
detainee to the station before implementing rights to counsel and (2) because he
was concerned that mr. mohamed would not have adequate privacy to consult with
counsel.

i am not prepared to find that this was an
instance where the arresting officer should have figured out a way to permit
mr. mohamed to consult with counsel at the roadside. firstly, the police are
not obligated to provide a detainee with the use of a cell phone at the
roadside:
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50. moreover, the circumstances were
too dynamic. the arrest was tense and involved mr. mohamed fleeing from the
police. there existed a reasonable belief that mr. mohamed had discarded
something of value. it was reasonable for pc clarke to prioritize looking for
that item.

with that said, knowing the tps policy would require
mr. mohamed to be taken to the station for access to counsel and that he would
be delayed by having to stay at the scene to assist in the search, it was
incumbent on pc clarke to take reasonable steps to minimize the delay. he had
two officers on scene, sergeant mcqueen and pc tran, either of whom could have
transported mr. mohamed to traffic services to implement rights to counsel and
administer the breathalyzer. pc clarke should have acted with more urgency in
providing access to counsel. the failure to do so resulted in mr. mohamed
having to wait 95 minutes to speak to a lawyer. this violated his 10(b) rights.
should the evidence be excluded under section
24(2)?

there are two components to determining whether
evidence must be excluded under section 24(2) of the
charter. the
threshold requirement asks whether the evidence was “obtained in a manner” that
infringed or denied a
charter
right. if this threshold requirement is
met, the second component, the evaluative component, asks whether, having regard
to all the circumstances, admitting the evidence would bring the administration
of justice into disrepute:
r. v. beaver
2022 scc 54
at para
94.

the crux of the analysis is whether the
admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. in
r. v.
grant,
2009 scc 32 (canlii),
 2 s.c.r. 353,
the supreme court of canada set out the test for whether the evidence obtained
in a manner which infringes
charter
rights should be admitted or
excluded under s. 24(2) of the
charter. a trial judge’s role is to
“assess and balance the effect of admitting the evidence on society’s
confidence in the justice system” having regard to: (1) the seriousness of
the
charter
-infringing state conduct; (2) the impact on the
charter
-protected
rights of the applicant; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits. i must balance these factors to determine whether the
evidence should be admitted.

section
24(2) is
not an
automatic exclusionary rule that requires the exclusion of evidence when police
act in an unconstitutional manner. the question is whether the admission of the
evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute:
r. v.
beaver, supra
at para
117
and
r. v.
whittaker,
2024 onca 182.

the objective is “not to assign blame, punish the police, or
deter future
charter
breaches. rather, it is to “preserve
public confidence in the rule of law and its processes.” the s. 24(2) analysis
must focus on the “broad impact [the] admission of the evidence [would have] on
the long-term repute of the justice system”:
r. v. whittaker, supra
at
paras
28 and 29.
obtained in a manner

in
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12, the supreme
court of canada explains that trial judges should take a “purposive and
generous approach” in determining whether evidence was “obtained in a manner”
that violates an accused’s rights.

the “entire chain of events” must be examined.
the connection between the breach and the impugned evidence can be “temporal,
contextual, causal or a combination of the three”. however, a remote or tenuous
connection between the
charter
breach and the impugned evidence will not
suffice to trigger s. 24(2):
r. v. mack,
2014 scc 58, 3 s.c.r. 3;
r. v. wittwer,
2008 scc 33, 2 s.c.r. 235;
r. v. pino,
2016
onca 389, 130 o.r. (3d) 561; and
r. v. davis,
2023 onca 227, 166 o.r.
(3d) 401.

using a purposive and generous approach, i am satisfied
that the temporal and contextual connections for the breath samples, the firearm
and ammunition meet the “obtained in a manner” threshold. there was a temporal
and contextual link between the 10(b) informational breach and mr. mohamed
providing samples of his breath. there is also a temporal connection between
the breach and the discovery of the firearm. although the contextual connection
is weak, it is not too remote or tenuous.
seriousness of the charter infringing conduct

police misconduct exists on a spectrum from technical or
inadvertent errors committed in good faith to deliberate breaches. i must
situate the police conduct here on that spectrum. the more willful,
reckless or deliberate the misconduct, the more the court will need to
dissociate itself from that conduct:
r. v. beaver, supra
at para
121.

good faith efforts by the police to comply with
the
charter
will reduce the need to dissociate from the conduct.
a conclusion of good faith must consider all the
circumstances surrounding the police conduct.
however,
as the court noted in
grant,
ignorance
of
charter
standards will not be rewarded or encouraged, and
good faith will not be found where police conduct is negligent or willfully
blind.

i do not see a problem in pc clarke’s testimony
that the right to counsel must be implemented “as soon as practicable” instead
of “immediately”. he explained that it means as soon as privacy can be
afforded. his language and understanding are consistent with the authorities:
r.
v. keshavarz,
2022 onca 312, at para.
71, and
r. v. samuels
2024
onca 786, at para.
37. moreover, there is ample case law holding that it is
reasonable for the police to withhold access to counsel until arrival at the
police station. in these circumstances, pc clarke had no ability to provide
privacy on scene for a phone call to a lawyer at the roadside. pc clarke was
clear and unequivocal in his evidence that he was not confident that he could
provide the privacy that was needed, and which mr. mohamed was entitled.

that, however, does not end the inquiry. pc
clarke’s delayed transport of mr. mohamed is a real concern. although it was
entirely reasonable for him to remain on scene to assist in the search, he was
under an obligation to confront the reality of the situation that this would
delay his ability to implement rights to counsel. this is especially so considering
the tps policy he was purportedly following. he failed to do so.

pc clarke’s failure to recognize the importance
of implementing rights to counsel led to a 95-minute delay. this is not an insignificant
breach. some of this delay was justified as pc clarke needed to remain on scene
to assist in the search. he was the only person to see where the item was
thrown and the only person who could guide the canine unit about where to
search. however, pc clarke could have minimized the delay by arranging to have pc
tran or sergeant mcqueen, two officers on scene who don’t appear to be playing
any role in the search, to transport mr. mohamed back to the station.

in my view, pc clarke’s failure to make
alternative arrangements to transport mr. mohamed reflects a casual
indifference to the importance of mr. mohamed’s 10(b) rights. even if
unintentional, what happened here reflected an unacceptably negligent approach
to safeguarding mr. mohamed’s 10(b) rights. the police conduct violated an
established constitutional obligation. as the court of appeal noted in
r. v.
noel, at para
34: “the law around s. 10(b) is clear and long settled. it is
not difficult for the police to understand their obligations and carry them
out.” pc clarke’s negligence in failing to uphold mr. mohamed’s 10(b) rights, precludes
a finding of good faith. it is a serious breach of an established constitutional
right and supports exclusion.
impact of the
charter
violation on the
protected interests of the accused

the
second line of inquiry deals with the seriousness of the impact of
the violation on the
charter
-protected interests of the
accused. this
line of inquiry
considers the impact of the breach on the accused's
charter
-protected
interests and asks whether the breach undermined the interests protected by the
right infringed:
r. v. tim,
supra
at para
90.

i must identify the interests protected by the
relevant
charter
rights and evaluate how seriously the
breaches affected those interests. as with the first line of inquiry, i must
then “situate the impact on the accused's
charter
-protected
interests on a spectrum, ranging from impacts that are fleeting, technical,
transient, or trivial, to those that are profoundly intrusive or that seriously
compromise the interests underlying the rights infringed.” the greater the
impact on the
charter
protected interests, the greater the risk that the
admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute:
r. v. tim,
supra.

rights to counsel is very important for any
person under investigation. the right to counsel is geared towards assisting
detainees with regaining their liberty and protecting them against the risk of involuntary
self-incrimination. however, the delay in accessing counsel in this case had
minimal impact on mr. mohamed. he did not incriminate himself and his liberty
was not jeopardized. the police made no attempt to obtain a statement from mr.
mohamed and he did not volunteer anything. although there was unacceptable
delay in providing mr. mohamed with a lifeline by speaking with counsel, he
ultimately did have the opportunity to do so.

in my view, the actual impact on mr. mohamed’s
charter
protected rights was not particular serious. moreover, there was no causal
connection between any 10(b) breach and the discovery of the evidence. the
firearm, ammunition and breath samples would have inevitably been discovered
even if there was no 10(b) breach:
r. v. keshavarz, at para
115.
accordingly, this factor
does not support the exclusion of evidence.
society’s interest in adjudicating a case on
its merits

the
third
grant
factor,
society’s interest in
adjudication on the merits, will typically pull towards inclusion of the
evidence.

the
third line of inquiry is concerned with society’s interest in an adjudication
on the merits. it asks whether the truth-seeking function of the criminal
process would be better served by the admission or exclusion of the evidence.
the reliability of the evidence and its importance to the prosecution’s case
are key factors. admitting unreliable evidence will not serve the accused’s
fair trial interests nor the public’s desire to uncover the truth. on the other
hand, excluding reliable evidence may undermine the truth-seeking function of
the justice system and render the trial unfair from the public’s perspective.

the
importance of the evidence to the crown’s case is corollary to the inquiry into
reliability. admitting evidence of questionable reliability is more likely to
bring the administration of justice into disrepute where it forms the whole of
the prosecution’s case, but excluding reliable evidence may more negatively
affect the truth-seeking function of the criminal law process where the effect
is to “gut” the prosecution’s case.

the
evidence sought to be excluded, the firearm, ammunition and the breath results
are highly reliable. moreover, there is a strong public interest in determining
cases of this nature on its merits. a loaded firearm thrown away during a
police chase at the side of the highway is an enormous threat to public safety.
further, exclusion of the evidence will result in the crown being unable to
prove its case. exclusion of the evidence, therefore, will more negatively
affect the truth-seeking function of the trial process than inclusion. this
factor favours admission of the evidence.
final balancing

there is no automatic exclusion rule for a breach of the right to
counsel as the inquiry is specific to the circumstances of the case:
r. v.
omar
2019 scc 32;
r. v. hobeika
2020 onca 750.

the final steps in the s. 24(2) analysis involves balancing the
factors under the three lines of inquiry. the balancing is a qualitative one,
not capable of mathematical precision. the cumulative weight of the first two
lines of inquiry must be balanced against the third line of inquiry. where the first and second inquiries, taken
together, make a strong case for exclusion, the third inquiry will seldomly tip
the balance in favour of admissibility. conversely, if the first two inquiries
together reveal weaker support for exclusion of the evidence, the third inquiry
will most often confirm that the administration of justice would not be brought
into disrepute by admitting the evidence:
r. v. lafrance,
2022 scc 32,
at para.
90;
r. v. beaver, at para.
134;
r. v. tim,
at para
98;
r.
v. le,
2019 scc 34
at para.
142;
r. v. mccolman,
2023 scc 8
at para.
74.

there
is nothing about the police conduct in this case that cries out for the court
to distance itself for fear of being taken as condoning it. mistakes were made.
the police could have done a better job. however, given the minor impact on mr.
mohamed’s
charter
rights and the strong public interest in a trial on
the merits, the balancing of the
grant
factors is strongly
weighted towards admitting the evidence. i am confident that admitting the
evidence in these circumstances is in the interests of justice and would not
cause an informed member of the public to lose respect for the justice system.

the application to
exclude the firearm, ammunition and the breath results is dismissed. the
evidence is admissible at trial.
the substantive charges

having dismissed the
charter
application,
the remaining issue for me to decide is whether the crown has proven the
charges beyond a reasonable doubt.
relevant legal principles

mr. mohamed is presumed innocent. there is no
obligation on him to do anything to establish his innocence. the presumption of
innocence remains in place unless and until the crown has proven each essential
element of the offences beyond reasonable doubt.

reasonable doubt is based upon reason and common
sense. it is logically connected to the evidence, or the lack of evidence.
reasonable doubt requires more than mere probability. although it cannot be
described with mathematical precision, reasonable doubt is a high standard
consistent with its role as a safeguard against wrongful convictions. at the
same time, reasonable doubt does not require proof beyond all doubt nor is it
proved to an absolute certainty. based on the totality of the evidence, i must
be sure of guilt before i convict. anything less must result in an acquittal.

support of the firearms and ammunition counts is grounded on the crown
proving that mr. mohamed was in possession of the loaded firearm found in the
ravine. to that end, the case is entirely circumstantial. there is no forensic
evidence linking mr. mohamed to the firearm. accordingly, the principles
enunciated by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33
apply.

to return a guilty verdict, i must be satisfied
that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the circumstantial
evidence is that mr. mohamad is guilty. when assessing
the circumstantial evidence, i must consider "other plausible
theories" and "other reasonable possibilities" which are
inconsistent with guilt. however, the crown does not need to "negative every possible conjecture,
no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent with the
innocence of the accused":
villaroman, at para.
37. as the supreme
court of canada noted, "the basic question is whether the circumstantial
evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience, is reasonably
capable of supporting an inference other than that the accused is guilty":
villaroman, at para.
38
and
r. v. megill,
2021 onca 253, at para.
42.

in
r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7, at para.
68,
the supreme court held that it is an error of law for a trier of fact to fail
to distinguish between a rational conclusion as to reasonable doubt based on
evidence, and an unsupported conclusion based on conjecture. in
determining whether the crown has met that burden in a circumstantial evidence
case, i must apply logic and common sense to the totality of the evidentiary
picture, including gaps, and consider whether other reasonable possibilities
not only exist, but preclude a finding that an inference of guilt is the only
reasonable inference available:
r. v. ali,
2021 onca 362, at paras.
97.
firearm and ammunition counts

both
parties agree that the only live issue with respect to firearms and ammunition counts
is whether the crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. mohamed
possessed the firearm.

the
defence submits that there is another reasonable explanation for the firearm
being found in the ravine – it was left there by someone else. it was submitted
that the firearm was found in weathered condition, partially concealed under
the leaves, suggesting that it had been exposed to the environment for some
time. moreover, the firearm was not located in the same general area where mr.
mohamed was seen to be disposing something. the defence submits that when all
the evidence is considered, the inference that mr. mohamed was disposing the
firearm is not the only reasonable inference to draw from the evidence.

the
crown submits that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the
evidence is that mr. mohamed possessed the firearm. he was seen throwing a dark
object that was removed from the front of his pants. further, a firearm was in
the same general area where mr. mohamed was seen to have discarded something.
the crown submits that, given its value, it does not make sense that someone
else would have abandoned the firearm. moreover, it is improbable that someone
else happened to abandon a firearm in the same location where mr. mohamed was
seen to be throwing away an item.

it may seem improbable that another firearm would happen to be
abandoned in the same general location where mr. mohamed is seen to dispose of
a dark object. however, for the reasons that follow, the defence position is,
in my view, plausible.

firstly,
as the photograph below reveals, the firearm was weathered and found almost
entirely buried under bushes and leaves. the muzzle, the top of the firearm and
the handle are almost covered. the debris on top of it suggests that someone had
previously attempted to conceal the firearm and that it had been there for some
time.

moreover,
a close examination of the body cam footage reveals that the firearm was found north
of where mr. mohamed was seen to be making a throwing motion. the body cam
video revealed mr. mohamed making a throwing motion at the 8
th
fence
post north of the “no stopping” sign at the side of the dvp. however, the
firearm was found approximately 5 or 6 fenceposts north of there. it would have
had to travel a significant distance north from where it was seen to be thrown.
moreover, mr. mohamed is throwing something to his side (to the east) as he ran
north. it is difficult see how, if thrown eastbound, the firearm could have
then travelled 5-6 posts north to a final resting place buried beneath the
leaves.

the
condition of the firearm and the location where it was found may very well
explain why officer aikman’s immediate reaction to finding it was “how the heck
did it get there?” although it is possible that the firearm could have
travelled the distance it did, i cannot say that it is the only reasonable
inference to draw. officer aikman estimated that the firearm was located eight
to ten feet east of the guardrail, down the lower incline and in the ditch. it
would have had to travel this distance through what he described as being tightly
knitted shrubbery with thorny bushes. this would have been a difficult route for
the firearm to travel to its final resting place partially buried under the
leaves.

the
possibility that mr. mohamed was throwing something other than a firearm is
enhanced by the fact that the object being thrown is not visible in the video.
moreover, pc clarke never saw what mr. mohamed was discarding. he certainly
could not say that it was a firearm. he could not describe the shape or size,
only that the object was black. indeed, his initial report to officer aikman at
the scene was that mr. mohamed threw dark “stuff.”

the
crown suggests that i can rely on mr. mohamed’s flight from police as
circumstantial evidence supporting the fact it was his firearm. while there is
no doubt his flight from police suggests that he was looking to get rid of
incriminating evidence, i cannot say that the only reasonable inference is that
it was gun he was looking to dispose. mr. mohamed could very well have been
looking to discard other evidence such as drugs or drug paraphernalia. given officer
aikman’s evidence that lokie may have missed items, i cannot be sure that there
was no other incriminating evidence in the area. perhaps if the police followed
the advice to conduct a more thorough search, i would be. however, their
failure to do so leaves me in some doubt.

in the absence of any forensic evidence linking mr. mohamed to
the firearm and ammunition found, i cannot conclude that guilt is the only
reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence. the
possibility of the firearm belonging to someone else is an
inference that may be drawn from the whole of the evidence and that i cannot
exclude beyond a reasonable doubt.
impaired driving and over-80

given that the breath samples have been ruled
admissible, the defence acknowledges, and i agree, that the crown has proven
the over-80 beyond a reasonable doubt.

the remaining issue to decide is whether the
crown has proven that mr. mohamed was impaired while driving his car northbound
on the dvp. in this regard the crown need only prove any degree of impairment
ranging from slight to great:
r. v. stellato
(1993),
1993 canlii 3375
(on ca).

in
r. v. bush,
2010 onca 554,
justice durno, explained at paragraph 47 that “slight impairment” means a “reduced
ability in some measure to perform a complex motor function whether impacting
on perception or field of vision, reaction or response time, judgment, and
regard for the rules of the road”. moreover, as noted in
r. v.
reeves,
 o.j. no. 4431 at para 76, “the test does not
involve a scorecard noting which indicia are present and which are
absent. it is the totality of the circumstances which much be
considered”.

i must also be mindful that evidence that
a person’s functional ability is affected does not automatically mean that
their ability to drive is also automatically impaired:
r. v.
andrews,
1996 abca 23
at para
23.
i must consider the
totality of the evidence in determining if a person’s ability to operate a
motor vehicle is impaired, and not look at every piece of evidence
individually.

when the evidence is viewed in its entirety, i
am satisfied that mr. mohamed’s complex motor functions necessary to operate a
motor vehicle were impaired by alcohol. he had a strong odour of alcohol and physical
indica of impairment, including having glassy eyes and staring blankly when
speaking with pc clarke. further, there is ample evidence that mr. mohamed’s fine
motor skills were compromised that night as demonstrated by his weaving within
the lanes of traffic for an extended period and his fluctuation of speed while
driving northbound on the dvp.

in my view the crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that mr. mohamed’s ability to operate a motor vehicle
was impaired by alcohol.
conclusion

in summary, on information 24-48107272, mr.
mohamed is found guilty of counts 1, 2, 12 and 13. he is found not guilty on counts
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. he is also found not guilty on count 1 on information
24-48107273.
released: june 11, 2025
signed:
justice seth weinstein