source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj329/2025oncj329.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. newth, 2025 oncj 329
date: 
2025 06 12
court
file no.: toronto
4810 998 25 50006382
4810
998 25 48100025
4810
998 24 48133586
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
lynda newth
before
justice andré chamberlain
heard
on june 10, 2025
reasons
for judgment read on june 11, released on june 12, 2025
ethan garber....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
andrew vaughan............................................... counsel
for the defendant lynda newth
chamberlain
j.:

lynda newth, you entered guilty pleas before me
yesterday on four counts: assault and failing to comply with a probation order
to keep the peace and be of good behaviour from november 5, 2024; as well as a
further failure to comply with a release order from january 3 to february 21,
2025, for neglecting to report to the toronto bail program; and finally a theft
under $5000 from a loblaws on april 6, 2025.

following the plea and finding of guilt, the
crown sought an order for a mental health assessment to determine if you were
criminally responsible under
s. 16
of the
criminal code, specifically
concerning the assault you committed on november 5, 2024.
facts and findings of guilt

on
tuesday,
november
5th,
2024,
at
approximately
10:55 a.m., janice
briones
was
walking
eastbound
along
howard
street
in
the
city
of
toronto.
at the time, she was engaged in a phone
conversation.

as ms. briones
began
to
cross
howard street,
she
heard you
yelling
at
her,
“stop talking!”
you then rushed toward her and pushed
her
forcefully
from
the
front
with
both
hands on
her
upper body,
causing
ms. briones to
lose
her
balance
and
fall
onto
her
back.

you left the scene immediately. nothing was taken from ms.
briones. understandably, she was quite upset and made her way to the sidewalk.
some bystanders assisted her until the police arrived promptly. she pointed you
out to the police, but they were unable to locate you right away. however, you
returned to the area and were found and arrested around 11:43 a.m.

you admitted that you were on probation at the time, and one of
the conditions was to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. justice jones
imposed this order in july 2023.

janice briones
sustained
no
visible
injuries.
she
was
taken to
the
hospital
and
reported
soreness
in
her
shoulder
area
from
the
push,
as well as
pain
in
her
back
and
buttocks from
the
impact with
the
ground.

you were released on bail on november 7, 2024. you were to report
to the bail program immediately upon your release, and thereafter as required. 
i think it’s safe to assume you reported briefly, as the facts of your plea to
failing to comply with that release order suggested you failed to report as of
january 5, 2025. a bench warrant was issued for your arrest.

you were arrested on april 6, 2025, for stealing
food items from loblaws at 396 st. clair avenue west. the outstanding bench
warrant came to light, and you have been in custody ever since.

the crown, in support of its application, relies
on a book of application materials filed before this hearing. it was clear to
you and your counsel at the time you entered your pleas that the crown was
going to seek this order.

the crown also relied on video evidence
presented in this application, using the body-worn camera footage from two
arresting officers and the in-car camera recording made during your transport
after your arrest.

they rely specifically on your words as you were
investigated, arrested, and later transported. audio was not always easy to
follow, but clearly, the software used to view the footage also provided a
“real time” transcript, one presumes by artificial intelligence. this was not
an official verified transcript but was helpful on some level in understanding
some of your words and utterances.

you made some of the following statements: “i am
a shadow,” and you mentioned a “shadowing supervisor” several times. you stated
you were an rcmp officer. when asked for your name, you said it was lynda van
holston (sp?) and shortly thereafter provided the name we know you by, lynda
newth, mentioning at one point that you were an actress, and the name newth was
a cover. you stated you were a veteran and noted that you had been honourably
discharged. while being transported, you said you saw your father.

your demeanour throughout most of the video i
observed was euphoric; you talked about love and finding a wife to love and
often referred to the officers or said “sweetheart” repeatedly.

the crown’s materials on the application
include:
(1)
your cpic criminal record: it’s not short. it contains a mix of
property offences, assault charges and administrative offences. the concerning
aspect is that many of the assaults are pretty serious. at least once a year,
the violence is evident in your record through charges like assault with a
weapon (2023), assault causing bodily harm (2022), and assault with a weapon
(2021, 2019, 2018).
i note a gap in your record until 2018, following a 2-year sentence for three
counts of assault with a weapon, one assault, and one assault on a peace
officer in 2013.
the last entry in 2023 is missing a count it seems; that sentence was for two
break-ins. there was a final entry not on your record from october 2018 where
you were convicted of uttering threats, being unlawfully in a dwelling, and
mischief, where you received a one-day sentence and 12 months of probation.
(2)
a pre-sentence report from june 20, 2022: specifically, the crown
directed me to the section relating to your physical and mental health. at page
40 of the crown’s application record, it states:
“as previously
noted, the subject disclosed a lengthy history of struggles with anxiety and
post traumatic stress disorder. the psychiatric report dated october 23, 2018
obtained from anishnawbe health indicated that the subject also has a history
of panic attacks, mood disorders and that she had a previous diagnosis of
complex post traumatic stress disorder and bipolar disorder. the same report
states that the subject indicated that she had auditory hallucinations and
delusions that people were talking about her and were planning to get her while
using substances. ministry records indicate that the subject has, on occasion,
attended the office and accused ministry staff of talking about her while she
was waiting to see a probation officer.”
(3)
the crown also relied on a transcript of that joint position plea
in 2013, where you received a two-year sentence. in the transcript at page 47
of the record, as part of the plea inquiry, justice green asked you if you
understood that the joint recommendation was for a penitentiary sentence of two
years on top of the 38 days of time served. you responded:
“and i can't get my
medication in the provincial. but at least - at least in the pen, i'll be able
to have a psychologist every week. i'll have a psychiatrist monitoring my
psychological medication that i really need.”
(4)
the crown also relies on a transcript at page 72
of the record where you admitted the following with respect to some counts
which were pled to and others which were admitted as aggravating, namely: at
page 70 of the application record:
“the
complainant was approaching a pharmacy store on parliament street. she was with
her seven year-old son at the time. ms. newth was walking northbound behind her
and began to shout at her and her son. she’s a complete stranger. the
complainant slowed down near the pharmacy to try to allow ms. newth to pass,
but at this point ms. newth confronted her, shouted at her, and hit her twice
in the back with her hand. the complainant then sheltered her son
[indiscernible] the pharmacy and then fled into the pharmacy where the police
were called.”
and later at page 71 of the record:
“just shortly after 5:35 ms. newth was
in the area of parliament and wellesley street. again, a woman was just minding
her own business walking down the street when ms. newth approached her and
attacked her. she punched her in the face, threw her to the ground and began to
kick her. she was kicked and punched while she was on the ground.”
having been released from custody on thursday, march 10th, 2022 the
next day ms. newth was in the area of the riverdale collegiate institute on
gerrard street in toronto. the victim was in the parking lot of the school and
was there to attend the swimming pool at the school and go for an evening swim.
when he exited his vehicle, ms. newth charged at him for no reason while
brandishing a ten-inch blade. while charging at him, she screamed “i’m going to
cut you so deep.” in fear of his life, the victim ran into the school and
called police. when he had trouble getting a phone reception he exited the
building, saw ms. newth again on the south side of gerrard street; the school
is on the north. she then ran towards him again, yelling that she was going to
kill him. police arrived and ms. newth was placed under arrest.
position of the parties

the crown argues that your tendency towards
violence, which is typically serious in nature and often unprovoked, is
directed at random strangers you seem to target for no apparent reason other
than your belief that they are victimizing you, along with your history of
mental health diagnosis, is a factor i should consider in support of their
application.

they note, specifically in relation to the
assault of november 5, your behaviour as described above in the body-worn
camera and in-car camera, given it was about an hour after the assault on ms.
briones, is enough evidence that should lead me to order an assessment to
determine if at the time of the assault, you were suffering from a serious
mental health disorder of such a magnitude that would render you not
criminally responsible for your actions by virtue of
s. 16, of the
criminal
code.

mr. vaughan argues that the application is
groundless and should be dismissed. he argues that your behaviour on the
videos is demonstrative of someone who is high on drugs such as meth, acid,
alcohol and pcp and has not slept for a few days rather than any serious
indication of a mental health disorder.

he notes that you gave your proper name and that
there have been no fitness concerns since the beginning of your involvement at
bail following your arrest. he argues that the late application for this
assessment, given that the count of simple assault with no serious injury to
the victim, is an overreach.

mr. vaughan acknowledges your history of mental
health issues, but he believes that nothing in your actions that day indicates
a psychosis. he notes that your initial flight from the scene demonstrates a
consciousness of guilt and an awareness of your actions.
the relevant legislation
defence of mental disorder
16
(1)
no
person is criminally responsible for an act committed or an omission made while
suffering from a mental disorder that rendered
the
person
incapable of appreciating
the
nature and quality
of
the
act or omission or of knowing that it was
wrong.
assessment
order
672.11
a court having jurisdiction over an
accused in respect of an offence may order an assessment of
the
mental
condition of
the
accused, if it has reasonable grounds
to
believe
that such evidence is necessary
to
determine...
(b)
whether
the
accused
was, at
the
time of
the
commission
of
the
alleged offence, suffering from a mental
disorder so as
to
be exempt from criminal responsibility by
virtue of
subsection 16(1);...
where court may order assessment
672.12
(1)
the
court
may make an assessment order at any stage of proceedings against
the
accused
of its own motion, on application of
the
accused
or, subject
to
subsections (2) and (3), on application
of
the
prosecutor....
limitation on prosecutor’s
application for assessment
(3)
where
the
prosecutor
applies for an assessment in order
to
determine
whether
the
accused was suffering from a mental
disorder at
the
time of
the
offence
so as
to
be exempt from criminal
responsibility,
the
court may only order
the
assessment
if...
(b)
the
prosecutor
satisfies
the
court that there
are
reasonable grounds
to
doubt that
the
accused
is criminally responsible for
the
alleged offence, on
account of mental disorder.
analysis

a finding that a person is not criminally responsible for an
offence committed by virtue of s. 16 of the
code
is not a remedy to be
sought or taken lightly. justice trotter in
r. v. john doe,
2011 onsc
92 (canlii)
noted:

on
a more general level, the assessment provisions under part xx.1 must be
approached with great care, especially when the crown attempts to invoke them.
 in this case, the crown's motivation for seeking an assessment is
legitimate. nevertheless, an assessment under part xx.1 is an entrance
into a socially protective regime, one that is accompanied by significant
deprivations of liberty. accordingly, one must proceed with restraint
when applying these provisions: see, more generally,
winko
v. b.c. (forensic psychiatric institute)
(1999),
1999 canlii 694 (scc),
135 c.c.c. (3d) 129 (s.c.c.),
at p. 156,
penetanguishene mental health centre
v. ontario (a.g.)
(2004),
2004
scc 20 (canlii),
182 c.c.c.
(3d) 193 (s.c.c.), at p. 201
and
regina v. conway
(2010),
2010
scc 22 (canlii),
75 c.r. (6
th
)
201 (s.c.c.), at p. 232. indeed, an assessment is itself an
invasive procedure in many ways. this is no doubt one of the reasons why
parliament intended assessment orders should be “completed with dispatch”:
see
ontario v. phaneuf,
2010 onca 901, at para.
16.

this isn't an application to determine if you, lynda newth, have
a serious mental disorder. it appears clear, even by her own admission, that
she has had mental health struggles. the critical test is whether there are
reasonable grounds to doubt the presumption of criminal responsibility, as
outlined in
s. 16(2)
of the
criminal code. the reasonable
grounds to question this presumption of criminal responsibility must be
connected to experiencing a mental disorder at the time of the offence.

from the evidence i have reviewed, there is no indication that
you were suffering from a serious mental disorder at the time of the offence
that would affect your ability to appreciate your actions. first, the evidence
of any serious mental health condition comes third hand in the pre-sentence report
of june 2022, with the author quoting a psychiatric report provided to yet
another agency, anishnawbe health, from october 2018, which cites a history of
panic attacks and mood disorders while mentioning a previous diagnosis of
complex post-traumatic stress disorder and bipolar disorder. this suggests
that, at the very least, this psychiatric report does not diagnose her with
those last two disorders but simply reports past diagnoses. in other words, it
is truly a fourth-hand account of a diagnosis.

further,
regina
v. gray
(2002),
2002 bcsc 1192 (canlii),
169 c.c.c. (3d) 194 (b.c.s.c.),
justice wong stated:
 thus, the
focus
of an assessment under section 672.11 is never
simply the existence of mental disorder but rather the effect of any mental
disorder with respect to specific legal concepts. the question of whether
an accused is unfit or not criminally responsible is not ultimately to be
decided by the assessing physician, but to be useful to the judge deciding fitness
or the trier of fact deciding criminal responsibility; a section 672.11
assessment must be directed toward those legal concepts.
 determining whether
an individual is fit to stand trial or whether an individual is criminally
responsible is very different than determining whether the individual has a
mental illness or developmental disability. this was noted by mr. justice
pitfield in r. v. muschke,
 b.c.j.
no. 2825. in r. v. muschke pitfield, j. states the
following:
46 while the disorders
attributed to the applicant may well be in need of treatment, there is nothing
in the letter to suggest that standing alone, they point to an inability to
understand the nature and consequences of one’s actions or that the actions
were wrong as contemplated by s. 16 of the code if one is to be absolved of
criminal responsibility.

it is clear that your mind was wandering that day, and that you
were saying things either to the officers or to yourself that, on the face of
it, were not based on fact. i can’t say for sure, but it certainly seems that
way. however, on those words and actions, i cannot conclude they are indicative
of a serious mental health disorder.

as such, i can find no evidence based on either the third or
fourth-hand reports of mental diagnosis or on the evidence of her actions that
day that would lead me to believe, on a balance of probabilities, that there
are reasonable grounds to doubt lynda newth’s criminal responsibility
for the alleged offence due to that mental disorder.

lynda newth is anishnawbe kwe; her father, robert nanabush, was
from parry island.
canada and the canadian
justice
system have a sordid and shameful history regarding their treatment of
indigenous peoples, particularly in the way it has treated indigenous women.

i am casting no aspersions on the crown in this case, nor
suggesting there was any deliberate intent to unfairly disadvantage lynda
newth. i also do not propose that there was any malicious or improper intent
regarding the decisions made in the prosecution of ms. newth. however, given my
findings and the current state of the law concerning the evidence required to
order an assessment under section 672.11, i believe that a better-informed
understanding of whether the crown was positioned to bring this application
based on the limited evidence of serious mental disorder presented would be
warranted.

the need for such vigilance and care is particularly warranted
when the individual before us is an indigenous person. we in the criminal
justice system must guard against actions or decisions that could be seen as
disadvantaging any indigenous person appearing before the court, whether as an
accused, a victim, or a complainant. we have been cautioned to be especially
aware of the impact of our actions by the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
barton
regarding the responsibility we all have to prevent unfair
practices:
 trials do
not take place in a historical, cultural, or social vacuum. indigenous persons
have suffered a long history of colonialism, the effects of which continue to
be felt. there is no denying that indigenous people — and in particular
indigenous women, girls, and sex workers — have endured serious injustices,
including high rates of sexual violence against women. the ongoing work of the national
inquiry into missing and murdered indigenous women and girls is just one
reminder of that painful reality (see interim report, our women and girls are
sacred (2017)).
 furthermore,
this court has acknowledged on several occasions the detrimental effects of
widespread racism against indigenous people within our criminal justice
system (see, e.g., williams, at paras. 54 and 58; r. v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 688, at para.
65; r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, 1 s.c.r. 433, at
paras.
59-60 and 67; ewert v. canada,
2018 scc 30, 2 s.c.r. 165, at
para.
57
). for example, in williams, this court recognized that indigenous
people are the target of hurtful biases, stereotypes, and assumptions,
including stereotypes about credibility, worthiness, and criminal propensity,
to name just a few (para. 28). moreover, in ewert, this court stressed
that “discrimination experienced by indigenous persons, whether as a result of
overtly racist attitudes or culturally inappropriate practices, extends to all parts
of the criminal justice system, including the prison system” (para.
57). in short, when it comes to truth and reconciliation from a criminal
justice system perspective, much-needed work remains to be done.
r. v. barton,
2019 scc 33, 2 s.c.r. 579

it is all too easy to perceive and conclude that a vulnerable
woman with a history of mental health issues requires intervention to address
any risk she may pose to herself or the community. the case before me involving
lynda newth is tragic, especially because the innocent victim was randomly
targeted by ms. newth. as ms. newth’s counsel stated, regrettably, these
unfortunate instances of random violence are the bread and butter of our work
in this court. this reflects a sad reality about the lack of adequate
counselling and support services for vulnerable individuals, as well as the
absence of sufficient affordable housing. we must be cautious about applying
different standards to indigenous women when it comes to rulings that can
significantly affect their lives. as justice trotter noted above:
“nevertheless, an assessment under part xx.1 is an entrance into a socially
protective regime, one that is accompanied by significant deprivations of
liberty.” (
john doe, supra
)

indigenous peoples are increasingly affected by these
deficiencies due to the historic wrongs inflicted on them by colonial policies
and practices, along with the betrayal of treaty rights and relationships.

r. v. king,
2022
onca 665
 as can be seen, the
term “
gladue
principles” has thus become a short form way of
adverting to the idea that those involved in the criminal justice system,
particularly judges exercising discretionary power, ought to be aware of the
realities of the indigenous people appearing before them. by this, we mean the
historical and present-day treatment of indigenous people that continues to
perpetuate patterns of discrimination and has resulted in “lower educational
attainment, lower incomes, higher unemployment, higher rates of substance abuse
and suicide, and of course higher levels of incarceration for aboriginal
peoples”:
ipeelee, at para.
60. failing to recognize these
realities can lead to further discrimination against indigenous people and
undermine efforts to apply the law impartially and equitably. we can put it no
better than moldaver j. in
barton, at para.
199: “when it
comes to truth and reconciliation from a criminal justice perspective,
much-needed work remains to be done.”

we must strive for improvement. we need to be more vigilant about
the steps we take and the orders we pursue, being aware of their often
disproportionate impact on the most vulnerable individuals within the criminal
justice system. few are considered more vulnerable in this system than
indigenous women. in closing, let me quote the dissent in
r. v. sharma
at para 115:
sentencing law cannot erase this country's
colonial past. nor can it remove the causes behind an offender's crime. but it
is uniquely positioned to ameliorate — or aggravate — the racial inequalities
in our criminal justice system.

the application is dismissed
released: june 12, 2024
signed:
justice andré chamberlain