source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj210/2025oncj210.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(3)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(3),
read as follows:
486.4(3) child
pornography
— (1) in proceedings in respect of an
offence under section 163.1, a judge or justice shall make an order directing
that any information that could identify a witness who is under the age of
eighteen years, or any person who is the subject of a representation, written
material or a recording that constitutes child pornography within the meaning
of that section, shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
subsections 486.4(1) to
(3)
or 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. p.m.,
2025 oncj 210
date: 
2025 04 16
court
file no.: toronto 22 30004754
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
p.m.
before
justice r. wright
heard
on march 26, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on april 16, 2025
m. petrie................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
j. pyzer..................................................................................... counsel
for the accused p.m.
wright j.:

on september 6, 2024, following a trial, i found
p.m. guilty of four counts: one count of counselling sexual touching, one count
of sexual assault, one count of sexual interference and one count of making
child pornography. conditional stays were entered on the counts of sexual
interference and sexual assault pursuant to
r. v. kienapple,
1974 canlii 14 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 729.

i am sentencing p.m. in relation to two counts
that relate to a single victim and a single transaction. the victim was the
daughter of p.m.’s partner at the time. he took advantage of an occasion when
she was left in his care.

the crown seeks a sentence of four-years jail:
three years on the count of invitation to sexual touching and a year
consecutive on the count of making child pornography. the crown also seeks
ancillary orders: a dna order; an order under s. 161; an order under s. 109; a noncontact
order while in custody; and, a soira order.

the defence submits that the appropriate jail
sentence is 23.5 months, to be served conditionally, followed by a period of
probation. the defence opposes elements of the order under s. 161 but concedes
that the other ancillary orders are appropriate.
the offences

at the time of the offences, p.m. was living
with the victim, s.o., and her mother, h.f. he was in an intimate partner
relationship with h.f. and would sometimes assist with caring for the children.
there had been a prior discussion between s.o. and her mother, which p.m. may
have been present for, about a yeast infection.

s.o. was either nine or 10-years old (due to
when her birthday fell and when the allegations were reported to police, it is
unclear whether she was still nine or had turned 10). on the day in question, she
had been left under the supervision of p.m.

p.m. told her to come into his bedroom. he told
her to take her pants down and open her legs. she was sitting/laying half on
his bed. he directed her to use her hands and open her “peepee.” she did not
want to and told him she did not want to. he told her to look at her privates,
and he said, “it's beautiful.” she was laying half on the bed with her legs
raised, her knees bent and her bottoms around her ankles. he told her she had a
yeast infection; she did not have a yeast infection.

p.m. video-recorded this with his cell phone.
she did not know he was taking a video; she thought he was using the phone as a
flashlight. the video is more than 30 seconds in length and depicts the victim
using her hands to manipulate and open the outer portion of her vagina while
she is laying on the bed, nude from the waist down, with her legs spread and
held up in the air. she can be seen to spread the external area exposing
herself several times. p.m. counselled her to engage in this behaviour. a
reasonable viewer, looking at this video objectively and in the context in
which it was recorded, would see this recording as intended to cause sexual
stimulation to some viewers.

several months later, h.f. discovered the video
in p.m.’s deleted items folder on his cellular phone. she did not report him to
police but did have a serious argument with p.m. and they separated for a time.
the allegations were reported some weeks later in october when s.o. told a
woman at school that p.m. had made a video of her privates.

i have a victim impact statement (“vis”) completed
by s.o. and h.f. it details the significant impact that these offences had on
their family and their trust. h.f.'s children were taken away from her for a
six-month period because of the charges. she has trouble sleeping and suffers
anxiety. h.f. blames herself for bringing p.m. into their home. she feels she
was manipulated. s.o. has a hard time trusting men. she doesn't ever like
speaking about p.m. she has taken counselling, but still suffers from the
broken trust.
the offender

i had the benefit of a pre-sentence report. p.m.
is 36-years old. he left school in grade 10 when he was accused of cheating. he
has worked in a variety of areas: construction, cleaning, and in government.
since being charged with these offences he has gone to live with his father in
kapuskasing. he has not been working, as he has issues with his memory. he has
been receiving ontario disability support program (“odsp”) payments due to his
memory issues.

p.m. has a limited criminal record. he was found
guilty of taking motor vehicle without consent and impaired driving in 2009. he
was sentenced to one day jail on top of credit for pre-sentence custody and
prohibited from driving for 18 months.

p.m. had a difficult childhood. his mother died
when he was 10-years old. he was subject to child protection proceedings prior
to her death, as she was involved in alcohol and drug use. his father was an
alcoholic, who has been sober for 30 years now, but was unable to care for him
for long periods in his childhood.

p.m. has experienced further trauma in his life.
he reported being sexually abused by a babysitter when he was a child. he was
also beaten up and left to die by drug dealers at the age of 16. he has had
several mental health issues, including depression and two suicide attempts.

p.m.’s father reported that p.m. had a difficult
time in school. he began using drugs and alcohol at the age of 12, which led to
a pattern of legal conflict. his father also confirmed that p.m. underwent
multiple psychiatric hospitalizations due to anxiety, delusions, and other
issues. his father has been supportive of p.m. and has been helping him since
he was charged.

p.m. has been through multiple treatment centres
for substance use. he has now been sober for over five years.

in his discussions with the report writer, p.m. expressed
some delusional thoughts involving control by the military or famous
individuals. for the last year he has been attending reflexion mental health
counselling services: he attends approximately every three weeks, but he has
not shared the substance of his criminal charges with his counsellors. he was
evaluated by a psychiatrist on december 18, 2024, and it was suggested that he
take antipsychotic medication; p.m. was not open to taking medication and
refused the suggested course of treatment.

with respect to the charges, he told the report
writer that they are not accurate. he did not provide any further information.
he expressed limited insight or accountability.
applicable sentencing principles

section 718.1
of the
criminal code of canada
(“
code
”) states that the fundamental principle of sentencing is
proportionality. to be a fit sentence the sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.

ss.
718.01
and
718.2
of the
code
set out
a number of other considerations:
718.01 when a
court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person
under the age of eighteen years, it shall give primary consideration to the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.
718.2 a court
that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a) a sentence
should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing,
…
(ii.1)
evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under
the age of eighteen years,
(iii)
evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of
trust or authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering
their age and other personal circumstances,
…
shall be
deemed to be aggravating circumstances.

other aggravating and mitigating factors and the
offender’s personal circumstances must be considered, but “[w]here parliament
has indicated which sentencing objectives are to receive priority in certain
cases, the sentencing judge's discretion is thereby limited, such that it is no
longer open to the judge to elevate other sentencing objectives to an equal or
higher priority.” see:
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para.
104.

in
friesen, the supreme court of canada
sent a strong message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes
that wrongfully exploit children's vulnerability. courts must impose sentences
that are proportionate to the gravity of these offences and the degree of
responsibility of the offenders, as informed by society's deepened
understanding of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against
children. sentences must accurately reflect the wrongfulness and the
far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes to children, families, and society
at large.

the focus of the scheme of sexual offences is on
the wrongful interference with sexual integrity. the court further observed
that mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against children
are normal and upper-single and double-digit penitentiary terms should neither
be unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional circumstances. substantial
sentences can be imposed where there is only a single instance of sexual
violence and/or a single victim. this is because even a single instance of
sexual violence can permanently alter the course of a child's life.

the court set out a non-exhaustive list of
factors to be considered in determining a fit sentence in cases of sexual
offences against children:
(1)
the higher the offender's risk to offend, the
more the court needs to emphasize the objective of separating the offender from
society to protect vulnerable children from wrongful exploitation and harm;
(2)
an offender who abuses a position of trust to
commit a sexual offence against a child should receive a lengthier sentence
than an offender who was a stranger to the child. any breach of trust is likely
to increase the harm to the victim and thus the gravity of the offence, and it
also increases the offender's degree of responsibility;
(3)
sexual violence against children that is
committed on multiple occasions and for longer periods of time should attract
higher sentences that reflect the full cumulative gravity of the crime and the
offender's increased degree of responsibility;
(4)
the age of the victim can be a significant
aggravating feature because children who are particularly young are even more
vulnerable to sexual violence. the moral blameworthiness of the offender is
enhanced in such cases;
(5)
a child's participation is not a mitigating
factor, nor should it be a legally relevant consideration at sentencing. in
particular, a child's non-resistance should not be equated to
de facto
consent and a victim's participation should not distract the court from the
harm that the victim suffers as a result of sexual violence. adults always have
a responsibility to refrain from engaging in sexual violence toward children.
(6)
defining a sentencing range based on the
specific type of sexual activity at issue poses several dangers. in particular,
courts must be careful to avoid;
(a)
attributing intrinsic significance to the
occurrence or non-occurrence of sexual acts based on traditional notions of
sexual propriety;
(b)
assuming that there is correlation between the
type of physical act and the harm to the child;
(c)
failing to recognize the wrongfulness of sexual
violence in cases where the degree of physical interference is less pronounced;
and,
(d)
understanding the degree of physical
interference factor in terms of a type of hierarchy of physical acts.

s. 718.3(7)
of the
code
states that a
sentence of imprisonment for a count of making child pornography should be
consecutive to another sexual offence committed on the same victim. in
r. v.
s.c.,
2019 onca 199, 145 o.r. (3d) 711, the ontario court of appeal dealt
with
s. 718.3(7)
and highlighted that it is not to be applied mechanically:
 
second, the
criminal code
does not mandate a purely mechanical approach
whereby all sentences governed by
s. 718.3(7)
must be simply added up and
imposed. both at trial and in oral argument before us, the crown properly
conceded that
s. 718.3(7)
is subject to the totality principle.
section
718.3(7)
must be read together with
s. 718.2
(c) stating that “where consecutive
sentences are imposed, the combined sentences should not be unduly long or
harsh.” in
r. v. ahmed,
2017 onca 76, 346 c.c.c. (3d) 504, this court
dealt with
s. 83.26
of the
criminal code, which provides that a sentence
other than one of life imprisonment, imposed on a person for a terrorism
offence, must be served consecutively to any other punishment imposed on the
person “for an offence arising out of the same event or series of events”. this
court, following the supreme court of canada in
r. v. khawaja,
2012 scc
69, 3 s.c.r. 555, stated, at para. 79:
the totality
principle is a particular application of the general principle of
proportionality. it requires that a sentencing judge who orders an offender to
serve consecutive sentences for multiple offences ensure that the cumulative
sentence rendered does not exceed the overall culpability of the offender.

sentencing must also consider the principle of
parity.
section 718.2
(b) of the
code
states that similar offenders who
commit similar offences in similar circumstances should receive similar
sentences.

as to a conditional sentence order
("cso"), it is available if there is no minimum punishment
prescribed, the offence does not fall into limited specific offences (which,
these offences do not), i impose a sentence of less than two years, and it
would not endanger the safety of the community and is consistent with
sentencing principles/purposes (ss. 718-
718.2
).

p.m. has served 11 days of pre-sentence custody
attributable to these offences. therefore, any jail sentence is to be reduced
by 16 days.
analysis

there are several aggravating features in this
case:
(1)
age: it is statutorily aggravating that the
victim was under the age of 18;
(2)
her home: it is aggravating that these offences
occurred in her own home, where she should have felt safe;
(3)
abuse of trust: it is significantly aggravating
that p.m. took advantage of a time when he had care of s.o. the trust that was
placed in him provided him the opportunity to commit the offences;
(4)
the surreptitious recording: it is aggravating
that he told s.o. he was checking her for a medical issue and recorded her
without her knowledge; and,
(5)
impact: the significant impact on s.o. and her
mother is a further aggravating factor.

there are mitigating factors:
(1)
family support: p.m. has the support of his
father, with whom he has been residing. his father’s support is to his credit;
(2)
counselling: p.m. has been attempting to address
some of his issues with counselling. i view this as mitigating, but the weight
to be accorded it is tempered by the lack of insight he has shown into his
offending, and his lack of reporting of the allegations to his counselors,
which impact his rehabilitative prospects; and,
(3)
mental health considerations: as the defence
submitted, his undiagnosed issues will make time spent in custody more
difficult for p.m. and impact the role of specific deterrence. i have also
considered that these issues and his memory concerns may be playing a factor in
his lack of insight.

both counsel provided sentencing authorities to
help support their positions. the crown relies on:
(1)
r. v. j.t.,
2021
onca 392: zarnett j.a. substituted a sentence of two years jail and two years
probation where the trial judge had sentenced the offender to nine-months jail.
the accused's sons had invited friends for a sleepover. late at night, the
accused directed the six- or seven-year-old victim into the bathroom and used
her hands to rub his penis. after he told her she could put her mouth on his
penis, she pulled away and left the room;
(2)
r. v. g.r.,
2020
onsc 7411, aff'd
2022 onca 374: bloom j. imposed a jail sentence of five and a
half years on a 50-year-old offender citing the age of the complainant (nine),
the presence of multiple incidents, the accused's role as a caregiver, and the
emotional harm to the victim and her mother as reflected in the vis. the
accused had no criminal record and was gainfully employed. the accused was the
partner of the victim's mother. there were three incidents of inappropriate
touching: (1) he rubbed her vagina inside her clothing, was laughing while he
did so and would sometimes stick out his penis; (2) he held her on the floor
and manipulated her nipples; (3) he touched her vaginal area with his finger
under her clothes and rubbed his penis on her and her vagina;
(3)
r. v. j.h.,
2022
oncj 271: rose j. imposed a jail sentence of four years concurrent on a guilty
plea to counts of sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching. the
victim was the 10-year-old daughter of j.h.’s intimate partner. the abuse
occurred on four or five occasions and included kissing the victim’s breasts,
digitally penetrating her and having her touch his penis. the victim was
significantly traumatized by the offences and suffered ongoing issues; and,
(4)
r. v. j.c.,
 o.j. no. 7396: masse j. imposed a total sentence of four years for three
events of sexual offending, two breaches of court order, and a count of
voyeurism. the offender was 48 years old and had an unrelated criminal record.
there were two victims: his 14-year-old and 25-year old nieces. he abused the 14-year-old
over the course of a weekend, slapping her buttocks, giving her a massage in
sexualized circumstances that included touching her side below her breasts, and
touching her breasts and vaginal area while he pressed his erect penis against
her back. the 25-year-old niece was living in his house and he surreptitiously
took pictures of her naked or in states of undress. he also contacted her while
prohibited from doing so.

the defence relied on:
(1)
r. v. p.r.j.,
2021 bcsc 2537: davies j. imposed a cso of 23 months, concurrent, on counts of
sexual interference and invitation to sexual touching. the 40-year-old offender
sexually offended against her daughter, on one occasion, by digitally inserting
a finger into and kissing her vagina and causing her daughter to touch her own
vagina. the offender was highly intoxicated on a combination of alcohol and
prescription medication;
(2)
r. v. j.m.h.k.,
2021 bcpc 50: t.j. gove j. sentenced the 47-year-old offender to six months
custody and 18 months probation. the crown had proceeded summarily. the victim
was six and seven years old. the offending took place in her bedroom: the
offender told her to take her clothes off and lie on her bed on her back,
holding a book that she was apparently to read. he lay on top of her and rubbed
his penis to her crotch area as he moved up and down without penetration for
approximately seven minutes. this happened on at least 10 occasions; and,
(3)
r. v. g. m.m.,
2021 abpc 253: c.j. sharpe j. sentenced the 64-year-old offender to 15 months
custody and two years probation, and rejected a request for a cso. the crown
had proceeded summarily. the victim was his six-year-old niece. there were two
days in which he touched her vagina over her clothing multiple times in her
home.

while these cases assist in applying parity,
there are distinguishing features between each of them and the case before me. the
cases that the crown relies on for a sentence of four years generally involve
multiple instances of abuse, although they do not include the making of child
pornography. in the cases relied on by the defence, there was the involvement
of intoxication or the crown had proceeded summarily.

in my view, an appropriate total sentence,
taking into account the mitigating and aggravating features here, is one of
just over three years custody. i am considering the 11 days of psc, credited as
17 days, and am imposing a total sentence of three years on top of credit for
those 17 days. nothing short of that length of sentence can appropriately
account for the serious breach of trust and other aggravating features. if it
were not for the mitigating features i have outlined, and in particular p.m.’s
mental health issues, i would have imposed a total sentence of four years.
sentence

the total sentence will be three years after
credit for 11 days psc, credited as 17 days. to properly reflect the principle
of totality, in accordance with
r. v. ahmed,
2017 onca 76
and
r. v.
jewell
(1995),
1995 canlii 1897 (on ca), 100 c.c.c. (3d) 270 (ont. c.a.), the sentence will be
recorded as:
(1)
for the offence of counselling sexual touching,
credit for 17 days psc followed by two-years jail;
(2)
for the offence of making child pornography,
one-year jail, consecutive.
ancillary orders

there will be an order pursuant to
s. 743.21
of
the
code
prohibiting communication with s.o. and h.f. while he is in
custody.

pursuant to
s. 109(2)
of the
code, p.m.
is prohibited from possessing any firearm, other than a prohibited firearm or
restricted firearm, and any crossbow, restricted weapon, ammunition and
explosive substance for 10 years and from possessing a prohibited firearm,
restricted firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device and prohibited
ammunition for life.

soira: s. 490.013(2)(b) applies. p.m. is ordered
to report for 20 years.

dna: invitation to sexual touching and making
child pornography are primary designated offences for the purposes of the dna
provisions. p.m. is ordered to provide such samples of his bodily substances as
are reasonably required for the purpose of forensic dna analysis to be used in
accordance with the dna identification act in relation to these charges.

s. 161 order: in my view, it is appropriate to
mitigate his future risk by making the order given the significant breach of
trust coupled with the concerns i have identified as to his insight and
prospects. therefore, pursuant to
s. 161
of the
code, he is prohibited
for a period of 20 years from his release from custody of:
(1)
attending any public park or public swimming
area where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can reasonably be
expected to be present, or a daycare centre, school ground, playground or
community centre;
(2)
being within one kilometre of any dwelling where
s.o. ordinarily resides;
(3)
seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment,
whether or not the employment is remunerated, or becoming or being a volunteer
in a capacity, that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards
persons under the age of 16 years; and,
(4)
having any contact with a person who is under
the age of 16.

i am satisfied that the victim fine surcharge
would amount to an undue hardship on p.m., given his current memory issues and
reliance on odsp, and the impacts of these convictions on his future
employment. it is waived.
released: april 16, 2025
signed:
justice r. wright