source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj443/2025oncj443.html

warning
the
court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the
file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the victim or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153,
153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173,
213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2,
286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read
from time to time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force,
if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if
it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with
in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in
paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on
application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in
paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity,
inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right
to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the
prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections
486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. amorocho, 2025 oncj 443
date: 2025 08 27
court file no.: windsor
22-81100429
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
gabriel amorocho
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 1 august
2025
reasons for
judgment released on 27 august 2025
citally maciel....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alexandra cardella.................................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant
ruling
on defence application to re-open
pratt j.:

on
19 february 2025, i found the defendant gabriel amorocho guilty of sexual
assault and sexual interference. prior to the imposition of sentence, counsel
for the defendant brought an application to re-open the trial and make further
argument. the crown opposed the application. this is my ruling.
positions of the parties

counsel
for the defendant argues re-opening of the case is required to prevent an
injustice. further, the need to re-open only became apparent after my reasons
for conviction were released. this is an exceptional case that merits setting
aside the conviction and permitting further argument.

crown
counsel denies that this is an exceptional case. re-opening would cause
significant prejudice to the crown and would interfere with the notion that
trial decisions are final. the argument sought to be made could have been made
at trial. the crown argues the proper course at this point is an appeal, not a
re-opening of the trial.
the law

in
the usual course, a trial moves from arraignment to the calling of evidence, to
a finding, and, if that finding is guilty, to sentencing. in most cases, it is
a one-way street. once a finding is made, that finding stands unless it is set
aside or otherwise modified by an appellate court. the trial court does not
typically back up to re-visit findings after they have been made.

the
law does, however, permit a trial judge to reverse a finding of guilt in proper
circumstances. as
stated by justice martin in the case of
r.
v.
lessard
1976 canlii 1417 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 74 (c.a.):
12 i see no reason why a trial
judge who has made a finding of guilt on disputed facts is not also empowered
to vacate the adjudication of guilt at any time before the imposition of the
sentence, although it is a power which, i cannot stress too strongly, should
only be exercised in exceptional circumstances and where its exercise is
clearly called for.

it
is an unusual remedy only given in exceptional circumstances. justice
rosenberg confirmed this point
in the more recent decision of
r.
v.
griffith
2013 onca 510. in that case, the crown argued for a stricter and more demanding
test for re-opening than merely showing exceptional circumstances. justice
rosenberg found the creation of a new test unnecessary. this is from paragraph
23:
third, in my view,
the phrase "exceptional circumstances" already captures the essential
point that it will only be in very rare cases that a judge would reopen a
conviction. indeed,
in
lessard, at para.
12, this court said that the exercise
of vacating an adjudication of guilt must be "clearly called for".
such a principle will recognize the strong interest in finality, as well as
other institutional concerns that are so deeply ingrained in our common law
system.

the
court of appeal for ontario specifically considered the question of re-opening
a trial for further evidence after a conviction
in the case of
r.
v.
kowall
1996 canlii 411 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 2715.
the test for re-opening the
defence case when the application is made prior to conviction has been laid
down by
this court in r. v. hayward
(1993),
1993 canlii 14679
(on ca),
86 c.c.c. (3d) 193. however, once
the trial judge has convicted the accused a more rigorous test is required to
protect the integrity of the process, including the enhanced interest in
finality. it seems to have been common ground in this case
that the most appropriate test for determining whether or not to permit the
fresh evidence to be admitted is the test for the admissibility of fresh
evidence on appeal laid down in palmer and palmer v. the
queen
(1979),
1979 canlii 8 (scc),
50
c.c.c. (2d) 193, at page 205 (s.c.c.)
(
see: r. v.
mysko
(1980),
1980 canlii 2057 (sk ca),
2
sask. r. 342 (c.a.).) that test is as follows:
(1) 
 the evidence should generally not be admitted if, by due
diligence, it could have been adduced at trial provided that this general
principle will not be applied as strictly in a criminal case as in civil
cases...;
(2) 
 the evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears upon a decisive
or potentially decisive issue in the trial;
(3) 
 the evidence must be credible in the sense that it is reasonably
capable of belief;
(4) 
 it must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when taken
with the other evidence adduced at trial, be expected to have affected the
result.
these criteria provide helpful
guidance to a trial judge faced with an application to reopen after
conviction.
in addition to
the palmer criteria, a trial judge must consider whether the
application to reopen is in reality an attempt to reverse a tactical decision
made at trial. counsel must make tactical decisions in every case. 
assuming those decisions are within the boundaries of competence, an accused
must ordinarily live with the consequences of those decisions.
should
the trial judge find that the test for reopening has been met, then the judge
must consider whether to carry on with the trial or declare a mistrial.

while
the exceptional circumstances test applies, the present case offers a different
situation. here, counsel does not seek to call further evidence. rather, the
request is simply to make further legal argument. the argument would be made
on the basis of the evidentiary record as it now stands.

in
the case of
r.
v.
calero-viteri
 o.j. no. 6706 (c.j.), my
sister justice tuck-jackson considered re-opening to allow for the presentation
of a new defence. her honour cited the windsor decision of justice abbey in
r.
v.
d.d.
 o.j. no. 760
(prov. ct. (fam. div.)). justice abbey
referred
to the
lessard
decision and said this at paragraph 10:
i
would think that based upon the principle in that case, in appropriate and
exceptional circumstances, the defence may also invite the trial judge to set
aside the finding not for the purpose of calling further evidence but for the
purpose of submitting argument which was not presented at the trial such that
it would be an apparent injustice not to permit the accused or, in this case,
the young person to advance that argument.

at
paragraphs 16 and 17 of
calero-viteri, justice tuck-jackson succinctly
summarized the requirements for such a re-opening:
16 in my view,
guidance on this issue can be gleaned from the line of authority that
delineates when a new legal argument can be advanced for the first time on
appeal. in r. v. ullrich,
 b.c.j. no. 3721 (b.c.c.a.), that court
identified the following factors as relevant:
there are
authorities which establish that in exceptional circumstances a court of appeal
may allow a defence not raised at trial to be considered. those exceptional
circumstances include a case where the balancing of the interests of justice
indicates that an injustice has been done, or where the new defence is based
upon an issue of law alone and not on an issue of fact in relation to which it
might have been necessary to adduce additional evidence at trial, or on appeal,
or on a new trial:
see r. v. vidulich,
1989 canlii 231 (bc ca),
 b.c.j. no. 1124 (supra)
at p.
399; r. v. speerbrecker
(1986),
47 m.v.r. 271 (b.c.c.a.)
at p. 273; r. v. schultz,
 b.c.j. no. 2757,
ca012697, september 27, 1991, (b.c.c.a.), at p. 21.
17 similarly,
in
r. v. brown
(1993),
1993 canlii 114 (scc),
83 c.c.c. (3d) 129, the supreme court of canada, in
upholding the dissenting opinion of justice harradence of the alberta court of appeal
at
(1992),
1992 canlii 12795 (ab ca),
73 c.c.c. (3d) 481, confirmed
that where an appellate court has a
sufficient factual foundation to appraise a new defence raised on appeal
without prejudice to the parties and particularly where refusing to do so will
result in unfairness, it is proper for the appeal court to hear and determine
the question. i see no reason not to adopt a similar standard when the matter
is still before the trial court. in my respectful view, leave ought to be
granted to permit the defence to raise a new defence after a verdict has been
rendered where; 1) doing so prevents an injustice or unfairness to the accused;
and 2) there is no prejudice to the crown which cannot otherwise be remedied.
in considering the second factor, it is relevant to consider whether there is a
sufficient factual record before the court which permits a fair assessment of
the issue from the perspective of both parties. put another way, it would be
unfair to the prosecution to permit an accused to advance a new defence after
the verdict has been rendered if, in retrospect, the crown would have called a
different case or cross-examined defence witnesses in a different fashion with
the benefit of earlier notice that the defence was a live issue.

finally,
on the issue of tactical decisions, justice tuck-jackson said this at paragraph
20:
in addition to
observing that the crown would not be prejudiced in the sense outlined above, i
note that there is no suggestion that mr. stastny's failure to raise the new
defence earlier was the product of a tactical decision. as he has very fairly
put it to the court, the argument simply did not occur to him until he had had
the opportunity to digest my findings of fact and law.
analysis

i
must consider if the present circumstances are indeed exceptional. i remind
myself that the defendant has a broad right to appeal the conviction. he is
free to raise myriad issues on appeal, and can also seek to make new arguments
not advanced at trial. this appeal process, broad as it is and largely available
as of right, is a big part of the reason why re-openings should be rare. 
finality at the trial stage is important.

what
are the circumstances that give rise to the application?

taken
from the crown’s factum, the charges against the defendant were laid on 25
march 2022. on 2 april 2024, trial dates were set in the ontario court of
justice. following trial in october and november of 2024, i provided my
reasons for conviction on 19 february 2025. on 8 may 2025, following the
preparation of a pre-sentence report, counsel for the defendant sought an
adjournment to consider bringing this application. it was brought, and the
parties made submissions on 1 august 2025.

defendant’s
counsel has argued that the application only became necessary on reviewing the
reasons for conviction. in my decision, i found the evidence of the
complainant incapable of proving the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. 
rather, the conviction was based on the statement provided by the defendant to
police. that statement was admitted to be both voluntary and
charter-compliant. it was led as part of the crown’s case. in it, the
defendant told police on two occasions what he understood the complainant’s age
to be. i set out the exchanges with the interviewing officer at paragraphs 40-42
of my decision.

how
counsel interpreted that statement is important and will inform my view on why
the proposed defence was not argued at trial.

the
second instance where the defendant mentions the complainant’s age was, in my
view, misheard by counsel. in written submissions, counsel said the statement
was “but i thought, i realized like, um i didn’t realize she was 15 man”. 
after listening to the statement, i found his words actually were “but i
thought, i realized like um, i realized that she was 15 then.”

if
the entire re-opening argument was based on this passage, i would be inclined
to grant the application. i certainly ascribe nothing nefarious to counsel’s
hearing of the audio. it seems we simply disagree. counsel would not have
known about that disagreement prior to my decision, so an opportunity to
respond to it doesn’t seem inappropriate.

there
is more to the issue, however. as i said, that was the second instance where
the defendant mentioned the complainant’s age. the first is longer and,
candidly, more compelling. i will set out the passage in totality, taken from
paragraph 40 of my reasons (“pp” is constable phil peladeau):
pp how old
is she?
ga she’s uh
15 turning 16.
pp she is
15?
ga turning
16.
pp she’s
turning 16?
ga turning
16.
pp and how
old are you?
ga i’m 18.
pp you’re
18? when did you turn 18?
ga november
1
st.
pp november
1
st
?
ga yeah.
pp so how do
you know she’s 15 turning 16?
ga
she
told me a little bit after that she was 15 turning 16.
pp but you
thought she was older than that?
ga no, no,
no.
i knew the age of consent is 16.
pp okay.
ga and i’m
only 18 you understand what i mean? so it’s like a two age difference, it’s
like if you’re dating…
pp yeah.
ga …it’s
like two year difference, it’s fine, you understand what i mean?
pp okay.
ga so i was
like,
i know i’m not supposed to be doing anything with like a, like a minor,
you understand what i mean?
pp yeah.
ga
so i
was like, if she’s 16, it’s fine, but if she’s anything lower than that i
can’t, i can’t go for it, you understand what i mean?
(emphasis added)

the
defendant was clear in this passage that he knew the complainant to be “15
turning 16”. he was asked when he learned that and said she “told me a little
bit after”.

when
i brought this passage to counsel’s attention during argument, the response was
that we don’t know what the “after” is referring to. was it after the first
sexual encounter? was it after the complainant’s mother kicked him out of her
house? we don’t know. consequently, there is a question when he came to
believe the complainant was 15 years old. the corollary to that question is
that perhaps he still believed her to be 16 at the time of the second sexual
encounter.

i
reject this submission. there is no evidence before me that after the
defendant left the complainant’s home on 22 march, they ever had any further
contact. i heard about texts between the defendant and the complainant’s mother,
but nothing related to the complainant directly. these charges were laid that
day. there is no basis to believe the “after” refers to after their second
encounter. such a finding would require me to hold that there had been
additional contact after the confrontation by the complainant’s mother. there
is no evidence of that. the only reasonable inference to be drawn is that the
word refers to after their first encounter.

the
evidence led by the crown is clear on this point. the defendant told police he
believed the complainant to be 15 years old. no evidence was led to clarify
what was meant by the word “after”. in any event, this is a side issue not
related to the argument counsel seeks to make. the idea that throughout their
dealings, the defendant thought the complainant was 16 was put forward at
trial. that was the core of the defence. the application does not seek to
make that argument again.

it
is relevant, though, to the underlying reason for the application. courts
should take a dim view of re-opening applications that seek to reverse a
tactical decision made at trial. again, this is from the
kowall
decision:
in addition to
the palmer criteria, a trial judge must consider whether the
application to reopen is in reality an attempt to reverse a tactical decision
made at trial. counsel must make tactical decisions in every case. 
assuming those decisions are within the boundaries of competence, an accused
must ordinarily live with the consequences of those decisions.

could
the argument that the defendant believed the complainant to be 15 at the time
of the second encounter, and was therefore eligible for the close in age
exception in s. 150.1, have been made at trial?

the
answer is clearly yes.

the
statement of the defendant was taken on 25 march 2022, long before the trial,
and was provided to the defence in the ordinary course of disclosure (at least,
i haven’t heard any suggestion otherwise). i can assume the statement was
carefully reviewed because it was admitted to be voluntary. it became an
exhibit on the trial on consent of both parties.

at
trial, the core of the defence was the lack of credibility and reliability of
the complainant, together with the defendant’s mistaken belief that she was
16. it was open to the defence throughout the trial to argue the close in age
exception based on his statement. that avenue was not pursued.

in
calero-viteri, counsel conceded that the argument he wished to make had
simply not occurred to him before hearing the trial judge’s findings. failing
to make that argument, therefore, was not a tactical decision. respectfully, i
don’t see how i can come to the same conclusion. in that case, the offender
was convicted of obstructing a police officer by misidentifying himself in the
course of a traffic stop. the trial was a blended trial and charter voir
dire. in the result, justice tuck-jackson found a breach of the offender’s s.
9 rights and dismissed some of the counts the offender was facing. her honour
still convicted him of the obstruct charge.

in
the application to re-open, counsel said he wanted to argue that the officer
was not in the execution of his duty at the time of the alleged obstruction. 
this argument appears to be based on the charter violation found by the court. 
that is, given that the traffic stop violated the offender’s charter rights, he
wanted to argue the officer was not in the lawful execution of his duty when
the misidentification was made.

it
makes sense that the argument would not have occurred to counsel in advance. 
it is based on the specific findings made in the charter ruling. those
findings had not been made at the time of trial. crucially, the proposed
argument was entirely dependent on the charter ruling.

that
is not the case here. the admission by the defendant that he believed the
complainant to be 15 was available throughout the life of this case. the close
in age argument was there to be explored. it was not. instead, the defence
focused on other aspects of the evidence. this is not to say that choice was
unreasonable; it wasn’t. but that is precisely what it was: a choice. nothing
in my ruling suddenly activated the close in age exception as an available
argument.

i
find i must disagree with the submission made by counsel for the defendant:
it’s not so much
that a different defence is being advanced, tactically or otherwise, it’s that
the defence that was previously advanced can be applied differently now in
light of this exception and in light of your honour’s findings.

my
ruling did not reveal an argument that was not previously available.

later
in submissions, after noting that the complainant was never asked if she told
the defendant she was 15, counsel said the following:
and in hindsight,
your honour, i will absolutely say, looking at that again, i would have said
and if your honour finds that she’s 15 years old, if you believe that, here are
the reasons why it was reasonable, the same reasons that he took, he didn’t
have to take any further steps to determine she was six—to believe she was 16
years old, that can also apply to the 15 year old age belief, belief in age, or
mistaken belief in age. but i would have then added, in which case, this
exception applies because it’s within five years. and i think that it would
have been open to your honour to apply that exception given your findings
because the exception is not necessarily a defence, the defence is mistaken
belief, which was advanced.

the
argument counsel says she would have made is one she could have made. while
that fact is not dispositive of the application, it is a significant
consideration.
prejudice

the
crown argues it would be prejudiced by the granting of the application. if
further argument is permitted, the crown says it would have to recall the
complainant to address the new evidence. for the reasons i will now set out, i
do not see prejudice as a compelling problem in this case.

counsel
has made it clear that re-opening would not involve any further evidence. at
most, it would be additional legal argument. the close in age exception would
be based solely on the evidence as it now stands. given that there would be no
new defence evidence, i’m not sure i see why the crown would need to recall the
complainant. it is the defendant who would bear the burden of showing an air
of reality to the mistake in age defence. only if that was done (again, on the
evidentiary record as it now stands) would there be an onus on the crown to
disprove one or more of the constituent elements. given that the claim would
rise or fall only on the existing evidence, i don’t see the utility, let alone
the necessity, of recalling the complainant. if anything, from a purely
tactical perspective, recalling the complainant and exposing her to further
cross-examination could result in the defence being strengthened.

i
find no significant prejudice would be caused if the application were to be
granted.

i
have considered whether the circumstances in the present case are exceptional. 
in my view, they are not. this is not the same situation as
calero-viteri,
supra, where the new argument was engendered by the court’s ruling. 
here, the argument was always present. the candid position of counsel comes
down to this: had i known the court would find that portion of the statement to
be important, i would have paid it more attention. this is not a case of
inadvertence or a change in circumstances brought about by my ruling. it is a
different view of the case taken with the benefit of hindsight.

if
i am wrong in my determination of exceptional circumstances and should have
permitted a re-opening for the close in age exception to be considered, i will
briefly address that issue.

in
my view, there is no air of reality to the mistake in age defence as it relates
to the defendant thinking the complainant was 15 years old. as chief justice
tulloch summarized at paragraph 35 of
r.
v.
hason
2024 onca 369:
parliament
resolved this dilemma and enhanced protections for young people by enacting
section 150.1(4)
of the
criminal code: george, at paras. 7-8; carbone, at
paras. 111-113. that provision modifies the mistake of age defence by requiring
the accused to take all reasonable steps to ascertain the complainant’s age.
the modified defence has two elements: (1) the accused honestly believed that
the complainant was at least 16 years old at the time of the alleged offence,
and (2) the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the complainant’s
age. if the accused shows an air of reality to both elements, then the crown
must negate the defence by proving beyond a reasonable doubt that either
element is lacking: r. v. w.g.,
2021 onca 578,
405 c.c.c. (3d) 162, at paras.
54-57, leave to appeal refused, s.c.c.a. no. 381.

while
the chief justice refers in this passage to a belief that a complainant is 16
years old, given the interplay in the present case between mistaken belief and
the close in age exception, i can substitute 16 years old with 15.

has
the defendant shown he honestly believed the complainant to be 15 after their
first sexual encounter? there is no evidence he can point to that supports
that contention. based on his statement to police, she told him when they met
that she was 16. after the first encounter she told him she was actually 15. 
as i put to counsel during submissions, that means she admitted initially lying
about her age. i am asked to find that he subjectively believed this new
information to be true. why would he? what is there in the evidentiary record
he can point to that shows his subjective belief? i see nothing. an air of
reality requires some evidence that, if accepted by a trier of fact, could lead
to acquittal. i must view the evidence in a light most favourable to the
defence. but there must be some evidence to view. here, there is none. she
tells him one age, which he believes. she then tells him another age. i have
no evidence he believed or disbelieved her.

if
there was a subjective belief that she was 15, he would then have had to take
all reasonable steps to ascertain her true age. counsel urges me to apply my
findings about the first encounter to the second. at paragraph 49 of my
decision, i stated:
as it is covered
by the date range in the information, i must also consider the alleged sexual
contact from the sunday night/monday morning. on that occasion, the defendant
was told (and the complainant agrees she said this) that the complainant was 16
years old and in high school. in this context, i do not find any additional
investigation was necessary on the part of the defendant. he asked her age,
and she told him. her answer was not obviously suspicious. i am not persuaded
that he should have done more. in the circumstances, i will give the defendant
the benefit of the doubt on this first encounter.

i
cannot apply this finding to the situation facing the defendant after the first
encounter. when the complainant changed what she told him about her age, she
fundamentally changed the state of affairs. in his statement, the defendant
himself acknowledged that 15 was an age line he couldn’t cross. finding out
that a) she had apparently lied about her age when she said she was 16, and b)
she was actually 15 and therefore, in the defendant’s words, “a minor”, meant
that further inquiry was absolutely necessary. at that point, he had no reason
to believe 15 was her true age given her dishonesty. it was incumbent on him
to take further steps. he took none.

support
for this finding is taken from the supreme court of canada’s
decision in
r.
v.
morrison
2019 scc 15 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 15
at paragraph
108:
relatedly, if the accused takes some
initial steps that could reasonably support a belief that the other person is
of legal age, but "red flags" are subsequently raised suggesting he
or she may not be, then the accused may be required to take additional steps to
ascertain the other person's age: see dragos, at paras. 62-64 and 66. if
the accused takes no such additional steps, then he or she may be found not to
have satisfied the reasonable steps requirement. the requirement is
thus an ongoing one.

the
complainant telling the defendant that she was actually 15 must surely be a
very red flag necessitating additional steps. that he was reasonable in
believing her to be 16 initially does not inoculate everything that followed. 
his obligation was, as justice moldaver said, an ongoing one.

there
is no air of reality to a claim that the defendant took all reasonable steps to
ascertain the complainant’s true age based on the situation that confronted
him.

had
i granted the application to allow consideration of the close in age exception
related to a mistaken belief in age, i would have found the claim lacked an air
of reality. the defence would not have been successful.
result

the
application is dismissed. we will proceed to sentencing.
released: 27 august 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt