source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj260/2025oncj260.html

warning
the
court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the
file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the victim or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153,
153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173,
213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2,
286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read
from time to time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force,
if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if
it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with
in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in
paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on
application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in
paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity,
inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right
to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the
prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections
486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. borja, 2025 oncj 260
date: 2025 05 09
court file no.: windsor
23-81104880
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
juan borja
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 27 and 31
march 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 9 may 2025
andrea harris...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
evan weber................................................................................. 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

the
defendant juan borja is accused of two sexual assaults on the complainant m.b. 
these assaults are alleged to have taken place between 18 june and 15 july in
count 1, and 16 – 31 july in count 2.

the
crown argues the evidence of the complainant is sufficient to prove both
counts. counsel for the defendant argues any sexual contact at the relevant
times was either consensual or never happened, and that whether or not the
court accepts or is left with a doubt by the defendant’s evidence, i should in
any event not accept the complainant’s evidence as proof beyond a reasonable
doubt.

for
the reasons that follow, i agree with the defence.
admissions

at
the outset of trial, date, identity, and jurisdiction were admitted.
issues

our
society functions according to the rule of law. in the criminal justice
context, several concepts are enshrined in the
charter of rights
and freedoms. 
the charter is part of our constitution and is the supreme law of canada. it
provides the bedrock principles of our justice system. these principles
include the presumption of innocence, the right to silence, and the right to
counsel.

the
foundation for
all these rights is an independent and impartial judiciary. without courts
empowered to act free of any pressure or influence from any quarter, the rights
canadians hold dear become illusions. without an independent review of state
conduct, that state becomes the unchallenged last word on right and wrong.
without an impartial body holding lawbreakers responsible, there will be no
respect for the law.

an
independent judiciary, committed to applying the law without fear or favour, is
crucial to the maintenance of a just and civil society.

in
all criminal cases, the crown bears the burden of proving the defendant’s guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. there is no burden on a defendant to prove his or
her innocence. defendants are presumed innocent and maintain that presumption
unless and until guilt is proved by the crown.

proof
beyond a reasonable doubt is a high standard. if i find the defendant is only
likely guilty or even probably guilty, the crown will not have met its burden. 
i must be sure of his guilt if i am to convict. it is also not a question of
whose evidence i prefer; a criminal trial is not a contest where the most
believable witness wins.

this
case is governed by the principles set out in
r.
v.
w.d.
1991 canlii 93 (scc),
 1
s.c.r. 742. the test is as follows:

if
i believe the exculpatory evidence of the defendant, i must acquit him.

if
i do not believe his exculpatory evidence but am nonetheless left with a
reasonable doubt by it, i must acquit him.

if
i neither believe his evidence nor have a reasonable doubt because of it, i
must then consider if, on the evidence i do accept, the crown has proved one or
more counts beyond a reasonable doubt. only if i find they have done so should
i find him guilty.
step 1: do i believe the evidence of the defendant?

the
defendant testified and was cross-examined. he agreed with the complainant on
several points:
(1)
they
met shortly after her 16
th
birthday.
(2)
they
were in a romantic relationship from june – august 2023.
(3)
they
would frequently stay in local hotels over the course of their relationship.
(4)
on
6 august, the defendant was arrested at his home on charges unrelated to the
complainant. she was present at the time of his arrest.

regarding
the charges before the court, the defendant described their hotel stays at the
relevant time. specifically, he testified to the two days that were the focus
of the complainant’s evidence.

while
i will consider her evidence in greater detail later in these reasons, i will summarize
it briefly here to provide context.

as
to the first incident, the complainant testified that they were sleeping in the
same bed. in the morning, she said she woke up to the defendant having vaginal
intercourse with her. she said the intercourse was painful and she told him to
stop. he did not. he eventually ejaculated on the bed.

the
defendant agreed they were in the hotel room, sharing a bed. he said they were
lying together and started kissing. he took this as an indication that she was
interested in having sex. they took off their clothes and he got on top of
her. he asked if she wanted to “do it”. she told him she didn’t want to have
sex as she had “too much trauma”. he rolled off her and returned to his side
of the bed. there was no sexual activity beyond the kissing.

as
to the second incident, the complainant described a similar series of events. 
she was sleeping, and woke to the defendant having intercourse with her. she
told him to stop, and this time he did.

in
his testimony, the defendant said the second incident was not in the morning
but in the evening. he had taken a shower and was sitting on the bed playing
video games. the complainant took her own shower and exited the bathroom
wearing a towel. he said they laid on the bed. they kissed, and he took his
boxers off. she then said she didn’t want to have sex, again referencing her
past trauma. he acquiesced and no further sexual activity took place. he said
they dressed and went out to eat.

in
cross-examination, the defendant agreed the first incident took place in the
morning. he said they awoke and were smoking marijuana and kissing each
other. they each removed their clothes while kissing. he said he asked if she
wanted to have sex and she said no, she had too much trauma. cross-examination
was also the first time he said she told him her stomach was hurting. she may
have also mentioned being on her period. they did not have sex, he said, for
all those reasons.

late
in his cross-examination, the defendant added to his account of the first
incident. initially he said they were kissing, they removed their clothing, he
got on top of her, and he asked if she wanted to have sex. she said no and he
stopped. towards the end of his evidence, he said the complainant first said
yes when he asked her about having sex. that is why he removed his clothing
and laid on top of her. it was only when he was in that position, about to
begin intercourse, that she changed her mind.

he
also testified for the first time at the end of his cross-examination that he
used a condom in the first incident. it was suggested to him he was not
wearing a condom and he replied that he was “probably” using one. he then
testified to a specific memory of the condoms being on the table next to the
bed. when he asked her the first time and she said yes, he took a condom and
put it on. it was after that that he moved on top of her and asked again.

the
defendant took a different tack in his testimony than counsel did in
cross-examination of the complainant. it was put to her that the sexual
contact in issue was entirely consensual. in his testimony, the defendant
claimed there was no sexual contact at all, beyond the kissing he admitted. at
no point in her cross-examination was it ever put to her that she refused sex
because of past trauma or stomach pain. she was never given the opportunity to
comment on the defendant’s account.

it
was agreed between counsel that the remedy for this never having been put to
the complainant was that i could draw a negative inference against the
defendant in assessing his credibility. i agree that is the appropriate
response.

i
would further note the obvious point that counsel’s questions are not
evidence. relevant to this case, that means that there is no suggestion in the
evidence that the complainant consented to the sexual intercourse alleged. the
defence is exclusively that the intercourse did not happen.

taking
the entirety of the defendant’s evidence into account, i find i do not believe
him. his account of the incidents was fluid. his testimony in chief was
markedly different from his testimony in cross-examination. he first said she
only said no to sex, then said she changed from yes to no. he was entirely
unclear in his narrative of the second incident, particularly in how they came
to be laying unclothed in bed. finally, his testimony regarding his use of a
condom in the first incident was not provided until very late in
cross-examination, when he went from saying nothing about condom use, to saying
he probably used a condom, to having a specific memory of putting one on.

on
the first prong of the
w.d.
test,
i find i do not believe the evidence of the
defendant.
step 2: do i have a reasonable doubt on
the basis of the defendant’s evidence?

the
second stage of the
w.d.
test
presents a much lower bar. i can disbelieve
evidence while still being left with a reasonable doubt by it. at this stage
of the analysis, i ask myself if, based on the defendant’s evidence, i have a
reasonable doubt. i do not ask myself if his evidence could reasonably be
true, as this would reverse the onus and imply that he bears a burden to
provide a reasonable explanation. the question is, simply, do i have a
reasonable doubt overall based on the defendant’s evidence?

the
answer to this question is no.

while
the test is lower at this stage, i can still rely on the same reasons i did in
the first stage. the reasons i rejected his evidence as unbelievable are the
same reasons i find it incapable of raising a reasonable doubt. at the risk of
repeating myself, i will review those concerns again.

the
evidence of the defendant was inconsistent. it changed as he testified, and
changed significantly between chief and cross-examination. i do not ignore
that he was testifying about events from nearly two years ago. the passage of
time makes his uncertainty about exactly when, for example, he removed his
boxers in a given incident less troubling. but his inconsistencies went beyond
minor points. throughout his evidence in chief, he said she only ever said no
to having sex. only in cross-examination did he reveal she first said yes. 
likewise, only in cross-examination did he say part of her stated reason for
not wanting to have sex was stomach pain or menstruation. that was not part of
his evidence in chief. his addition of evidence regarding condom use was late
and, respectfully, convenient.

added
to all this is the negative inference i draw from his failure to put his
defence to the complainant.

after
evaluating the evidence of the defendant and placing it in the context of all
the evidence heard in this trial, i find it does not leave me with a reasonable
doubt.
step 3: has the crown proved the offences
beyond a reasonable doubt?

at
the third stage of the
w.d.
test,
i must determine if, on the evidence i do accept,
the crown has proved one or more charged offences beyond a reasonable doubt.

again,
it is not sufficient if the evidence leads me to conclude the defendant is
likely or probably guilty. finding i simply prefer the evidence of the
complainant is also not enough. i must be sure of the defendant’s guilt before
i convict.

the
complainant was 17 years old at the time of her testimony. she was testifying
about events she said took place shortly after her 16
th
birthday. 
she is a child witness, and her evidence must be viewed through that lens. speaking
for the supreme court of canada in the case of
r.
v.
r.w.
1992 canlii 56 (scc),

2 s.c.r. 122, justice mclachlin (as she then was) cited justice wilson in the
supreme court decision of
r.
v.
b.(g.)
1990 canlii 7308 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 30, at
paragraphs
25 and 26:
as wilson j. emphasized
in
b. (g.), these
changes in the way the courts look at the evidence of children do not mean that
the evidence of children should not be subject to the same standard of proof as
the evidence of adult witnesses in criminal cases. protecting the liberty of
the accused and guarding against the injustice of the conviction of an innocent
person require a solid foundation for a verdict of guilt, whether the
complainant be an adult or a child. what the changes do mean is that we
approach the evidence of children not from the perspective of rigid
stereotypes, but on what wilson j. called a "common sense" basis,
taking into account the strengths and weaknesses which characterize the
evidence offered in the particular case.
it is neither desirable nor possible to
state hard and fast rules as to when a witness's evidence should be assessed by
reference to "adult" or "child" standards -- to do so would
be to create anew stereotypes potentially as rigid and unjust as those which
the recent developments in the law's approach to children's evidence have been
designed to dispel. every person giving testimony in court, of whatever age, is
an individual, whose credibility and evidence must be assessed by reference to
criteria appropriate to his or her mental development, understanding and
ability to communicate.

these
decisions confirm that witnesses should be not viewed through unyielding
preconceived stereotypes. all witnesses are individuals deserving of bespoke
assessment. this is especially true of child witnesses who lack the life
experience or narrative capabilities of adults. this does not mean that the
crown’s burden shifts as the ages of its witnesses decrease. the burden is
always the same and must be met regardless of the nature of the evidence
offered. courts must also be careful when employing “common sense” in
assessing evidence. it is a short drive from assessing evidence pragmatically
to inappropriately filling in gaps and making unsupported assumptions.

the
complainant testified as i’ve noted. she related two incidents with the
defendant at a hotel. in both, she said she was sleeping and awoke to find the
defendant having vaginal intercourse with her. on the first occasion, she told
him to stop but he did not. she said he continued and ultimately ejaculated on
the bed. on the second occasion, she again told him to stop, and he did. on
neither occasion did the defendant wear a condom. she said she never brought
the incidents up in conversation with him and went on with their relationship. 
in fact, she said she wanted to continue the relationship despite the
allegations she described.

in
both incidents, she said she fell asleep wearing shorts, underwear, and a
t-shirt. when she awoke each time, she was naked from the waist down.

even
after his arrest in august, she still wanted to stay with him. when she was
questioned by police following his arrest, she did not disclose any sexual
assault despite the interview being largely about their relationship.

the
complainant’s evidence was not perfect. there were certain areas, properly
pointed out by counsel, that he argues should give me concern.

the
first relates to the complainant’s knowledge of the defendant’s age. in her evidence
in chief she said she didn’t know his exact age, but believed the defendant to
be around her age when they met. in cross-examination, she said she believed
him to be 17 or 18. it was put to her that in her first statement to police,
taken in august 2023, that she told police she knew at the time that he was 22
years old. at first, she disagreed she’d said that. she then immediately
agreed, and when asked why she said otherwise in her testimony, she said it was
hard to remember. i take from that evidence she is saying she forgot she told
police that.

i
agree it is a weakness in her testimony that she told the court she thought he
was 17 or 18 but told police she knew he was 22. i must consider, however, the
nature of this inconsistency and the context in which it arose.

is
this an inconsistency that goes to core issues in the case? it is not. the
age of the defendant, or the relative age difference between the complainant
and defendant, is not relevant to the charges. while specifying that she
thought the defendant was 17 or 18 is more of an issue than had she simply said
she didn’t remember his age, i do not place undue weight on this one point when
assessing her credibility.

the
second area counsel points to is the complainant refraining from mentioning
anything about the sexual assaults in her august statement. further, he notes
that when police told her about a sexually transmitted disease the defendant apparently
had, she told them she didn’t need to be tested as he always wore a condom. 
this went against her testimony that the defendant did not use a condom in
either incident. he does not make the argument that had the sexual assaults
happened, she would have told someone. that reasoning would be improper and
counsel does not invite me to engage in it. he does, however, submit that the
condom issue is an inconsistency. she acknowledged in cross-examination that
she may well have lied to the officer when she said he always used one. this,
counsel suggests, is a problem.

when
she was asked about not mentioning the sexual assaults to police in august, the
complainant provided an explanation. she said, simply, that she wasn’t yet
ready to talk about them. failure to disclose sexual assaults in a timely
manner is not a standalone basis for taking a dim view of a complainant’s
credibility (see:
r.
v.
d.d.
2000 scc 43,
r.
v.
kruk
2024 scc 7 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 7
). it does, however, form part of the “factual mosaic” of
the case and “must be assessed in the context of the trial evidence as a whole”
(see:
r.
v.
s.g.
2022 onca 727
).

that
said, as
noted by justice major in
d.d.,
supra, at paragraph
65;
a trial judge
should recognize and so instruct a jury that there is no inviolable rule on how
people who are the victims of trauma like a sexual assault will behave. some
will make an immediate complaint, some will delay in disclosing the abuse,
while some will never disclose the abuse. reasons for delay are many and at
least include embarrassment, fear, guilt, or a lack of understanding and
knowledge.

the
latitude that is properly granted in the disclosure of traumatic events must
surely be even more applicable when the witness in question is a child.

in
the present case, counsel alleges that disclosure was only made after the
complainant learned of the defendant’s infidelity. this discovery provided a
motive for her to fabricate her allegations. this is the crux of the delayed
disclosure argument. counsel is not arguing that because she delayed in
telling police about the assaults, they are less likely to have happened; he is
arguing that the allegations only being made after learning the extent of the
defendant’s unfaithfulness makes them less believable. her anger at finding
out she’d been cheated on motivated her to concoct these accusations.

i
have considered the defence argument on this point, remembering throughout that
the burden is on the crown to prove the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.

i
find the revelation of the defendant’s infidelity was the motivation for the
complainant to disclose the sexual assault allegations. that does not mean,
however, that the allegations are necessarily false. motive to disclose and
motive to fabricate are two very different things.

where
the defence adduces evidence of a motive to fabricate, a trier of fact is
required to consider it “to give full effect to the presumption of innocence,
and a failure to do so constitutes reversible error.” (
see
kruk,
supra,
at paragraph
65
). in the present case, i find the defence has adduced evidence
of a possible motive to fabricate given the timing of the disclosure. i must
therefore consider that issue in deciding whether i accept the evidence of the
complainant.

on
her evidence, the complainant, a 16-year old girl, was sexually assaulted twice
by the person she cared for and was in a relationship with. on two separate
occasions, she went to sleep only to wake up without her pants and with the
defendant having intercourse with her. she did not confront him about this
afterward but rather wanted to stay in the relationship. even after his arrest
on the other charges, she wanted to stay with him. it was only later, when she
learned more details about how he’d lied to her about being with other girls,
that she came forward with these allegations.

the
complainant did testify that after her august statement she learned more
details about the defendant’s unfaithfulness. she denied, however, that those
details led her to fabricate her allegations.

i
find the complainant was careful in her answers on this point. when she was
asked how learning the defendant had been charged with sexual offences against
other females made her feel, she responded, “i don’t really remember”. 
respectfully, that is an odd response. she was told that the person she’d been
in a relationship with for months had been charged with sexual offences on
multiple women, and she doesn’t remember how that made her feel? in my view,
that answer is more consistent with not wanting to share how she felt than it
is with a legitimate failure of memory.

where
a motive to fabricate has been shown, it falls to the crown to show that the
evidence is believable, nonetheless. that isn’t to say that there is a
separate burden in such cases. instead, from the crown’s perspective, it is a
complication that can make proof beyond a reasonable doubt harder to establish.

counsel,
as i said, also pointed out that she told police in august the defendant always
wore a condom. her allegations would contradict that point. this is another
inconsistency.

her
failure to mention the occasions where he didn’t wear a condom can be taken two
ways. in saying she was not ready to disclose the sexual assaults in august,
it makes sense that she would not have mentioned the times he didn’t use a
condom as that could have forced her to disclose the assaults. or, she may
have been telling police the truth and there never was a time when he didn’t
wear one. this would cast doubt on her allegations.

when
asked about this point, the complainant effectively disavowed both her answer
and her thought processes at the time of the august statement.
complainant: i
did not make him use a condom.
counsel: but
you told the officer in august you did.
complainant: yes.
counsel: what’s
your explanation for just making that up? why would you make that up?
complainant: it’s
two years ago, so i don’t know. i know what…
counsel: appreciate
how that’s not a real good explanation for lying to the police, that, just because
it was two years ago?
complainant: yeah,
i know what i’m telling you right now is the truth, i can’t speak for what i’ve
done two years ago.
counsel: now
that you know he was very unfaithful to you, not a good boyfriend.
complainant: yes.

i
find myself distinctly uncomfortable with the complainant’s evidence on all these
points. i remember that she is a child witness and that inconsistencies on
peripheral matters should be viewed more generously. i remember that she is
testifying about events from two years earlier, and that two years is a long
time in a teenager’s life.

but
the crown’s burden never shifts. the standard of proof never shrinks.

i
have given this case much consideration. in the end, i do not accept the
evidence of the defendant. he was not a credible witness. on the basis of the
complainant’s evidence, i am very suspicious that the defendant did exactly
what she said he did. it is far more likely that she is telling the truth than
that she is fabricating the allegations out of vengeance. i cannot, however,
accept her evidence as proof of the allegations beyond a reasonable doubt. 
that is a high standard, not easily met. it has not been met in this case.

the
defendant will be found not guilty.
released: 9 may 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt