source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj357/2025oncj357.html

warning
the
court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the
file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) 
subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order
directing that any information that could identify the victim or a witness
shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way,
in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153,
153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173,
213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2,
286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read
from time to time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force,
if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if
it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with
in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in
paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on
application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in
paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity,
inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right
to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the
prosecutor or any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections
486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. c.p.,
2025 oncj 357
date: 2025 06 27
court file no.: windsor
23-80200545
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
c.p.
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 4, 5, 6,
9 june 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 27 june 2025
emile carrington................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
shane miles.................................................................................. 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

on
4 june 2025, i began the trial of the offender c.p. on a 17-count information. 
after two days of evidence, i was advised the matter had resolved. on the
third day of trial, the offender changed his pleas on counts 1, 5, and 15. 
these counts relate to breaching a release order, assault, and assault causing
bodily harm. on the fourth day set for trial, i received sentencing
submissions and victim impact.

these
are my reasons for sentence.
facts

at
the time the guilty pleas were entered, the crown read in supporting facts. i
asked both counsel if they were content that i also rely on the evidence called
at the trial to that point. both said yes. i will therefore consider the
evidence called on the trial, together with the facts as read in. i will not
consider the evidence on the voir dire that had been in progress at the time
the pleas were changed.

the
offender met the victim d.m. in 2014. they began an intimate relationship. at
the time, she was married to t.b. their relationship continued, on and off,
for several years. in 2021 the victim separated from t.b. and continued her
relationship with the offender. t.b. moved out of the family home he had
shared with the victim and her daughter a.m.

on
24 july 2022, there was an incident that led the victim to go to police. the
offender was subsequently arrested and released on conditions based on
allegations related to both the victim and t.b. i note the criminal record
filed on consent included an entry from 2024 for two counts of uttering
threats. i was advised this related to the july 2022 incident.

relevant
to the present case, the offender breached the july undertaking almost
immediately. he went to the victim’s home and they resumed their
relationship. the victim testified that she didn’t think her house had a key
at that point as she recalled installing an electronic keypad instead. she
said the offender knew the code and could therefore enter the home whenever he
wished. despite the order prohibiting contact, he went to her house at least
every couple of days. by then, t.b. had moved out and the victim thought she
and the offender could move forward with their lives.

given
the restrictions, the victim felt they needed to sneak around. it appears
their contact was primarily at her residence.

from
his return to her residence in july until she went to police again in december,
the victim was assaulted on a regular basis by the offender. he would punch
her in the head and chest. he would slap her in the face. he would pull her
hair. these assaults were often accompanied by vile and degrading insults. he
would call her a whore and a bitch, and would say she was fat and ugly.

much
of the conflict in the relationship related to the offender’s infidelity. the
victim testified to the offender having multiple other women in his life, a
fact she confirmed personally by looking through his phone messages and finding
him at other women’s houses. she believed he had at least ten other women in
his life. she testified that when it came to sexual activity, she was afraid
that if she did not indulge him, he would go elsewhere. sex, she said, “came
with a lot of other feelings.”

the
physical and emotional abuse came to a head when they went out for a friend’s
birthday the night of 30 november 2023. the evening began at a restaurant and
later continued at a bar. on the drive between locations, the offender took
exception to the victim speaking with other men. an argument began. jealousy,
from both sides, was a constant feature of their relationship. the argument
eventually turned physical with the offender striking the victim in her head,
face, and chest. he struck her with enough force that he caused swelling to
her head sufficient to make out the offence of assault causing bodily harm.

it
was in the days following this last incident that the victim went to police and
the charges before me were laid.

i
heard from the victim that drugs were also a significant part of their
relationship. while she had experimented with drugs as a teenager, her use at
this point was entirely a function of her connection to the offender. as she
noted in her victim impact statement, “c.’s addiction pulled us into a world i
never wanted to be a part of…i found myself in places no one should ever be.” 
they consumed cocaine and methamphetamine. she testified that the drug use
became quite heavy at one point, and confirmed they’d both taken methamphetamine
the night of the birthday party.
positions of the parties

the
crown seeks a jail sentence of 12 months minus credit for pre-sentence
custody. this would be followed by three years of probation. it also seeks a
s. 109 weapons prohibition for life, a non-contact order while the offender is
in custody, and the provision of a dna sample.

for
the offender, counsel seeks a sentence of time served. the offender has 122
actual days of pre-sentence custody, which counsel urges me to enhance to 183
days. he seeks a sentence of one further day jail followed by probation. he
does not take issue with the ancillary orders. i was also advised that the
offender would be resolving other matters on the conclusion of this case and
that those matters would involve a joint submission for 60 days jail
consecutive to whatever sentence he receives presently.
victim impact statements

i
received two victim impact statements in this case: one from the victim and one
from her mother w.m. i am grateful for them.
w.m.

the
statement filed by the victim’s mother is striking for its grace and
forgiveness. while describing in painstaking detail the toll the offender’s
actions have taken on her daughter, w.m. appears to harbour no anger or desire
for harsh punishment. the ordeal she has been through, watching her child descend
into addiction and shame and suicidal thoughts, is obvious. but she is focused
on the future. i do not doubt that her resilience, her strength, and her faith
will be key in helping her daughter recover from the damage she’s suffered.
d.m.

the
victim’s statement is similarly eloquent. it describes the deterioration of a
relationship. the victim was pulled into drug addiction and a cycle of abuse. 
it is through her own hard work, and the support of those around her, that
she’s been able to emerge from this situation successfully. she hopes the
offender can get help to be the person she says he still is. her concern also
relates to the offender’s son cx. she further expressed the hope of possibly
reuniting at some point.

i
will have more to say about the victim’s statement later in these reasons.
principles of sentencing

parliament
has enacted several sections in the
criminal code
that are relevant to the
present case.

first,
s. 718 sets out the fundamental purpose of sentencing. it states:
718
the fundamental purpose of sentencing
is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a)
to denounce unlawful
conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by
unlawful conduct;
(b)
to deter the offender
and other persons from committing offences;
(c)
to separate offenders
from society, where necessary;
(d)
to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to provide reparations
for harm done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or
to the community.

a
fit sentence must protect society and contribute to respect for the law. it
must seek to maintain a just and peaceful society. these goals are achieved by
imposing sentences that emphasize the objectives listed.

several
other sections relate specifically to cases like the matter before me.

section
718.04 requires that i place primary importance on denunciation and deterrence
in cases where offences are committed against vulnerable victims. i find as a
fact the victim was vulnerable for the purpose of this section. she referred
in her testimony multiple times to the stresses she was under over the course
of her relationship: her ongoing contentious separation from her husband, the
effect that separation was having on her daughter’s daily life, and her attempts
to maintain the household on her own all show the emotional difficulty she was
experiencing. against that backdrop, she was dealing with an abusive,
unfaithful partner who brought drug addiction and violence into their lives. i
am required, therefore, to emphasize denunciation and deterrence in the
sentence i impose.

section
718.2(a) lists several factors that a court must take to be aggravating when
determining sentence. three of those factors apply in the present case: paragraph
(a)(ii) (abuse of an intimate partner), paragraph (a)(iii) (abusing a position
of trust over a victim), and paragraph (a)(iii.1) (an offence having a
“significant impact on the victim”).

section
718.201 directs judges to consider the increased vulnerability of female
victims of intimate partner violence.

finally,
s. 718.1 requires that any sentence be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.

in
general, parliament and the courts have begun to recognize the seriousness of
intimate partner violence to an extent not seen in the past. myths and
stereotypes have been identified and cast aside. the impact of trauma on
victims is being given appropriate weight. the net effect of this evolution is
the imposition of sentences that truly reflect the harm done to victims and the
broader community. it is a positive change.
mitigating and aggravating factors

the
chief mitigating factor in this case is the offender’s guilty plea. it came at
a point in the trial where the crown was facing obstacles. we had just
embarked on an application under s. 9(2) of the canada evidence act. depending
on how that application turned out, there may have been another application to
follow. i was also advised that the victim had provided what was called a
recantation letter to the police. it was in the face of this uncertainty, with
many of the possible outcomes being favourable to the offender, that he agreed
to change his plea. he spared the victim from continuing her testimony and
from having her statement played in open court. his guilty pleas are
meaningful.

he
has also taken steps since the offences to address his addictions. he has
attended narcotics anonymous meetings while in custody, and has reached out to
two local recovery facilities for help on his release from custody. given the
central role his addiction has played in his offences, this is an important
step.

one
aspect of this case that is most certainly not a mitigating factor is the
contention that the victim was an active participant in the couple’s arguments. 
that she yelled back, and that she may have called the offender names, does
nothing to absolve him of his responsibility.

the
aggravating factors are clear. in addition to the statutory factors listed
above, the nature of the offences is itself aggravating. in particular, the
court order disallowing contact with the victim was breached almost immediately,
and then on a near-daily basis thereafter. it meant nothing to the offender. 
further, while he pleaded to just one count of assault, i heard that his
physical abuse of the victim continued for months. repeated punches and slaps,
combined with degrading insults, became a feature of the victim’s daily life.

in
my view, the overall context of the relationship is also important in this
regard. in her testimony, the victim spoke of the power the offender exercised
over her: his infidelity left her desperate to please him. his insults left
her feeling hurt by the person she loved. as she stated in her victim impact
statement: “the emotional and verbal abuse became part of my daily life –
constant criticism, jealousy, and isolation. eventually, it escalated into
moments of physical harm.”

in
their research paper submitted to the office of the federal ombudsman for
victims of crime entitled, “understanding coercive control in the context of
intimate partner violence in canada: how to address the issue through the
criminal justice system?”, professor carmen gill and phd candidate mary
aspinall, both of the university of new brunswick, noted the following:
there are four common domains of coercive
controlling behaviours, which include controlling/proprietary behaviours,
psychological abuse, sexual jealousy, and stalking (dawson et al., 2019: 47).
perpetrators may make implicit or explicit threats, use physical or sexual
violence, destroy the victim’s personal property, and isolate or intimidate the
victim by closely monitoring their behaviours and interactions with other
people (crossman & hardesty, 2017; hamberger et al., 2017).

i
find the behaviours of the offender in the present case meet this definition of
coercive control. the victim testified to and wrote about the offender’s
jealousy. the simple act of speaking to another man at the birthday party
started a serious and violent argument. the psychological abuse of the
“constant criticism” and “isolation” clearly took a tremendous toll on the
victim. this is from w.m.’s victim impact statement, describing the victim
when she was with the offender:
she was broken,
she was incredibly sad, she was suicidal, she was addicted to drugs, she was
ashamed of her body and ashamed of her life. that broken woman in that video
was the woman you created and after all that she was still my child.

justice
richmond, of the saskatchewan court of king’s bench, said the following at
paragraph 22 of
s.c.
v.
n.c.
 s.j. no. 282:
physical violence
is easily identified and it can suffice to show an isolated incident. coercive
control is far more subtle and may be more damaging, its effects can be long
lasting as it slowly strips away confidence and self-worth. one act alone may
be innocuous and forgivable, but the cumulative effect may be devastating.

i
agree with justice richmond. the physical assaults, serious as they are, were
only one part of the abuse the offender inflicted on the victim.
analysis

the
actions of the offender are very serious. over a prolonged period, he violated
the victim physically and emotionally. he belittled her and assaulted her. in
doing so, he also showed utter disregard for a court order.

on
his behalf, counsel seeks a sentence of time served plus one day. as the
offender has slightly more than four months of pre-sentence custody, that would
equate to a sentence of approximately 6 months if i grant the standard 1.5:1
credit.

the
crown seeks a sentence of roughly double that length. it agrees to
pre-sentence credit but argues it should come off a sentence of 12 months’
duration.

balancing
the aggravating and mitigating factors, and taking into account the relevant
legislation, i find the crown’s position to be appropriate, if even perhaps
somewhat lenient.

the
offender will be sentenced to 12 months custody on each count, to be served
concurrently. to be specific, the sentence on each count will be 365 days. he
will receive credit for 140 days of pre-sentence custody which i will enhance
to 210 days. this means that on each count, he will have a further 155 days
custody to be served concurrently.

on
release from custody, the offender will be bound by a probation order for three
years. in addition to the statutory conditions of probation, the terms will be:
(1)
report
in person to a probation officer within two working days of your release from
custody and thereafter as required by the probation officer or any person
authorized by the probation officer to assist in your supervision.
(2)
cooperate
with your probation officer. you must sign any releases necessary for the
probation officer to monitor your compliance and you must provide proof of
compliance with any condition of this order to your probation officer on request.
(3)
do
not contact or communicate in any way, either directly or indirectly by any
physical, electronic or other means with d.m., a.m., or w.m.
(4)
do
not be within 100m of any place you know any of the persons named above to
live, work, go to school, or any place you know them to be except for required
court attendances.
(5)
do
not possess anything defined in the
criminal code
as a weapon.
(6)
attend
and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed by the probation officer and complete them to the
satisfaction of the probation officer, including but not limited to counselling
for substance abuse, anger management, and domestic violence, which may include
the partner assault response program.

the
offender is ordered on count 5, which is a primary designated offence, to
provide a sample of his dna to the windsor police for inclusion in the national
dna databank, forthwith. he is also ordered to provide a sample forthwith on
counts 1 and 15, which are both secondary designated offences.

the
offender will be prohibited from possessing weapons pursuant to s. 109 for life
on count 5.

there
will be an order pursuant to s. 743.21 prohibiting the offender from contacting
d.m., a.m., or w.m. while in custody.

given
the custodial sentence, i will waive the victim surcharges on each count.
the
no contact and not attend conditions

counsel
for the offender has sought an exception to the no contact and non-attendance
conditions in the probation order. the victim herself has voiced a desire for
contact with the offender, and hasn’t ruled out possibly reuniting with him. 
part of the victim’s concern stems from the offender’s son cx. i have been
told that cx. is without a parental figure now that the offender is in
custody. he has been rendered effectively homeless and was recently the victim
of a violent crime. the victim wants to maintain contact with the offender so
that she can help care for cx.

i
have considered the idea of permitting any sort of contact between the victim
and offender. in my view, any such permission is asking for violent and dangerous
trouble. the relationship between the parties, to once again quote ms. m., was
toxic and cancerous. my duty in imposing sentence is to protect society. that
society includes the victim. i recognize the victim is an adult who can make
her own decisions. there will be times, however, when the justice system must
override an individual’s independence because they appear unwilling or
incapable of protecting themselves. this is one such time. there will be no
exceptions to the terms. i remind both parties that any contact in violation
of this order could result in both of them being charged and taken into
custody.

there
is nothing in the order that would prevent the victim from helping cx. as she
sees fit. she is welcome to provide whatever assistance she wishes to give and
he wishes to accept, so long as it does not involve any contact with the offender.

both
parties have spoken about this dark chapter of their lives now being over. it
is my sincere hope that is true. my wish for both families is that they are
able to move forward in a positive way, but in very separate directions.
released: 27 june 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt