source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj536/2025oncj536.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. gyory, 2025 oncj 536
date: 
2025 10 10
court
file no.: central east 4911-998-24-91110634-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
peter gyory
before
justice peter d. tetley
heard
on september 2 and 22, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 10, 2025
naime sayde........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
the defendant peter gyory..................................................................... 
on his own behalf
tetley j.:
background

peter gyory, a self-represented defendant, is
charged with the offence of operating a motor vehicle with more than the
lawfully permissible amount of alcohol in his blood, contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(b)
of the
criminal code, the “80+” offence.

the charge arises from a york regional police
service investigation on november 19, 2024. on that day, the defendant was
stopped by constable ryan knight, shortly after 12:18 p.m., while operating a
commercial vehicle northbound on highway 27 in the township of king.

the officer’s attention was initially attracted
by the fact the vehicle did not have a front licence plate. on speaking to the
defendant, constable knight testified that an odour of alcohol could be
detected on the defendant’s breath. this prompted an approved screening device
or asd demand at 12:20, with the defendant registering a “fail” at 12:23 p.m. 
the failed roadside test confirmed that the concentration of alcohol in the
defendant’s blood (his blood alcohol concentration or b.a.c.) was at least “100
milligrams or higher” according to the investigating officer. constable knight
then proceeded to arrest the defendant at 12:30 p.m. for the offence of “over
80” or having “more than 80 milligrams of alcohol in the blood.”

after the arrest, right to counsel, and caution,
the defendant was taken to 1 district headquarters in newmarket where
subsequent breath tests confirmed the concentration of alcohol in the
defendant’s blood to be 109 milligrams of alcohol in 100 millilitres of blood
at the time of the completion of the initial breath test and 95 milligrams of
alcohol at the time of the completion of the second breath test.

the samples of the defendant’s breath were secured
pursuant to a roadside demand by the arresting officer. the demand was issued
at 12:31 p.m. and was confirmed as being understood by the defendant. the
demand was repeated by the qualified technician, police constable alexandra
positano, prior to the defendant’s provision of further breath samples at the
police station with the arresting officer advising that he had no further
dealings with the matter once the defendant had been placed in the control of
officer positano.
the issues

at the conclusion of the presentation of
evidence by the prosecution, the defendant elected to call no evidence. two issues
were identified as having arisen in the prosecution’s case as follows:
(i)
the admissibility of the certificate of
qualified technician in the absence of any direct evidence that the certificate
had been served on the defendant in advance of trial; and
(ii)
whether the crown was able to rely on the
testimony of the qualified technician, as to the defendant’s blood alcohol
concentration readings, were the certificate to be deemed inadmissible.
the law

i am indebted to ms. sayde for her industry in
addressing these concerns in a comprehensive and objective fashion. in
circumstances involving an unrepresented defendant, it falls to both the court
and the crown to ensure all available defences are identified and addressed. 
the crown in such circumstances acts as a quasi-minister of justice in ensuring
that the fair trial interests of the unrepresented defendant are protected. 
ms. sayde has discharged that obligation with distinction.
analysis
a.
proof of service of the certificate

leaving aside the arresting officer’s incomplete
description of the results of the failed approved screening device test (confirmation
of a blood/alcohol concentration of more than 100 milligrams of alcohol in
100
millilitres of blood
), i am satisfied that a lawful basis existed for the
breath demand that ensued. the initial consideration here is whether the crown
has proven service of the qualified technician’s certificate in the absence of
direct evidence in relation to that issue and the seemingly erroneous factual
assertion by the arresting officer that his involvement in the investigation
ended once he turned the defendant over to the qualified technician.

the crown references an alberta court of appeal
decision,
r. v. sirman,
2020 abca 174, in support of the contention that
proof of service can be established by both direct evidence or circumstantial
evidence, or both. on the trial record here, the crown asserts that
confirmation of service of the certificate of qualified technician is
established by the arresting officer’s signature attesting to service of the
certificate on the defendant, who acknowledged service by his own endorsement
on the certificate itself.

even in the face of conflicting testimony on
this point by the arresting officer, the signatures on the face of the
certificate itself are submitted to establish proof of service on the balance
of probabilities standard required by what was then s. 258(7) (now s.
320.32(2)). service of the certificate in advance is a pre-requisite to
admissibility when the crown relies on certificate evidence to prove a 80+ offence. 
as noted in
sirman, at para.
2, “no certificate shall be received in
evidence unless the party intending to produce it has, before the trial, given
to the other party reasonable notice of their intention to produce it and a
copy of the certificate.” see also
r. v. redford,
2014 abca 336, at
para.
10.

the issue was explored in greater detail, much “closer
to home”, by b.p. o’marra j. of the ontario superior court of justice, in
r.
v. zorlescu,
2015 onsc 3458, with extensive reference being made to
paragraphs 31-36 of
r. v. oslowski,
2006 oncj 488, o.j. no. 5036,
a decision of justice b. duncan of the ontario court of justice. the jurisprudence
relating to the requirement for reasonable notice under s. 258 of the
code
was summarized in
“
oslowski
”
as follows:
31
reasonable notice is a concept,
not a document:
r. v. spreen
(1987)
1987 abca 189 (canlii),
40 ccc (3d) 190
alta ca.
as a concept, it is capable of evolution and must be considered in the existing
legal context. that context includes the advent of full pre-trial disclosure of
all relevant evidence to the defence. such disclosure substantially if not
wholly fulfills the purposes that this provision, rooted in the pre-disclosure
era, was designed to serve: see
r. v.
balen
(2003),
30 m.v.r. (4th) 1
aff'd
39
m.v.r. (4th) 94. a further legal development is the decision of the
court appeal in
r. v. mackinnon,
2003 canlii 48350 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 3896
clarifying
that reasonable notice is a question to be determined on the balance of
probabilities, and not proven beyond a reasonable doubt
10.
it seems to me that these two developments render much of the earlier case law
obsolete and certainly warrant a departure from the punctiliousness of former
days.
32
having said that, there are a
number of relevant principles from the decided cases under this and similar
provisions in other statutes: notice need not be in writing:
r. v. bowles
(1974),
1974 canlii 1442 (on ca),
16 c.c.c. (2d) 425
(ont ca). notice need not be formal in
any way:
r. v. penno
(1977),
1977 canlii 1626 (bc ca),
35 c.c.c. (2d) 266
(bcca). notice may be given to counsel
or counsel's representative:
r. v. meyer
(1976),
1973 canlii 1525 (bc ca),
29 c.c.c. (2d) 165
(bcca).
notice is directed to alerting the other party as to the possibility, not the
certainty, that a certificate will be used - it is notice that the
certificate
may
be used in evidence;
r. v. good et al
(1983),
1983 abca 141 (canlii),
6 c.c.c. (3d) 105
(alta ca).
33
further, there is a consistent
line of authority holding that, where no notice at all has been given, the
tendering of a certificate at a preliminary inquiry provides sufficient
compliance with the notice requirement:
r. v. kwok
(2002),
2002 bcca 177 (canlii),
164 c.c.c. (3d) 182
(bcca); r. v. chang
(1996),
1996 canlii 2996 (bc ca),
106 c.c.c. (3d) 87
(bcca); r.
v. norris,
1993 canlii 681 (bc ca),
 b.c.j. no. 1900,
57 w.a.c. 133 (bcca
);
r. v. penno
supra r. v. cordes
(1978),
1978 altascad 94 (canlii),
40 c.c.c. (2d) 442
(alta ca)
and
most recently
r. v. dillon,
 o.j. no. 2516
hill
j. since no notice
per se
was
given in any of those cases, it is apparent that those cases have interpreted
the section as meaning "put on notice". in other words, nothing,
written or verbal has to be specifically "given".
34
finally, whether reasonable notice
has been given is a question of fact:
r. v.
morrison
(1982)
1982 canlii 3670 (nb ca),
70 c.c.c. (2d) 193
(nbca
per laforest j.a.). this is important because, as a
question of fact, its resolution is a matter of reason, logic, common sense and
experience applied to evidence, and not a matter of precedent. further, like
all facts, it can be established by direct evidence or inference.
35
accordingly, the issue
becomes
whether the court is satisfied on a balance of probabilities by
direct evidence or by inference that, one way or another, the defendant or his
counsel was reasonably put on notice that a certificate might be used at his
trial. the short resolution of that issue in this case is
that i am satisfied that, on the night of the breath testing, the arresting
officer
did
provide notice of intention to the defendant
at the same time that he served the certificate of analysis itself. while his
notes were not specific, it is my view that it is more likely than not that the
notice of intent given at that time was in relation to the concurrently served
certificate and not in relation to the breach of probation charge.
36
further, quite apart from the
above, it is my view that the service of the certificate itself on a defendant
represented by counsel
11
satisfies the test as
set out above. after all, in any other case where a defendant represented by
counsel receives a package of disclosure, it goes without saying that it is
understood that the material may be presented in evidence. why should the
understanding be any different here? add to this understanding the fact that
proof by certificate is a routine procedure and the certificate's admissibility
as evidence is clearly set out in a well-known statutory provision, and the
conclusion is inescapable that the test for notice has been satisfied.

justice o’marra similarly concluded that proof
of notice could be established on the balance of probability standard as
previously concluded by the alberta court of appeal in
redford
and
re-affirmed later in
sirman.
b.
admissibility of the breath test results in the
absence of the certificate of the qualified technician

on this issue, ms. sayde makes reference to
another decision of the ontario superior court of justice,
r. v. yi wu,

o.j. no. 5000, a decision of justice g. roberts, in support of the contention
that the crown can rely on the “
viva voce”
or oral testimony offered by
the breath technician to establish the breath test results and for those
results to be admissible in evidence at common law. preconditions for
admissibility require that the court is satisfied that the instrument was capable
of making the measurement in issue, was in good working order and was properly
used at the material time. see also
r. v. mccarthy,
2013 onsc 599, at
paragraphs
21-23.

when the prosecution relies on the evidentiary
shortcut in s. 320.31(1) of the
code,
the results of the breath tests
are conclusive proof of the defendant’s blood alcohol concentration level at
the time the analysis was made, if the referenced criteria are met. section 320.31(1)
provides as follows:
breath samples
320.31
(1)
if
samples of a person’s breath have been received into an approved instrument
operated by a qualified technician, the results of the analyses of the samples
are conclusive proof of the person’s blood alcohol concentration at the time
when the analyses were made if the results of the analyses are the same — or,
if the results of the analyses are different, the lowest of the results is
conclusive proof of the person’s blood alcohol concentration at the time when
the analyses were made — if
(a)
before each sample was taken, the
qualified technician conducted a system blank test the result of which is not
more than 10 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood and a system calibration check
the result of which is within 10% of the target value of an alcohol standard
that is certified by an analyst;
(b)
there was an interval of at least 15
minutes between the times when the samples were taken; and
(c)
the results of the analyses, rounded
down to the nearest multiple of 10 mg, did not differ by more than 20 mg of
alcohol in 100 ml of blood.

the testimony offered by the qualified
technician confirms that an approved instrument was employed (an intoxilyzer
8000c), that the qualified technician was appropriately designated, that the
breath samples were secured from the defendant directly into an approved
instrument that was found to be in proper working order following a series of
quality assurance checks. the defendant’s breath samples were concluded to be
“good” or “suitable”, with the analysis of the first breath sample revealing a truncated
blood alcohol concentration of 100 milligrams of alcohol in 100 millilitres of
blood and the second breath test disclosing a truncated blood alcohol
concentration reading of 90 milligrams in 100 millilitres of blood.
conclusion

based on the foregoing considerations, i
conclude the prosecution has established proof of the offence alleged on the
basis of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, the standard of proof that applies in
a criminal case.

in reaching this conclusion the following
findings of fact are warranted:
(i)
the defendant is concluded to have been
operating a motor vehicle, on november 19, 2024, at the time of the traffic
stop conducted by officer knight;
(ii)
a failed approved screening device, or roadside
breath test, provided a lawful basis for the ensuing demand for further samples
of the defendant’s breath for analysis by a qualified technician by means of an
approved instrument, an intoxilyzer 8000c;
(iii)
analysis of the subsequently obtained samples of
the defendant’s breath confirms that the defendant’s b.a.c. exceeded the legal
limit, contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(b) of the
criminal code; and
(iv)
the prosecution may rely, at common law, on the
trial testimony of the qualified technician to establish the defendant’s b.a.c.
readings without reliance on the evidentiary shortcut referenced in s.
320.31(1). the point of the evidentiary shortcut, as discussed by justice
roberts at page 3 of
r. v. yi wu, is to avoid the need to call the
qualified technician to give evidence in relation to the breath test process
employed and the resulting analysis of the samples of breath provided by the
defendant. that testimony is concluded to establish the breath test results as
admissible and reliable.
(v)
alternatively, the prosecution can rely on the
certificate evidence confirming the breath test results, with the confirmation
of service of the certificate being concluded as established, on a balance of
probabilities standard, by the signatures on the certificate of both the arresting
officer and the defendant. the trial record is concluded to confirm that the
defendant received a copy of the certificate of qualified technician before he
left the police station. that certificate references the results of the breath
test procedure and confirms that the concentration of alcohol in the
defendant’s blood exceeded the legal limit within two hours after the defendant
had ceased to operate a commercial vehicle.
verdict

based on the foregoing analysis, the defendant
shall be found guilty of the
s. 320.14(1)
(b) offence.
released: october 10, 2025
signed:
justice peter d. tetley