source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj99/2025oncj99.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. collinge, 2025 oncj 99
date: 
2025 02 24
court
file no.: brampton (central west) 23-31106771
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
shawn collinge
before
justice a. neil singh
heard
on september 23-25, 2024 & january 22, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on february 24, 2025
gregory hendry.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
alan sobcuff...................................................... counsel
for the accused shawn collinge
contents
introduction..
3
factual background..
3
discussion..
6
issue #1 – the relevant inquiry is
who mr. collinge believed he was communicating with, not who he was actually
communicating with.
6
analysis and discussion.
7
issue #2 – mr. collinge had the
required state of mind regarding h.o.’s age when he communicated to her
8
analysis & discussion..
9
conclusion..
11
singh j.:
introduction

shawn collinge is charged with three child
luring offences. it is alleged that between april 1, 2023, and april 4, 2023,
he:
1.
communicated with h.o., a person under the age
of 16 for the purpose of facilitating the offence of sexual interference
contrary to
s.172.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code;
2.
communicated
with h.o., a person under the age of 16 for the purpose of facilitating the
offence of invitation to sexual touching contrary to
s.172.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal code; and
3.
communicated
with h.o., a person under the age of 18 for the purpose of facilitating the
offence obtaining sexual services for consideration contrary
to
s.172.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code.

much of the case against him was conceded when
mr. collinge testified in his own defence. there are two principal issues that
i need to determine in coming to a verdict in this case. they are (1) does it
matter that mr. collinge may have been unknowingly communicating with mr. s.l. when
the information specified that the prohibited com­munication was with h.o.?; and
(2) did mr. collinge have the required state of mind to for a finding of guilt
when he testified that he believed h.o. was 18-20 years old, and not 14?

these reasons explain that my answer to issue #1
is no. my answer to issue #2 is yes. i find mr. collinge guilty of the three
offences before the court. these are my reasons.
factual background

much of the factual background in this matter is uncontested. mr.
collinge acknowledged most of it in his testimony.

on april 1, 2023, mr. collinge contacted h.o. on facebook messenger. his
username was “shawn collinge.” his profile picture was of him.

h.o. is a real person. she was 14 years-old at the time.

h.o. replied to mr. collinge asking if she knew him. from there, over
the next few days the chat devolved into an explicit conversation with mr.
collinge propositioning h.o. sexually. the facebook messenger chat was entered
as an exhibit on the trial. i will review and summarize some important aspects
of the chat.

mr. collinge and h.o. discuss their ages.
•
in the chat, h.o. tells mr. collinge that she is 14 in three
separate messages. mr. collinge tells h.o. he is 36.
•
mr. collinge tells h.o. he is ok with her being 14.
•
during the portion of the recorded phone call / video chat, h.o.
asks mr. collinge if he’s ok with the fact that she is 14. mr. collinge
responds that he is if she is.

mr. collinge and h.o. also have discussions that
are relevant to h.o.’s age.
•
early in the conversation, mr. collinge tells h.o. that she is
very cute – an indication that he has seen what she looks like.
•
at one point when mr. collinge asks h.o. if she’s busy, h.o.
responds by saying that she’s busy with her family and that “my mommy is going
shopping with me.”
•
when mr. collinge initially asks if h.o. wants to meet “this
saturday” she tells him she wants to meet and her “parents won’t be home this
weekend.”
•
h.o. asks mr. collinge if he’d like her to bring a friend to
their meeting. when h.o. asks how old her friend should be, and suggests 12-17
years old, mr. collinge responds 18-17. when h.o. asks why, his response was
because h.o. was “young enough.”
•
during their discussions about meeting up, h.o. tells mr.
collinge that her parents are home almost every day, and it would be hard to
meet unless mr. collinge picks her up or they meet at a park.
•
mr. collinge asks h.o. if she wants him to come in her bedroom
when her parents are not home.
•
mr. collinge after the recorded phone/video chat tells h.o. “i
know you don’t want your dad knowing about us right babe, because we are a
secret relationship.”

the conversations, including the texts and the
recorded call/video chat include sexually explicit content.
•
mr. collinge first suggests giving h.o. a foot massage. he tells
her he wants her feet in his lap.
•
he then says he wants a footjob.
•
mr. collinge asks h.o. if she made her boyfriend cum with her feet.
•
mr. collinge asks h.o., “will you do a footjob on me and make me
cum”?
•
mr. collinge tells h.o. “i want to go inside you”
•
mr. collinge asks h.o., “wanna squeeze my cock with your red toes
to stiffen it up”?
•
mr. collinge says to h.o. “i hope your toes and heels are
extremely red and super sweaty”
•
mr. collinge then says, “i love when a girl makes me cum with her
sexy feet.”
•
he says to h.o. “if my hard cock goes inside you i want you to
push it further inside with your feet.”
•
and later, “i hope you like guys with a serious foot fetish”
•
then, “how long does it take for you to make your boyfriend cum
with your hot and sexy red toes and red heels during a footjob”
•
followed by, “i bet you love that hard cock after jerking it off
with your feet.”
•
the last message captured from mr. collinge to h.o. reads, “babe
how long can you jerk off my cock without stopping to make my body shake and
eyes roll.”
•
in the recorded call, mr. collinge mentions doing “vaginal” with
h.o. he confirmed it takes her 20 minutes to make the guy cum and that she
keeps going after. he also asked her if anything sticky goes on her feet when
she makes a guy cum with her feet.

regarding the obtaining of sexual services for
consideration, the following communications are captured.
•
h.o. offers mr. collinge “pussy pics” in
exchange for $30.
•
when mr. collinge tells h.o. that he wants to
“go inside” of her, she responds by telling him to “send me some money come see
me tonight.”
•
h.o. then asks for $40. mr. collinge says he
wants to meet her first and “bang” h.o. “soo hard.” h.o. tells mr. collinge
that he must “pay” her to “see her.” in response, mr. collinge asks if “that
includes the works and footjob.” mr. collinge confirmed in cross-examination
that the “works” possibly means sexual intercourse.
•
h.o. tells mr. collinge that she’s 14 and needs
money. she said $40 plus $60 for her body if he wanted to “fuck” her. h.o. then
tells mr. collinge, “pay me or nothing.” mr. collinge’s response: “i agree.”

mr. collinge made efforts to meet up with h.o.
the following texts were captured in the facebook chat:
•
mr. collinge asks h.o. if she wants to meet up.
at first, it is just a coffee shop. then there are discussions about meeting at
a park. mr. collinge asks, “which park should we meet at on saturday?”
•
throughout their discussions on this topic, they
discuss meeting on saturday. h.o. suggests that either mr. collinge picks her
up or they meet at a park. mr. colling asks about what park is near where she
lives, and h.o. and mr. collinge discuss the location of a park near where she
lives.

mr.
collinge testified that he sent the messages that were captured by h.o. and provided
in evidence. he also confirmed that it was him who participated in the recorded
phone call with h.o.

mr.
collinge confirmed several important pieces of information in his testimony.
they include:
1.
that he communicated to h.o. that he wanted to
penetrate her vaginally with his penis.
2.
that he wanted to go into her bedroom and have
sex with her.
3.
that he let h.o. know that she could make his
erection harder by squeezing it with her feet.
4.
that he invited her to squeeze his cock with her
feet.
5.
that he was trying to get h.o. to make him cum
with her feet
6.
that much of the texts communicated his
intention to have sexual relations with h.o.
7.
that he was willing to pay h.o. for her sexual
services, and that was his intention at the time he sent the messages.
8.
that at the time he sent the messages, he wanted
to do these things with h.o., but then changed his mind.
9.
in fact, everything he said to h.o. represented
his intentions at the time he sent the messages or said what he said
discussion
issue #1 – the relevant
inquiry is who mr. collinge believed he was communicating with, not who he was
actually communicating with

counsel
for mr. collinge argued that the information is particularized to allege that
he committed the three offences by communicating with h.o. the defence argues
that this problematic because the evidence established that mr. collinge may
have been communicating instead with mr. s.l., h.o.’s friend at the time.

in her examination in chief, h.o. stated that she sent some of
the messages and mr. s.l. sent some. this was clarified in her
cross-examination. h.o. stated that she was the driving force behind the
messages. she was not being directed by mr. s.l. she clarified that there were
a couple times that he told her what to say when she didn’t know what to say,
but that it was “my free will.” h.o. confirmed that a couple messages were sent
by mr. s.l. when she went to the bathroom. ultimately, she conceded that the
messages could have been a 50/50 split between her and mr. s.l. indeed, she
went so far as conceded that upwards of 90% of the messages could have been
sent by mr. s.l.
analysis and discussion

the
elements of the offence of child luring are (1) an intentional communication by
computer; (2) with a person who is
or
who the accused believes is
underage; and (3) for the specific purpose of facilitating the commission of an
enumerated secondary offence with respect to that person.

the
purpose of the child luring provisions of the
criminal code
is to “shut the
door on predatory adults, who generally for a sexual purpose, troll the
internet for vulnerable children and adolescents.


regarding
the recipient of the communication, the ontario court of appeal, in
r v.
alicandro,
has provided guidance regarding the importance of age. the court
stated that the age of the person
to whom
(
emphasis added
)
the communication is made, or the accused’s belief as to the age of that
person, is also a part of the conduct prohibited by the offence. if the person
to
whom
(
emphasis
added
) the communication is made
is under 14 years of age, his or her age is a condition or circumstance that
must be proven by the crown to complete the actus reus.


the
use of the phrase “to whom” the communication is made is important. it makes
clear that the analysis on the second element of the offence is focused on who
the accused believes they are (and intends on) speaking to, regardless of who
the ultimate recipient is.

indeed,
the law has clearly demonstrated that when an accused person communicates with an
undercover officer, where they believe the undercover officer to be a person
under the age of 16, they are not absolved of criminal liability.

it
would be absurd that an accused could escape criminal liability where they have
committed the act in question, with the required frame of mind, solely because
the recipient of the message might be someone other than their intended one, a
factor completely outside of the accused’s control. this defies common sense
and cannot be the law.

the
supreme court of canada unanimously found that the offence can be made out by a
single message.
this means that for the offence, to be made out, it does not require a response
from the recipient. therefore, the actual recipient of the message is
immaterial to the analysis of criminal liability. for example, if mr. collinge
sent a single message to h.o. (who was under 16) that made out the offences,
and it were received by her parent or guardian without a response, he could not
escape criminal liability because h.o. did not personally receive the message.
if all other elements of the offence were established by the crown to their
burden of proof, he would be guilty.

i
find that it does not matter whether it was h.o or mr. s.l. who sent the
messages to mr. collinge. to assess criminal liability, what matters are mr.
collinge’s actions and intentions. in other words, who did mr. collinge believe
he was communicating with, and intending on communicating with?

i
find as a fact, however, that h.o. was the driving force behind the messages.
she stated clearly that she sent the messages through her own free will, and
that it was only a couple messages that were sent by mr. s.l., and a couple
others where he helped her with what to say. while h.o. conceded in
cross-examination that mr. s.l. could have sent upwards of 90% of the messages,
i find that the entire evidentiary record establishes that she sent most of the
messages.
•
h.o. stated initially that she sent the vast majority of the
messages. she also stated that when she received help in crafting messages, she
ultimately decided to send them with her own free will.
•
that mr. s.l. sent some messages when she was in the bathroom does
not detract from this.
•
in addition, it is clear from the recorded call and the sexually
explicit content in them that h.o. was aware of and involved in the earlier
discussion about sex, footjobs, and paying for sexual services.

it is clearly h.o. and mr. collinge who are
communicating in the recorded call.

the evidence overwhelmingly establishes that mr.
collinge believed he was communicating with h.o. who was 14 years old at the
time. i find that mr. collinge specifically intended to communicate with h.o.
when he sent the messages. i also find that h.o. was 14 years old at the time.
i reject the defence argument.
issue #2 – mr. collinge
had the required state of mind regarding h.o.’s age when he communicated to her

mr.
sobcuff, on behalf of the defence, argues that mr. collinge honestly believed
that h.o. was over the age of 18. mr. sobcuff asserts that, in the
circumstances before me, the court should find that mr. collinge took
reasonable steps to ascertain h.o.’s age. mr. collinge should therefore be
acquitted upon the court’s finding that he took those reasonable steps.

the
crown urges the court to reject mr. collinge’s evidence in this regard. mr.
hendry argues that the evidentiary record establishes that mr. collinge
believed h.o. to be 14 years old. alternatively, the crown argues that mr.
collinge failed to take reasonable steps to determine h.o.’s age. further, in
this case, where the alleged victim is an actual person under the age of 16
years old, the crown submits that the court can find mr. collinge guilty based
on his recklessness as to h.o.’s age.

analysis &
discussion

mr.
collinge testified that he believed h.o. to be somewhere in the range of 18 to
20 years old. mr. collinge testified it was his belief that to be registered on
facebook, a user had to be at least 18 years old. he obtained this belief from
doing research on facebook and trying to read their guidelines. it is on this
basis that mr. collinge believed that h.o. to be above 18 years old.

i
do not accept this evidence. i find that mr. collinge lied to the court. i come
to this conclusion for several reasons.
1.
when asked by his counsel why he thought people
had to be over the age of 18, mr. collinge testified that he had several
experiences in the past where people lied about their ages.
2.
mr. collinge testified that he knew people would
make fake accounts. mr. collinge knew when he was communicating with h.o. that
people on the internet engage in catfishing,
where they pretend to be someone entirely different.
3.
mr. collinge testified that he had been tricked
many times before by people online.

with this knowledge and experience, there is no
logical reason to believe that mr. collinge would accept that people on
facebook are 18 years or older. he knows this, as a fact, not to be the case.
he has had several experiences on facebook where people were pretending to be
something other than they were. he knows that people on the internet lie about
their identities, and their age.

mr.
collinge’s evidence about reporting h.o.’s profile also makes no sense. he
testified that he tried to report the profile, but never received any feedback.
mr. collinge stated that he tried to tell facebook that h.o. was trying to scam
him for money. he also tried to tell them that he believed she was 19 or 20,
but she was saying she was 14 years old and putting down a year of birth of 2006
(making her 16 years old).

i
find that mr. collinge lied about this. i come to this conclusion due to a
glaring internal inconsistency in his evidence. while h.o. testified that she
may have registered 2006 as her year of birth with facebook (making her 16
years old), mr. collinge’s evidence on this point is telling. at numerous
points throughout his testimony, mr. collinge stated that he never saw a date
of birth on h.o.’s profile. it would therefore be impossible for mr. collinge
to notify facebook about her fake year of birth were this the case.

interestingly,
mr. collinge’s testimony that he tried to notify facebook about the year of
birth, completely undermines his purported belief that users need to be 18
years and above to be on facebook. if facebook prohibits people under the age
of 18 from participating on their platform, why would h.o. be permitted to put
2006 as her year of birth? h.o. would have at least had to have had a year of
birth in 2004 or earlier to comply with the guidelines mr. collinge believed
were in place.

finally,
when asked by his counsel about who he communicated with on facebook back in
2023, mr. collinge stated that he’d
mainly
(emphasis added) try
to communicate with people 18 years old and above, but not underage. he stated
this was because underage is against the law and not the right thing to do.

the
fact that mr. collinge stated that he’d mainly try to communicate with people
18 years or older, his evidence on this point makes it clear that he knew there
were people under 18 years old on the platform. it is also evident from this
evidence, that he had previously communicated with people under the age of 18
on facebook. this completely undermines his evidence that he believed you
needed to be at least 18 to be on facebook.

mr.
collinge knew there were underage people on facebook. he knew people lied about
their identity and their age. he had been tricked several times in the past. he
knew to be cautious about these things. there is no sensible or defensible
reason to accept his evidence. i reject it and find, as a fact, that he lied to
the court.

having
rejected his evidence on this point, i find that mr. collinge knew and believed
h.o. to be 14 years old.

if
i am wrong in my conclusion that mr. collinge knew and believed h.o. to be
under 16 or 18 (as the relevant counts allege), i find that mr. collinge did
not only fail to take reasonable steps to ascertain h.o.’s age, but he took
absolutely no steps. the following are reasons why i (i) find mr. collinge knew
/ believed h.o. to be under 18/16, and (ii) why i find that he took no
reasonable steps in the alternative.
1.
based
on my reasoning above, i find that it was completely unreasonable to think that
h.o. was 18. she never stated she was 18. mr. collinge never observed anything
that told him she was 18.
2.
h.o.
stated on numerous occasions, both over text and on the recorded call that she
was 14 years old. mr. collinge, indicated on numerous occasions, he was ok with
the fact that she was 14 years old.
3.
the
specific content in the messages between the mr. collinge and h.o. make it
clear that she is underage, or at the very least, mr. collinge believed h.o. to
be a child. for example,
•
h.o. telling mr. collinge that her parents won’t be home this
weekend when he tries to set up a meeting with her “this saturday.” h.o. makes
several references to her “parents” in the texts.
•
mr. collinge told h.o. she was “young enough” when he asked why
she wanted him to bring a 17- or 18-year-old to their meet up and not someone
younger.
•
mr. collinge asks h.o. if she wants him to come in her bedroom
when her parents are not home.
•
mr. collinge after the recorded phone/video chat texted h.o. “i
know you don’t want your dad knowing about us right babe, because we are a
secret relationship.”

these factors, in addition to h.o. repeatedly
stating she was 14, make it very clear that h.o. was underage, or at the very
least, that mr. collinge should have been concerned about that were he truly not
interested in engaging in sexual conduct with a minor. in fact, the messages demonstrate
that mr. collinge knew and believed h.o. to be the age she professed, 14. in
the face of this evidence, to do nothing, and simply assume everyone on
facebook is over 18 is completely unreasonable.

any reliance that mr. collinge’s placed on his
purported belief that h.o. was 18 was objectively unreasonable in the
circumstances. as he stated in cross-examination, he simply assumed she was. the
evidentiary record makes clear that mr. collinge did not take any steps to
ascertain h.o.’s age in the face of clear and compelling evidence that h.o. was
14 years old.
conclusion

the crown has proven their case. there is no reasonable doubt. while
mr. collinge was neither a reliable nor credible witness, i accept his
admissions to the court regarding his conduct. i do so because they come in the
face of significant, compelling confirmatory evidence.

specifically,
i find that:
1.
mr.
collinge communicated with h.o.
2.
h.o.
was 14 years old at the time.
3.
mr.
collinge knew and believed h.o. was 14 years old based on her telling him.
4.
mr.
collinge directed communications to h.o. through facebook messenger.
5.
mr.
collinge spoke directly to h.o. on the recorded audio/video call.
6.
all
the communications were telecommunications within the meaning of
s.172.1
of the
criminal code.
7.
mr.
collinge wanted to have vaginal intercourse with h.o. as he testified, that was
his intention at the time he sent the messages and otherwise communicated with
her.
8.
mr.
collinge wanted to invite h.o. to touch his penis with her foot. as he
testified, that was his intention at the time he sent the messages and
otherwise communicated with her.
9.
mr.
collinge wanted and agreed to pay h.o. to obtain her sexual services. i rely on
the texts where mr. collinge asks what his payment would include (“the works
and footjob”). i also rely on the fact that when h.o. tells him she needs $40
plus $60 for her body if he wants to fuck her, and that she’ll do a “hook up”
with him for $100, and then she says, “pay me or nothing” mr. collinge
responds, “i agree.” as he testified, these were his intentions at the time he
sent the messages and otherwise communicated with h.o.
10.
mr.
collinge’s specific purpose in communicating with h.o. was to facilitate the
commission of a number of secondary offences.
•
with respect to count #1, mr. collinge communicated with h.o.
with the specific purpose of facilitating the commission of the offence of
sexual interference. he did so in communicating with h.o. for the specific
purpose of trying to facilitate sexual intercourse and a footjob with her.
•
with respect to count #2, mr. collinge communicated with h.o.
with the specific purpose of facilitating the commission of the offence of
invitation to sexual touching. he did so in communicating with h.o. for the
specific purpose of inviting her to touch his penis with her feet.
•
with respect to count #3, mr. collinge communicated with h.o.
with the specific purpose of facilitating the commission of the offence of
obtaining sexual services of a person under 18 for consideration. he did so by
engaging in communications and agreeing to pay h.o. for her sexual services.

mr. collinge will be found guilty as charged on all three counts
before the court. my thanks to counsel.
released: february
24, 2025
signed:
justice a. neil singh

r v. levigne,
2010 scc 25
at
para
23;
r v. morrison,
2020 onca 343
at para
43.

r v. levigne,
supra at para
2.

2009 onca 133
at para
30

r v. morrison,
supra at para
146
and 182
(on this issue, moldaver j. spoke for the majority. karakatsanis j.
concurred. abella j. dissented in part, but unrelated to this aspect of the
analysis).

see
r v. fox,
2022 onca 674
at
paras
19-37.

“catfishing”
is defined by
merriam-webster dictionary as “to deceive (someone) by creating a false
personal profile online.”
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/catfish