source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj317/2025oncj317.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. mahbub, 2025 oncj 317
date: 
2025 06 10
court
file no.: newmarket 4911 998 23 91108083 00
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
hesham
mahbub
before
justice a. a. ghosh
heard
on march 28, april 10, and april 28, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on june 10, 2025
c. downing........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
n. fakih....................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant hesham mahbub
ghosh j.:
overview:

mr. hesham mahbub pleaded guilty to “child
luring”, “sexual assault”, “invitation to sexual touching”, “uttering a death
threat” and “breaching a release order”, contrary to the
criminal code.

when mr. mahbub was about 20 years old, he lured
a 14-year-old girl online to engage in sexual acts with him by offering drugs
and money. they met, but she never touched him. while on bail for that offence
to stay away from children, he threatened to kill a 15-year-old girl that he
had illegal sexual relations with. while on the same bail, he met a third
victim, aged 15, kissed and touched her breast, and sent a photograph of the
touching to the girl he had threatened to kill.

the crown submitted that the discreet
culpability for each offence may have required a 9.5-year total sentence.
ultimately, applying the principles of totality and restraint, the crown would
have been content with a total sentence of 7 years with a proposed breakdown.
the defence submitted for a global sentence of 4 years and 3 months.

these are my reasons imposing a global sentence
of 5 years and 3 months.
summary of the evidence:
child luring under 16 (s.172.1(1))

on march 23
rd, 2022, 20-year-old
hesham mahbub contacted 14-year-old a.n. on instagram. she asked who was
attempting to contact her, and mr. mahbub replied that it was “the guy who was
coming to see her.” he asked her if she wanted to meet him and consume acid
together. she replied that she was grounded.

the offender again asked a.n. the following day
to meet up and do drugs together. she simply replied “grounded”. he asked if
she would meet him the following week, to which she replied “prolly not”.

four days later, mr. mahbub offered to pay her
$50 to perform oral sex on him. a.n. did not respond. days later, he messaged
her “yo”, to which she replied “stop”. days later, he
offers her $100 and she failed to respond.

throughout the ensuing two months, mr. mahbub
repeatedly asked a.n. to provide sexual services in exchange for money and
drugs. on may 14
th, 2022, after yet another request for sex, a.n.
replied: “you know i’m a kid right? ur just a horny 19 year old boy who cant
get girls his own age so he preys on kids with addictions and shit for brains
for a social life.” mr. mahbub asked her to add him back on snapchat.

they continued to communicate. on may 28, 2022,
they agreed to meet in person. she initially agreed to perform oral sex on him
in exchange for a vape pen. a.n. became nervous when they met and did not wish
to follow through. mr. mahbub attempted to convince her to come to his car.
when she refused, he told her not to ask him for drugs anymore, that he took
time off work, that he was wasting time and money on her, and that he felt she
was exploiting him for money.
“utter threat” to shoot a child at
school (s.264.1(1)(a))

on march 23
rd, 2023, mr. mahbub sent
threatening messages involving two 15-year-old girls that caused a high school
to go into lockdown. he sent c.y. messages threatening c.m. he sent a
photograph of a hand holding a handgun, with his bedroom as the background. the
gun was in fact a bb gun. he then sent her a photo and video of a hand holding
a bullet, stating that the bullet has c.m.’s name on it.

mr. mahbub stated he was going to pay c.m. a
visit at school with his “clip loaded.” he stated that he has friends that went
to their school and that he would call them and that they have guns too. he was
on a release term to stay away from children.
sexual touching of 15-year-old c.y.
contrary to release order

mr. mahbub met the child victim c.y. through
c.m. he knew c.m. from a prior sexual encounter. he asked c.y. to meet up, and
after some reticence, she decided she liked him and agreed to meet. they
facetimed. initially, she told him she was 16 years old, but later told him
prior to their first meeting that she was 15 years old.

mr. mahbub picked up c.y. from her high school,
drove her to a secluded area, and they kissed and made out. he asked to put his
hand on her breast. she agreed. he took a photo of his hand on her breast, and
that photograph was later collected by the police. mr. mahbub sent that photo
to the other girl, c.m.

mr. mahbub told c.y. that he wanted to go
further, but she said no and he relented. nothing else happened between them.
at the time, mr. mahbub was on conditions not to communicate with or be in the
presence of anyone under 16 years of age.
victim impact evidence

none of the victims provided victim impact
statements.
circumstances of the offender

a “sexual behaviours assessment”, pursuant to s.
21 of the
mental health act,
was received in evidence.
mr. mahbub
was born on november 9
th, 2001, and was 20 years old when he
committed his first offence of child luring. he was born in bangladesh and
moved to canada in 2015. at the time of his arrest, he was attending
university in a business program and working part-time at a pizzeria.

at the time of his arrest, he lived with his
mother, sister, and grandmother. his father died when mr. mahbub was 10 years
old. their family fell on hard times financially, but their mother ensured the
bills were paid.

mr. mahbub disclosed that he had been a victim
of sexual abuse between the ages of 6 and 9 by three former tutors and a male
cousin. as a teenager, mr. mahbub had some age-appropriate intimate partner
relationships. during his teenaged years, his low mood occasionally
intensified, and he contemplated killing himself. he shared that he once tried
to hang himself from a ceiling fan.

the offender struggled academically in high
school and post-secondary studies. as an adult, he was placed on academic
probation, causing him to change programs. his main intimate partner relationship
as an adult had been unstable and intermittently paused.

mr. mahbub submitted to a sexual behaviours
assessment, pursuant to s.21 of the
mental health act.
the report
illuminated that:
in
the context of his low self-esteem, possibly inadequate parts of his
relationship, and history of depression, he inappropriately sought out sexual
contact with adolescent females whom he met on social media. this does not
appear to have been motivated by a wish to harm them nor by antisocial traits.
it may be that mr. mahbub felt inadequate in relationships with women his own
age, and impulsively engaged with these adolescent girls online. his engagement
with adolescents may have been driven mainly by a desire to feel competent and
in control, rather than deviant sexual desires toward children and/or
adolescents. based on his reporting, he does not appear to have an elevated sex
drive (hypersexuality).

the forensic assessor applied a commonly used
actuarial tool called the static-99r, employed to assess the future risk of
hands-on sexual offenders. mr. mahbub was scored and placed in the “level iv-b
– well above average risk” category. a number of recommendations were
consequently made, including treatment at an accredited sexual behaviours
clinic and that he be prohibited from any contact with underage girls.

the offender has been down about the charges and
feels regret and remorse. he reported that his sex drive was not antisocial or
especially intense or problematic. he also provided a thoughtful letter.
analysis:
applicable principles of sentencing

the principles of sentencing are codified in
section 718
of the
criminal code. for sexual offences against children,
deterrence and denunciation are the primary sentencing principles engaged.
since 2020, an upward departure from past ranges for such offences has been
required.

both sides agree that a penitentiary sentence is necessary here.

mr. mahbub sexually preyed upon or threatened
multiple girls under 18 years of age, confirming both aggravating factors and
the primacy of deterrence and denunciation: ss.718.01 and 718.2(a)(ii.2). for
first time offenders, rehabilitation, reintegration, and restraint must also be
considered in determining a fit custodial term, but they must cede here to the
primary sentencing objectives identified.

section 718.1
of the
criminal code
directs that the sentence imposed must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. the principle of
parity codified in
s. 718.2
(b) must also be considered.
aggravating factors

the following aggravating factors have been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt:
i.
child luring victim well under 16 years of
age
– given her age, the luring victim was
unable to consent to any sexual activity with mr. mahbub. any sexual
interaction with such a victim is illegal, beyond just the commodification of
sexual activity. she was particularly young, at 14 years of age. this all
heightens the offender’s moral blameworthiness.
ii.
arranged meetings
– the luring went a step further to an arranged meeting. he met her to obtain
fellatio, but she got “cold feet”. mr. mahbub went beyond the elements of the
inchoate offence and took steps to meet the child victim to commit a sexual
offence. he met her twice, despite the absence of any sexual contact.
iii.
procuring and communicating with a child for
sexual service:
mr. mahbub preyed on the addictions
of a.n. and attempted to lure her into providing fellatio in exchange for acid
and a vape pen. he offered money for the same sexual act as well.
iv.
persistence over child luring victim’s
protesting and demurring:
a.n. repeatedly told mr.
mahbub she was grounded after he would ask her to meet up and consume drugs. 
he then offered $50 for oral sex, and she failed to respond. he urged her again
by messaging her “yo”, to which she replied “stop”. he then offered $100 for
the same act and she again failed to respond.
v.
pressuring and guilting the child luring
victim:
mr. mahbub went beyond grooming the child
luring victim. he was aggressive when rebuffed. he messaged her telling her not
to ask him for drugs anymore. he cursed in some of these communications as he
admonished her for wasting his time and money. he gaslit her by calling her
exploitative.
vi.
threatening death in school shooting context:
this death threat was particularly jarring with rippling
consequences to the community. the threat to shoot a girl at her school caused
a school lockdown.
vii.
sexual contact with c.y. was recorded and transmitted:
the kissing and placing of his hand on c.y.’s
breast was problematic enough. her participation in all this is neither
mitigating nor relevant. it is aggravating that mr. mahbub photographed his
hand on her breast and then sent it to her friend, c.m.
viii.
sexual contact with c.y. while on bail to stay away from children: when mr. mahbub sexually assaulted c.y., he was subject to a bail
term to stay away from children.
ix.
violation of core term of release: mr. mahbub not only violated the primary term of his release order
relating to a.n. to stay away from children, but he did so by committing
another child sexual offence against c.y. i caution myself not to “double-dip”
a similar aggravating factor in applying it to the breach and the sexual
offences against c.y. the last two factors i have described are mirror
opposites in application to each discrete offence. however, i will ensure this
does not impact the quantification of the overall term, and specifically it
will not impact the quantification for the sexual offences against c.y.
mitigating and contextual factors

the following mitigating and contextual factors
have been established:
i.
guilty plea:
despite some of the counts supporting little discernable defence, the pleas of
guilt spare the child victims from testifying and are mitigating to some extent.
ii.
youthful first offender:
mr. mahbub was 20 years old at the time some of the offences were
committed. he had no criminal record.
iii.
prosocial background: mr. mahbub has solid family support and was gainfully employed
before his detention. he was in a post-secondary education program, despite
some academic challenges.
iv.
offender as victim and mental health:
while the gravity of the offences and his moral responsibility for
them must be deemed high, mr. mahbub himself had been sexually abused as a
child. the s.21 report supports that he may suffer from several, likely
related, diagnoses, which may include post-traumatic stress disorder,
adjustment disorder, depression, and anxiety.
v.
risk of sexual offending:
the defence acquiesced to the s.21
mental health act
report.
i am reluctant to weaponize that transparent and instructive pursuit into an
aggravating factor. its intent was to distill mr. mahbub’s criminogenic risk
factors and to guide treatment and rehabilitation. however, mr. mahbub was
deemed “well above average risk” to sexually reoffend. this requires some
attention and intervention in the correctional setting and frames his prospects
of rehabilitation. it also represents the absence of the heightened mitigation
that may accompany a “low risk” forensic assessment.
vi.
harsh presentence custody conditions:
mr. mahbub had spent 767 days in custody. he must receive the
standard
summers
credit of 1.5 to 1 for each day of detention, totalling
1151 days, as circumscribed by s.719.(3.1). he has also spent his detention
under harsh presentence custody conditions. he was fully or partially locked
down for over 500 of those days. he was triple bunked for 278 days. he was also
assaulted and needed medical attention. mr. mahbub must receive heightened
mitigation for the harsh presentence custody conditions. in accordance with
appellate direction, i decline to quantify this mitigation, as quantification
may serve to skew the calculation of a fit sentence.

it will be a powerful
mitigating factor to be applied to the overall sentencing analysis.
discussion:
i.
threatening death to child victim

there is no sentencing range for threats to
cause death or bodily harm. dispositions generally run the gamut from peace
bonds, conditional discharges, suspended sentences and probation, to a spectrum
of custodial terms in the reformatory.

the defence position of nine months of custody
is an illustration that mr. mahbub’s death threat engages a startling
confluence of aggravating factors warranting a significant custodial term. this
threat warrants a middle reformatory term in the 9–12-month range that frames
the modest contest and the competing positions for this charge.

first, mr. mahbub threatened to shoot a 15-year-old
girl through a teenaged proxy. he threatened to shoot a child. second, the
facts support that he had an illegal prior sexual encounter at some point with
the intended child victim. the only reasonable inference to draw is that there
was an illegally sexualized component to his connection with the intended child
victim of his death threat.

third, mr. mahbub expressly invoked other
shooters who would join him for what can only be inferred to be a school
shooting. the photographs he sent of the handgun and bullet support that he was
able to carry out his threat. this reached the school administration and it
went into lockdown. such threats strike at the heart of canadian values and jar
and disrupt our collective sense of safety and security in schools. the school
and home are presumptively the safest of havens for our precious children.

fourth, he was on a release term not to
communicate with children. he violated that central bail term by threatening a
child. a deterrent custodial term is required. the original crown position of
12 months is fit, and the application of restraint and totality causes me to
arrive at the defence position of 9 months.
ii.
sexual assault and invitation to sexual touching
of c.y.

counsel agreed to the totality quantification of
1.5 years for the sexual offences against c.y., so i will not spend much time
on this analysis beyond to acknowledge it as restrained. whether it is treated
as a joint submission or not, the proposed term is fit, especially considering
the totality principle.

its seriousness must be discussed when assessing
the overall fitness of the total sentence. c.y.’s participation in her abuse
cannot be a mitigating nor even a relevant factor on sentence. mr. mahbub was
the adult. he also initiated the sexual contact. the absence of coercion merely
signals the absence of an additional aggravating factor.

while kissing and touching a breast may not fall
at the most serious end of the spectrum of intrusion, it nonetheless warrants a
deterrent custodial term. the lesser degree of physical interference here only
signals the absence of yet another aggravating factor. on that point, i remind
myself that any sexual contact with a child is both inherently violent and
harmful.

the degree of intrusion does not necessarily correlate to the degree of harm to
the child.

the victim was 15 years old. importantly, mr.
mahbub was subject to a release order to stay away from children when he
committed this offence. finally, mr. mahbub further violated the child’s
privacy and sexual autonomy by photographing his hand on her breast and then
sending it to another child.

it is valuable to return to the supreme court’s
direction in
friesen
that an upward departure was required from previous
sentencing ranges for sexual offences against children:
(i)t is incumbent on us to provide an overall message
that is clear… that message is that mid-single digit penitentiary terms for
sexual offences against children are normal and that upper-single digit and
double-digit penitentiary terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare
or exceptional circumstances. we would add that substantial sentences can be
imposed where there was only a single instance of sexual violence and/or a
single victim.


as the pre-totality original crown position of
2.5 years signals, this could have been a lower penitentiary or a maximum
reformatory sentence. the application of the principles of totality and
restraint support the fundamentally joint submission of 1.5 years.
iii.
child luring offence against a.n.

from the crown position, the child luring
offence is the most serious of mr. mahbub’s intersecting child abuse offences.
as the supreme court reflected in
r. v. bertrand marchand:

to protect a range of social interests, parliament
enacted the offence of "luring a child"… the online world and digital
communications between adults and children warrant special regulation because
children are particularly vulnerable to manipulation in online settings… the internet
has infinitely expanded the opportunity for offenders to attract or ensnare
children and the enactment of a distinct crime protects them from the
possibility of sexual exploitation facilitated by the internet… the luring
offence helps keep children safe in a virtual environment and was intended to
meet "the very specific danger posed by certain kinds of communications
via computer systems"…
the purpose of s. 172.1 is both remedial and
preventative. it was enacted "to combat the very real threat posed by
adult predators who attempt to groom or lure children by electronic
means"… the provision seeks to safeguard children from sexual abuse by
identifying and apprehending offenders before they commit a designated
offence.

the supreme court in
friesen
accepted evidence
that incidents of child luring had more than doubled between 2010 and 2017.
this must be juxtaposed with the proximate development that parliament twice
increased the maximum sentence for this offence in 2007 (from 5 to 10 years)
and 2015 (from 10 to 14 years).

increases in maximum sentences signal
parliament’s intention that related custodial sentences increase in length. as
far back as 2006, our court of appeal observed that trial level rulings seemed
to support a sentencing range for child luring of 12-24 months. by 2011, the
same court questioned whether that decision even supported a range but
reflected that any such range “needs to be revised” as too low, given the 2007
increase in maximum sentence.

it is certainly insufficient by today’s appellate standards, given the
subsequent increase in the maximum sentence and the guidance in
friesen.

several courts have now acknowledged that the
sentencing range for child luring may be 3-5 years when the crown proceeds by
indictment. in 2023, our court of appeal in
r. v. m.v.
confirmed that
the upper range for child luring is now 5 years, while expressing reasoned
apprehension in setting any lower range.


as far back as 2011 in
woodward,
the same
court held that a range of 3-5 years would be proper if the child luring became
a “pervasive social problem.”

as the supreme court confirmed in
friesen,
the problem had certainly
become pervasive, as it inferentially may have “commended” this prospective
range in
woodward.
the 3–5-year range for child luring was soon further
and explicitly supported by our superior court in
r. v. moolla.


i have considered the submitted post-
friesen
sentencing
rulings for child luring, and have found the following instructive:
r. v. m.v.,
2023 onca 724
– the ca intervened to resentence the first-time offender and
determined a fit sentence for the “internet child luring” offence was 4 years,
before totality was applied. the offender had pleaded guilty to charges from
two distinct but facially unrelated prosecutions relating to child sexual
abuse. the child luring offence involved two sisters, aged 8 and 10, that the
offender had encountered online. he sent them 44 images of child pornography
along with videos of himself masturbating. a significant child pornography
collection was found upon an examination of the offender’s devices. he never
attempted to meet nor abuse the girls, although he had sent some of their nude
images to at least one other person.
r. v. moolla,
2021 onsc 3702
– the offender
was sentenced after trial to 3.5 years for “child luring”, and 6 months
concurrent for breaching probation. the “making sexually explicit material
available to a child” was conditionally stayed. he was 35 years old with four
entries on his unrelated criminal record. mr. moolla had placed an ad on
craigslist seeking a sexual relationship with a girl “at least 16 and at most
19”. an undercover officer responded, posing as a 14-year-old girl. they
communicated over some days with the expressed intention to meet for sex. mr.
moolla engaged “her” in sexually explicit communications and sent her a
photograph of his penis. while en route to the agreed upon meeting place,
police arrested him.
r. v. rosin,
2023
mbpc 72
– the offender was sentenced after trial to 18 months for child
luring. he was 33 years old with no criminal record. mr. rosin communicated
over 3 days with an undercover officer posing as a 15-year-old girl. the
discussions showed evidence of grooming and explicit sexual content of the acts
the offender hoped to perform on the girl. he was arrested as he attended an
agreed upon meeting place.

i will apply the upper range of 5 years for
child luring, mindful that there is jurisprudential support for a lower end of
3 years. i agree with the defence that i cannot be restrained by the suggestion
of a lower end of 3 years, given our court of appeal has specifically declined
to embrace it.

the facts and circumstances relating to mr.
mahbub, support that the luring sentence must fall to the middle to lower end
of such a range, even before totality is considered. i find the upper range of
5 years should not be applied here. i also find the two years proposed by the
defence to be too restrained.

i have discussed several aggravating facts. mr.
mahbub aggressively lured a.n. and preyed on the addictions and vulnerabilities
of a particularly young child, aged 14. given her age, a.n. was unable to
consent to any sexual activity of any sort, so mr. mahbub’s moral
responsibility exceeds the mere commodification of sexual activity with a child
under 16 years of age.

he went beyond the mere elements of the inchoate
offence of child luring, and in fact arranged to meet a.n. twice to attempt to
engage in sexual activity. he was dogged and assertive in his pursuit. his
luring went beyond grooming and involved attempts to commodify her sexual
engagement with him in exchange for drugs and money. this requires a
penitentiary sentence above 2 years.

that said, mr. mahbub pleaded guilty. he was a
very youthful first offender, mere years older than the adolescent victim.
while a significant gap in age can be additionally aggravating,

the absence of such a gap is
relevant in situating the moral responsibility of a youthful, first-time
offender.

in applying the principle of totality and
restraint, i have determined the fit quantification of sentence for the “child
luring” offence is 3 years.
positions on sentence:

i have summarized the competing positions at the
end of my reasons, to orient the reader in how i determined the contest for
each offence from a totality perspective. the crown submitted the individual
sentences may have totalled 9.5 years. while i accept the ultimate crown
position as reasoned and reasonable, i disagree that successive sentences for
guilty pleas to each offence would have warranted such a crushing individual
quantification for this youthful first offender. each successive sentencing
court would have to consider any proximate sentence being served, mindful of
the related order of the offence dates.

accounting for totality, the crown finally
submitted for a global sentence of 7 years. this is the only crown position
that i will address for this hearing, as it is the ultimate one for a contested
sentencing. the crown submitted the sentences should be apportioned as
follows:
i.
child luring (a.n.) – 5 years
ii.
sexual assault and invitation to touching (c.y.)
– 1.5 years consecutive (joint submission, after totality applied)
iii.
utter threat (c.m.) – 6 months consecutive
(before totality, at 12 months)
iv.
fail to comply – 6 months concurrent to the
sexual assault.

the defence joined the crown in some of the
individual sentences, and in her approach to totality and concurrent and
consecutive sentences. in submitting for a global sentence of 4 years and 3
months, counsel proposed the following apportionment of sentence:
i.
child luring (a.n.) – 2 years
ii.
sexual assault and invitation to touching (c.y.)
– 1.5 years consecutive.
iii.
utter threat (c.m.) – 9 months consecutive
iv.
fail to comply – 2 months concurrent to the
sexual assault.
conclusion:

i will respect the joint agreement on the
approach to concurrent and consecutive sentences, some of it mandated to be
consecutive by statute. mr. mahbub victimized three girls under the age of 16:
one, he lured to commit sexual acts for consideration before she declined any
sexual contact; another, he threatened to kill at her school; and the last, he
kissed and touched her breast.

the final two sets of offences were contrary to
the release order for luring that prohibited contact with children. while this
aggravating factor cannot be counted twice, it goes into the overall assessment
of a fit global sentence.

i have determined that a fit and proportionate
total sentence is one of 5 years and 3 months, to be apportioned as follows:
i.
child luring (a.n.)
– 3 years, less 1.5-1 credit for 767 days in presentence custody.
ii.
sexual assault and invitation to sexual
touching (c.y.)
– 1.5 years consecutive to the
child luring offence, but concurrent to each other.
iii.
utter threat (c.m.)
– 9 months consecutive to sexual offences against c.y.
iv.
fail to comply
–
3 months concurrent the sexual offences against c.y.

a
sex offender information registration act
(soira) reporting order is required. as it relates to the crown application for
a lifetime soira order, i accept mr. mahbub was sentenced for three designated
offences. however, only the “child luring” sentence exceeds 2 years. given that
these are his first findings of guilt, and the only “hands on” offence involved
kissing and the touching of a breast, i am not persuaded that the offences show
a “pattern of behaviour” supporting that he presents an “increased risk of
reoffending” to meet the preconditions of a lifetime soira reporting order.
note, the test does not readily contemplate the troubling forensic risk
assessment. i will impose a 20-year reporting order under the soira.

similarly, i accept a s.161 order is required to
prohibit access to spaces where children can be found. the crown requests a
20-year order, while the defence advocates for 5 years. despite offending
against three children, his burgeoning and limited insight as a young adult
offender is growing and i am prepared to balance restraint with sustained
public safety. the s.161 order will be for 10 years.

thus, i will impose the following ancillary
orders:
i.
dna – on all primary and secondary eligible
offences
ii.
s.109 weapons prohibition for 10 years to
applicable offences
iii.
soira order – 20 years
iv.
s.743.21 non-communication order with c.y.,
c.m., and a.n.
v.
victim fine surcharges waived (undue hardship)
vi.
forfeiture order of seized items on consent
vii.
s.161 order for 10 years, prohibiting him from:
(a)
attending
a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years
are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre,
schoolground, playground or community centre.
(a.1)
being
within 500 metres of any place of residence employment or education of c.y., c.m., and a.n.
(b)
seeking,
obtaining, or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment is
remunerated, or becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity, that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16
years.
(c)
having
any contact — including communicating by any means — with a person who is under
the age of 16 years, unless the offender does so under the supervision of an
adult over 30 years or age.
(d)
using
the internet or other digital network, unless with an internet capable device
to access the internet with the restrictions as follows:
a.
he must only
access the internet on a device for which he is the sole owner and user.
b.
the internet
service must be registered in his own name.
c.
he is not to
directly or indirectly access any social media sites, social network, internet
discussion forum or chatroom, or maintain a personal profile on any such service
(such as x – formerly twitter, tinder, bumble, snapchat, instagram or any
equivalent or similar service)
d.
he is not to use
any telecommunication device to access the internet or other digital network in
order to possess or access content that violates the law.
 
my thanks to counsel.
released: june
10, 2025
signed:
justice a. a. ghosh

r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9, paras.
108-114

r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344, para.
52.

friesen,
paras.
138-144
–
degree of physical interference

friesen,
para.
114;
r. v. t.j.
2021 onca 392, para.
30

r. v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26,
paras.
7-8

r. v. woodward,
2011 onca 610, para.
58

r. v. m.v.,
2023 onca 724, para.
87

woodward,
para.
58

r. v. moolla,
2021 onsc 3702, para.
21

bertrand-marchand,
para. 87