source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj627/2025oncj627.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. ferguson,
2025 oncj 627
date: 
2025 12 01
court
file: toronto #24 48117822-02
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
rodney ferguson
charter
section 11(b)
ruling
before
justice brock jones
heard
on november 27, 2025
decision
released on december 1, 2025
l. abdalla, p. harris and n. piccinin............................................. counsel
for the crown
a. craig and s. khan................................................................... counsel
for mr. ferguson
jones j.:
introduction

mr. ferguson is charged with conspiracy to commit an indictable offence
(
criminal code
section 465(1)(c)), arson (
criminal code
section 434),
possession of incendiary material (
criminal code
section 436.1), and
mischief over $5000 (
criminal code
section 430(3)).

he was arrested on june 5, 2024, and an information was sworn the same
day. his trial is set to conclude on march 16, 2026. the period between the swearing
of the information and the anticipated end of his trial is 649 days. this exceeds
the 18-month ceiling for trial sets in the ontario court of justice established
by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27.

during the oral hearing on november 27, mr. piccinin submitted that,
based on recent decisions made by the crown’s office to reduce the complexity
of the trial, he was optimistic that the case would conclude under the
jordan
ceiling. he estimated the trial would be completed no later than january 30,
2026. the total delay would be approximately 17 months. ms. khan disputed the
accuracy of that new, revised timeline.

mr. ferguson alleges a violation of his
charter
section 11(b)
right to a trial without unreasonable delay. he requests a stay of proceedings
pursuant to
charter
section 24(1).

regardless of whether this case falls above or below the
jordan
ceiling,
for the following reasons, i grant the application and stay the proceedings.
overview of the allegations

mr. ferguson was originally charged along with two other individuals, renan
vinicius da silva and steven lepera. the crown withdrew the charges against
these other two suspects on october 30, 2025, which was the day this
application was originally set to be heard.

on february 9, 2023, at 3:48 am, surveillance footage captured three
unknown individuals at the petty cash bar, located at 487 adelaide street west,
toronto. they arrived in a red hyundai sonata. the group carried jerry cans,
poured gasoline inside the bar, and ignited a fire.

on february 28, 2023, at 4:00 am, three unknown persons attended the
myth bar at 522 king street west, toronto. they also arrived in a red hyundai
sonata. the group used jerry cans, poured gasoline inside the bar, and ignited
a fire.

at 4:39 am, a video captured the same three persons approaching a parked
black dodge truck. they broke into the truck, poured gasoline inside it, and
set it on fire.

a
police investigation commenced. the police believed mr. da silva owned and
operated the red hyundai sonata. it was believed that mr. ferguson and mr.
lepera were the other two people involved in these crimes.

central
to the original theory of the case for the crown was cellphone location data
obtained by the police, which purportedly would help the crown prove a conspiracy
between the three co-accused persons and implicate them in each of the arsons.

mr.
piccinin advised me that the crown had abandoned that theory by the time he
took over the case in september 2025. as of november 27, 2025, the crown was alleging
that mr. ferguson was involved in only one of the incidents, and the trial’s
complexity was reduced accordingly.
history of the proceedings

i
have focused my summary of the chronology of the case on the most salient
features for the purposes of this decision, given the concessions made by
counsel.
(i)
june
5, 2024 – october 4, 2024

mr.
ferguson initially retained larry lebovits as his counsel. on june 17, mr.
lebovits requested disclosure on the court record. he wanted to review that
material before considering an application for bail on behalf of mr. ferguson.
on july 8, mr. lebovits repeated that request.

on
july 15, mr. ferguson informed a justice of the peace that he wanted to retain
a new lawyer. duty counsel nevertheless informed the court that mr. lebovits
was still awaiting disclosure and remained counsel of record.

mr.
lebovits was removed as counsel on july 29. mr. ferguson made a request for a
change of solicitor application via legal aid. on september 9, mr. ferguson
appeared before a justice of the peace, while self-represented, and indicated that
he wanted disclosure. his change of solicitor application was still being
processed. he was also considering a
rowbotham
application if necessary.
the crown advised that once mr. ferguson had his new lawyer “firmed up,” they
would send disclosure to that lawyer, who was intended to be ms. a. craig.

on
september 23, mr. ferguson appeared in court and once again requested disclosure.

ms.
craig was retained on october 4.
(ii)
october
4, 2024 – september 17, 2025

ms.
craig made multiple requests for the disclosure materials. on october 7, she
did so in court, as she did on october 28. she sent a follow-up request to the
crown on november 25. on november 26, in a case management court, ms. craig
relayed to duty counsel that she was awaiting initial disclosure. the crown
agreed to “flag” the matter for disclosure to be located and provided to ms.
craig. the case was adjourned to december 4 in the judicial intensive case
management court (“jicmc”).

initial
disclosure was finally received on december 4, six months after mr. ferguson’s
arrest. a crown pre-trial was held on december 12. ms. craig requested further
pre-trials in january 2025, but the assigned assistant crown attorney did not
respond.

a
judicial pre-trial (“jpt”) was held on february 19, 2025, before justice p.
fraser. everyone agreed that a follow-up jpt would be necessary to discuss the
status of several outstanding disclosure items, including video footage,
witness interviews, information to obtain court orders (“itos”), and cellphone
extraction reports.

a
continuing jpt was held before justice fraser on may 5. the significant items
of disclosure were still outstanding. the crown could not provide an
explanation. a further jpt was set for june 17.

on
june 17, the crown did not attend, and the jpt could not be conducted.

despite
the outstanding disclosure materials, on june 20, a trial scheduling conference
was held to set trial dates. a ten-day trial was set for all three accused
parties, which would have concluded on march 16, 2026. earlier dates were
offered but ms. craig was not available.

a
further jpt was held with justice fraser on june 23. the disclosure materials
remained outstanding.

at
yet another jpt on july 2, defence counsel advised justice fraser that they
received “several gigabytes” of disclosure a few days prior and were still
reviewing it. the trial coordinator also attempted to obtain trial dates within
the
jordan
ceiling but was unsuccessful. ms. craig needed time to
determine if she was available for some of the proposed new dates.

justice
fraser heard from the parties in open court and summarized what occurred at the
jpt. the case was set to return on july 15, when dates for an 11(b) hearing would
be put on the record. that did not occur, however, until a subsequent date.

a
further trial scheduling conference was held on july 23. the dates for the 11b
motion were set for october 30 and 31, 2025.

the
crown failed to appear for another continuing jpt on august 7 before justice
fraser.

two
more jpts were held before justice fraser on august 19 and september 17.
(iii)
section 11b hearing set for october 30, 2025 – november 27, 2025

the
charter
section 11b application was assigned to me. the crown chose to
withdraw the charges against the co-accused of mr. ferguson on the morning of
the anticipated arguments. as a result, the application was adjourned, with the
crown and ms. craig agreeing to seek new dates that might enable the trial for
mr. ferguson to finish within the
jordan
ceiling. the crown undertook to
advise if it believed the length of the trial could be shortened because of its
decision to withdraw against the co-accused.

a
key item of outstanding disclosure – the cellphone data extraction reports –
had still not been provided to the defence as of the original date set for this
application.

mr.
piccinin informed me on november 27, 2025, that after reviewing the evidence,
the crown would not rely on the cellphone tower evidence. it did not directly
implicate mr. ferguson. however, it was never disclosed.

a
date of november 21, 2025, had been set aside to potentially begin the evidence
in this trial after the october 30, 2025, hearing for the 11b application was
adjourned. defence counsel made themselves available for that date despite the
difficulty in quickly rearranging their schedules. however, the crown later informed
them that the key crown witness would not be available on that date, and the
date was vacated.

the
trial is still scheduled to conclude after 18 months. however, mr. piccinin
remains confident the crown’s case will be finished by the end of january
2026.
position of the crown

mr.
harris structured his written argument into three parts. first, he argues that
mr. ferguson’s decision to change lawyers early in the process contributed to
the delay. second, he criticized ms. craig for not moving more quickly to
secure trial dates after the may 5, 2025, jpt with justice fraser. if i accept
these first two points, the total delay in this case is under 18 months.
however, if i do not accept them, he argues that the case involved three
co-accused, extensive disclosure, and several unusual features, which justify
describing it as 'particularly complex' and requiring additional time beyond
the standard
jordan
ceiling.

mr.
piccinin augmented these written arguments during oral submissions. he argued
that the case should properly fall under the
jordan
ceiling because it
is likely to conclude by january 30, 2026. the crown has decided to pursue only
one arson charge against mr. ferguson, and much of the disclosure material is
no longer intended to be part of the crown’s case at trial. the case has been
significantly simplified.

he
could not comment on how prior members of his office had handled the file.
however, he informed me that he was assigned to the case in september 2025 and
was given the time he needed to thoroughly assess it. he needed to correspond
with multiple oics and review thousands of pages of material.

he
otherwise relied upon the written submissions of mr. harris.
position of the defence

ms.
khan argues that the trial will take longer than 18 months to complete, and
therefore, her client’s rights have been infringed. she asserts that a stay of
proceedings is the appropriate remedy. in response to the crown’s arguments,
she contends that none of the time specified by the crown should be considered
defence delay. she also disputed the crown’s final claim that the case involves
“exceptional circumstances”.

she
disagreed that this is an under-the-ceiling case, as the anticipated end of the
trial is still on march 16, 2026. however, even if the crown’s new time
estimate was correct and the case would be completed before the
jordan
ceiling was breached, the reasons for the delay still demand a stay of
proceedings. the defence has done everything reasonably possible to move this
case along since they were retained, and the delay is solely attributable to
the crown’s office failing to properly formulate a plan to review and
distribute the disclosure materials. it also failed to determine which charges
would be pursued, and against which of the co-accused, for far too long. it was
only in september 2025, 14 months after mr. ferguson’s arrest, that the crown’s
office finally began to make these crucial decisions. that is unacceptable.
analysis

in
r. v. cody,
2017 scc 31, the supreme court summarized the steps to
adjudicate a
charter
section 11(b) motion:
1. calculate the total delay from
the charge to the anticipated end of trial;
2. subtract delay waived by or
attributable to the defence;
3. compare the net delay to the
presumptive ceiling;
4. if the net delay falls below the
ceiling, then the onus is on the defence to show
that the delay is unreasonable.
5. if the net delay exceeds the
presumptive ceiling, the delay is presumptively
unreasonable.

mr.
ferguson concedes a total of 97 days of defence delay related
to two discrete time periods. first, 92 days from october 20, 2025, to january
19, 2026, when ms. craig was not available, but the crown, court, and other
counsel were available. second, five days from february 2-6, 2026, for the same
reason.

even with these concessions, ms. craig and ms. khan submit that the
proper calculation of net delay leaves the case just slightly over 18 months.
(i)
crown’s first argument – additional periods of defence delay

the crown argues that a further period should be deducted from the
total delay. mr. harris points to the period when mr. ferguson was changing
lawyers and submits that he somehow bears responsibility for any delay that
resulted. specifically, mr. harris directed the court’s attention to the dates
of june 10 to june 28, and july 29 to august 26, 2024, as what should be
characterized as “defence delay.”

mr. ferguson was effectively self-represented during the dates
identified by the crown. he was also in custody. as i understand the crown’s
argument, mr. harris submits that mr. ferguson should be faulted for not taking
sufficient steps to move the case forward. his decision to change lawyers was
purportedly the cause of this period of delay.

i do not find this argument convincing. as a matter of fact, i note
that mr. ferguson requested disclosure on the court record, even when he was
self-represented on both september 9 and 23, 2024. as an accused person in
jail, there was little more he could do. furthermore, i reviewed the
transcripts of all of mr. ferguson’s court appearances, including those which
occurred after the problems with delay in this case began to raise serious
concerns. the crown never made a claim that the timing of the anticipated trial
dates had been compromised by mr. ferguson’s conduct when he was
self-represented, and crown counsel repeatedly conceded that major portions of
disclosure remained outstanding well into the summer of 2025.

indeed, the crown’s attempt to blame mr. ferguson is disappointing.
as i will explain, the unnecessary delay that accumulated in this case was entirely
due to the crown’s failure to effectively manage the prosecution and to provide
the disclosure materials in a timely manner. the pace of disclosure in this
case and the crown’s handling of its own file is amongst the worst i have ever
encountered. it is the crown’s constitutional obligation to provide disclosure
materials to the accused.
as
stated by charron j. in
r. v. mcneil,
2009 scc 3, at para.
17: (my emphasis added):
the
crown’s obligation to disclose all relevant information in its possession
relating to the investigation against an accused is well
established. the duty is triggered upon request and does not require an
application to the court.
stinchcombe
made clear that relevant
information in the first-party production context includes not only information
related to those matters the crown intends to adduce in evidence against the
accused but also any information in respect of which there is a reasonable
possibility that it may assist the accused in the exercise of the right to make
full answer and defence.

in
r. v. drummond,
2024 oncj 170, i addressed the same
argument presented here in another section 11(b) application, which was also plagued
by the crown's chronic failure to comply with its constitutional obligations. i
repeat some of my comments from that decision here:
 the crown, it is often
remarked, is no ordinary litigant. it must ensure trial fairness, and crown
counsel, as officers of the court, have a duty to consider the rights of all
justice system participants, including the accused.
 in
stinchcombe, the
supreme court of canada held that when an accused is unrepresented, “crown
counsel should advise the accused of his right to disclosure” and that a “plea
should not be taken unless the trial judge is satisfied that this has been
done”: see p. 343 (my emphasis added.)
…
 ensuring that the rights
of an unrepresented accused person are meaningfully protected is thus vital. an
accused person does not waive his
charter
section 11(b) rights by taking
a reasonable amount of time to retain a lawyer. for marginalized and socially
disadvantaged individuals, retaining a lawyer may be very difficult, and courts
must be sensitive to that reality. in cases where the crown cannot even provide
disclosure when an accused person seeks to retain counsel, the argument that
the accused has somehow waived those rights is entirely meritless. accepting
that argument would allow the crown to weaponize its failure to meet its
constitutional obligations. a more unjust outcome is difficult to imagine.
…
 the crown’s disclosure
requirements are not frozen in time until a lawyer is on the record. they start
from the genesis of the prosecution. i note that the law society of ontario’s
rules
of professional conduct
require prosecutors to make “timely disclosure to
defence counsel or directly to an unrepresented accused of all relevant and
known facts and witnesses…”: see rule 5.1-3.

justice charron’s reference in
mcneil
to an accused person
needing to request disclosure should not be mischaracterized. it was not intended
to shield the crown from its responsibilities, simply because the request by an
accused person was not made in a certain format or with precise language. the
crown is expected to work diligently to meet its obligations under the
charter.
this is especially true where an accused person is in custody, unrepresented,
and their case is being repeatedly adjourned as they seek to retain counsel. the
crown, as a minister of justice, is mandated to move with alacrity to ensure
that the constitutional rights of the accused are respected. the court also has
a duty to assist a self-represented accused and “guide him or her throughout
the trial”: see
r. v. bancroft,
2024 onca 121, at
paras.
6-7. that duty includes advising an accused person
of their right to disclosure and information about how they can obtain and
review it.

regardless, as previously noted, mr. ferguson did formally request
disclosure when he was without a lawyer. ms. craig renewed those requests
vigorously after she was retained. despite these efforts, the crown failed to
provide meaningful disclosure to mr. ferguson until well into the latter half
of 2025. it is not a serious argument to suggest that mr. ferguson was
responsible for any delay in the period identified by the crown, when the crown
itself repeatedly acknowledged in court that it was unable to provide the
disclosure materials. it is instead an attempt to recharacterize the record of what
was occurring in a light favourable to the crown for the
jordan
purposes.

the crown relies upon some authorities for the proposition that when
an accused person retains new counsel, “the
additional time
required for
new counsel to be retained,
obtain disclosure, or redo any steps which have
already occurred, such a crown and judicial pre-trials, is deducted as
defence delay”: see
r. v. bettes,
2024 onsc 2684,
at para.
22
(my
emphasis added) and the cases cited therein. that argument is completely devoid
of merit in a case such as this, where the crown failed to meet its disclosure
obligations by the time the accused retained new counsel, and no interim steps
(such as a jpt) had ever been taken. there was nothing that had to be “redone”
because it was never able to be done in the first place.

i note the following excerpts from the transcripts filed by ms.
craig in support of her client’s application, which reveal what was happening
as this case languished for over a year after mr. ferguson was charged.
june 23, 2025 – proceedings before
justice fraser
k. sajid (defence): your
honour, i can begin. we – we attended the trial scheduling conference on
friday. we do have dates. the dates push us past the jordan timelines, and
there’s still outstanding disclosure that’s - remains to be an issue, one of
them being the ito. i know my friend advised that the ito would be disclosed on
friday. that hasn’t happened, and we need the ito to likely schedule the
garofoli motion.

importantly,
the assistant crown attorney in court at the time frankly acknowledged the
state of disclosure and the unfortunate inevitability of an 11b motion. that is
to her credit, as it allowed the court to have a frank assessment of how dire
the situation had become. what occurred is worth repeating:
ms. verboom (crown): i was
certainly not surprised that mr. sajid and mr. luscombe may be seeking an 11(b)
application, given....
a. craig (defence): as will i,
yeah, for the record. regardless of the dates.
…
the court: sorry, ms. craig?
what was that?
a. craig: we will also be
bringing an 11(b) regardless of the dates, your honour. it’s 11 months in, and
there’s still half the disclosure missing and my client’s in custody.

in
addition, counsel relayed to justice fraser that scheduling a 10-day trial at
10 armoury street for the balance of 2025 was not possible.
k. sajid: i was just going to
say that i know that there are some issues with ms. craig’s availability, but
the trial coordinator had also advised during the scheduling of the dates that
it would have been very difficult to schedule this within this current year.
so, obviously that’s going to be a factor, but the trial coordinator had also
advised that, you know, it’s - trying to schedule 10 dates in - in this year
would have been very difficult.

counsel
continued and informed justice fraser that no december 2025 dates were offered
by the trial coordinator’s office whatsoever, by way of an example of that
difficulty.

how the ito for the search warrants was handled and ultimately disclosed
in this case is a glaring example of what was truly causing the delay in
bringing this case to trial. search warrants were executed on june 5, 2024. the
ito was not disclosed until nearly 11 months later. however, after this
occurred, crown counsel accepted on the court record that its office bore
responsibility for improperly disclosing confidential source information and
then had to contact defence counsel to ensure those documents were returned for
proper vetting. this resulted in additional delay. it was not until june 29,
2025, that the crown finally provided a redacted copy of the ito. that was
close to 13 months after the charges were laid.

inadvertently revealing confidential source information is one of the
most serious errors crown counsel can make, for reasons well documented in the supreme
court’s jurisprudence: see, for example,
r. v. leipert,
1997 canlii 367
(scc), at para.
9. indeed, in a recently published ruling, justice campbell of
the superior court of justice held that even the inadvertent disclosure of
information that might identify a confidential informant is a violation of the
informant’s constitutional rights under section 7 of the
charter of rights
and freedoms: see
r. v. c.i.p.,
2025 onsc 5600, at para.
25. as
justice campbell eloquently wrote, the very lives of informants are placed at
risk when the crown makes these terrible mistakes: see paras. 32-3.

i
cannot determine how this error occurred based on the materials provided to me
for this application. nor is it necessary for me to do so, and ms. khan did not
seek to further explore this facet of the reasons for the delay in bringing
this case to trial during oral argument.

i also wish to acknowledge the professionalism of the crown in court at the
time, who wisely recognized the severity of this problem and the need to
address it. however it happened, it was a serious failure on the part of the
crown’s office and added to the mounting disclosure problems in the prosecution
of mr. ferguson.

to
settle any doubt about whether the crown was aware of the deepening problems
with delay, justice fraser noted on june 23, 2025, that he would “attach some
priority to this [case], because it seems to me there’s 11(b) jeopardy.”

on
july 2, 2025, the parties appeared before justice fraser again. the crown did
not dispute that there were still substantial disclosure items outstanding. mr.
luscombe, counsel on behalf of one of the co-accused, stated:
we - we - we received very
voluminous disclosure on friday, many, many, many gigabytes. worse, far more
than we have received thus far. some of the, essentially, outstanding
disclosure is pertinent to the information to obtain, the new version we had
just received on the weekend. and that we recognize that that will likely have
a bearing on a - a potential, though, at this point likely expected, garofoli
application down the road.

the
assistant crown attorney in court did not suggest any of this was inaccurate.

it
should go without saying that over a year into the case, when section 11b problems
were already readily apparent, “gigabytes” of disclosure should not need to be
provided to the defence. if there is a good reason for such an inordinate
delay, it should be provided. yet no explanation was ever stated to the court
as to why it had taken so long for this additional material to be provided.

the
crown made other unprofessional errors. crown counsel missed a scheduled jpt
with justice fraser on august 7. then, crown counsel apparently misrepresented
the availability of the vital outstanding cellphone tower data at a further jpt
on august 19. on that date, before justice fraser, the crown said the material
in question was available and would be provided to the defence. justice
fraser’s jpt notes from that date confirm this fact. a week later, on august
26, when appearing before a justice of the peace, another member of the crown’s
office advised the court that they had
not
yet received this material. i
reproduce an important portion of the transcript of that proceeding below.
august 26, 2025 –
proceedings before justice of the peace shawyer
articling student l. stoddart
on behalf of counsel luscombe, t (defence): we had a continuing jpt with
justice fraser on august 19th where we discussed outstanding disclosure issues
including mechanical records for our client's car that the police have and the
cell tower ping data that we've been waiting for, for months.
m. rauser (crown): i can see
that they just had the jpt recently, your honour, and the crown is working to
obtain that disclosure to provide to them.
the court: and are there any
notes about whether or not the disclosure is now within the possession of the
crown's office properly as opposed to the police?
m. rauser: i can see it's been
requested but has not yet - we have not received it yet.

i
pause here to comment on the disturbing nature of this inconsistency. i
received no evidence, such as an affidavit filed on behalf of the assistant crown
attorney who appeared at the jpt before justice fraser, to explain how this
misrepresentation about the availability of these disclosure materials could
have been made. if the assistant crown attorney who appeared at the august 19
jpt knowingly misled justice fraser, that would bring great harm to the repute
of the administration of justice and the crown’s office specifically. if that
assistant crown attorney made this false representation by accident, it would
suggest that they did not have a comprehensive understanding of the status of their
own file or whether this fundamental item of disclosure was in the possession
of the crown and ready to be disclosed, over a year after the charges had been
laid.

mr. piccinin confirmed on november 27, 2025, that these materials were never
disclosed.

the
value of a jpt is dramatically undermined if counsel does not attend them
prepared and knowledgeable about their files. for the assigned representative
of the crown’s office to attend a further jpt that was specifically intended to
address the ongoing problems regarding disclosure, without an accurate
understanding of the status of those outstanding disclosure materials, is
inexcusable: see
r. v. aden,
2023 onsc 766, at para.
109.

to
summarize, the disclosure of the ito was seriously mishandled in this case.
false statements about the availability of cellphone tower data were made to
justice fraser. gigabytes of electronic disclosure were being dropped on
defence counsel over a year after the charges were laid. the assigned crown was
missing scheduled jpts. i conclude that as the disclosure problems associated
with mr. ferguson’s prosecution grew, careless mistakes were being made.
despite these problems and setbacks, i emphasize that no plan was ever
presented to justice fraser, even after five jpts, to explain how the
outstanding disclosure would be provided in a timely and professional manner.

mr.
piccinin revised the crown’s determination of which charges had a reasonable
prospect of conviction after he took over the case in september 2025. he was
also finally able to conclude that the cellphone tower evidence would not be
necessary to prosecute mr. ferguson. he alluded to the fact that when he was
assigned, he had more time to devote to the case than his prior colleagues. i
commend him for his hard work to properly assess the prosecution. but there is
no excuse for the way this case was handled prior to his involvement, and the
conduct of the crown’s office must be viewed and assessed in its entirety. 14
months after mr. ferguson was arrested was far too late for these important
decisions to be made.

defence
counsel in this case (including the lawyers for the prior co-accused) did
everything reasonably possible to move the case along responsibly. the crown,
and the crown alone, bears responsibility for this prosecution falling apart. all
the disclosure material should have been provided within 60-90 days of the
accused parties’ arrest.

had it been obtained earlier in the proceedings, a trial estimate could have
been obtained sooner, and trial dates within the
jordan
ceiling secured.
the disclosure items that held up this case’s progress were in the possession
of the investigating police force from the moment the applicants were arrested.

while the crown is not obligated to provide every item of disclosure before
trial dates should be set the outstanding materials in this case were of great
importance and went to the core of not only proving mr. ferguson’s involvement
in the acts of arson but also to any potential
charter
applications he
might have pursued: see
r. v. allison,
2022 onca 329, at paras.
44-52.

i
have virtually no evidence of the steps the crown took to obtain the
outstanding disclosure items, despite over a year of waiting, multiple requests
by counsel and the accused, and concerns expressed by justice fraser. nor was
evidence presented to justify the delay in providing these crucial disclosure
materials to the accused parties. there is no evidence that the crown developed
a plan and implemented it with the investigating police force to ensure that all
disclosure materials were provided in a timely manner. nothing was filed by the
crown, even something as simple as an email to the oic outlining the problems
with the file and the urgent need to prioritize resolving the outstanding disclosure
issues.

in
conclusion, none of the time identified by the crown should be characterized as
defence delay. nor can the crown point to good faith efforts it took to
ameliorate glaring difficulties with its ability to fulfill its constitutional obligations.
the record is clear. any delay in setting trial dates for mr. ferguson,
including time needed for applications or motions, was caused by the glacial
pace of disclosure. mr. ferguson’s decision to switch lawyers in 2024 did not
result in additional delay.

as noted by justice thomas in
r. v. turcios,
2024 oncj 628, the
crown’s obligation to provide disclosure materials is an ongoing constitutional
duty that must be respected. any suggestion that the crown is only responsible
for delay caused by late disclosure “if it impacts the initial scheduling of a
trial, is misguided.” the argument “displays a misunderstanding of the crown’s
duties”: see para. 40.

when
substantial disclosure is not provided within a reasonable period after
criminal charges have been laid, many adverse consequences inevitably follow. the
crown will be unable to assess whether there is a reasonable prospect of
conviction, how long a trial might take, and what applications it may seek to
bring. it is almost impossible for defence counsel to accurately estimate their
response time to the crown’s case or how they might challenge the admissibility
of evidence the crown plans to rely upon. a judge presiding at a jpt is also
left in a frustrating position, as authorizing limited court time cannot be
done efficiently when neither the crown nor the defence has had an opportunity
to comprehensively review the evidence likely to be presented in the case and
explain their trial estimates. we are left to make an educated guess. time may
be improperly allocated accordingly. those time estimates may need to be
significantly adjusted later, when the disclosure materials finally arrive.

defence counsel will then need an opportunity to review the late
disclosure with their client and possibly reformulate their strategy. yet
another jpt may need to be scheduled, creating yet more work for the lawyers
and a judge. nearly ten years after
jordan
was released and the culture
of complacency was condemned, the degree of crown mismanagement that
characterized nearly the entire history of these proceedings cries out for
condemnation.
(ii)
crown’s second argument – delay in setting the
trial from may 5 – june 20, 2025

at a jpt held on may 5, 2025, justice fraser indicated that the case
should be set down for a trial with targeted dates, despite there being
outstanding disclosure. justice fraser ordered that the office in charge
(“oic”) of the case attend at the next jpt to explain why so much material
remained to be disclosed.

the crown argues that the defence is responsible for the period
between this date and june 20, 2025, when the parties attended a trial
scheduling conference to obtain trial dates.

a review of the court appearances during and shortly after this
period contradicts the crown’s claim. on may 12, 2025, mr. ferguson raised
concerns again about the status of disclosure. an adjournment to june 23 was
granted due to the need for a continuing jpt. the crown did not indicate in
court that it wanted to set a trial date, and ms. craig had, for some reason, refused.

on june 17, crown counsel did not attend a scheduled judicial
pre-trial. i received no explanation for this absence.

on june 23, the case was adjourned to june 24 for an update about
the most recent jpt.

on june 24, the trial dates were entered on the record, along with
the need for a further jpt to address ongoing disclosure problems.

i have no other evidence from the crown that it was taking steps to
set a trial date between may 5 and june 20, 2025, and the defence was somehow
obstructing those efforts. to the contrary, the record demonstrates that despite
significant outstanding disclosure materials, ms. craig and the crown obtained
trial dates together. the crown’s argument is therefore rejected.
(iii)
crown’s third argument – exceptional
circumstances

exceptional
circumstances lie outside the crown’s control in that they are reasonably unforeseen
or reasonably unavoidable, and crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the
delays emanating from those circumstances once they arise. generally,
exceptional circumstances fall under two categories: (1) discrete events, and
(2) particularly complex cases: see
jordan, supra
at paras.
69-71.

a case will be complex if the nature of the evidence or the issues requires
an inordinate amount of trial or preparation time. this can include voluminous
disclosure, a large number of witnesses, significant requirements for expert
evidence, and charges covering a long period of time. it can also include many pre-trial
applications and/or novel or complicated legal issues. determining the
complexity of a case is a qualitative rather than quantitative assessment: see
jordan
at para.
77;
cody
at para.
64.

originally,
mr. ferguson’s case involved two other co-accused. however, the presence of
multiple accused persons does not, by itself, render a case particularly
complex. in
r. v. albadry,
2018 oncj 114, doody j. held that it should
have been obvious to the crown that proceeding against multiple accused together
would somewhat complicate proceedings. moreover, the exercise of prosecutorial
discretion must conform to the accused’s s. 11(b) rights. in this case, the
crown chose to proceed jointly against the three accused parties but, as i have
explained, failed to take the necessary steps to move the joint prosecution
forward expeditiously with due regard to the need to provide the parties with
access to the disclosure materials within a reasonable period of time:
jordan
at para.
79;
albadry
at paras
27-28, 31.

i
appreciate that the complexity of a case must be assessed on the basis of the
entire course of the proceeding, not merely on what is likely to be presented
at trial: see
r. v. picard,
2017 onca 692, at para.
57. however, the
issues in this case are relatively straightforward. the main issue in dispute
is the identity of the suspects. the matter was scheduled for 13 days, comprising
a
garofoli
application and a trial. while it is a lengthier matter for
the ontario court of justice, it is not “exceptional.” the existence of a
search warrant or production order, an accompanying ito, cellphone records, and
multiple surveillance videos does not make the case so complex that, for
constitutional purposes, the
jordan
ceiling can be exceeded.

even
if the case were so complex, the crown must demonstrate that it made sustained
efforts and developed a plan to address the complexity and volume of
disclosure. i have heard nothing to suggest that anything of that nature occurred,
and much to demonstrate, unfortunately, that the prosecuting crown's office did
not even fully understand its own case and the disclosure materials it was
required to provide until over a year after the charges were laid.

in
picard, a first-degree murder case was prosecuted on the basis of
largely circumstantial evidence. the disclosure consisted of 30,000 pages,
2,800 photographs, dozens of video-recorded witness statements, 6,800 pages of
cellphone records, 25,000 text messages, 103,000 lines in excel of records from
picard’s phone, 78 witnesses interviewed, 60 judicial authorizations, and eight
separate areas of expert evidence. the court of appeal ultimately upheld the
trial judge’s finding that, despite the amount of disclosure, it did not rise
to the level of a particularly complex case for
jordan
purposes:
see
paras.
61-9.

in
support of its position, the crown relied upon the court of appeal’s decision
in
r. v. jurkus,
2018 onca 489. in
jurkus, the respondents were a
correctional officer and an operational manager at the elgin-middlesex
detention centre. they were on duty when an inmate was beaten to death. they,
and a third person, were charged with failing to provide the necessaries of
life to the deceased. the charges against the third co-accused were withdrawn
at the outset of the preliminary hearing. the trial judge granted a stay of
proceedings due to excessive delay in the case.

the court of appeal overturned the trial court’s decision. it held that,
properly calculated, the resulting delay for the respondent jurkus was three
weeks above the
jordan
ceiling. it also concluded that the complexity of
the proceedings justified those three weeks. t
he court of appeal affirmed that complexity can arise from
having multiple co-accused: see para.
67.

this
case does not assist the crown. while the court of appeal found that providing
disclosure in
jurkus
took “a considerable amount of time”, it did not
conclude that the crown’s ongoing disclosure obligations delayed the trial.
that is entirely at odds with my findings in this case. the court of appeal
also concluded that the defence lawyers in
jurkus
were “not unhappy”
with the pace of the proceedings, and many adjournments requested were made “on
the consent of all parties”: see paras. 79-80. again, that is not what occurred
in mr. ferguson’s case.

finally,
the vast majority of the proceedings in
jurkus
pre-dated the release of
jordan.
after
jordan
was released in 2016, an 11(b) application was brought.
the court of appeal held that the transitional exceptional circumstance, unique
to cases of that nature, applied, which was a basis in itself to grant the
crown’s appeal: see para. 100.
(iv)
crown’s fourth argument – under the ceiling

the
anticipated end of the trial remains march 16, 2026. mr. piccinin argued that
there is good reason to believe it will be completed by january 30, 2026, and
thus fall under the
jordan
ceiling by one month.

i
do not accept that i should decide this case based on optimistic views of when
a trial might end. normally, a judge hearing an application of this nature
should accept the trial estimate approved by the jpt judge that was formulated
following discussions with counsel. to accept the crown’s argument would be to
engage in speculation. trials can often change. sometimes they finish sooner
than expected, but sometimes later than expected. i do not have a sufficient
record to draw this hopeful conclusion. nor can the defence be expected to
commit to a precise estimate of how long its response to the revised crown’s
case may take until it sees how exactly that case is presented. the crown has
not been consistent regarding how it will prosecute mr. ferguson or what
evidence it will rely upon.

this
case remains set to conclude after 18 months. but even if this case were completed
one month below the ceiling, i would still find a violation of mr. ferguson’s
charter
section 11(b) rights.

jordan
established
that delay falling below the presumptive ceiling would be unreasonable where
the defence establishes that “(1) it took meaningful steps that demonstrate a
sustained effort to expedite the proceedings, and (2) the case took
markedly longer than it reasonably should have”: see para. 48. unless the
defence establishes both requirements, the s. 11(b) application must be
dismissed:
r. v. campbell,
2022 onca 223, at
paras.
20-23.

in
r.
v. k.j.m.,
2019 scc 55, the supreme court clarified the nature of the
“ceilings” established in
jordan
at para.
69:
while the presumptive ceilings
are a significant chapter
in
jordan, they are
not the whole story.
jordan
established
ceilings, not
floors.
while the ceilings offer a bright-line approach, they are supplemented by a
more flexible, case-specific approach to delay
below
the
ceiling. in this way,
jordan
marries
uniformity with flexibility.

a
case's reasonable time requirements “derive from a variety of
factors, including the complexity of the case, local considerations,
and whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the proceedings”:
see
jordan
at para.
87.

the
crown’s office, prior to the assignment of mr. piccinin, woefully failed in its
obligations to properly manage this case and the disclosure materials
associated with it. now, as i heard during the argument on november 27, 2025,
the crown believes it can finish its case sooner than expected. ms. khan
rightly submitted that this was a paradoxical argument for the crown, as it
sought to argue on this application that the case was both so complex as to
justify a time limit above the
jordan
ceiling, yet was also so simple
that it could also be completed under the
jordan
ceiling.

the
majority of the supreme court of canada noted in
jordan
that
most
cases “can and should” be completed in less time than the hard ceilings
established in that ruling:
jordan
at para.
56. the ontario court of
justice implemented a new jordan-compliant scheduling practice directive on
november 1, 2023, to ensure all cases are heard within 15 months. the directive
also creates the expectation that matters will be resolved or set down for
trial within six months: see ontario court of justice, “practice direction:
jordan-compliant trial scheduling.” that did not happen in this case, as target
dates for a trial were not obtained until over a year after the information was
laid. no specific evidence was presented to explain why the directive was not
followed in mr. ferguson’s case. the only reasonable conclusion i can draw from
the evidence is that the significant disclosure problems precluded setting a
trial date until justice fraser required the parties to do so.

the crown’s
revised time estimate only demonstrates that, had the file been managed
properly from the outset, it could have been set for trial at a much earlier
date. the crown cannot have it both ways. if the case, once properly assessed,
is truly as straightforward as the crown now suggests, it should have made that
determination much sooner. a short trial can be obtained in this courthouse much
earlier than 17 months after charges have been laid. the crown cannot fail to
act, allow nearly a year of delay to accumulate, and then turn the
jordan
analysis on its head on the eve of the trial, once it has finally exercised its
professional duties. its obligation to act diligently arose from the case’s
inception, not on the eve of an 11b application.
conclusion

this case serves
as a reminder of the importance of the crown taking a proactive approach to
meeting its disclosure obligations. that will often require an early assessment
of the materials that must be provided and how to obtain and vet them with the
assistance of the investigating police force. it will also require that the
crown commence, as early as possible, a thorough review of the complexities of
the prosecution and a realistic plan for charting the course of the case as it
moves toward trial. none of that occurred here.

when the crown
fails to act with the degree of professionalism and due diligence that must be
demanded of any criminal prosecution, it is responsible for the adverse outcomes
that will inevitably follow.

the application
is granted, and a stay of proceedings is entered.
released: december 1, 2025
signed:
justice b. jones

while i am assigned to hear this application, i am not the trial judge. pursuant
to the
ontario
court of justice practice direction: section 11(b) charter applications, the
s. 11(b) application judge is appointed a case management judge under
s. 551.1
of the
criminal code
for the purpose of hearing and determining the s.
11(b) application. if this matter were to go to a trial, it would be for the
trial judge to determine whether this breach of cs privilege needed to be
addressed further.

i recognize that if these were third-party records not in the
possession of the police or the crown, they would not constitute first-party
disclosure. it was not in dispute for the purpose of this application that the
investigating police force had control of this item of disclosure and that the
crown accepted it bore responsibility for the delay in providing it: see
r.
v. jalili,
2018 onsc 6408, at paras.
47-67.

indeed, the ministry of the attorney general’s new “protocol for timely
disclosure in criminal cases” sets out a timeline for the provision of
disclosure of this nature. in cases where there is not a sealing order, the material
should be provided within six weeks (see section 7.1) in other cases, the
material should be provided within 12 weeks (see section 8.1.) the protocol
goes into effect february 1, 2026.

i heard no evidence to the contrary, and the application was argued on this
basis.