source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj452/2025oncj452.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
this
is a case under the
youth criminal justice act
and is subject to
subsections 110(1) and 111(1) and section 129 of the act. these provisions
read as follows:
110. identity
of offender not to be published
—
(1) subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a
young person, or any other information related to a young person, if it would
identify the young person as a young person dealt with under this act....
111. identity
of victim or witness not to be published
—
(1) subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a child
or young person, or any other information related to a child or a young person,
if it would identify the child or young person as having been a victim of, or
as having appeared as a witness in connection with, an offence committed or
alleged to have been committed by a young person....
129. no
subsequent disclosure
—
no person who is given access to a record or to whom information
is disclosed under this act shall disclose that information to any person
unless the disclosure is authorized under this act.
subsection
138(1) of the
youth criminal justice act,
which deals with the
consequences of failure to comply with these provisions, states as follows:
138. offences
—
every person who contravenes
subsection 110(1) (identity of offender not to be published), 111(1) (identity
of victim or witness not to be published)... or
section 129 (no subsequent disclosure)...
(
a
) is
guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years; or
(
b
) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. z.d., 2025 oncj 452
date: 
2025 09 02
court
file no.: brampton 998 24 y3110407
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
z.d., a young
person
— and —
s.s., a young person
before
justice c.k. assié
heard
on july 17, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 2, 2025
s
ébastien
gerdun.............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
harpreet saini........................................................................ 
counsel for the accused z.d.
lakhwinder sandhu............................................................. 
counsel for the accused s.s.
assi
é
j.:
introduction

four young persons were charged with two
different home invasions to facilitate stealing vehicles. the crown is prosecuting
them jointly. two of the defendants apply to have their charges stayed because of
unreasonable delay in getting their matter to trial. the other two defendants
are effectively the cause of the delay.

the total delay from the swearing of the
information on june 9, 2024, to the anticipated end of the trial on december
19, 2025, is 18 months and 11 days.

this application raises one question: was the
delay in this joint prosecution reasonable?
facts underlying the charges

in the early hours of june 9
th, 2025,
five suspects smashed their way into a home on meadowridge court in brampton.
one of the suspects pointed a gun at the homeowner and demanded the keys to a
vehicle. they dragged the homeowner outside, made him start his car, and then
drove off with the car. later that same morning, the same parties went to a
home on sacramento road in brampton where they smashed their way in and stole a
second vehicle.

approximately forty minutes later, the vehicle
from the second address was located by the police. it went off the road,
mounted a curb, and drove across the grass. it was found extensively damaged
and unoccupied. a search of the area was conducted with the assistance of a k9-unit.
items from the first address were found in the vicinity of the damaged vehicle.

the police learned that the suspects fled into nearby
backyards and eventually four of the suspects smashed their way into a third home
on oakview road. one suspect was arrested outside of the home. the others were found
hiding in a closet inside the home.
facts underlying the s. 11(b)
application

z.d. and s.s. are applying for stays pursuant to
ss. 11(b) and 24(1) of the
charter. r.i. and t.b. have not participated
in the application, though t.b.’s counsel advised he would re-evaluate his
participation in the event the application was granted.

the following are the facts relevant to the application:
(1)
june 9, 2024: the information was sworn.
(2)
october 7, 2024: a judicial pre-trial was held.
the time estimated for trial was determined to be ten days with seven civilian
witnesses and ten police witnesses anticipated to testify.
(3)
october 24, 2024: initial trial dates were
secured on this date.
(4)
november 12-december 4, 2025: these were the earliest
dates offered by the court. the dates were available for s.s. and t.b.’s
counsel. the dates were not available z.d. and r.i.’s counsel.
(5)
march 2-13, 2026: these were the initial trial
dates agreeable to all parties.

the anticipated delay from the swearing of the
information to the end of the initial trial was 21 months and 4 days. had all defence
counsel been available for the earliest dates offered by the court the delay
would have been 17 months and 25 days.

on the day the march 2026 trial dates were set,
counsel advised that delay was a concern and scheduled a date for hearing an
11(b) application in november of 2025.

the crown responded to the concerns over delay
by bringing the matter forward in an attempt to find earlier trial dates. the
following are additional facts relevant to the application:
(1)
january 9, 2025: the crown sent an email to all
counsel suggesting meeting to select earlier dates.
(2)
january 15, 2025: the parties appeared in court
to select earlier dates.
(3)
february 24-march 10, 2025: these dates were the
earliest dates offered by the court to counsel. the crown was available. however,
some of the counsel were not available.
(4)
november 3-7, december 15-18, 2025: these are
the current trial dates selected during the january 15, 2025, appearance.

the anticipated delay from the swearing of the
information to the end of the new trial dates is 18 months and 11 days.

during the january 15, 2025, appearance, z.d.’s
counsel advised he was unavailable during the following weeks, which were offered
by the court and agreeable to the crown:
(1)
march 3-10, 2025.
(2)
september 15-19, 2025.
(3)
september 22-26, 2025.
(4)
november 17-21, 2025.
(5)
november 24-28, 2025.
(6)
december 1-5, 2025.
(7)
december 8-12, 2025.

s.s.’ counsel advised he was unavailable only during
the week of november 24-28, 2025.

looking at the complete record, regardless of
the unavailability of z.d. and s.s’ lawyers during specific weeks, the delay
was principally caused by the unavailability of r.i.’s lawyer.

during the january 15, 2025, scheduling
conference in court, z.d.’s counsel suggested that r.i. be severed. ultimately,
the crown never severed any of the four co-accused and none of the defence
counsel brought severance applications. in submissions, z.d.’s counsel advised
the reason for not applying for severance was that he estimated the application
would have a very low chance of success.
section 11(b) of the
charter

the supreme court’s decision in
jordan
established the current framework for assessing allegations of unreasonable
delay under s. 11(b) of the
charter.

the framework requires the court to examine the total delay from the swearing
of the information to the anticipated end of the trial. from that delay, the court
is to deduct any delay explicitly or implicitly waived by the defence or caused
by the defence (either through frivolous applications or periods of time where
the crown and the court were ready to proceed but the defence was not).


the next step in the framework is for the court
to determine if any ‘exceptional circumstances’ existed. exceptional
circumstances are circumstances that fall outside the crown’s control in the
sense that they are reasonably unforeseen or reasonably unavoidable and that
the crown cannot reasonably remedy the delay that arises from those
circumstances. events do not have to be rare or uncommon to be classified as ‘exceptional
circumstances.’


exceptional circumstances fall into two
categories: 1) discrete events, or 2) complex cases. discrete events include
instances where a participant falls sick, or a witness recants requiring
additional applications, or the parties underestimated the amount of time
needed for the trial.


after subtracting any defence delay and the
delay caused by discrete events, the court determines if the delay is above or
below the presumptive ceilings (generally 18 months for matters proceeding in
the ontario court of justice and 30 months for matters proceeding in the
superior court of justice).


if the delay is above the presumptive ceiling,
the crown may rebut the presumption that the delay is unreasonable by showing
the presence of exceptional circumstances.


the crown cannot simply point to past
exceptional circumstances to excuse delay but must also show that it took
reasonable steps to avoid the delay before the presumptive ceiling was reached.
the crown does not have to be successful at those steps. it only has to show
that it was being proactive in trying to minimize the delay.


complexity of a case is assessed by the nature
of the evidence or the nature of the issues that must be litigated and not
simply the nature of the charge.


furthermore, in
jordan, the supreme court
stated, “
proceedings jointly against multiple co-accused, so long as it is
in the interest of justice to do so, may also impact the complexity of the case.
”

(emphasis added)

in
cody
the supreme court clarified that
delay caused by ‘discrete events’ are to be deducted mathematically from the
overall delay, whereas the ‘complexity’ of a case is more of a qualitative
assessment that affects what constitutes reasonable delay in any given case.


in
gopie, the court of appeal rejected
the crown’s argument that delay by one defendant in a multi-defendant
prosecution should be attributed to all. the court concluded that the weight of
jurisprudence favoured an ‘individualized approach’ in assessing delay. in
other words, when assessing delay in multi-defendant trials, the court must
look at the delay caused by the actual defendant and refuse to impute delay
caused by other co-defendants.


however, what constitutes ‘reasonable delay’ in
a complex case is not rigidly governed by the presumptive ceilings.

what is reasonable delay, “…falls
well within the expertise of a trial judge.”

a holistic approach must be taken.
application of the law to the facts

the defence takes the position that there were
no exceptional circumstances in this case. i disagree. in
jordan
the
supreme court used multi-defendant prosecutions as an example of exceptional
circumstances.


in this case, the original trial dates offered
by the court were november through to december 2025. that would have meant a
delay of 17 months and 25 days – just under the presumptive ceiling. though
s.s.’ counsel was available, z.d.’s counsel was unavailable until march of 2026.
z.d.’s counsel’s unavailability, combined with the unavailability of r.i.’s
counsel caused the anticipated delay to grow to just over 21 months. faced with
this delay, the
crown acted proactively by prioritizing the matter and
attempting to secure earlier dates. the crown and the court offered
february and march 2025 dates – a full year before the original trial dates.
had all the defence accepted those dates the total delay from the swearing of
the information to the end of the trial would have been 9 months. however, the
four defence counsel were not all available until november and december of
2025, thus leading to a delay of 18 months and 11 days.

this is not a case in which the crown or the court
as an institution failed to appreciate the delay. they moved proactively before
the delay to provide a 10-day trial within 9 months of the defendants’ arrest. the
crown had no control over who the defendants hired. the fact that one of the
defendant’s lawyers had a very busy schedule and was unwilling to change his
commitments to prioritize this matter is outside of the crown’s power.

counsel for z.d. and s.s. concede they did not
apply for severance because they knew it would not be granted. implicit in
their concession is the admission that the crown’s decision to prosecute the
defendants jointly was in the interest of justice.

the supreme court said in
vassell, “[i]n many
cases, delay caused by proceeding against multiple co-accused must be accepted
as a fact of life and must be considered in deciding what constitutes a
reasonable time for trial.”

justice fairburn, as she then was, stated it aptly in
ny, “[t]he concept
of “reasonable time” within s. 11(b) may fluctuate depending on whether accused
are standing alone or together. provided it is in the interest of justice to
proceed jointly, delay above the ceiling may reflect the realities of life in a
joint trial and transform an otherwise unreasonable delay into a reasonable
one.”


in cases where the delay is caused because of
the complexity of the case, there is no obligation for the court to deduct
periods to bring the matter under the presumptive ceilings. in
gopie,
after deducting the delay attributable to the defence and to discrete events,
the court of appeal upheld a refusal to stay proceedings that exceeded the
presumptive ceilings by 5.5 and 2.5 months for each co-accused after
appropriate deductions had been made.


in this case, i find the crown was proactive in
attempting to secure earlier dates, and that it was in the interest of justice
to proceed jointly. i conclude that the delay of 18 months and 11 days to be
reasonable in the circumstances because of the complexity in prosecuting
multiple co-defendants and accommodating the schedules of their counsel.

i find that the applicants have not shown that
their section 11(b)
charter
rights have been violated and dismiss the
application.
released: september
2, 2025
signed:
justice christopher k. assié

r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27.

ibid
at paras. 60-66.

ibid
at para. 69.

ibid
at paras. 71-73.

ibid
at para. 49.

ibid
at para. 68.

ibid
at para. 70.

ibid
at para. 77.

ibid
at para 77.

r. v. cody,
2017 scc 31, at paras.
48 and 64.

r. v. gopie,
2017 onca 728, at paras.
128 to 135.

cody, supra
at para.
64.

ibid.

jordan, supra, at para.
77.

r. v.
vassell,
2016 scc
26, at para.
6.

r. v. ny,
2016 onsc 8031
at
para.
47.

gopie,
supra
at para.
166.