source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj326/2025oncj326.html

ontario
court of justice
toronto region
citation:
r. v. done, 2025 oncj 326
date:
2025
06
05
court
file no.:
4815 998
21
55001658
10
armoury st., toronto
b
e
t
w
e
e
n:
his majesty
the
king
— and —
sean
done
before justice joseph
callaghan
reasons
for
decision
on s. 8
charter
application (
bykovets
issue)
released
on
june
5,
2025
b. donohue......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
b. bytensky.............................................................................................. counsel
for s. done
j. callaghan j.:
overview

between january 5
and january 17, 2021, a kik

account that was ultimately linked to mr. done uploaded 17 video files
containing images of child sexual abuse material (csam).

on february 17,
2021, the national centre for missing and exploited children (ncmec),
based in the united states, received a cybertipline

report from kik, including the relevant internet protocol (ip) address,
indicating that one of their users uploaded suspected child sexual abuse
material to their account. pursuant to american federal legislation,
when an electronic service provider (esp)

such as kik obtains knowledge of any facts or circumstances relating to certain
enumerated csam offences, they must provide a report to the cybertipline, and
that report may include the relevant ip address.

kik provided the
necessary report to ncmec and chose to include the suspect ip address in its
report.

based on the location
of the upload, which resolved to canada, ncmec sent the package of information
to the national child exploitation crime centre (ncecc), a unit of the royal
canadian mounted police (rcmp).

prior to
receiving this report from ncmec, police in canada took no steps to seek out or
obtain mr. done’s ip address. indeed, they had no knowledge of any offence
having been committed until they received the report. and after receiving the report
of an alleged crime having been committed, police took no steps to use the ip
address to obtain personal or core biographical information without obtaining prior
judicial authorization.

in addition, upon
receipt of the ip address, nothing in the conduct of the rcmp or tps
investigators resulted in mr. done being deprived of the use of his ip address
or access to the internet.

once the ip
address was received, an open-source
check was conducted by the rcmp, and
it was determined that the ip address resolved to internet service provider
(isp) bell canada and in the municipal location of toronto. after the rcmp
confirmed with bell that the relevant subscriber was indeed in toronto and that
the records had been preserved, the information that ncmec had provided was
forwarded to the toronto police service (tps) for investigation.

upon receipt of
that ip address, officer vijay shetty, the officer-in-charge of the toronto investigation,
conducted his own open-source check, again using a publicly available search
engine,
to confirm for himself that the ip address originated in toronto.

officer shetty also
took the step of confirming that the suspect videos involved were indeed child
sexual abuse material. with this information, he sought and obtained the necessary
production order from bell, to obtain the subscriber information of the user
attached to the suspect ip address. consequently, officer shetty learned that
mr. done was the registered subscriber.

the police then obtained a search
warrant for mr. done’s home and devices, and on may 27, 2021, the police
executed the search warrant. during that search, several devices belonging to
mr. done were seized and subsequently analyzed.

an examination of mr. done’s
cellphone located a quantity of images and videos containing child sexual abuse
material, as well as chats and other relevant information.

as a judge in a busy jurisdiction,
having conducted numerous related judicial pre-trials and trials, it is clear to
me that the investigative steps followed in this case mirror the steps police
take in many investigations leading to charges of accessing, distributing or
possessing child pornography. the reported cases reflect this experience.


following the release of the supreme
court’s
decision in
r. v. bykovets,
i allowed mr. done to re-open the trial after i had found him guilty

and he brought an application challenging the police conduct outlined above, which
he asserted breached his section 8
charter
rights.
the
bykovets
issue

in
bykovets, the police
undertook an investigation into fraudulent online purchases from a liquor
store. as part of their investigation, the police contacted the third-party transaction
processing company

that managed the store’s online sales and requested two ip addresses used for
the purchases, without obtaining any prior judicial authorization. police then
obtained a production order in relation
to those ip addresses compelling the isp to disclose the subscriber information
of the customer.

unlike when an ip address is used to
access child sexual abuse material, there was no legislative framework that governed
reporting requirements of an isp in these circumstances.

a majority of
the supreme
court in
bykovets
held that a reasonable expectation of privacy existed
in an ip address and that
in the facts and circumstances of that case,
s.8 of the
charter
was violated due to the police failing to seek judicial authorization prior
to
requesting
and obtaining the ip addresses.
the majority
in
bykovets
made
it clear that the context in which they assessed the alleged s. 8 breach was a
r
equest
made by police for ip addresses.


flowing from this decision, the main
issue for me to decide is whether, in all the circumstances, the police conduct
in receiving the complaint and confirming the relevant isp and municipal
location of the ip address, breached mr. done’s section 8 rights.

for the reasons that follow, i conclude:
1.
mr. done’s section
8 rights were not violated. the passive receipt by the rcmp of a report of an
alleged crime from ncmec was neither a search nor a seizure.
2.
the communication
of ncmec to the rcmp, within the legislative framework in the united states and
canada that governs isps and their customers’ use of the internet to access csam,
is not the equivalent to the informal arrangement criticized by justice doherty
in
r. v. orlandis-habsburgo.
3.
given the provisions
of the
mandatory reporting act,
i find that the police actions in receiving the ip address from ncmec and using
it in the limited way that they did, was authorized by law.
4.
similarly, given
the legislative context of the
mandatory reporting act
and related
regulations,
mr. done’s subjective reasonable expectation of privacy was not objectively
reasonable.
5.
finally, even if
i am wrong, and the actions of the rcmp and tps in this case violated mr.
done’s s. 8
charter
rights, the evidence of the video, images and
related chats found on mr. done’s cellphone should not be excluded.
analysis
legislative framework (context or
totality of the circumstances)

when assessing any claim of
reasonable expectation of privacy, it has always been necessary to understand the
context or the totality of circumstances in which a privacy claim is made to
determine whether section 8 has been violated.


in the case at bar, unlike
in
bykovets,
the reasonable expectation of privacy claim occurred in the context of mr. done
accessing images of child sexual abuse via the internet, through services
provided by an isp (bell).

since 2011, isps have been subject to
strict reporting obligations under
an
act respecting the mandatory reporting
of internet child pornography by persons who provide an internet service

(referred to as the
mandatory reporting act
in these reasons) and
related
internet child pornography reporting regulations

(referred to as the
regulations
in these reasons).

the duties created by the
mandatory
reporting act
include the following:
duty to report internet
address
2
if a
person is advised, in the course of providing an internet service to the
public, of an internet protocol address or a uniform resource locator where
child pornography may be available to the public, the person must report that
address or uniform resource locator to the organization designated by the regulations,
as soon as feasible and in accordance with the regulations.
duty
to notify police officer
3
if a
person who provides an internet service to the public has reasonable grounds to
believe that their internet service is being or has been used to commit a child
pornography offence, the person must notify an officer, constable or other
person employed for the preservation and maintenance of the public peace of
that fact, as soon as feasible and in accordance with the regulations.
preservation
of computer data
4
(1)
a person who makes a notification under section 3 must
preserve all computer data related to the notification that is in their
possession or control for 21 days after the day on which the notification is
made.
destruction
of preserved computer data
(2)
the
person must destroy the computer data that would not be retained in the
ordinary course of business and any document that is prepared for the purpose
of preserving computer data under subsection (1) as soon as feasible after the
expiry of the 21-day period, unless the person is required to preserve the
computer data by a judicial order made under any other act of parliament or the
legislature of a province.
no
disclosure
5
a person
must not disclose that they have made a report under section 2 or a
notification under section 3, or disclose the contents of a report or
notification, if the disclosure could prejudice a criminal investigation,
whether or not a criminal investigation has begun.

the
mandatory reporting act
provides civil protection to isps who make their reports in good faith.
in addition, reports made under the laws of a foreign jurisdiction are deemed
to have complied with section 2 of this act.

the similar american act

that governed at the relevant time required isps who obtain actual knowledge of
any facts or circumstances relating to certain enumerated csam offences to provide
a report to the cybertipline. the content of that report had specific
legislated requirements but gave the isp discretion to include the suspect ip
address.
in this case, kik, a private, third-party company, voluntarily provided the
relevant ip address to the designated american recipient organization (ncmec),
who then, per statute, forwarded that information to the designated organization
in canada (ncecc, an arm of the rcmp).

when understanding the legal
framework in which to assess the claim of reasonable expectation of privacy, it
is also important to consider the
regulations
flowing from the
mandatory
reporting act:
online
internet address reporting system
3
the
designated organization must, for the purpose of receiving reports of internet
addresses under section 2 of the act, maintain a secure online system that
(a)
assigns
each service provider a unique identifier for the purpose of making reports;
(b)
allows a
service provider to report only internet addresses; and
(c)
issues to
a service provider, for each report they make, a receipt that indicates the
incident number assigned to the report, the service provider’s name and unique
identifier and the date and time of the report.
analysis
and communication of findings
4
as soon
as feasible after receiving a report under section 2 of the act, the designated
organization must determine whether any material found at the reported internet
address appears to constitute child pornography and, if so,
(a)
determine,
if possible, the geographic location of the server that the reported internet
address points to and the geographic location of the server hosting the
material that appears to constitute child pornography; and
(b)
make
available to every appropriate canadian law enforcement agency by secure means
(i)
the
reported internet address,
(ii)
a
description of any geographic location that the designated organization was
able to determine under paragraph (a), and
(iii)
any other
information in the designated organization’s possession that might assist the
agency’s investigation.
retention
of records
5
for each
report received in accordance with section 2 of the act, the designated
organization must retain the reported internet address and a copy of the
receipt issued under paragraph 3(c) for two years after the day on which
the report is received.
security
measures
6
the
designated organization must take measures to
(a)
ensure
its continued ability to discharge its role, functions and activities under the
act, including measures relating to the protection of its physical facilities
and technical infrastructure, risk prevention and mitigation, emergency
management and service resumption;
(b)
protect
from unauthorized access any information obtained or generated by the
designated organization in the course of discharging its role, functions or
activities under the act; and
(c)
ensure
that its personnel are capable of fulfilling their duties in the discharge of
the designated organization’s role, functions and activities under the act,
including measures relating to their selection and training.
notification of ministers
7
the
designated organization must notify the minister of justice and the minister of
public safety and emergency preparedness within 24 hours of becoming aware
of any incident that jeopardizes the designated organization’s ability to discharge
its role, functions or activities under the act.
…
method of reporting
10
for the
purpose of section 2 of the act, an internet address must be reported by a
service provider using the online system referred to in section 3.
form
and content of notification
11
for the
purpose of section 3 of the act, a notification from a service provider
must be in writing and must include the following information:
(a)
the child
pornography offence that the service provider has reasonable grounds to believe
is being or has been committed using their internet service;
(b)
a
description of the material that appears to constitute child pornography,
including its format;
(c)
the
circumstances under which the service provider discovered the alleged offence,
including the date and time of discovery;
(d)
a
description of any other evidence relating to the alleged offence in the
possession or control of the service provider; and
(e)
contact
information of the service provider’s representative for the purpose of
investigating the matter.

there are additional provisions in
the
regulations
that require isps to submit an annual report to the federal
government on the discharge of its duties under the
mandatory reporting act,
a data preservation provision, as well a requirement to notify the federal
government within 24 hours of becoming aware of any incident that jeopardizes an
isp’s ability to discharge its obligations under the
act.


these provisions, contained in the
act
and related
regulations, make clear parliament’s intention to
regulate the use of the internet, including ip addresses used to distribute or
access child sexual abuse material.

applicable legal principles: section
8 of the
charter

the supreme court in
r. v.
campbell,
has recently summarized the applicable legal principles a court must consider
when assessing a claim of a section 8
charter
breach:
section 8 of the
charter
guarantees that "[e]veryone has the right
to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure." the main purpose
of
s. 8
is
to protect the right to privacy from unjustified state intrusion (
hunter v. southam inc.,
1984 canlii 33 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 145, at p. 160;
r. v. plant,
1993 canlii 70 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 281, at p. 291;
bykovets, at para.
29
).
the right to privacy is foundational
to a free and democratic society. it is essential to "individual dignity,
autonomy, and personal growth" (
bykovets, at para.
29;
see also
plant, at p. 292;
r. v. jones,
2017 scc 60,
 2 s.c.r. 696, at para.
38
), and to "the relationship between
the state and the citizen" (
r. v. tessling,
2004 scc 67,
 3 s.c.r. 432, at para.
12
). in an oft-quoted passage
in
r. v. dyment,
1988 canlii 10 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 417, at pp. 427-28, la forest j. wrote that "[t]he restraints
imposed on government to pry into the lives of the citizen go to the essence of
a democratic state." a similar sentiment was echoed by binnie j.
in
tessling, who observed that "[f]ew things are as
important to our way of life as the amount of power allowed the police to
invade the homes, privacy and even the bodily integrity of members of canadian
society without judicial authorization" (para. 13).
a
central preoccupation of this court's
s. 8
jurisprudence has been to balance the often
competing aims of personal privacy and the public interest. this quest for balance
reflects the constitutional imperative in
s. 8
itself, which, expressed negatively, protects
against an unreasonable search and seizure or, expressed positively,
safeguards only a reasonable expectation of privacy (
hunter,
at p. 159).
in
hunter, dickson j., as he then was, explained
that
s. 8
requires "an assessment... as to whether
in a particular situation the public's interest in being left alone by
government must give way to the government's interest in intruding on the
individual's privacy in order to advance its goals, notably those of law
enforcement" (pp. 159-60).
in
tessling, binnie j. added that "[t]he community wants
privacy but it also insists on protection. safety, security and the suppression
of crime are legitimate countervailing concerns" (para. 17;
see also
plant, at pp. 291-92
).
section 8 of
the
charter
is
engaged where a person has a "reasonable privacy interest in the object or
subject matter of the state action and the information to which it gives
access" (
marakah, at para. 10, quoting
cole, at para.
34
). a claimant seeking standing to argue
that their rights under
s. 8
were infringed must show that they subjectively
expected the subject matter of the search would remain private, and that their
expectation was objectively reasonable having regard to "the totality of
the circumstances" (
marakah, at para. 10, quoting
r. v. edwards,
1996 canlii 255 (scc),
 1
s.c.r. 128, at paras.
31 and 45;
see
also
r. v. spencer,
2014 scc 43,
 2 s.c.r. 212, at paras.
17-18;
jones, at para.
13
). in making this evaluation, courts are
guided by four lines of inquiry: (1) the subject matter of the alleged search;
(2) whether the claimant had a direct interest in the subject matter; (3)
whether the claimant had a subjective expectation of privacy in the subject
matter; and (4) whether the claimant's subjective expectation of privacy was
objectively reasonable (
marakah, at para. 11;
cole, at para.
40;
spencer, at para.
18;
bykovets, at para.
31
).
did the police conduct amount to a
search or seizure?

the first issue i must decide is
whether the police conduct, prior to seeking judicial authorization, amounted
to a search or seizure.
position of the applicant

on behalf of mr. done, mr. bytensky
argued that the receipt of the ip address by the police in this case
constituted a search, despite the police obtaining that information without a
request. in his view, pursuant to
bykovets, the police breached mr.
done’s section 8 rights by not obtaining judicial authorization prior to using
the ip address in any way, including their efforts to determine which service
provider was the record holder and the relevant municipal location of the ip
address.

mr. bytensky further argued that
where an ip address is provided pursuant to a formal or even an informal
arrangement for cooperation between police and a third party, there is a
requirement for prior judicial authorization for the police to be able to use
the ip address in their investigation. mr. bytensky argued that the unrequested
receipt an ip address from the ncmec cannot be treated as the passive receipt
of information. rather, he submitted that this court should find the
relationship between ncmec and the rcmp to be akin to that which existed
between the public electrical utility and the police
in
orlandis-habsburgo.

finally, mr. bytensky argued that even
if no search took place, the police decision to receive and review the suspect ip
address, without prior judicial authorization, amounted to a seizure.
position of
the respondent

ms. donohue, on behalf of
the crown, argued that there was no search involved in this case. in
particular,
she argued
that in receiving the relevant ip address, no search took place. the police
never made a request; rather they passively received the ip address indirectly
from a private third-party organization located in the united states, where the
charter
has no application.

the police received a
report, akin to a complaint filed with the police alleging the commission of a
crime. ms. donohue argued that police were entitled to use the information
provided in the report, including the ip address, in the next step of their investigation
(confirming the relevant isp and municipal location), without prior judicial
authorization.

the crown also submitted
that any comparison to the situation
in
orlandis-habsburgo
ignores the
fact that the rcmp took no steps to direct the ncmec or make any requests.
indeed, there is no evidence in this case that the ncmec would cooperate even if
the rcmp made a request. it also ignores the fact that there is a clear
legislative scheme in the united states and canada governing the reporting
obligations of isps.

ms. donohue disputed the
characterization of the police receipt and use of the suspect ip address as a seizure
for purposes of section 8.

even if the court finds that the
police passive receipt and subsequent use of the ip address provided by ncmec
constituted a search, ms. donohue argued that there can be no reasonable
expectation of privacy in an ip address used to access child sexual abuse
material where the law explicitly requires isps to make a report to the police
when they become aware that an ip address is connected to an offence involving such
material.
the receipt of the ip
address from ncmec did not amount to a
search

in this case, there were no positive
investigative steps taken by the police to obtain mr. done’s ip address. on the
contrary, the police merely passively received an ip address from a private
third-party organization in the united states (ncmec), that had received the ip
address from a private company (kik). this is an important distinction.

t
he comments made by the majority
in
bykovets
must be interpreted in
light of the
facts
that w
ere
before the supreme court and the
specific
finding
the majority made,
that "the request by the state
for an ip address is a search under s. 8 of the charter”.

it was the request by police
that made obtaining the two ip addresses in that case constitutionally
objectionable.

since
bykovets,
a number of cases have considered whether or not the passive receipt of an ip
address from ncmec or a similar foreign organization

amounts to a search.
in
r. v.
cofell,
justice vermette, in providing a helpful summary of these cases, noted:
…in
most of the cases, the reasoning of the majority
in
bykovets
was found
not to apply to situations where the police did not make a request to obtain an
ip address and was voluntarily provided with an ip address by a third party.”

three additional cases not considered
by justice vermette, involving almost identical scenarios to the case at bar,
are consistent with her conclusion.
the decisions in
r. v. brazeau,
r. v. hillier,
and
r. v. miller

all distinguished the
bykovets
decision
and concluded that the passive
receipt by police of an ip address forwarded by the ncmec to the rcmp does not
constitute a search.


similar to justice griffin in
miller,
i am in complete agreement with justice darroch’s conclusion
in
brazeau:
the
passive receipt of this information is not a search and therefore not subject
to the constitutional protection against unreasonable state intrusions to those
individuals who have a reasonable expectation of privacy over the subject
matter of a search.

to be clear, in mr. done’s case, the
receiving of the cybertipline report by canadian police did not constitute a
search or seizure for the purpose of section 8 of the charter. further, as
justice griffin noted in
miller:
[n]o
canadian police agency was involved in creating the cybertipline report as it
was provided by the ncmec by an american non-profit corporation incorporated
under laws of the district of columbia whose mission it is to reduce child
exploitation and prevent child victimization and as such, they are not even
subject to the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms.
application of
r. v.
orlandis-habsburgo

in arguing that the practice of
information sharing from ncmec to the rcmp cannot be treated as the passive
receipt of information, counsel for mr. done analogized this information
sharing to the arrangement that had been in place between a public electrical
utility and the police
in
orlandis-habsburgo.

in that case, the court of appeal was
critical of the informal arrangement the police had established with the local
power authority, in which the power authority would review customers’
electricity usage records and forward a “high consumption list” of users to the
police, without prior judicial authorization.

significantly, however, justice doherty
took great care to limit the application of the court’s
decision in
orlandis-habsburgo:
i
have considerable difficulty with the submission that
s. 8
is engaged if the police look at information in
which an accused has a legitimate privacy interest, even if that
information is brought to the police by an independent third party acting on
its own initiative. on that
approach,
s. 8
would be engaged if a "whistleblower"
took confidential documents belonging to her employer to the police to
demonstrate the employer's criminal activity. must the police refuse to look at
the documents to avoid violating the employer's
s. 8
rights? as
duarte
teaches, it is one thing to say that canadian
values dictate that the state's power to decide when and how it will intrude
upon personal privacy must be carefully circumscribed, and quite another to say
that an individual's private information is cloaked in the protection of
s. 8
no matter how that information comes to the
police.
i
need not decide whether the appellants'
s. 8
rights would be implicated if horizon, acting on
its own initiative, volunteered the energy consumption data to the police. the
evidence establishes that the police and horizon were acting together. they had a mutual interest in finding marihuana
grow operations. those operations were not only criminal, but also posed a
significant fire hazard and a threat to horizon's legitimate interests.
personnel at horizon and the police developed an informal arrangement whereby
horizon would share energy consumption records with the police on an ongoing
basis. horizon or the police might initiate the request to share the
information if either had reason to believe that a customer of horizon was
operating a marihuana grow-op at a particular location. often when horizon
provided the initial information, the police would request additional
data. horizon always complied.
given
the arrangement between horizon and the police, the
s. 8
analysis in this case should not depend on
whether it was horizon or the police who initiated the contact that led to the
police obtaining the appellants' energy consumption data from horizon. i think
it is a fair reflection of the relationship between horizon and the police to
treat the police investigation in this case as beginning when mr. franco
observed the suspicious pattern of energy consumption at the appellants'
residence and forwarded the data to the police.

in my view, the police/third party
relationship
in
orlandis-habsburgo
is not analogous to the circumstances
in the case at bar, nor to the reported cases where canadian police receive
information, including an ip address, from ncmec or their british counterpart.

ncmec, the private american organization
that collects and forwards tips related to child sexual abuse material on the internet
and other offences, does not seek out information at the request of canadian
authorities. on the contrary, the relationship exclusively involves ncmec
forwarding information gathered about potential criminal activity collected by
operation of american law.

there is no evidence that canadian authorities made any requests of ncmec or
directed them in any way. in addition, there is no evidence that the american,
not-for-profit organization would even comply with such requests or direction.

unlike
in
orlandis-habsburgo,
there
is simply no evidence that the police in this case, whether that be the rcmp or
the tps, had any special arrangement with or influence on ncmec. rather, it is
clear to me that the canadian authorities simply received a tip from an
american organization acting independently.

finally, the information gathering
and sharing by ncmec is authorized by american law and recognized by canadian
law.
as noted earlier, similar canadian legislation not only authorizes isps to
share information with the police, it
requires
isps to file a report
and, in certain circumstances,
provide a suspect ip address to the police. no such legislation or legal
authorization allowed the information sharing engaged in by the police and the
private power utility
in
orlandis-habsburgo.

the circumstances in the
case at bar are a far cry from the nudge-nudge, wink-wink, extra-judicial
arrangement justice doherty rightly criticized
in
orlandis-habsburgo.
steps taken by
police to use the ip address to confirm the existence of records with the
relevant isp did not breach s. 8

in this case, after receiving the suspect
ip address from ncmec, both the rcmp and the tps used an open-source website to
geo-locate where in the country the ip address was located. this website also
provided the name of the relevant isp.
once it was determined that bell was the isp, the police confirmed with bell that
they had the relevant records.

counsel for mr. done argued that by
taking these steps, police breached mr. done’s s. 8 rights. with respect, i do
not read paragraphs 41 and 42 of
bykovets

to require police to obtain prior judicial authorization to merely determine in
which city the ip address was located and with which service provider the ip
address was connected.

obtaining this type of information did
not provide the police with any of the details that concerned
the supreme court
in
bykovets, for example, core biographical information about mr. done
or any details of mr. done’s specific and personal online activity. however, knowing
the isp and location of the ip address, and confirming the existence of the isp’s
records, was a necessary step for the police to take the next step and obtain a
production order.

section 487.014(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code
requires a justice issuing a production order to have grounds to
believe that the document is in the possession or control of the person that
will receive the production order. to obtain a production order for subscriber
information relating to ip addresses, officers first must confirm whether the
isp has such records and would preserve those records for a sufficient period
that they could be requested via production order.

analogous to this situation are the
circumstances in
r. v.
dersch,
where the supreme court indicated that hospitals could release neutral medical
information, such as confirmation of the presence of a patient in the hospital,
to the police without warrant.

this was expanded upon
in
r. v.
lillico,
where the court held that disclosure of general information by confirming
only that a particular cheque was deposited into the customer’s account was not
an infringement of the privacy of the individual so as to attract the
protection of
s.8
of the
charter.

this principle was recently
affirmed
in
r. v. bhogal

in the context of bank records, where the court held:
consumers reasonably expect
that banks will not disclose a customer's transactions to others, without
proper authorization. in some cases, police might call a bank to confirm that
they have records pertaining to a particular person or corporation. this is
sometimes necessary in order to obtain a production order. the police must be
able to establish that the institution possesses the records of interest. in
that instance, the bank is merely confirming that a particular individual or
agency banks at the institution. this is akin to asking whether a person is a
patient at a hospital.
in
r. v. dersch,
1993 canlii 32 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 768
it was held
that such inquiry, without more, did not engage
s. 8
of the
charter.

accordingly, i find that the actions
of the police, once they had received the ip address from ncmec, did not breach
mr. done’s s. 8 rights. indeed, the police took no steps that could breach mr.
done’s privacy without seeking prior judicial authorization. in seeking and obtaining
a production order for bell subscriber records, the police fairly disclosed to
the authorizing justice the process through which they had obtained the ip
address.
the receipt and use of the ip address did not amount
to a
seizure
for purposes of section 8

while i accept that police can
convert
something
that is given to them by a third party into a seizure,
that
something
is generally an object such as a computer or a telephone,
not simply information contained in a tip or a report of an alleged crime.

in
r. v. lambert,
the accused’s wife turned over her husband’s computers to the police after finding
images of child sexual abuse. once these computers were turned over, police
took active steps to assert control over them, by lodging and securing them in
police custody, thereby preventing mr. lambert from having access.

in overturning the trial judge’s finding
that the police conduct did not amount to a seizure for s. 8 purposes, paciocco
j.a. concluded:
i
am persuaded that state action occurred and resulted in a seizure when the
police accepted the computers and took control over them
to the exclusion of
mr. lambert, thereby impeding
his reasonable expectation of privacy.
…in
my view, consistent with the definition of “seizure” embraced by the supreme
court of canada, the term “seizure must embrace any investigative conduct by
the police
in which they take control of a thing, to the exclusion of a
person holding a reasonable expectation of privacy in a thing.

paciocco j.a., however, went on to
confirm that information, unlike a thing such as a computer, should not be
treated the same way:
…[i]ndividuals
do not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the knowledge that others
have:
see
r. v. molyneaux
2020 peca
2, at para.
51.
individuals with
relevant information about criminal conduct are free to communicate this
information to the police, without
s. 8
being engaged.
it
also appears to be settled that a
charter
claimant cannot reasonably
expect that a person they share an expectation of privacy with will not
disclose information they discover to the police, including after discovering
it on an electronic device:
r. v. gomboc
2010 scc
55,
 3 s.c.r. 211, at para.
41;
cole, at para.
73. in this case,
had ms. lecompte
only described what she had seen on the computers instead of handing the
computers over,
s. 8
would not have been engaged regardless of how
extensive the information she provided was.

accordingly, it is clear to me that
no seizure took place in the case at bar. the police receiving a report from
ncmec, which is merely an electronic complaint or tip containing information, is
not analogous to the police holding a computer or telephone, to the exclusion
of an accused.

in the present case, the police
actions in receiving and reviewing the report from ncmec, and in taking their preliminary
steps to identify the isp and location of the ip address, had no impact on mr.
done. there was no interference with mr. done’s right to privacy. he was not prevented
from using the internet and accessing his personal files while the police continued
their investigation.
if police conduct amounted to a
search or seizure, it was authorized by law

if i am wrong and the police conduct
in this case resulted in a search or a seizure, i find that the police receipt
of the report provided by ncmec was authorized by law.

state intrusion into an accused’s
privacy interest will only be reasonable when it was authorized by law, the
authorizing law was itself reasonable and the execution of the search was
itself reasonable.


in this case, there was no challenge
to the constitutionality of the
mandatory reporting act, so i will focus
on the other two elements.

section 9 of the
mandatory
reporting act
reads as follows:
provincial
or foreign jurisdiction
a person who has reported information in compliance with an
obligation to report child pornography under the laws of a province or a
foreign jurisdiction is deemed to have complied with section 2 of this act in
relation to that information.

in my view, this section clearly contemplates
the police receiving reports from foreign jurisdictions. indeed, this is a
common scenario in csam investigations. section 9 treats reports made pursuant
to foreign laws, such as the american federal law

that created reporting duties for isps, the same as reports made pursuant to
the
mandatory reporting act.

the rcmp, and then the tps, were therefore
authorized by the
mandatory reporting act
to both receive and act upon
the report they received from ncmec.

and consistent with the supreme
court’s
decision in
spencer, the police in this case took no steps to
intrude into mr. done’s privacy without prior judicial authorization. after
confirming the service provider and municipal location of the suspect ip
address, they obtained a production order to obtain subscriber information for
the person attached to the ip address. once received, the police used that
subscriber information as part of the materials used to obtain a search warrant
for mr. done’s home and devices.

there was nothing in the manner of
how the police received and then used the ip address that was unreasonable.
no reasonable expectation of privacy
in an ip address in the circumstances of this case

if i am wrong and the police conduct
in this case resulted in a search or a seizure, and was not authorized by law, i
find that mr. done’s reasonable expectation of privacy in the ip address used
to access images of child sexual abuse was so reduced, section 8 would not be
engaged.

in most contexts, and for the reasons
articulated by the supreme court of canada in
bykovets, an internet user
has a reasonable expectation of privacy in an ip address. however, given the
legislative context created by the
mandatory reporting act
and related
regulations,
i find that mr. done’s subjective reasonable expectation of privacy was not objectively
reasonable.


as is evident from the mandatory
reporting obligations and related responsibilities created by the
mandatory
reporting act
and its
regulations, parliament has chosen to
specifically regulate isps and therefore ip addresses through which the internet
is accessed, when an ip address is used to make child sexual abuse material
available or commit a related csam offence.

given this unique legal framework, it
is reasonable to conclude that a person using their ip address to distribute or
access images of child sexual abuse has a much-reduced expectation of privacy
than an internet user in any other context.

in addition, the societal interest in
protecting vulnerable children from exploitation carried out using the internet
further reduced any expectation of privacy.


to be clear, it is not
the subject
matter itself
(csam or related offences) that leads to a conclusion that mr.
done’s subjective expectation of privacy was not objectively reasonable.
rather, i find that the legislative context that requires isps to notify the
designated authorities when child sexual abuse material is made available on
the internet or when an ip address has been used to commit a csam-related
offence, which makes mr. done’s subjective expectation of privacy objectively unreasonable.
how could mr. done have reasonably expected his ip address, with which he
accessed and shared child sexual abuse material, to remain private when the law
required isps to disclose such activity if discovered?


given the legislative context in both
canada and the united states, i find that someone who engages in such access or
distribution, when viewed objectively, would appreciate the risks of detection.
indeed, the communications that were recovered from mr. done’s phone
demonstrate a real understanding by mr. done of the risks he faced of being
identified when accessing child sexual abuse material on the internet.

not bound by horizontal
stare
decisis

there currently is an absence of binding
appellate authority that deals with the issues in this application. there is
also a series of conflicting trial level decisions, with most decisions favouring
the position i have taken that the unrequested receipt by the rcmp of a
complaint or report from ncmec is not a search.

the decision of justice schreck in
r.
v. asantarajah

lacks an analysis of the legislative context when the issue of reasonable
expectation of privacy was considered. additionally, the reasons do not address
whether the police actions were authorized by law within the governing
legislative framework. i therefore conclude that i am not bound by this trial
level decision, per
r. v. sullivan.
section 24(2)
charter
analysis
in the alternative

in all the circumstances, i find that
mr. done’s
section 8
charter
rights were not infringed; however, if i am
incorrect, i would not exclude the evidence pursuant to
s. 24(2)
of the
charter.
seriousness of
charter
-infringing
conduct

in my view, this breach would not tip
the scale in my previous
charter
analysis

to the point where the evidence should be excluded.

clearly, the police did not have the
benefit of the guidance from
the supreme court in
bykovets
when they
conducted the investigation in this case. it is not contested that the police
in this matter would have taken the necessary steps to obtain a production
order to allow them to use the ip address, had that been the law at the time. therefore,
this breach is at the very low end of the spectrum and counsel for mr. done has
fairly conceded that it should have no impact on my previous analysis under the
first branch of
grant.
impact of the breach on mr. done’s
charter
-protected
rights

the impact on mr. done’s
charter-protected privacy interests is attenuated by the fact that mr. done, a
person who accessed and shared child sexual abuse material on the internet, would
have a substantially diminished expectation of privacy, given the legislative
context i have previously outlined.

in addition, if the police breached
mr. done’ s. 8 rights by viewing the ip address and using it to determine the
relevant ip address and municipal location without prior judicial
authorization, this was remedied by the police when they obtained a production
order for subscriber information. in their information to obtain the production
order, they disclosed to the authorizing justice how they obtained the ip
address. this further limits the impact of such a breach on mr. done’s s. 8
rights.

although this factor continues to favour
exclusion per my previous analysis, this additional breach does not tip the
scale towards ultimate exclusion, when balanced against society’s interests in
the completion of this trial, including sentencing.
society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits

the offence against mr. done is very
serious. the court of appeal has repeatedly stressed the gravity of child
pornography offences, most recently
in
r. v pike.

the supreme
court in
r. v. friesen

made it clear
that
sexual offences against children are violent
crimes that wrongfully exploit children's vulnerability and cause profound harm
to children, families, and communities.

online distribution of
films or images depicting sexual violence against a child repeats the original
sexual violence since the child must live with the knowledge that others may be
accessing the films or images, which may resurface in the child's life at any
time.

balancing

when balancing the
grant
factors,
i find that t
he admission of the evidence
of
the video and images of child sexual abuse and related chats found on mr.
done’s cellphone
would better serve the
truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process and society’s interest in
the adjudication of the case on its merits. society’s interests include having an
accused person who has been found guilty appropriately sentenced.
application
dismissed

accordingly, mr. done’s
charter
application is dismissed.
procedural
history


before concluding my reasons, i wish
to outline the procedural history in this matter:
(1)
on february 8,
2023, i dismissed mr. done’s previous application alleging breaches of
sections
7,
8
and
10(b)
of the
charter.
(2)
on may 29, 2023,
i found mr. done guilty of accessing child pornography contrary to
s.
163.1(4.1)
of the
criminal code.
(3)
following his
conviction, i heard an application to stay mr. done’s charges pursuant to
s.
11(b)
of the
charter. that application was dismissed on october 4, 2023.
(4)
on may 30, 2024,
and june 3, 2024, i heard sentencing submissions. following the release of the
ontario court of appeal’s
decision in
pike, i heard additional
sentencing submissions on august 20, 2024.
(5)
also on august
20, 2024, counsel for mr. done indicated that he was likely to bring an
application to re-open the trial to argue a
section 8
charter
application
based on the supreme court’s
decision in
bykovets. on september 17,
2024, counsel for mr. done confirmed that he would bring this application.
(6)
on november 25,
2024, i allowed the application to re-open

and then heard submissions on the
section 8
charter
application. at that
time, the evidentiary record was incomplete, and the matter was adjourned to
continue arguments on january 9, 2025.
(7)
on january 9,
2025, arguments on the
section 8
charter
application were adjourned at
the request of counsel to await the release of two anticipated superior court
decisions on the
bykovets
issue.
(8)
on january 24,
2025, the evidentiary record was completed, and further arguments were heard.
(9)
following the
release of
asantarajah, on march 3, 2025, i heard further submissions on
april 10, 2025. the matter was then adjourned to june 5, 2025, for a decision
on the
section 8
charter
application as well as judgment on sentencing, should
i dismiss the
charter
application.

finally, i wish to commend mr. bytensky
and ms. donohue for their excellent advocacy in this matter. i am grateful for
their professionalism and dedication.
released:
june 5,
2025
justice
joseph
callaghan

kik
interactive inc. is a private company that operated a freeware instant
messaging mobile application.

when
possible, i have used the preferred terminology “child sexual abuse material”
or “csam” in these reasons, that more accurately reflects the nature of “child pornography”.

the ncmec is a private american non-profit
organization whose mission is to help find missing children, reduce child
sexual exploitation, and prevent child victimization. ncmec is not a law
enforcement agency. it serves as the u.s. clearinghouse for families, victims,
private industry, law enforcement, and other professionals on information and
programs related to missing and exploited children’s issues.

the
cybertipline was created by ncmec to allow persons to report online (and via
toll-free telephone) the enticement of children for sexual acts, child sexual
molestation, child pornography, child sex tourism, child sex trafficking,
unsolicited obscene materials sent to a child, misleading domain names,
misleading words or digital images on the internet. the majority of
cybertipline reports ncmec receives relate to apparent child pornography and
are from electronic service providers (“esps”).

internet protocol (ip) address
is
also known as an "ip number". when a subscriber of an internet
provider logs onto the internet using a computer, their internet service
provider assigns them an ip address. this number is specific to that computer.

title 18, usc § 2258a

usually
referred to as an internet service provider (isp) in canada

see
for example
r. v. leger,
2024 nbkb 72;
r.
v. brazeau,
2024 oncj 611;
r. v. prys,
2024 abcj 166;
r. v.
pengelly,
2024 skkb 192;
r. v. miller
(unreported, january 22, 2025
– ocj - g. griffin j);
r. v. a.k.,
2022 aj no. 9141;
r. v. daniels,
2024 onsc 344; and
r. v. asantarajah,
2025 onsc 1377;
r. v. hillier,
2024 nj no. 263

2024 scc 6

see the
procedural history section at the conclusion of these reasons.

moneris

see
bykovets,
at paras.
14, 30 & 92

2017
onca 649

an
act respecting the mandatory reporting of
internet child pornography by persons who provide an internet service
[s.c.
2011, c.4]

internet child pornography reporting regulations
[sor/2011-292]

see
r. v. spencer,
2014 scc 43, at paras.
17-18,
54;
r. v. gomboc,
2010 scc 55, at paras.
27-34;
r. v. cofell,
2024 onsc 7151, at para.
159; and
r. v. z.e.,
2025 onsc 675, at para.
39

s.c. 2011, c.4; amended 2024, c. 23: “child
pornography” now reads “child sexual abuse and exploitation material”

sor/2011-292

section 7 of the
mandatory reporting act

section 9 of the
mandatory reporting act

title 18,
usc § 2258a

see the affidavit of heather girton

sections 7, 12 & 9 of the
regulations

in
spencer,
the supreme court undertook a
lengthy analysis of pipeda, and the privacy policy contained in the relevant
isp contract in that case; however, it appears that the relevance of the
mandatory
reporting
act
(and related
regulations
) was neither argued
nor considered.

2024 scc 42, at paras.
36-39

see the
majority
reasons in
bykovets
at para.
92, and the minority reasons
at para. 135;
see also
r. v. cofell,
2024 onsc 7151
(vermette j.), at
para.
107

united
kingdom national crime agency ("uk nca") –
see
r. v. leger,
2024 nbbr 72

2024
onsc 7151, at paras.
108-117

2024 oncj 611
(darroch, j.)

2024 nj no. 263 (brown, j.)

unreported, ocj - january 22, 2025 (g. j. griffin, j.)

in
r.
v. daniels,
2024, onsc 344, justice dineen declined to decide the issue.

see
para. 19

at page 17

see paras. 34-36 [emphasis added]

see
r. v. daniels,
2024 onsc 344
(dineen j.),
at para. 19

see section 9 of the
mandatory reporting act

see s. 2 of the
mandatory reporting act

when one types in the ip address into the open-source
application, the municipal location and the name of the isp are obtained.

see
daniels,
at para. 20. i note that in
daniels, the police took the additional step
of seeking information through an mlat prior to seeking judicial authorization.
no such step was taken in the case at bar.

1993 canlii 32 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 768
at para.
23

 o.j. no. 95 (onca), affirming
1994 canlii 7548 (on sc),
 o.j. no. 4521
at para.
13

2020
onsc 7327, at para.
53-54

2023 onca 689

see
lambert,
at paras.
66-74
[emphasis added]

see
lambert, at paras.
58-59
[emphasis added]

see
r. v. cole,
2012 scc 53, at paras.
34-37;
spencer,
at para.
68;
el-azrak,
2023 onca 440, at para.
29

title 18, usc § 2258a

justice griffin’s decision in
miller
(at paras.
18-19), in which he made a similar finding, is the only decision of which i am
aware that considered the legislative context when assessing whether a
subjective reasonable expectation of privacy was objectively reasonable.

see
r. v. knelsen,
2024 onca 501, at para.
45;
r.
v. p.m.,
2025 onca 208, at paras.
35-39

see
r. v. campbell,
2024 scc 42
at paras.
50-52

i
recognize the distinction between sections 2 and 3 of the
mandatory reporting
act; however, i find that both sections, when the totality of circumstances
are considered, make mr. done’s subjective expectation of privacy objectively
unreasonable.

see the chats in trial exhibits #9 to 17

2025 onsc 1377

2022 scc 19

see my
reasons for decision on
charter
application dated february 8, 2023

2024 onca 608, at paras.
144-165

2020
scc
9,
at
paras.
1-
5

friesen,
at para.
48

i do
not intend for this to be a complete record of the procedural history; rather,
a summary of key, relevant dates.

the crown consented to the re-opening.