source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj727/2025oncj727.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. bonsu, 2025 oncj 727
date: may
8, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 998 23 31111153
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
gideon bonsu
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 01 and 02 may 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 08 may 2025
k. holmes................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
c. levien........................................................... counsel
for the defendant gideon bonsu
ruling on application under ss. 9 and
10(b) of the
charter
renwick j.:
introduction

the defendant is charged with six firearms
offences in relation to a loaded, prohibited firearm found in his pants pocket during
a traffic stop on 09 october 2023. the prosecution proceeded by indictment and
the defendant chose to have a trial in the ontario court of justice.

prior to trial, the defendant brought a written
charter
application alleging violations of his ss. 9 and 10(b) rights.

the parties agreed that the
evidence on the
charter
application could run concurrent to the trial
proper, during the prosecution’s case.

the parties also agreed that the outcome of the
charter
application would be determinative of the trial result: if the defendant
succeeds under s. 24(2) of the
charter, the evidence obtained from the
search of the defendant will be excluded and he will be acquitted. conversely,
if the firearm found by police is admissible, the defendant may be found
guilty.
the evidence
general
considerations

in this part, i will outline some of the
evidence with references to specific portions of the testimony and other
evidence. although i will not refer to all of what a witness said, i listened
to each witness carefully, i have taken detailed notes, i have reviewed the
exhibits, i have had access to the digital record of the proceedings, and i
have assessed all testimony for intrinsic and extrinsic consistency,
plausibility, balance, possible interest, and the witness’ ability to recall
and communicate.

i do not propose to recapitulate all of the evidence received
during this trial. suffice it to note that i have used ample and many
opportunities during the trial and subsequent to the completion of the
submissions to consider the testimony heard, to review the exhibits, and to
re-play parts of the video evidence or the digital audio recording of the
proceedings. i have thoroughly reviewed the evidence in this case, and i will
only discuss parts of the evidence where it serves to underscore my findings.
lastly, despite any exchanges with counsel during submissions, i came to no
conclusions about any of the evidence received until all of the arguments were
made and my review of the evidence was complete.
the police testimony and other
evidence

police constables (“p.c.”) alex ahn, chris bazinet, and brendon
rodriquez testified for the prosecution. the body-worn camera footage of
officers ahn, deng, bazinet, and rodriguez became exhibits 1a, 1b, 1c, and 1d,
respectively.

p.c. ahn was the main prosecution witness. given
the significance of p.c. ahn’s testimony in determining the s. 9
charter
application,
i will concentrate on this evidence, almost exclusively in this part.

this officer testified about his interactions
with the defendant. this witness testified about his first observations of the
defendant and why he chose to conduct a traffic stop of the defendant’s vehicle

minutes later. the traffic
stop and the officer’s reason for detaining the defendant is squarely in issue.

p.c. ahn testified that at the time of this
incident, he was a police officer for approximately two years. this case was
the officer’s first time testifying in criminal court.

on the morning in question, p.c. ahn was on
general patrol. he was responding to radio calls for service and patrolling for
“deterrence” of offences under the
highway traffic act
or “possible”
impaired drivers. for this reason, he was equipped with an approved screening
device (“asd”) in his police cruiser.

p.c. ahn testified that he was in the area of
the midway invader strip club, a liquor licensed establishment, around closing
time, to deter patrons from driving while impaired by alcohol. he first
encountered the defendant upon entering the parking lot for the club. the
defendant was standing outside next to a female who was seated in the driver’s
seat of a mercedes vehicle. p.c. ahn had never met the defendant prior.

the officer testified that as he drove past, he
interacted with the unknown male and female. he asked what they were doing and
if they had come from the strip club. p.c. ahn testified that the defendant
answered, “i am here to pick up my girlfriend,” who the officer assumed was the
female in the driver’s seat of the mercedes. the officer then asked if the
female had anything to drink. he testified that he asked the question to “both”
the male and female and the male answered, “no,” while the female shook her
head from side to side. p.c. ahn told them to have a good night and continued
into the parking lot.

p.c. ahn told the court that this brief
interaction was cordial and momentary. once he was satisfied that the driver
had not been drinking, he let two proceed on their way. this interaction was
not recorded on the officer’s body-worn camera (“bwc”). it was a very brief
encounter and the officer never left his cruiser, so he did not activate his
bwc.

as he drove away, p.c. ahn saw in his rear-view
and side mirrors that the defendant walked away from the mercedes and entered
another vehicle. the officer then saw the mercedes and the other car drive out
of the parking lot. p.c. ahn found this odd. he wondered whether the male had
misrepresented the nature of the relationship between the parties. he turned
his cruiser around and like he had done with the female driver, he decided to
stop the male driver for a sobriety check.

the officer was candid that once he saw the
license plate for the hyundai driven by the male, he queried the plate on his
police computer and learned that the vehicle was a rental car. when asked if he
had queried the license plate of the mercedes, p.c. ahn testified that he had.

approximately 50m from the driveway to the strip
club, p.c. ahn and two other police vehicles performed a “tandem stop” of the
defendant in the hyundai. officers deng and bazinet were the other officers
involved in the traffic stop. p.c. ahn had not called for the other officers to
assist in the traffic stop, he just did it, “and they followed [him].”

p.c. ahn explained that a tandem stop is a
common practice used to pull over vehicles for sobriety checks, given that some
motorists may try to flee from police when they have been drinking alcohol.
with one or two other police vehicles, the police can position their cruisers
so that the target vehicle has no choice but to pull over.

once he approached the driver (the defendant),
p.c. ahn indicated the reason for the traffic stop and he asked for the usual
documents (license, ownership, and insurance). the officer found it odd that
the driver asked to get his jacket from the back seat, which he then draped
over his right leg, but none of the requested documents were located in the
jacket. at first, p.c. ahn thought that the driver may be impaired [by
alcohol]. also strange to the officer, the defendant was on his hands-free
phone in the car, speaking to his “lawyer.” he knew this because the contact
for the person on the other end of the phone call said, “lawyer” on the
vehicle’s display monitor, and the defendant advised him that his lawyer was on
the phone. p.c. ahn did not believe that it was the defendant’s lawyer given
the time of day (after 2:00 a.m.), so, he advised the defendant to end the
call. this request was ignored, but the officer did not insist.

the officer took the driver’s license and
requested the rental agreement and other documents as he left to query the
license in his cruiser. once there, he observed that p.c. deng moved into the
spot he had been, closest to the driver. he called p.c. deng over, because he
was a newer officer, and told him to be cautious, to watch p.c. bazinet, and to
observe that p.c. bazinet had his hand near his firearm, to be ready in case
things went “bad.”

at his computer, p.c. ahn learned that there was
a caution for the defendant as “armed and dangerous.” at this point his senses
were heightened and he wanted to alert his partners about the caution he had
seen for the driver. p.c. ahn also testified about his conversation with the
defendant and why he had not left with the female in the parking lot. when that
female called the defendant, p.c. ahn testified that he permitted the defendant
to speak to her because “she was waiting for him” and he believed that she had
a reasonable right to know what was happening with the defendant.

during this encounter, p.c. ahn eventually saw
p.c. bazinet make a gesture that he took to mean the other officer could not
see the defendant’s right leg or the centre console area. at this time, the
defendant’s jacket was still covering his right leg. p.c. ahn asked the
defendant to move his jacket to the rear several times before the defendant
complied. the officer testified that when the defendant reached back to put the
jacket into the rear seat, he observed the bulge in the defendant’s right front
pant pocket and what he believed was the “butt” of a gun. he was 100% certain of
this.

p.c. ahn next moved to the passenger side of the
hyundai to advise p.c. bazinet of his observation. he whispered, “firearm right
pocket” to p.c. bazinet.

at this point, p.c. ahn testified that the
sobriety check had become an investigation into an unauthorized possession of a
firearm. when asked if he had alerted his dispatcher of his belief that the
driver had a firearm, p.c. ahn testified, no. when asked if he had advised the
defendant what he had seen, he said, “no, especially not [him].” his rationale
was that he did not want to alert the defendant to the fact that he knew that
the defendant was armed. he felt this would “jeopardize officer safety.” p.c.
ahn explained, if the defendant became aware that the police knew he was armed,
it may “escalate” the situation to where multiple firearms would be drawn.

p.c. ahn then testified that he decided to use
“trickery” to lure the defendant out of his vehicle safely. he decided to tell
the defendant that he smelled alcohol and he would be administering a roadside
breath screening with an asd. this way, once the defendant stepped out of his
car he could be safely apprehended without an escalation of the situation.
unfortunately, around this time, p.c. rodriguez returned from another traffic stop
and while looking inside the car on the passenger side, he saw the defendant’s
firearm and yelled, “gun, gun, gun,” pursuant to his training, and drew his own
firearm. p.c. ahn then dove into the car to hold onto the defendant’s right arm
and quickly remove the defendant from his car. the officers tussled with the
defendant on the ground and even tasered him twice until he was subdued and
handcuffed and the loaded, sub-compact firearm

was safely retrieved.

p.c. ahn arrested the defendant at 2:43 a.m. and
provided him with his rights to counsel at 2:49 a.m. in between those times,
p.c. ahn testified that he continued to restrain the defendant and he “paused”
the whole situation as other officers were arriving on scene. at 3:08 a.m.,
p.c. ahn called the defendant’s counsel of choice and from 3:09 a.m. until 3:49
a.m. the defendant spoke in private with mr. levien while in the back of the
police car. the defendant was re-read his rights to counsel at 4:36 a.m. at the
police station and again spoke with mr. levien from 4:43 a.m. until 4:49 a.m.

cross examination focused on several areas,
including:
i.
whether the officer was certain which side of
the mercedes the defendant stood while speaking with the female driver;
ii.
what was discussed during the initial
interaction with the defendant and the female driver;
iii.
whether the officer was telling the truth about
this being a sobriety check versus an investigation into some other type of
criminal activity;
iv.
whether the officer held conscious or
unconscious bias against young black men and his awareness of whether they are
stopped by police disproportionately because of their race;
v.
whether the officer could have asked for the
name of the “lawyer” to research if he was actually a lawyer;
vi.
whether the officer was “entitled” to tell a
motorist to discontinue a call with counsel during a traffic stop;
vii.
how many officers can be involved in a tandem
stop;
viii.
whether the officer thought the defendant and
the female may be discussing sexual services for money, or he was her pimp;
ix.
how he wrote his notes and who he spoke with
before adding to his notes; and
x.
whether the officer became suspicious of the
defendant before seeing him get into the hyundai.

much of the other police testimony confirmed the
evidence given by p.c. ahn. for instance, p.c. bazinet was clear that they were
in the area to deter patrons leaving a licensed establishment from driving
after they had been drinking. p.c. bazinet also confirmed that he simply
followed p.c. ahn and activated his emergency lights and became involved in the
traffic stop once he observed p.c. ahn pulling over the defendant. to a lesser
extent, p.c. rodriguez also corroborated the reason for police presence in the
area and the rule that officers assist each other for purposes related to
officer safety.

as well, the bwc footage of all four officers
tended to support the testimony of the prime prosecution witness. p.c. ahn is
seen on p.c. deng’s bwc footage communicating his belief that the driver was
armed: at 4:45 of exhibit 1b, p.c. ahn tries to get p.c. bazinet’s attention
and he is seen tapping his firearm several times. also, p.c. ahn is heard
telling p.c. bazinet, “firearm right pocket.” lastly, at 1:34 of p.c. rodriguez’
bwc video, a black object is visible inside the defendant’s right pant pocket.

although i was initially skeptical of the
testimony of both officers ahn and rodriguez respecting their claims to have
seen the handgun inside the defendant’s pocket, exhibit 1a clearly shows the
bulge of the object from p.c. ahn’s vantage point and exhibit 1d confirms that
a black object can be seen by p.c. rodriguez. moreover, p.c. deng’s bwc footage
clearly shows p.c. ahn moving around and getting a view of the defendant from
different angles. the defendant was also moving around as he placed his jacket
into the backseat. i have no doubt that p.c. ahn may have been influenced by
having learned of the police caution in respect of the defendant, but his
observations were not challenged or proven inaccurate during his testimony, and
i accept this evidence as truthful.
analysis

the defendant applied for
charter
relief.
the applicant has the onus to establish his allegations on a balance of
probabilities. if the defendant’s
charter
rights have been violated, the
exclusion of evidence is not automatic. in order to have the seized contraband
excluded from his trial, the defendant must establish that it is more likely
the case than not that the admission of this evidence in the circumstances of
one or more
charter
violations would tend to bring the administration of
justice into disrepute.
credibility and
reliability generally

this case involves various first-hand accounts and credibility
assessments. in assessing witness credibility and reliability i have taken into
account the general capacity of the witness to make their observations, to
remember what they perceived, and their ability to accurately testify to their
recollections. it is also important to determine whether the witness was trying
to tell the truth and whether or not the witness was sincere, candid, biased,
reticent, and/or evasive. a trier of fact is entitled to accept some, none, or
all of a witness’ testimony.

a valuable means of assessing the credibility of any witness is
to examine what is testified to in the context of all of the evidence in the
case and not on an isolated basis. this is true for any inconsistencies and
whether these are inconsequential or significant to the case. if the
inconsistency is significant, then i must pay careful attention to it when
assessing the reliability of the witness' testimony.

triers of fact must consider both credibility
and reliability in determining the facts in a given case. credibility is
shorthand for truthfulness and believability. reliability is the lens through
which one evaluates the accuracy of evidence. trial judges must be careful not
to conflate credibility with reliability otherwise the fact-finding net might
entangle even the least reliable piece of evidence.

it is important to remember that in some cases
credibility takes a back-seat to reliability. for example, there are
prosecutions where the suspect is unknown to the complainant and the latter may
be honestly mistaken about the identity of the perpetrator. in such a case,
reliability concerns govern the analysis because credibility does not guarantee
accuracy. credible witnesses can be mistaken or otherwise inaccurate. thus,
credibility is not a proxy for reliability.


where witness testimony is highly credible,
consistent, plausible, not inconsistent with other evidence, not found to be
the product of bias or motive, largely undisturbed upon a vigorous
cross-examination, and not found to be otherwise unreliable, truth and accuracy
are likely established.

assessments of credibility and reliability can
be the most important and challenging judicial determinations in a criminal
trial. our highest court has reminded us:
credibility
and reliability assessments are also context-specific and multifactorial: they
do not operate along fixed lines and are “more of an ‘art than a science’.”
with respect to credibility in particular, while coherent reasons are crucial,
it is often difficult for trial judges to precisely articulate the reasons why
they believed or disbelieved a witness due to “the complex intermingling of
impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and
attempting to reconcile the various versions of events.” the task is further complicated
by the trial judge’s ability to accept some, all, or none of a witness’
testimony.


judicial fact-finding is often based on
inductive reasoning and evaluations of “probable interpretations of the
evidence.”

it necessarily depends on common-sense inference-drawing.

to again quote the supreme
court:
reasoning
about how people generally tend to behave, and how things tend to happen, is
not only permissible, it is often a necessary component of a complete
testimonial assessment.

there was no violation of s. 9 of the charter

initially, through his factum, the defendant
argued that his s. 9
charter
right was violated when the police detained
him and prolonged his detention by asking him questions. during submissions,
the s. 9 application morphed into an allegation of racial bias or unconscious
bias and arbitrary detention. no issue was taken by the prosecution with the
revised focus of the inquiry and there was no suggestion that the prosecution
was unable to respond to the actual thrust of the s. 9 application.

a s. 9 claim has two parts: was there a
detention, and was it arbitrary. as with other constitutional freedoms, the
supreme court has adopted a purposive approach that seeks to balance individual
autonomy and freedom from unjustified restrictions on liberty with effective
law enforcement.


during submissions, the defendant also raised,
for the first time, that he had been detained when p.c. ahn conversed with the
defendant and ms. moradi in the parking lot.

despite the defendant’s submissions, i am not
satisfied that it is proven that the initial interaction in the parking lot created
a detention. police are entitled to interact with motorists for a variety of
reasons (check sobriety, vehicle registration, insurance, roadworthiness, and
license status). not every interaction with the police is a detention. in
r.
v. suberu, the supreme court made this clear:
…not every interaction between the police and members of the
public, even for investigative purposes, constitutes a detention within the
meaning of the
charter. section 9 of the
charter
does
not dictate that police abstain from interacting with members of the public
until they have specific grounds to connect the individual to the commission of
a crime. likewise, not every police encounter, even with a suspect, will
trigger an individual's right to counsel under s. 10(
b
). as
iacobucci j. aptly observed, "[t]he person who is stopped will in all
cases be 'detained' in the sense of 'delayed', or 'kept waiting'. but the
constitutional rights recognized by ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
are
not engaged by delays that involve no significant physical or psychological
restraint" (para. 19).


i cannot agree that the defendant was detained
at all during this brief encounter with police. first, i accept p.c. ahn’s
testimony that he was not investigating the defendant. he stopped to inquire
into the female motorist’s sobriety. this was not unreasonable and it was
exactly what happened. second, there was no suggestion that the officer’s
questions required the defendant to answer. third, there is no evidence that
the defendant felt detained. although psychological detention can arise in
brief police encounters, there is no evidence to suggest that this brief,
friendly encounter was at all intimidating, or uncomfortable for the defendant.
i have no idea of his age or familiarity with police interactions, however, the
defendant is observed on the bwc footage to be confident, knowledgeable of his
rights (when told to exit his car for the asd sampling he says, “don’t i have
to blow something”), and comfortable asking questions or making requests (for
his jacket, for instance). in these circumstances, there is not even a
scintilla of evidence to suggest that he was psychologically detained when p.c.
ahn first arrived.

in respect of the traffic stop, the parties
agreed that once the defendant pulled his vehicle over, he was detained. the
larger question is whether it is proven on a balance of probabilities that p.c.
ahn detained the defendant for an improper (arbitrary) purpose.

i am not satisfied on a balance of probabilities
that the traffic stop of the defendant was motivated by conscious or
unconscious bias or anti-black sentiment for the following reasons:
i.
p.c. ahn left the female driver and the
defendant shortly

after a cordial, professional interaction about the female’s sobriety. if he
were truly suspicious of some undefined criminal activity, it would have been
counter-intuitive to leave the couple to proceed on their way. it also defies
credulity that the detention of someone suspected to be a pimp, or someone
possibly soliciting sexual services, would yield any evidence of this
criminality;
ii.
p.c. ahn immediately turned his vehicle around
and began to follow the defendant once he observed the defendant get into a
different vehicle. i find as a fact that the defendant’s vehicle was stopped within
a short distance (50m) of the driveway of the strip club. this evidence
supports the officer’s testimony respecting the reason for the traffic stop,
close in time with the officer’s concerns for the male driver’s sobriety;
iii.
p.c. ahn was candid that he had discovered that
the defendant was in a rental vehicle before he approached the hyundai. the
fact that the officer knew that the vehicle was rented, could found a suspicion
that the officer was concerned with unspecified criminal activity, however, the
officer was candid about this knowledge. furthermore, he had already made the
decision to stop the hyundai before he learned that it was a rental;
iv.
p.c. ahn was quick to advise the defendant of
the reason for the traffic stop and it was consistent with his testimony – he
had observed the defendant leaving the strip club [property], which is a
licensed establishment, and he was unaware whether the defendant had been
drinking;
v.
at the five minute mark of his bwc footage,
after confirming the defendant’s identity on his police computer, p.c. ahn
asked the defendant whether he had “nothing to drink in there [the strip club].”
in response to the claim that the defendant had gone there to pick up his
girlfriend, he followed up by asking “how come you’re not leaving with her.”
this evidence is consistent with his earlier indication of a sobriety check and
it aligns with the officer’s notes and his testimony about his suspicions from
his prior contact with and observations of the defendant (leaving separately
from the female);
vi.
the bwc footage proves that p.c. ahn was
respectful of the defendant at all times when dealing with him. though the
officer asked mr. levien to end their phone call, he did not insist on this.
also, when the defendant’s girlfriend called, and the defendant asked the
officer if he could answer the phone, p.c. ahn said, “yeah, ya;” and
vii.
the police testimony was consistent that the
purpose for their presence in the area of the strip club, a liquor licensed
establishment, at that time of night, was the deterrence and investigation of
driver insobriety. this is also plausible in light of the juniority of p.c. ahn
and his partners and consistent with their role as patrol officers; these were
not drug or gang or morality investigators.

i have also taken into account that p.c. ahn was
relatively inexperienced as a police officer that night. he was not a grizzled
veteran who may have been trained at a time before racial profiling was deemed
unacceptable. as a racialized individual, he may even have lived experience
with anti-asian sentiment. none of this means that he could not harbour
unconscious bias or racist views, however, the likelihood of
mala fides
is reduced where there are no outward signs of disrespect, inarticulable
concerns, prejudicial thinking, or subtle intolerance. the rationale offered
for stopping the defendant was entirely reasonable in the circumstances.

i find that the traffic stop of the defendant
was not arbitrary. i accept as truthful and reliable the testimony of p.c. ahn
that once he saw the defendant driving, he wondered whether the defendant had
misled him about picking up his girlfriend, possibly to obscure the fact that
he had been drinking inside the club. i accept as truthful and reliable the
reason offered by p.c. ahn for the traffic stop of the hyundai: to investigate
the sobriety of the driver. this is an appropriate reason to detain motorists
leaving licensed venues.
there was a
violation of s. 10(b) of the charter

in all, there are three periods of time where
the defendant alleged that his s. 10(b) rights were violated:
i.
during the police interaction in the parking
lot;
ii.
while he was stopped in his car and speaking
with his counsel; and
iii.
after his arrest and prior to receiving both
components of the right to counsel.

in respect of the first concern, as indicated
above, there was no detention when p.c. ahn first spoke with the defendant in
the strip club parking lot. thus, there was no necessity to provide the
defendant with his s. 10(b) rights.

in respect of the second concern, the
defendant’s written application asserted that his s. 10(b) right was violated
when the police attempted to end his phone call with his counsel during the
traffic stop. this complaint included the failure to provide the defendant an
opportunity to speak privately with his counsel while he was detained in his
car. counsel produced no jurisprudence to support the view that there is a
right to speak to a lawyer
during
a traffic stop. to the contrary, it is
well recognized that the police may suspend s. 10(b) rights during drink-driving
investigations, which are supposed to be brief in duration.

the third concern was meritorious. the defendant
was arrested at 2:43 a.m. and received the informational component of his
rights to counsel at 2:49 a.m. his lawyer was called at 3:08 a.m. and they
spoke from 3:09 a.m. until 3:49 a.m. in addition, the defendant was also put in
touch with his lawyer while he was at the police station.

after his arrest, p.c. bazinet testified toward
the end of his evidence in chief that the defendant had to be seen by the
paramedics to safely remove taser barbs from him. once that was completed, the
defendant was walked to p.c. ahn’s cruiser, where he was patted down for any
other contraband (“we double check, triple check to make sure there was nothing
else”), before p.c. ahn provided the rights to counsel. i do not find that
there was any unacceptable delay in providing the informational component of the
rights to counsel during the six minutes following the defendant’s arrest.

however, there was a further delay of 19 minutes
before the police facilitated the exercise of the right to counsel (2:49 a.m.
to 3:08 a.m.). there was no real explanation for this delay. i find that this
19 minute delay was not justified and as a result, i am satisfied on a balance
of probabilities that this constituted a violation of s. 10(b) of the
charter.
section
24(2) of the charter


section 24(2) recognizes that if evidence gained by constitutional
infringements is regularly admitted in criminal trials this may weaken public
confidence and bring the administration of justice into disrepute. this
subsection seeks to mitigate the negative effects of inappropriate state conduct
by requiring a qualitative analysis of the long-term effect that tainted
evidence could have upon public confidence in the justice system.

to perform the balancing exercise required by s. 24(2) of the
charter,
i must consider:
i.
the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
state conduct;
ii.
the impact of the breach(es) on the
charter
-protected
interests of the applicant; and
iii.
society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits.

the first two factors serve to mitigate the loss
of civil liberties by requiring exclusion of evidence when the
charter
-infringing
conduct is serious and the impact upon
charter
-protected interests is
significant. the third factor “pulls in the opposite direction toward the
inclusion of evidence. that pull is particularly strong where the evidence is
reliable and critical to the crown’s case.”


it is also the case that the third factor can
also pull in the opposite direction, requiring evidential exclusion, when the
state conduct is so subversive of protected freedoms that the only way to
protect public confidence in the administration of justice is to have the
evidence excluded from the trial process.
the seriousness of the charter-infringing state conduct

as our court of appeal has remarked:
…the
evaluation of the seriousness or gravity of the offending state conduct 
focuses upon the level of fault of the breaching officers in the
circumstances…the more serious the offending conduct, the more pressing the
need for the court to dissociate itself from the fruits of that conduct.


further, the seriousness of any breach is
aggravated where the evidence establishes a systemic problem or a pattern of
charter
non-compliance.

courts must
view the matter holistically to determine if there circumstances that mitigate
or exacerbate the offending state conduct and the level of state culpability.


here, the violation was not explained. it is
difficult on the evidentiary record to establish how avoidable was the 19
minute delay to facilitate the defendant’s exercise of the right to counsel.

the seriousness of this violation was somewhat
attenuated by the quick decision to provide a cell phone and to permit the
defendant to speak again with mr. levien while in the back of the police car.
he was certainly given an adequate period of time (40 minutes) to fully exhaust
his s. 10(b) rights once police put him in contact with his lawyer. moreover,
the right was also exercised, briefly, at the police station.

these extensions of assistance modulate the
seriousness of the violation because they demonstrate the officer’s interest in
complying with his obligation to facilitate contact with counsel. there is no
suggestion that the police made any attempts to have the defendant implicate
himself during the pause before he was given an opportunity to exercise his s.
10(b) right.

this mitigates the police misconduct and reduces
the seriousness of the
charter
breach to “low.”
the impact of the charter-infringing state conduct

there are a number of factors that bear upon the
impact of the
charter
violation upon the defendant’s fair trial rights:
evidence discoverability, the absence of a causal link between the
charter
breach and the evidence to be excluded, and the nature of the evidence itself.
these considerations do not move the needle even incrementally toward excluding
evidence in this case.

nonetheless, the decision not to facilitate the
right to counsel in a timely way had a modest impact upon the defendant. though
he would have been helpless, handcuffed in the back of a police car, waiting
for the police to help him to exercise his right to counsel, the police did not
elicit any incriminating statements or otherwise interfere with his bodily
integrity during this delay.
balancing
whether a remedy is required

our court of appeal has confirmed, “[t]he more
important the evidence is to the crown’s case, the greater the risk of
disrepute from it’s exclusion.”


it must be remembered, however, that the third
line of inquiry can cut both ways:
while the public has a heightened interest in a determination on the
merits where the offence is serious, it also has a vital interest in
maintaining a justice system that is above reproach.


there is no doubt that the firearm and
ammunition are real pieces of evidence that existed independently of the
charter
violation. this evidence is critical to proving the alleged offences. if the
firearm and ammunition are excluded from the trial, the prosecution will
disintegrate.

the
charter
violation is technical: the
police provided the defendant with the right to counsel, but they did not
facilitate the exercise of this right in a timely way. the violation was
mitigated by the good faith of the police, which was demonstrated by the
efforts to facilitate contact with counsel in the back of a police car, and the
provision of a second chance to speak to counsel back at the station.

in the end, i do not believe that this factor
requires exclusion in order to protect the integrity of the justice system and
public confidence. all three of the
grant
factors provide weak (if any)
justification for the exclusion of real evidence. the interest in admitting the
firearm and ammunition into evidence outweighs the requirement to exclude the
evidence to maintain public confidence.
conclusion

though i have found a minor
charter
violation, i rule that the firearm and ammunition remain admissible in the
trial.

for these reasons, the
charter
applications are dismissed.
released: 08 may
2025
justice
g. paul renwick

interestingly, the first page of the application (the table of
contents) lists both
charter
rights allegedly violated, while page 2
(applicant’s factum) did not refer to s. 9 of the
charter
in the
heading. this is consistent with para. 2, which only referenced s. 10(b).
paragraph 9, however, alleges that the “prolonged questioning” of the defendant
was problematic. unfortunately, the factum does not disclose any actual s. 9
concerns beyond the questioning mentioned.

the defendant was operating a white hyundai rental car that
night. i have used the phrase “defendant’s vehicle” merely for simplicity sake,
and not to denote ownership or association.

the parties never referred to the firearm as a “sub-compact.”
however, given its diminutive size, and its designation as a
prohibited
firearm (by definition, a handgun with a barrel length less than 105mm is
prohibited: see
s. 84
of the
criminal code
), this is an appropriate
description.

r.
v. h.c.,
2009 onca 56
at para.
41.

r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7
at para.
81.

kruk, supra, at paras.
71 and 75.

ibid.

kruk, supra, at para.
72.

r.
v. thompson,
2020
onca 264
at para.
29.

r.
v. suberu,
2009 scc 33
at para.
3.

according to the female, sarah moradi, who also testified on
the
charter voir dire, the interaction lasted “maybe a minute or less.”

for the origins of this analysis, see
r.
v. grant,
2009 scc 32.

r.
v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 365
at para.
62.

r.
v. o’brien,
2023 onca 197
at para.
24.

o’brien, supra, at para.
25.

r.
v. mccolman,
2023 scc 8
at paras.
57, 58, and 64.

o’brien, supra, at para.
53.

mccolman, supra, at para.
70.