source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj269/2025oncj269.html

citation:
r. v. butt, 2025 oncj 269
date: february 10, 2025
court file no. 4860 999 00 2867309f-00
ontario court of justice
his
majesty the king
v.
muhammad
butt
proceedings
before
her worship justice of the peace r. scarpato
on february
10, 2025, at toronto, ontario
appearances:
i. silvanovich municipal
prosecutor
v. manoukian agent
for the defendant
r u l i
n g
scarpato, 
j.p.: (orally)
this is with
respect to the matter of muhammad butt. there was a motion brought by the
defence paralegal, mr. manoukian, on behalf of his client, muhammad butt,
charging him with the offence of red light, driver fail to stop, contrary to
section 144(18) of the
highway traffic act.
mr.
manoukian provided the court with two cases,
r. v.
bertolucci;
r.
v. wu;
r. v. woo; r. v. young,
 o.j. no. 4283
c.c.c.; and
r.
v. wilson,
 o.j. no. 4907
– both are
poa
appeal court
decisions.
relying
on these cases, mr. manoukian submits that the part i certificate of offence
should be quashed as the informant’s name is not included on the certificate of
offence.
he
submits that mr. butt would be prejudiced if an amendment is granted to include
this particular. he further submits that the cases of
massicotte
and
pine
deal with informations and summonses, which is not the case here.
mr.
silvanovich, for the prosecution, submits that there is some information on the
certificate of the offence as to who the informant is. it reads, “pc 10429”. 
although there is no specific name noted, it includes “pc 10429” and therefore,
the certificate of offence can be amended. he points out that the officer's
signature, along with all other material particulars with respect to the
offence, are provided and made clear.
pursuant
to subsection 34(1),
the court has the
discretion at any stage of proceedings to amend the information or certificate
where it appears that the information or certificate fails to state or states
defectively anything that is [essential] to charge the offence; does not negative
an exception that should be negatived or is in any way defective in form or
substance. it is also open to the court to amend the information or
certificate during the course of the trial if the subject matter of the
proposed amendment has been disclosed by the evidence.
the
scope of these remedial amendments provisions in subsection 34(1) and (2) is
therefore quite broad. conversely, the power to quash under section 36 of the
provincial
offences act
is concurrently narrow.
as
stated in
r. v. massicotte,
2017 onsc 5837, a recent and binding
decision on this court, a superior court of justice decision, at paragraph 10:
an
over-arching principle informs the proper determination of any challenge to the
validity of a
provincial offences act
information: substance matters
more than form. in
york v. winlow,
2009 onca 643
at para.
9, the
ontario court of appeal observed that, “section 34 of the
poa
authorizes
the amendment of an information or certificate of offence. the amendment power
is broad, reflecting the legislative intent that
poa
charges be decided
on their merits and not on technical grounds or procedural irregularities.”
the
court of appeal recently affirmed this approach in
york
(regional
municipality) v. wadood,
2017 onca 45, at para.
14: “an important goal of
the
provincial offences act
is that cases be decided on their merits. a
corollary to that goal is that a minor defect in a proceeding, not prejudicing
a defendant, should not be given effect to”. the court of appeal went on to
state at paragraph 49:
the
act
is intended to permit judges to decide cases on their merits, to deal
efficiently and inexpensively with the province’s large volume of minor
regulatory offences and to avoid having proceedings invalidated because of
technical objections or irregularities having no prejudicial impact on a
defendant.
the
overarching principle has long been well established. “the overall philosophy
is to ensure that technical objections do not impede an impartial verdict on
the merits”.
at
paragraph 11, the court goes on to say, holding firm, the
regional
municipality of york v. lorman,
2015 onsc 6486, where at para.
8, justice
edwards writes,
the spirit and
intent of
provincial offences act,
and prosecutions conducted
thereunder, is to ensure that technical objections do not impede a verdict on
the merits.
there
is a footnote stating that,
while many of the
cases cited arose in the context of part i proceedings under the
provincial
offences act, and the instant case is a part iii proceeding initiated by an
information rather than by certificate of offence, this distinction is
immaterial to the present analysis. the jurisdiction of a justice of the peace
to deal with defects on the face of the charging document once the defendant is
before the court for adjudication of the allegations is, in both situations,
governed by section 36 of the
provincial offences act
(
massicotte).
at
paragraph 12, the court goes on to say,
there is nothing
new or controversial about this principle. almost 40 years ago, in
sault
ste. marie,
the supreme court stated, “we must look for substance and not
petty formalities. while the supreme court was concerned in
sault st. marie
with a
criminal code
charging document, its dictum governs the proper
approach to
provincial offences act
information with at least equal
force.
the
provincial
offences act
empowers a justice of the peace to quash an information, but
only in very limited circumstances. and this is conferred by section 36, which
provides: “which refers to motion to quash information or certificate an
objection to an information or certificate for a defect apparent on its face,
shall be taken by motion to quash the information or certificate before the
defendant has pleaded, and thereafter only by leave of the court.
subsection
(2) reads,
the court shall
not quash an information or certificate unless an amendment or particular under
section 33, 34 or 35 would fail to satisfy the ends of justice.
this
refers both to the certificate and to informations.
there
is the decision that i am also aware of. it's an ontario court of appeal
decision,
r. v. davis,
2017 o.j. no. 245. in that case, the defendant
appealed being deemed not to dispute due to the fact that the certificate of
offence initially did not include the municipality.
the
officer in that case had added the name of the municipality after giving the
defendant's offence notice, but before filing the certificate with the court. 
the court of appeal upheld the conviction.
while
the analysis focuses on section 90 of the
poa, it is different than the
case here, it reinforces the principle that's articulated in
massicotte,
that minor errors do not justify quashing.
at
paragraph 50, the court says in all these examples and many other examples of
minor errors or omissions on certificates of offence, the defendant charged
would not be misled. quashing the certificate of offence because of minor
errors that cause no prejudice would not promote the fair administration of
justice in the provincial court.
in
this case, the certificate provides some information about the informant. it
reads “pc 10429”. the officer's signature is clearly there and along with all
the other particulars requisite to the charge in order for the accused to be
able to make a full answer and defence.
so,
for these reasons i am not prepared to quash the certificate.
ms.
rodrigues: thank you, your worship.
the
court: you're welcome. thank you.
mr.
manoukian: thank you, your worship....proceedings
adjourned
**********