source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj382/2025oncj382.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. walton, 2025 oncj 382
date: 
2025 07 16
court
file no.: toronto region
4810
998 24-31105898
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
gregory dale
walton
before
justice c. faria
heard
on march 11 and may 2, 2025
reasons
for sentencing released on july 16, 2025
levi karademir.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alison craig....................................... 
counsel for the accused gregory dale walton
faria j.:

gregory walton was declared a dangerous offender
(do) and is currently serving a 10-year long-term supervision order (ltso). he
pled guilty to consuming drugs and thereby breaching a condition of that ltso
contrary to
s. 753.3(1)
of the
criminal code.

the parties disagree on the quantum of jail this
breach warrants, the way pre-sentence custody (psr) should be considered, and
the approach to the balancing of the applicable sentencing principles in the
circumstances of this offence and this offender.

mr. karademir for the crown recommends a
2.5-year jail sentence minus pre-sentence custody (psc) on a one-to-one basis
with no enhancement. he estimated mr. walton had served 311 days at the time of
submissions and proposed mr. walton serve another almost 20 months in jail. he emphasizes
denunciation and deterrence, and the fact mr. walton has already received
higher sentences for previous ltso breaches than what the defence recommends.

ms. craig for mr. walker submits he is in a time
served position with his pre-sentence custody whether enhanced or not. she
agreed with the 311-day calculation on the day of submissions. she argues
denunciation and deterrence are not the only relevant factors, and the
principle of rehabilitation in the context of an addiction that cannot be
overcome in a linear fashion warrants a step away from simplistic increases in
sentences, even in the context of serving a ltso.

these are my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts

although mr. walton pled guilty to one breach on
july 4, 2024,
a second breach that occurred earlier, on may 14, 2024, was read into the
record as an aggravating factor.


mr. walton was designated a do on june 22, 2016,
after a conviction on the charges of aggravated assault and kidnapping. the
value of his total sentence, including pre-sentence custody, was 7 years and 9
months. a 10-year long term supervision order (ltso) was also imposed and began
on january 21, 2019.

one of the conditions of the ltso is not to
consume, purchase, or possess drugs other than prescribed medication. he is
subject to random urinalysis. on
may 14, 2024, he had
amphetamine, methamphetamine and
mdma
in his system which are street drugs he was not prescribed. he was
arrested and released on a surety bail.

on
july 4, 2024, mr. walton provided another urine sample on demand. he tested
positive for the same three substances as on may 14. he was arrested and has
been in custody since.
ii.
gregory walton

mr. walton has just turned 51 years old. the s. 752.1
assessment report prepared by dr. jeff mcmaster dated october 7, 2015, for the do
designation hearing in 2016 is the primary source of information about mr.
walton’s background.

a.
background

mr. walton was born and raised in north york.
his father was strict, promoted good grades and participation in sports. however,
during his childhood mr. walton did observe his father to be verbally and
physically abusive towards his mother and unfaithful to her. his father also
had a drinking problem and a temper that emerged during physical discipline.
his parents separated when he was 12. he continued to live in the family home
with his mother until he was 18 years old and to see his father regularly.

mr. walton’s father passed away while mr. walton
was in jail in 2014. his mother passed away after significant health difficulties
around the time he was designated a do. neither his sister, nor his several
half siblings have problems with the law or substance use.

mr. walton had difficulties academically and
did not complete high school. he was truant, had conflicts, and a learning
disability which required special education. he has completed some further
education while serving federal time.

mr. walton has demonstrated a good work ethic.
he has obtained numerous jobs throughout the years but maintaining them has
been more difficult. he has a job currently lined up with armed paving.

in addition to doing legitimate
work however, mr. walton has spent much of his adult life in the nightclub
scene, “partying” which involved illegal activities such as collecting debts
with the use of violence. this led to his two most serious criminal offences
and his do designation.

during his assessment, mr. walton was diagnosed
with a personality disorder with anti-social traits and a moderate degree of psychopathy.
he was also diagnosed with a poly-substance abuse disorder involving ghb,
ecstasy and cocaine (in remission). the risk of violence flowing from these
factors may be reduced by the passage of time, or by treatment.

b.
criminal record

mr. walton has been committing serious offences
for almost 30 years.

his very first offences, 5 robberies, led him to a 4 year and 11-month
penitentiary sentence at the young age of 22 in 1996. at least one robbery
involved the possession of a loaded firearm.

while on parole, he was convicted of aggravated assault
in 1999 and sentenced to psc of 16 months at the age of 26. mr. walton had seriously
beaten a customer of his girlfriend who worked as an escort. he violated his
parole and was re-committed in 2000.

while on bail for very serious charges in 2005,
mr. walton was located driving with a woman he was not to have contact with,
while out of his home contrary to a house arrest condition and provided a false
name when investigated for having no licence plate and a suspended licence. he
was sentenced to 54 days at the age of 31 for this fail to comply and
obstruction.


mr. walton returned to serious offending in 2006
when he was convicted for extortion and forcible confinement. he was sentenced
to another penitentiary sentence of 5 years when he was 32 years old. mr.
walton had “terrorized” two young men “in the context of enforcing a drug debt
for someone involved in organized crime”, one of whom did not owe any debt.

he violated his parole and
was recommitted in 2008.

a short 2 day sentence followed in 2009 for
mischief before the index offence that led to his do designation in june of
2016 when he was 42 years old.
c.
index offence

on the evening of january 21, 2013, mr. walton,
with an associate, followed subinder sooch into an underground parking garage. 
the two men attacked mr. sooch when he exited his vehicle. the vicious beating
left a pool of blood on the concrete of the victim’s parking spot. mr. sooch’s
hands and feet were bound with plastic zip ties, a sweater pulled over his
head, and he was thrown into his own car. he was driven around and taken to a mechanic
shop. at this location, the victim was water boarded. this is a technique
where the victim is tied down flat, face up, with their head immobilized and
placed in a lower position than their feet. their face is covered with fabric
while water is poured onto their face, mouth, and nose creating the sensation
of drowning. mr. sooch sustained further beatings until the morning. he was
then loaded back into his vehicle, soaking wet, stripped of most of his
clothing, and left naked in sub-zero temperature at an intersection in toronto.
mr. sooch flagged down help and was taken to hospital. he sustained a broken
arm in addition to other injuries.

mr. walton pled guilty to kidnapping and
aggravated assault. he was candid with the forensic psychiatrist, providing
details of the offences the crown did not have.

in june 2016, mr. walton did not dispute he
should be declared a dangerous offender, nor that a 10-year ltso be imposed. the
dispute was the appropriate quantum of the determinate jail sentence after the
do designation. justice cole sentenced mr. walton to 8 years with a modest deduction
of 3 months for harsh jail conditions.

d.
offence cycle and risk to re-offend

dr. mcmaster described mr. walton’s offence
cycle as follows:
mr. walton appears to have an offence cycle
in which he does not have the sense, and responsibility to avoid high risk
situations, despite past difficulty in same. he appears to gravitate to
positions in which he makes use of his physical size and strength, which gives
him a sense of importance, and which provides monetarily. it appears that any
prosocial gains accrued from programming, supervision, and personal support,
gradually erode over time, while he places more emphasis on activities which
place him at elevated risk. in his cycle, he gravitates to organizations which
may be associated with activities of limited or questionable stability, morality,
or legality.


put simply, mr. walton gets involved in the underground
scene, engages with criminal associates, and beats people up to collect debts
for these criminal associates, including twice kidnapping and torturing people to
collect such a debt. he does drugs along the way.
e.
role of substance use and risk to
re-offend

mr. walton’s drugs of choice back in 2016 were
ecstasy, ghb, and mdma. he admitted to having used ghb earlier in the day of
the index offence but believed that it had worn off.

mr. walton continued to use substances after
taking treatment while serving a federal sentence prior to his do designation. dr.
mcmaster noted in his report that:
“substance misuse required mr. walton to
be on relapse prevention, monitoring, and random urinalyses, as “substance use
may contribute to mr. walton’s risk of violence through the following pathways,
via intoxication, or withdrawal; of lifestyle effects (e.g. association with certain
individuals, financial strain.” dr. mcmaster also stated that “mr. walton’s
offence cycle could be derailed by not using substances or associating with
substance using individuals.”


cocaine was the drug mr. walton consumed on september
30, 2020, for which he was found guilty in march 2021 after trial by justice
felix. at his sentencing in august 2021, mr. walton admitted to frequent and
substantial use of cocaine when he was involved with a woman who was a
substance user.

it appears that it was during that sentencing for
his first breach with cocaine in august 2021 that mr. walton truly acknowledged
he had a problem with drug use. neither his counsel at the time (not ms. 
craig) nor any other institutional service, provided justice felix with a plan
to address the issue. it was this acknowledgment of a problem that persuaded
justice felix on november 24, 2021, during the second breach sentencing of may
2021, to focus on rehabilitation in addition to denunciation and deterrence.

the breach before this court is for amphetamine,
methamphetamine and mdma, the drugs originally identified as problematic.
f.
history of supervision

mr. walton breached his ltso on september 30, 2020,
when he failed a urinalysis by having ingested cocaine. he was convicted on
march 18, 2021 and sentenced on august 6, 2021 by justice felix.

during the sentencing hearing for the september
30, 2020 breach, justice felix accepted the evidence of mr. walton’s parole
officer. the officer testified mr. walton had taken several positive steps
including engaging in counselling to deal with alcohol and stressors. mr.
walton met with her weekly and on his own initiative, was taking intensive
programing, showed no violence or aggression during supervision, was working,
avoiding negative peer groups, and providing several negative urinalysis tests.
as a result, justice felix sentenced mr. walton to 20 months jail for that
first breach, and then 10 months jail for a second breach on may 1, 2021.

iii.
legal principles

section 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
sets out the guiding principles of sentencing.

every sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (s.
718.1).

sentencing objectives are to (
s. 718
):
o
denounce unlawful conduct;
o
deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences;
o
separate offenders from society, where
necessary;
o
assist in rehabilitating offenders;
o
provide reparations for harm done to victims or
to the community; and
o
promote a sense of responsibility in offenders,
and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.

aggravating and mitigating factors are to be
considered (
s. 718.2
(a)).

similar sentences should be imposed on similar
offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances (
s.
718.2
(b)).

as this breach was proceeded by indictment, the
maximum sanction is 10 years in jail (
s. 753.3(1)
(a)).
iv.
analysis

both the supreme court in
ipeelee

and the ontario court of
appeal in
matte,
set out the sentencing principles for an ltso breach as:
1.
long-term supervision has two specific
objectives: protecting the public from risk of re-offence and rehabilitating
the offender and reintegrating him or her into the community.
2.
it is wrong to say that protection of the public
is paramount and that significant sentences must be imposed even for slight
breaches.
3.
the severity of a breach of an ltso depends on
all the circumstances, including, but not only the circumstances of the breach,
but the nature of the condition breached, and the relationship between the
condition breached and the management of the offender’s risk of re-offence.
4.
rehabilitation will not always be the foremost
consideration when determining a fit sentence for a breach of an ltso. a
sentencing judge must apply all the principles mandated by
ss. 718.1
and
718.2
of the
criminal code. the relative weight to assign to each sentencing
principle or objective varies with the circumstances of the particular breach. 
ultimately, the sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of the offender’s responsibility.


justice greene in
middleton
identified the
sentencing range for drug consumption breaches of an ltso to be between 9
months and 5 years. sentences below or on the low end of the range apply when
the offence is a “blip” while sentences on the higher end of the range are for
repeat offences with additional aggravating conduct.

assessment of breach in this case

there are four aggravating factors in this case:
i.
this is mr. walton’s third drug consumption ltso
breach.
ii.
although he pled guilty to one count, he
admitted a second incident of drug consumption.
iii.
the second incident of drug consumption occurred
while he was on bail for the first offence.
iv.
drug consumption, although not central, does
play a role as a triggering factor in mr. walton’s offence cycle and risk to
re-offend.

it is mitigating that:
i.
mr. walton has increasing insight. he now freely
admits to having a substance addiction, and spoke about the experience of
abstinence, and then failing to use the tools he has learned and using drugs again.
ii.
he continues to participate in programming for
his addiction.
iii.
he has a job to go to.
iv.
there is a 3-year gap between his last lapse
into drug use and this offence.
v.
mr. walton pled guilty which reflects
accountability, obviated the witnesses from having to testify and saved the criminal
justice system resources that can be used elsewhere.

after reviewing the jurisprudence decided after
ipeelee,
justice wheeler, in
liedtke
identified nine factors that inform the
length of sentence imposed for a breach of a ltso for using illicit substances.


it is a helpful list that incorporates the
aggravating and mitigating factors identified above, in the context of an ltso
drug consumption breach and i will apply it to mr. walton.
1.
extent of the breach: mr. walton’s breaches were during routine urinalysis testing which
appear to reflect isolated use. however, mr. walton’s testing process demonstrated
deceptive behaviour and denial, and it occurred twice.

2.
number of prior breaches: mr. walton has breached twice before on the same ltso.
3.
impact of breach on ability to supervise mr.
walton: neither positive urinalysis tests negatively
affected the ability of authorities to supervise mr. walton.
4.
other breaches or criminal offences: there are no other breaches or criminal offences accompanying this
offence or the previous drug breach offences.
5.
length of time on supervision prior to the
breach: mr. walton breached the first time after 20
months of supervision, the second time was 8 months later. it has been 3 years
since mr. walton’s last similar positive test. this is a significant period of
abstinence for a person with a substance addiction.
6.
history of supervision: mr. walton’s correctional plan identifies a few behavioural
incidents, however, he co-operates with his supervisors and appears to follow
the rules of his ltso for over 6 years, but for the drug consumption breaches.
7.
attitude: while
in the community, mr. walton’s correctional plan notes he is co-operative, hardworking,
and engaged with staff. his guilty plea exhibits accountability, and he
demonstrated insight during his allocution.
8.
role of substances in mr. walton’s history of
violence: consuming illegal substances is part of a
lifestyle that leads mr. walton to associate with people involved in criminal
activity. he then participates and commits violent crimes for their benefit
and his own financial gain. substance use is therefore an indirect indicator of
possible association with both the lifestyle and circumstances that lead to mr.
walton’s violence. as such, substance use is a serious flag but not central to
mr. walton’s offence cycle.
9.
context of mr. walton’s use of substances: it is unclear how and when mr. walton consumed the illicit
substances the first time on may 14 or the second time on july 4, while on release
to his surety. he calls his surety his “spouse” but they were neither married,
nor living together when she became his surety. there is some concern that she
may not assist him with his substance addiction.

the overall circumstances of mr. walton’s breach
places him just above the lower end of the continuum of substance use ltso
breaches. it is neither a “blip” because it is his third such breach, nor is it
a “flag” for repetitive and dangerous criminal conduct.

as the supreme court noted in
ipeelee
at
para.
91:
“it is therefore necessary to consider what
sentence is warranted in the circumstances. mr. ipeelee breached the alcohol
abstention condition of his ltso. his history indicates a strong correlation
between alcohol use and violent offending. as a result, abstaining from
alcohol is critical to managing his risk in the community. that being said,
the conduct constituting the breach was becoming intoxicated, not becoming
intoxicated and engaging in violence. the court must focus on the actual incident
giving rise to the breach. a fit sentence should seek to manage the risk of
reoffence he continues to pose in the community in a manner that addresses his
alcohol abuse, rather than punish him for what might been. to engage in the
latter would certainly run afoul of the principles of fundamental justice.”

thus, although denunciation and deterrence are
the primary guiding factors because mr. walton is a repeat ltso breach offender
as the crown submits, these principles do not negate, nor minimize the role of
the rehabilitation principle in his case.

given mr. walton’s progressive improvement of
insight, the sanction must reflect rehabilitation in a way that that recognizes
the extent of the breach in its context of substance addiction without associated
offences or violence.

justice felix specifically recognized mr.
walton’s first admission of substance addiction after his trial as an important
first step, and i find that mr. walton has continued with a commitment to deal
with the addiction. re-incarcerating him for a significant period of time is
therefore unlikely to assist him in that road to recovery.
pre-sentence custody

while in pre-sentence custody on this offence,
mr. walton’s ltso has been running and thus enhancement of that time is inappropriate
pursuant to the ontario court of appeal in
bourdon.

however, mr. walton has not
been in a penitentiary accessing treatment programs as contemplated in a long-term
supervision order.

instead, as justice h. pringle in
hoshal
noted, the offender serving pre-sentence custody in a provincial facility while
his ltso runs is “wasting away his rehabilitative potential in the tsdc
(toronto south detention centre)”.


ms. craig filed a lockdown summary for mr.
walton while incarcerated at the tsdc. he was on lock-down during 66 days of
295 days he was there. that is 22% of the time. of those 66 days, staff
shortages were the reason for the lockdowns on 45 of those days.


while on lockdown, his access to showers,
exercise, and a phone is significantly restricted. he is entitled to these essential
daily living activities, and they are denied or limited because that
institution has consistently and persistently not addressed its personnel
issues.

this is a significant mitigating factor.

although i do not agree with enhancing the
entirety of mr. walton’s pre-sentence custody on a 1.5 basis while his ltso
runs, i agree with the need to enhance it to reflect both the fact he did not
access the rehabilitative programs that would have been available to him had
corrections transferred him to a penitentiary to serve this period of his ltso,
and the harsh conditions of lockdowns that the tsdc continually imposes.

i find a 1.3 to 1 credit for pre-trial custody to
be an appropriate reflection of this circumstance.
v.
sentence

i find the appropriate sentence to be 18 months
(547 days).

mr. walton’s pre-sentence custody of 386 days
will be enhanced to 502 days. mr. walton will serve an additional 45 days.
released: july 16, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

exhibit 1: agreed statement of facts (synopsis), july 4, 2024, ltso breach,
walton gregory.

exhibit 2: agreed statement of facts (synopsis), may 14, 2024, ltso breach,
walton gregory.

exhibit 9: transcript, r. v. walton, june 22, 2026. justice cole, ontario court
of justice, dr. jeff mcmaster, october 7, 2015

exhibit 12: armed paving, marco commisso.

exhibit 9: transcript,
r. v. walton, june 22, 2026. justice cole,
ontario court of justice, dr. jeff mcmaster, october 7, 2015, page 70.

exhibit 3: cpic criminal record, gregory walton.

exhibit 11: transcript,
r. v. walton, october 7, 2005, justice zabel,
ontario court of justice.

exhibit 10: transcript,
r. v. walton, december 4, 2006, justice
o’reilly, superior court of justice.

exhibit 9: transcript,
r. v. walton, june 22, 2026. justice cole,
ontario court of justice.

exhibit 9: transcript,
r. v. walton, june 22, 2026. justice cole,
ontario court of justice, dr. jeff mcmaster, october 7, 2015, at page 65-66.

exhibit 9: transcript,
r. v. walton, june 22, 2026. justice cole,
ontario court of justice, dr. jeff mcmaster, october 7, 2015, at page 69.

exhibit 8: transcript,
r. v. walton, march 18, 2021, justice felix,
ontario court of justice,
exhibit 7: transcript,
r. v. walton, august 6,
2021, justice felix, ontario court of justice.

r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13
at paras.
48-55.

r. v. matte,
2012 onca 504
at para.
34-37.

r. v. liedtke,
2020 oncj 689
at para.
61.

r. v.
middleton,
2019 oncj 280
at
paras.
37 and 42.

supra
at para. 94.

exhibit 4: correctional plan updated july 10, 2024, at page 11.

r. v. bourdon,
2012 onca 256
at paras.
17-21.

r. v. hoshal,
2020 oncj 345
at paras.
43-46.

exhibit 13: toronto south detention century lockdown summary, june 17, 2024 – june
20, 2024, july 15, 2024, to august 20, 2025.