source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj285/2025oncj285.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. wood, 2025 oncj 285
date: may 26, 2025
court file no.: 24 11402701
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jeffrey wood
before justice robert wadden
suzanne schriek & christian moreno................................................. counsel
for the crown
lawrence greenspon & hannah drennan.......................................... counsel for mr. wood
wadden j.:

in january 2022, a portrait of winston churchill was stolen from the
chateau laurier hotel in ottawa. the portrait was a print of the famous
photograph of churchill taken by canadian photographer yousuf karsh in december
1941, during churchill’s visit to ottawa in which he addressed the canadian
parliament.
significance
of the portrait

the portrait is notable for churchill’s posture and facial expression,
which came to personify the determination of a nation that had held out against
nazi germany despite enduring military defeats and bombed cities. churchill’s
address to the canadian parliament was intended to bolster the confidence of a
wartime ally and the photograph was an image that came to be looked on as a
symbol of resolve.

the photograph was taken by yousuf karsh in the speaker’s chamber of the
canadian house of commons, after churchill had spoken to parliament. karsh’s
portrait session with churchill was scheduled to last only two minutes. as
karsh was preparing, churchill was smoking a cigar, which karsh asked him to
put down so the smoke did not interfere with the picture. churchill refused, so
just before taking the photograph karsh moved forward and snatched the cigar
from churchill’s mouth. the resulting belligerent scowl came to epitomize the
fierce glare of the leader of a nation fearlessly confronting its enemy. after
the photograph was taken, churchill spoke of karsh’s ability to make a roaring
lion stand still, which gave the photograph its name. it is known as “the
roaring lion” portrait.

karsh’s photograph of churchill is one of the most famous portraits in
the world. it was described in the
economist
as “the most reproduced
portrait in the history of photography.” when the bank of england chose to
depict sir winston churchill on its £5 note, a copy of this photograph was
selected. that note remains in circulation.
karsh’s
legacy and connection to the chateau laurier

this remarkable picture was taken by a remarkable photographer. yousuf
karsh is one of the most famous canadians of the twentieth century. karsh was a
master of portrait photography, with subjects as diverse as einstein, picasso, muhammad
ali, hemingway, and warhol, as well as royalty and world leaders.

karsh had been established in ottawa since he opened his studio in 1932
on sparks st. he had a professional and personal connection to the nearby chateau
laurier hotel. karsh’s first exhibition of his works in the 1930’s was held in
the drawing room of the chateau laurier. in the 1970’s he moved his studio to
the sixth floor of the hotel. ten years later he and his wife estrellita moved
to an apartment on the third floor of the hotel, and it became their home for
the next fifteen years. karsh closed his studio in 1992 and he and estrellita
moved from the hotel in 1997. as a parting gift, to express their gratitude,
karsh gave the chateau laurier a print of the churchill portrait, along with a
selection of other meaningful portraits. karsh’s will stipulated that the print
was provided as a permanent loan to the hotel as long as it remained on display
to the public, and it had to remain on the walls of the chateau laurier. if the
hotel failed to comply with this, the portrait was to be returned to karsh’s
estate. the hotel had kept it on permanent public display in the hotel’s
reading lounge until the date of the theft.

it is worth noting that the chateau laurier is itself a building of such
significance that it has been declared a national historic site.

the print which hung in the chateau laurier had been personally
developed from the negative by karsh himself. it was a silver gelatin print karsh
made by hand in his studio, signed, framed, and matted by him. karsh’s former photography
assistant described the process whereby karsh produced prints, which is an
artistic process in itself. he testified that “there are a lot of photographers
that are great photographers but not great printers, and a lot of great
printers that are not great photographers, but [karsh] was both and that was
pretty rare.” karsh’s printing process involved his own formula of nitrate, sulfites,
and chlorides, to develop and print the picture. only when he was satisfied
with the result did he sign the final product.

although there are numerous reproductions of this photograph, it is
unknown how many signed prints of this portrait were produced by karsh. there
are at least three others at various locations in ottawa. however, no
production of a new print from the original is possible. after karsh’s death,
the negative of the churchill print was sent to library and archives canada with
a stipulation that it never be printed from again.
the theft

in january 2022, jeffery wood stole the portrait from the hotel. he replaced
it with a cheap copy, onto which he had forged karsh’s signature. as this was
during the pandemic, there was less activity than usual in the hotel. the theft
went undetected for months.

mr. wood was an art dealer. as far back as the spring of 2021, he had
contacted sotheby’s auction house in london, england, about auctioning a print
of the roaring lion, falsely claiming at that time that he had acquired one
from the karsh estate. in the spring of 2022, with the stolen print from the
chateau laurier in hand, mr. wood again contacted sotheby’s and arranged to
ship the stolen portrait to london for auction. sotheby’s estimated the sale
price to be the equivalent of approximately $26,000 cdn. (the portrait had been
insured by the chateau laurier for $20,000).

one consequence of the theft was that the print was damaged at some
point during the theft or transit. an art conservator in the u.k. who was
commissioned to perform restoration work on the portrait noted and restored
numerous points of damage to the print. this reduced the value, and the print was
auctioned to an italian collector for the equivalent of just under $10,000 cdn.
mr. wood received approximately $4500 cdn.

all this occurred before the theft had been discovered by the chateau
laurier.
the
discovery & investigation of the theft

the realization that the portrait had been stolen took place in august
2022. a staff member of the chateau laurier noticed the portrait was crooked,
and then realized the frame did not line up with the holes in the wall. chateau
laurier management contacted the karsh estate to examine the picture left on
their wall. it was confirmed to be fraudulent and the signature of karsh to be
a forgery. the ottawa police were contacted on august 20, 2022.

news of the theft was covered in canada and abroad by international news
outlets. the police appealed to the public for help in establishing the time of
the theft. examination of photos taken by visitors to the hotel determined that
a guest had taken the last known photo of the genuine portrait on december 25,
2021, and that the journalist paul hunter had unknowingly taken the first known
photo of the fraudulent portrait on january 6, 2022.

the karsh foundation noted that the framing of the forged copy showed
some signs that the person knew how to frame an art object, as the tape was in
the right locations and there was a similar style of matting. however, the
framing also showed that the person did not know the correct materials to use.
it was noted that the signature is a poor copy of karsh's, the size of frame
and portrait were wrong, and the frame was of much poorer quality than the
original.

the police examined the fake for fingerprints and were not able find any.
however, a viable sample of dna was found on the tape used to secure the
portrait to the matting.

in september 2022, the police found that a copy of the roaring lion
portrait had been auctioned by sotheby’s in may 2022. soon afterwards, a mutual
legal assistance request was made to the united kingdom to obtain the detailed
records of this purchase and sale by sotheby's. the records disclosed that the
seller of that roaring lion portrait had been a canadian by the name of jeffrey
wood.

the buyer was nicola cassinelli, an italian lawyer in genoa, italy. with
the cooperation of the italian federal police, the canadian embassy, and mr.
cassinelli, the portrait he purchased at auction was examined and determined to
be the print that had been stolen from the chateau laurier.

although mr. cassinelli was an innocent buyer and owner of the portrait,
once he was made aware that it had been stolen, he agreed to return the
portrait to its rightful owner, the chateau laurier.

through the canadian embassy in rome and with the assistance of the
italian government, the portrait was returned to the chateau laurier. a conservator
who examined the portrait determined that it was irreparably damaged with
scratches and there were places where the emulsion had been eaten away by mold.
the portrait was re-framed and as of november 15, 2024, was returned to public
display on the wall of the chateau laurier.

the chateau laurier increased security for this portrait and its other
karsh holdings, incurring costs of over $100,000.

had mr. cassinelli not cooperated it might not have been possible to
have the portrait returned. mr. cassinelli aptly described the portrait as one
that “captures in the eyes of sir winston churchill the pride, anger and
strength of the free world, and it represents better than any other the desire
for the triumph of good over evil.” mr. cassinelli stated, “the roaring lion belongs
to anyone who cherishes freedom. for this reason, and out of my deep respect
for the crown, the government, and the people of canada, i did not hesitate to
return it, waiving my rights as a good faith purchaser and the financial
benefits i could have derived from it. i am pleased that today the roaring lion
is once again on display for the public, who can enjoy one of the most
significant photographs in our history.”
the
arrest of mr. wood

the investigation had uncovered the name of mr. wood through the
sotheby’s records. further investigation revealed he had been living in the
ottawa area shortly before the theft. phone records led the police to a storage
locker, for which they obtained a search warrant. in the unit the police searched
they recovered a poster printout of the roaring lion portrait, apparently the
same as the fraudulent one. mr. wood had seemingly ordered two prints of the
portrait from a quebec company, one of which became the fraudulent one at the
chateau laurier, and the other was found in his storage locker.

the police also recovered dna from the locker that matched the dna found
on the tape used with the forged print.

a canada wide warrant was issued for the arrest of mr. wood, on april
19, 2024. he turned himself in to the police in north bay on april 25, 2024.
the plea
of guilty

mr. wood pleaded guilty to a count of theft over $5000, contrary to
s.
334
of the
criminal code, for having stolen the portrait; forgery,
contrary to s. 367 of the
code, for having created a fake signed copy of
the portrait to cover up the theft; and possession of property over $5000 for
the purpose of trafficking, contrary to s. 355.5 of the
code, for having
been in possession of the stolen portrait and trafficking it through sotheby’s.

the crown proceeded by indictment. the maximum penalty for theft and
forgery is ten years jail. the count of possession of stolen property for the
purpose of trafficking carries a maximum penalty of fourteen years jail.
positions
of the parties

at this sentence hearing, the positions of the parties are far apart. counsel
for mr. wood seeks a suspended sentence and probation. the crown seeks a
sentence of two years less a day.
background
of mr. wood

jeffrey wood is 44 years old and has no criminal record. he completed
his high school education and began university studies in philosophy but did
not complete them. he has had steady employment at different banks and
financial services operations over the years, as well as in festival
organization and hospitality.

in 2017 he began working as an art dealer, seeking out important
photographs, which he would sell on consignment at major auction houses in the
united states and the u.k. at the time of the theft, he was working in this
field.

mr. wood had a brother to whom he was very close. in the winter of 2022,
his brother was having mental health problems. mr. wood told the court that he
stole the roaring lion portrait to get money to assist his brother, but his
brother died that spring, before mr. wood received the proceeds from the sale.
sentencing
principles

the principles of sentencing set out in
s. 718
of the
criminal code
state
the fundamental purpose
of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute […] to respect for the
law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society …,
and go on to state that
specific objectives of sentencing are to
denounce unlawful conduct
and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful
conduct; … to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences; …
to separate offenders from society, where necessary; [and] to promote a sense
of responsibility in offenders.

an overarching principle is, as stated in s. 718.1 of the
code,
that a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender. the principle of parity is entrenched
in s. 718.2(b), which states that “a sentence should be similar to sentences
imposed on similar offenders for similar offences in similar circumstances.” 
when an offender has little or no criminal record and is receiving a first jail
sentence, principles of restraint must be applied.
cases
cited

the crown has cited a number of cases dealing with theft of artwork. two
of those authorities are from canada, and a number of others are from international
jurisdictions.

the ontario decision of
r. v. dalton

is not especially helpful. although the accused took works of art and sold
them through an auction house, the case is primarily about the breach of trust,
as he was holding them for the owner. the details of the art are not specified.
mr. dalton received a five-month jail sentence.

a more relevant canadian authority cited by the crown was
r v lamont,
an unreported case from thunder bay. that case involved forgery in the creation
of hundreds of fake paintings falsely attributed to the great canadian artist norval
morrisseau. the crime included the marketing of the fake paintings and other artwork
to art galleries and collectors. mr. lamont was sentenced to a five year
penitentiary term.

although there are differences in the degree of the crime in
lamont,
there is similarity to the matter before me. mr. lamont had created the fakes
for his financial gain and had taken advantage of the legacy of morrisseau to do
so. in the case before me, mr. wood has not damaged karsh’s legacy in the way
that mr. lamont did for morrisseau, but he has caused damage. mr. wood forged a
print purported to be hand-crafted by karsh and, to cover up his theft, hung it
on public display, risking the imperiling of karsh’s reputation. he went to
great effort, including forging karsh’s signature, to fool people into thinking
it was karsh’s work. although the
lamont
case involved a much larger
scale crime than mr. wood’s, it sets a standard that these crimes warrant consideration
of a penitentiary sentence.

art theft, art forgery and trafficking in stolen art are not commonplace
crimes in these courts, and aside from
lamont
there are not many
sentencing precedents in canadian law. the crown has helpfully provided cases
from the courts of other countries that have considered these crimes. the
rarity of mr. wood’s crime warrants consideration of these cases. a canadian
court can benefit from the perspective of courts in other countries that have
considered similar crimes.

in
united states v goldman

the court considered the appropriate sentence for the theft of a single item with
historical significance – a gold bar recovered from the shipwreck of a
seventeenth-century spanish galleon. mr. goldman had played a secondary role in
the theft, acting as lookout while his accomplice stole the item. after the
theft, the accomplice gradually chipped away at the gold bar until nothing
remained. much of the contested part of the case was over the valuation of the
item. the sentencing court held that the stolen item had value beyond its simple
value as a gold bar, or beyond the price of similar items sold at auction. the
court noted that there are numerous gold bars recovered from shipwrecks in circulation
but held that the pedigree of this item – the history of it, its donation to a
museum, the display of it for years in a museum, and the enjoyment by the
public of the item and their association of it with that museum – made this
item, though not unique, at least iconic.

the
goldman
court recognized that there was an intangible value
of the item based on where it had been displayed and the contact the public had
had with it over the years. this is applicable to mr. wood’s case in that the
value of the roaring lion print he stole was in part that it had been
continuously on public display since 1998 and was part of the recent history of
the chateau laurier.

in the
goldman
case, even for the secondary role that mr. goldman
played he received a sentence of 40 months (nearly 3 ½ years), upheld on appeal.
his accomplice, the principal thief, was sentenced to 63 months, or over 5
years.

in
united states v medford

the appeal court reviewed sentences of two men who stole hundreds of artifacts
from the historical society of pennsylvania over ten years. although
overturning the four year sentences due to errors by the sentencing judge, the
appeal court held that the historical and cultural nature of the property
stolen is an aggravating factor on sentence. “the price set by the commercial
market is insufficient to ‘fully capture the harmfulness of the [defendants’]
conduct.’ the antiques stolen in this case unquestionably have historical and
cultural importance. [...] in addition, the monetary value of these objects
does not adequately take into consideration the real but intangible harm
inflicted upon all of the other victims of the offense, including the [...] the
general public.”

in
united states v mccarty

the court considered the appeal of a forty-six month sentence on an antique
book dealer who stole two antique books. the sentence was upheld.

in the united kingdom, the court of appeal reduced a sentence from eight
years to seven years in
r v stanton & anr.
the crime was the theft of cultural property from a museum – specifically, jade
treasures from china worth over £1 million. some of the aggravating factors,
from paras. 9 – 12 of that decision, resonate in the case before me:
first, the impact of the offence had been immense, causing
enormous consternation to the dedicated staff at the museum and concerns that
benefactors may be worried about entrusting valuable artefacts to the museum in
the future; secondly, the museum had been put to the expense of hundreds of
thousands of pounds in improving its security; thirdly, the offence was
carefully planned, tenaciously and audaciously executed; fourthly, the property
stolen was of huge cultural importance... we consider that the recovery of the stolen property was
a relevant factor in reduction of sentence although it would have been more
relevant had the appellants played any part in assisting the recovery of the
property.

a new zealand case,
r v te kaha,
was cited by the crown. that is the only case before me in which the sentence
was close to that suggested by the defence. te kaha had stolen a painting worth
$1.2 million nz dollars. justice thorburn of the n.z. district court found that
“the painting, by its own images and symbols, and by the very place it was
housed, means that it can be regarded as taonga [a treasure]... it was and is
a most special treasure in national terms for all new zealanders.” the judge
found as an aggravating factor that “it is hugely significant that something
precious was taken. [...] the unique nature of such an item requires special
attention and something could very easily have gone wrong, with ultimate loss
to all new zealanders of one of its proudest possessions.”

in that case, the theft was committed for political purposes, to bring
attention to the treatment of an indigenous tribe. the judge classified it as a
political protest case and imposed a suspended sentence. the judge was clear,
though, that if the theft had been profit-motivated “the possibility of many
years of imprisonment” would be appropriate.

counsel for mr. wood rely on two cases that focus on the principle of restraint
on a first time offender –
r v stein

and
r v priest.
these stand for the well-established principle that the judge must consider options
other than incarceration before imposing a jail sentence and impose the lowest
sentence that can be imposed on a first-time offender. the caselaw on this
issue also makes it clear that the sentence must be within the appropriate
range of sentence for the offence. the principle of restraint does not mean
that a first offender would never receive a jail sentence. rather, a first
offender should receive as short a sentence as possible within the appropriate
range. in the case of
r. v. borde,
often cited on this issue, it was held that a first jail sentence should be as
short as possible, however a four year sentence was imposed in that case.

defence counsel have also cited two examples of fraud cases in which
jail was not imposed.
r v samson

was a welfare fraud overpayment.
r v snyder

was a fraud on an employer. both are distinguishable from mr. wood’s case as they
involved commonplace frauds. mr. wood’s crime is different – he stole a piece
of artwork of historic and cultural importance.
sentence

the challenge in this case is to determine the appropriate range of
sentence.

first, it is clear to me that the roaring lion portrait stolen by mr.
wood was an object of historical and cultural significance. the portrait is a
reminder of the importance not just of churchill but of karsh. it is a point of
national pride that a portrait taken by a canadian photographer would have
achieved such fame. the skill karsh used in bringing out the character of
churchill is unparalleled. it could well be said that the portrait is a
depiction of the human virtue of courage. it is the artistic talent of karsh
that brought that out.

the stolen print was an original print made by karsh himself. it is
unknown how many signed originals of this print exist in the world, but it is a
finite number. no more will ever be produced. mr. wood not only stole this
property, but in doing so he caused significant damage to it. a print made by
karsh himself is irreplaceable. it can be and has been repaired, but it will
always be a repaired, not an undamaged, work.

the stolen print had value beyond its monetary value. it had been
personally given by karsh to the chateau laurier, with a stipulation it be on
display to the public. it was a mark of appreciation by karsh to the hotel where
he had spent so much of his life. it was also intended as a gift to the people
of canada. regardless of whether museums, institutions or galleries displayed
his churchill portrait, karsh provided that the chateau laurier would always
display it. one can only imagine how many canadians have seen that specific portrait
over the years. the portrait’s placement in the chateau laurier, at karsh’s
direction, is also part of its historical and cultural significance.

in short, that portrait, in that place, was a piece of historical and
cultural property.

mr. wood’s theft was aggravated by his forgery of a replacement copy. this
was an affront to the chateau laurier and to the reputation of karsh, and to everyone
who was deceived by the forgery. the forgery of art, whether done for one piece
or for multiple ones, is a significant crime.

it is also significant that mr. wood trafficked in the stolen artwork. he
went to substantial effort to profit by his theft. mr. wood’s crimes were
international in scope – the portrait was stolen from canada, trafficked
through an english auction house, and sold to an italian collector. the
recovery involved an international investigation and the cooperation of two
foreign governments. all of the substantial effort to investigate and recover
this print arose from his crimes, which were committed solely for financial
gain. mr. wood played no part in the recovery.

a denunciatory sentence is called for. the very nature of a cultural
property will often make it vulnerable to theft. there is an element of trust
in our society that allows such properties to be displayed to be enjoyed by all
canadians. to steal, damage and traffic in such property is to breach that
trust. to do so in a planned manner for personal financial gain is aggravating.

taking guidance from the
lamont
decision, as well as the
goldman,
medford
and
mccarty
decisions from the united states, and the uk
decision in
stanton & anr
and the new zealand case in
te kaha,
it is clear that in canada, the united states and the commonwealth, sentences
in the penitentiary range, of several years of imprisonment, have been deemed
appropriate for crimes committed for profit involving culturally significant
works.

my view is that a penitentiary sentence would be appropriate in this
case.

considering all the mitigating factors in this case, mr. wood would be
entitled to a sentence at the low end of the appropriate range. the mitigating
factors include that he pleaded guilty, sparing society the time, expense, and
uncertainty of a trial. the plea of guilty is implicitly an expression of
remorse. mr. wood has also spoken to the court and said he is remorseful. another
mitigating factor is that mr. wood has no criminal record. this is his first
conviction and jail sentence. principles of restraint apply. mr. wood served five
days of presentence custody, before he was released on bail on these charges. that
is to be taken into account in calculating his sentence. furthermore, mr. wood
spend over a year on very strict bail conditions. he is entitled to credit for
that in accordance with
r v downes.

my conclusion is that it would have been appropriate in this case to
impose a penitentiary sentence in the range of three years. taking into account
all the mitigating factors personal to mr. wood, and considering the position
sought by the crown, i would impose a sentence of two years less a day.

on the count of theft over, the sentence will be two years less a day in
jail. on the count of forgery, there will be two years less a day concurrent. on
the count of possession of property for the purpose of trafficking, there will
be two years less a day concurrent.

there will be an order that a sample of dna be taken for the dna
databank.
acknowledgments

finally, i would like to comment on the investigation in this matter. in
the
lamont
case (involving the morrisseau paintings) justice warkentin
commended the investigation, noting that crimes of this nature risk not being
taken seriously. in that case, her honour noted that the police had put
enormous resources into that investigation and acknowledged that would give
comfort to the victims.

i wish to express the same sentiments in this case. it is a credit to
canadian society that this theft was taken seriously, and the authorities were
prepared to commit resources to it.
released: may 26, 2025
signed: “justice robert
wadden”

r. v. dalton
 o.j. no. 5602 (scj)

r v gary lamont, december 14, 2023, thunder bay cr-23-00000043-0000
(warkentin scj)

united states v goldman,
953 f.3d 1213
(11
th
cir.
fla. march 25, 2020)

united states v medford,
194 f.3d 419
(3d cir. pa, july 2,
1999)

united states v mccarty
628 f.3d 284
(6
th
cir.
ohio december 28, 2010)

r v stanton & anr
 ewca crim 1456

r v te kaha

dcr 48

r v stein
(1974),
1974 canlii 1615 (on ca), 15 c.c.c.(2d) 376 (oca)

r v priest
(1996), 110 c.c.c. (oca)

r. v. borde
(2003),
2003 canlii 4187 (on ca), 63 o.r. (3d) 417 (c.a.)

r v samson
2010 onsc 4451

r v snyder
 oj no 4904

r v downes
2006 canlii 3957
(onca)