source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj158/2025oncj158.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. gilbert,
2025 oncj 158
date: 
2025 03 20
court
file no.: hamilton 998 24 47105668
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
lord leland gilbert
reasons
for sentence
before
justice davin m.k. garg
heard
on march 19-20, 2025
reasons
released on march 20, 2025
mark dean............................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
geneviève eliany....................................................... counsel
for the accused mr. gilbert
garg j.:
overview

as the supreme court explained in
r. v.
friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para.
1:
children are the future of our country and
our communities. they are also some of the most vulnerable members of our
society. they deserve to enjoy a childhood free of sexual violence.

friesen
is about imposing
sentences that reflect the profound harmfulness of sexual offences against
children. mr. gilbert was acquitted of committing a sexual offence against a
child.

he was instead found guilty of breaching an order under
s. 161
of the
criminal
code
that prohibited him from communicating with children without receiving
certain permissions. despite this important difference,
friesen
highlights
the seriousness of breaching the prohibition order. the very purpose of the
order is to protect children and help ensure that they enjoy a childhood free
of sexual violence.

these reasons explain why i impose an 18-month
global jail sentence in this case: 15 months for breaching the prohibition
order and 3 months consecutive for breaching a probation order. the custodial
term is followed by 3 years of probation.
circumstances of the offence

mr. gilbert began a romantic relationship with
the mother of an eight-year-old boy.

during the relationship, mr. gilbert was bound by a prohibition order under
s.
161
of the
criminal code
that directed him as follows:
do not be in the company of or communicate,
directly or indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means, with males
or females under the age of 16 years unless you have written permission of your
probation officer and the local child protection authority and the lawful
guardian of that child.

mr. gilbert did receive permission from the
boy’s mother. however, he never received permission from the local child
protection authority.


i was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr.
gilbert was in the direct company of the boy and communicated with him. while i
did not make exact findings on how many visits or communications occurred, i
was satisfied that mr. gilbert had developed a relationship with the boy. the
relationship was sufficiently close such that the boy called mr. gilbert
“daddy”. in addition to in-person visits, i found that mr. gilbert communicated
with the boy over video chats.

by virtue of breaching the prohibition order, mr.
gilbert also breached the condition of his probation order to keep the peace
and be of good behaviour.
kienapple
principle

i found mr. gilbert guilty of two counts of breaching
the prohibition order and two counts of breaching the probation order. a
preliminary issue is whether any counts should be stayed pursuant to the
kienapple
principle. the crown argues against staying a prohibition count because mr.
gilbert breached the order on multiple occasions and in different ways. one
count could relate to the in-person visits and the other could relate to the
video chats.

i do not accept the crown’s argument. the counts
are identical. it is not as though one count particularizes in-person visits
while the other particularizes video chats. both counts cover the broad
timeframe of may 1 to december 1, 2023. one count can thus cover multiple instances
of contact and association over the course of the relationship. i will stay one
count of breaching the prohibition order and one count of breaching the
probation order.
circumstances of
the offender

mr. gilbert is 36 years old. he endured a
difficult upbringing.

he and his twin sister were initially raised by his grandmother. his care was later
transferred to one aunt and then another. he was told growing up that his
mother had passed away. in reality, his mother was peripherally present and
posing as an aunt. mr. gilbert learned the truth as a teenager and was shaken
by the deception. mr. gilbert had limited interaction with his father over his
lifetime and never developed a positive father-son relationship before his
father passed away. mr. gilbert believes that his father only used him for self-serving
reasons.

mr. gilbert described an abusive childhood,
citing physical abuse by caregivers. mr. gilbert is estranged from all family
members and stated no interest in reconciliation.

as an adolescent, mr. gilbert disclosed
“deviant” sexual thoughts and desires, which resulted in brief hospitalization.
as a young adult, mr. gilbert was assessed as likely suffering from pedohebephilia,
a condition that tends to be lifelong.

mr. gilbert identified as indigenous to the
author of the pre-sentence report. the only relevant mention in the report is
that mr. gilbert “believes that his father was an indigenous person but,
otherwise, has no information regarding indigenous ancestry”. defence counsel
did not request a
gladue
report and did not present additional
information to shed light on mr. gilbert’s connection, if any, to an indigenous
identity. defence counsel asserted that mr. gilbert’s indigenous connection was
“tenuous” and did not weave any
gladue
principles into her submissions.

i will delve into other aspects of mr. gilbert’s
circumstances in my analysis.
positions of the parties

the crown seeks a global jail sentence of 2
years less a day. the defence seeks a global jail sentence between 6 and 12
months. the defence does not argue for a conditional sentence and recognizes
that one would be inappropriate. the parties jointly argue for 3 years of
probation.
general principles

the goal of any sentence under the
criminal
code
is to protect society, contribute to respect for the law, and help
maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society. the fundamental principle of
sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and mr. gilbert’s degree of responsibility. the sentence that i impose
must be tailored to mr. gilbert’s circumstances and the circumstances of the
offences that he committed. i must also seek to impose the least intrusive
sentence and the least quantum that will achieve the purpose of being an
appropriate and just sanction.

the overarching function of a prohibition order
under s. 161 is to shield children from sexual violence:
r. v. k.r.j.,
2016 scc 31
at para.
44. “the predominant sentencing principles that control
the disposition in cases involving a breach of a
s. 161
order are denunciation
and deterrence, both specific and general”:
r. v. exell,
2015 onca 704
at para.
8. as hackett j. explained in
r. v. s.b.,
2008 oncj 383:
child sexual abuse is a serious societal
concern because it can damage and destroy children and families and undermine
the safety and security of children in our communities. it is also an offence
where child victimization can sometimes lead to adult offending behaviour later
in life, which perpetuates its impact, damage, and destruction on future
generations.
section 161 orders have therefore been
enacted to protect vulnerable children from dangerous convicted paedophiles.
they are an important part of our justice system’s preventative response to
these dangers and harm.
…
section 161 strikes an important balance
between the liberty interests of a paedophile who has served his sentence and
the continuing societal responsibility to protect vulnerable children and our
communities from the continuing risk presented by paedophiles.
aggravating factors

i have identified the following aggravating
factors.
nature of the breach

i find that the nature of the breach aggravates the
gravity of the offence and increases mr. gilbert’s degree of
responsibility: see
r. v. m.v.,
2023 onca 724
at para.
46. prohibition
orders can be breached in many ways. defence counsel cited one case where an
offender was convicted for shouting at children on the street. by contrast, mr.
gilbert developed a close relationship with a young boy that he was prohibited
from even speaking with. implicit in there being a relationship is that mr.
gilbert met with the boy on multiple occasions over a period of time. his close
access to the boy put him in position to potentially commit the very sexual
exploitation that the order is designed to prevent. even though mr. gilbert was
acquitted of any sexual charges, it remains relevant that his conduct struck at
the core of why these orders exist.
blatant breach

the breach was blatant. defence counsel showed
how mr. gilbert had taken steps around the time of the offence to remove from
the prohibition order the need to receive permission from the probation
officer. i find that this litigation of the order would have heightened mr.
gilbert’s awareness that he required permission from the local child protection
authority to associate with the boy. it also would have shown mr. gilbert that
he had mechanisms available to try and remove the involvement of the protection
authority if he felt that condition was unworkable or operating unfairly.
rather, mr. gilbert decided to wilfully disrespect the order and conduct
himself how he saw fit.

i do not accept the representation that mr.
gilbert had sought permission from the protection authority and permission was
withheld. a representative from the catholic children’s aid society testified
at trial. no such suggestion was put to the witness.

criminal record

mr. gilbert has a lengthy and related criminal
record. he has seven total entries for breaches of court orders. four relate to
breaches of sexual offender obligations: one conviction for failing to comply
with a soira order and three convictions for breaching a prohibition order
under
s. 161. he was convicted most recently for breaching a prohibition order
in april 2022 and received a global 6-month sentence (credit for 3 months of pre-sentence
custody and a further 3 months). roughly a year after serving that sentence, mr.
gilbert was breaching the order again.
absence of aggravating or mitigating factors

there are certain factors that are neither aggravating
nor mitigating.
permission from the boy’s mother

mr. gilbert received permission from the boy’s
mother to associate with the boy. it is unclear when exactly mr. gilbert
received that permission, but the basis for finding mr. gilbert guilty was only
premised on him not receiving permission from the child protection authority.

i do not find it mitigating that mr. gilbert
sought and received permission from the mother, other than to recognize the
offence would have been even more serious if mr. gilbert had failed to receive
any of the required permissions. the court that imposed the
s. 161
order
determined that mr. gilbert’s risk profile required the oversight of multiple
stakeholders for him to safely engage with children. it was not up to mr.
gilbert and the mother to decide whether he could engage with the boy. mr.
gilbert knew that fact; the mother did not. by withholding the involvement of
the child protection authority, mr. gilbert unilaterally shifted the decision-making
away from an expert protection agency and onto a single mother who herself was
vulnerable due to multiple health concerns.
constant supervision

defence counsel argued that it was mitigating
that mr. gilbert was never alone with the boy. someone else, presumably the
mother, was always present. if accepted, this factor would be mitigating. if
mr. gilbert had never been alone with the boy, it would mean that the actual
risk to the boy was reduced despite the breach of the prohibition order.

however, i do not accept that the mother was
always present. the failure to prove an alleged
aggravating fact beyond a reasonable doubt does not permit me to assume a
version of facts most favourable to mr. gilbert. the defence must establish any
non-conceded mitigating facts on a balance of probabilities:
r. v. smickle,
2013 onca 678
at para.
18. i only expressed “doubt” in my reasons for judgment
as to whether mr. gilbert and the boy were together in a manner that allowed
mr. gilbert to commit the sexual offences: para. 35. this doubt about
being sufficiently alone to commit an offence does not translate to establishing
constant supervision on a balance of probabilities. based on the totality of
the evidence and my findings at trial, i am not satisfied on a balance of
probabilities that mr. gilbert was never alone with the boy.
mitigating factors

i have identified the following mitigating
factors.
challenging upbringing

i acknowledge mr. gilbert’s very difficult
upbringing. as the author of the pre-sentence report fairly summarized: “the
offender has lived a chaotic and dysfunctional life, from birth to childhood. …
various relatives assumed caregiving roles but, in general, the home
environments were troublesome and abusive”.

i accept that this turbulent upbringing has some
bearing on mr. gilbert’s moral culpability. but the impact of this factor is
limited. the conduct at issue here is not about mr. gilbert’s ability to
control his impulses or his underlying sexual diagnoses. while sexual abuse suffered
as a child can very well contribute to an adult’s sexual deviances, those
underlying issues do not explain why mr. gilbert developed a relationship with
a young boy without even so much as reporting the situation to the child
protection authority. notwithstanding any intellectual deficits, mr. gilbert
knew about the need for permission from the child protection authority, and he
knew about the process to vary the order. he was not unsophisticated.
expression of accountability

during his allocution, mr. gilbert expressed
that he took accountability for not receiving permission from the child
protection authority. i give some weight to this factor, although it is
undermined by comments in the pre-sentence report that i will address later in
these reasons.
analysis

defence counsel argued that the applicable
jurisprudence shows a sentencing range of 6 to 18 months for breaches of
s. 161
prohibition orders. i find that this interpretation is largely correct,
although the parties provided cases with sentences on either side of that range
(e.g., see the 2-year sentence imposed in
r. v. parker,
2024 onca 591

).

i considered all the cases submitted by counsel
but find the following ontario decisions to be most helpful:
•
r. v. s.b.,
2008
oncj 383: 18 months for each breach of the prohibition order, reduced to 12
months for totality, resulting in a global 7-year sentence. the offender began
a relationship with a woman who had two sons. each 12-month sentence related
to a single visit between the offender and one or both boys. six of the
visits were to canada’s wonderland; the mother was present for three of them.
the seventh visit involved the offender taking the boys to a pool. the boys
made no complaints of sexual touching or activity. the offender had a very
serious criminal record; however, unlike mr. gilbert, the offender did not have
prior convictions for breaching a prohibition order (he had four breaches of
court orders for failing to comply with probation, bail, and appearances in
court). the case proceeded by an agreed statement of fact and thus the boys did
not need to testify.
•
r. v. hamid,
2022
oncj 630: 10 months for a single count of breaching a prohibition order. the
breach arose from a single incident wherein the offender invited a 13-year-old
girl into his apartment where she stayed for an indeterminant, but more than
momentary, period of time. the offender’s criminal record did not contain any
prior convictions for breaching a prohibition order.
•
r. v. j.h.,
2022
onsc 779: 1 year concurrent to other charges on a guilty plea. the offender had
a very serious criminal record. he was designated a dangerous offender due to
the substantive charges.
sentencing principles

i choose to prioritize deterrence and denunciation
in fashioning the fit sentence. this approach aligns with
exell
at para.
8
and is supported by the
following factors in this case.

first, the aggravating features are significant.
the offence is serious. mr. gilbert’s decision to form a close relationship with
the boy—to the point of the boy calling him “daddy”—was a blatant breach that repeatedly
occurred over a period of time. the court must strongly denounce this conduct.

second, mr. gilbert’s criminal record reveals
that a lengthy sentence is required to send a message that court orders must be
followed. when mr. gilbert first breached the order, he was sentenced to 60
days intermittent. when mr. gilbert breached the order again he was globally sentenced
to an effective term of 6 months.

third, mr. gilbert maintains little respect for
the prohibition order despite being found guilty of breaching it once again. in
the pre-sentence report, mr. gilbert reported that he visits with his children
in violation of the order. mr. gilbert “held a firm stance to continue this
contact, regardless of potential consequences”. mr. gilbert “justified the
violation, by denying any risk to the children and made a firm assertion to be present
for his children, regardless of any court order”. defence counsel added that
mr. gilbert’s visits with the children are supervised, albeit with no details
on who is doing the supervising and on what authority. even assuming this
additional detail to be true, it does not reduce the need for specific
deterrence. it is not mr. gilbert who gets to decide whether he poses a risk to
children and whether he has taken sufficient steps to address that risk. that
would be like a driver with an elevated blood alcohol concentration claiming
that they posed no risk to public safety because they took steps to follow the
speed limit. mr. gilbert taking matters into his own hands is what led him to
committing the offence before me—and it seems like mr. gilbert is primed to
commit the offence again.

given that a global 18-month sentence would keep
mr. gilbert in custody past the expiration date of his prohibition order, it is
arguable whether mr. gilbert needs to be specifically deterred from breaching
that exact order. i nonetheless prioritize deterrence. for one, mr. gilbert’s
lack of insight into his conduct calls into question his willingness to follow
any court orders. moreover, the court must send a message to anyone bound by a
prohibition order that flagrant violations will be met by heavy sanction.

while i prioritize deterrence and denunciation, it
is essential that i do not impose a sentence that crushes mr. gilbert’s rehabilitative
potential. there are facts in favour of that potential. while mr. gilbert has
been steadily accumulating a criminal record, the last disposition for a
substantive offence dates back to 2017 (and he must have committed the offence
well before that). furthermore, mr. gilbert has a steady record of employment,
is presently working, and expects that he would remain employed but for his
pending incarceration. employment is essential to mr. gilbert’s well-being: he
“enthusiastically shared details of his employment and workplace relationships”
with the author of the pre-sentence report. “he shared that he feels
appreciated, accepted, and ‘loved’ by his co-workers”. finally, mr. gilbert is
newly married. by all accounts the relationship is a significant positive in
his life and gives some reason to believe that mr. gilbert can stay on the
right track.
jump principle

the jump principle cautions a court against
imposing a dramatically more severe sentence than those imposed on the offender
for similar offences in the recent past, provided the subsequent offence is not
significantly more serious:
r. v. parker,
2024 onca 591
at para.
41.
this principle, while a helpful guide, “cannot be used in a way that diminishes
the seriousness of the offences or detracts from the need for the protection of
the public”:
r. v. thompson,
 o.j. no. 171 (c.a.) at para. 4.

it is arguable whether a 15-month sentence is
“dramatically more severe” than the prior 6-month sentence for breaching a
prohibition order. even if it is, the increase is justified. first, when mr.
gilbert received the 6-month sentence he benefited from the mitigation of a
guilty plea. second, the facts of the present offence are more severe. the
prior offence involved a single incident where the police saw mr. gilbert in
the presence of an 11-month-old child and watching youtube on the internet. there
is no indication that mr. gilbert had been repeatedly spending time with the
child or developed any relationship with them.
gladue
principles

as mentioned above, defence counsel did not advance
any arguments with respect to mr. gilbert’s stated indigenous identity. counsel
asserted that any connection to that identity was tenuous. i agree. the
evidence before me, at its highest, does not go beyond “a bare assertion” of an
indigenous connection:
r. v. e.c.,
2019 onca 688
at para.
16. without
more, i have no meaningful basis to assess how unique systemic and background
factors might have played a part in mr. gilbert committing the offences or how
they might have mitigated his moral blameworthiness. i cannot say that mr.
gilbert’s degree of responsibility is diminished to the extent that colonialism,
dislocation, marginalization, or racism could have reasonably contributed to
his offending: see
r. v. r.s.,
2023 onca 608
at para.
40;
r. v.
ipeelee,
2012 scc 13
at para.
73
i have also not been presented with
anything to suggest that mr. gilbert’s heritage or experiences as an indigenous
person make culturally sensitive sanctions appropriate, including opportunities
for restorative justice.
consecutive sentences

i am going to impose a consecutive sentence for
the breach of probation order. the breach of a separate court order constitutes
the distinct invasion of a protected societal interest:
r. v. fournel,
2014 onca 305
at para.
59. given that i will impose consecutive sentences, i
cannot treat the fact that mr. gilbert was on probation as an aggravating
factor. furthermore, i must ensure that the total sentence remains
proportionate and does not become unduly long or harsh.
conclusion

the total analysis leads me to conclude that a
fair and proportionate sentence requires a 15-month jail term for the breach of
prohibition order and a 3-month consecutive jail term for the breach of
probation order. this sentence is the lowest quantum that remains fit in view
of the governing sentencing principles and the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances. as the court of appeal held in
exell
at para.
9, “those who are subject to such [
s. 161
] orders must realize that
contravention comes at a price”. any lower “price” would send the wrong message
to mr. gilbert and the community. while courts have imposed lower sentences
(e.g., the 10-month sentence in
hamid
), key facts in this case include
that mr. gilbert developed a close relationship with the boy and is now being
sentenced a third time for breaching the order. these aggravating features make
a longer sentence appropriate to ensure that similar sentences are imposed on
similar offenders in similar circumstances.

i arrive at this sentence despite the impact of
imprisonment on mr. gilbert’s employment prospects. crafting a sentence that
could conceivably permit mr. gilbert to work over the summer would overwhelm
the other principles of sentencing and result in a sentence that does not
reflect the seriousness of the offence and mr. gilbert’s degree of culpability:
see
r. v. habib,
2024 onca 830
at para.
43.
disposition

counts 8 and 10 are conditionally stayed
pursuant to the
kienapple
principle. convictions are entered on counts 4
and 9.

on count 9 (breach of prohibition order), mr.
gilbert is sentenced to 15 months jail. on count 4 (breach of probation order),
mr. gilbert is sentenced to a consecutive term of 3 months jail less credit for
3 days of pre-sentence custody. expressed in days, the total global sentence is
540 days, with 537 days left to serve.

the custodial term is followed by 3 years of
probation. the terms will prevent mr. gilbert from contacting the boy or
his mother and include counselling to assist in mr. gilbert’s rehabilitation.

the victim surcharge is waived given the lengthy
custodial term.
released: march 20, 2025
signed:
justice davin m.k. garg

the identification of the offender does not disclose any information that could
identify the complainant.

also see my reasons for judgment:
r. v. gilbert,
2025 oncj 50.

it may have been that mr. gilbert did not need permission from his probation
officer. for sentencing purposes, the only permission that mr. gilbert failed
to receive was from the local child protection authority.

i learned about mr. gilbert from the pre-sentence report.

it may be that counsel was referring to mr. gilbert seeking permission from the
ccas to associate with his own children. i nevertheless do not accept the
representation and afford it no weight.

the court of appeal reduced the sentence for other charges but did not disturb
the sentence for the prohibition breach.