source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj319/2025oncj319.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. braun,
2025 oncj 319
date: 
2025 06 09
court
file no.: hamilton 24-47102470, 24-47102698
and
23-21000992
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
kaitlyn braun
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on january 7 and may 16, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 9, 2025
simon mcnaughton........................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alison macdonald............................................... counsel
for the offender kaitlyn braun
fiorucci j.:
overview

like many who come in conflict with the law, the
offender, kaitlyn braun, has diagnosed mental health issues. the offender’s mental
health issues played a central role in her commission of multiple offences,
victimizing multiple victims over a prolonged period. her victims were doulas, trained
professionals who provide emotional, informational, physical, and mental
support to women before, during and after the birth of a child. the offender
was never pregnant but obtained the services of multiple doulas by falsely
claiming that she was.

as i will explain, to characterize the
offender’s conduct as fraudulent is accurate, but incomplete. it fails to
capture the full extent of her offending behaviour. before justice robert gee
of the ontario court of justice, the offender entered guilty pleas to
twenty-one offences. these offences included fraud under $5,000, false
pretences, and indecent acts in relation to multiple doulas and public mischief
for making a false accusation of sexual assault against an individual.

on february 14, 2024, in accordance with a joint
submission presented by the crown and defence counsel, justice gee sentenced the
offender to a conditional sentence of imprisonment (cso) of two years less a
day, followed by three years of probation, concurrent on each count. the
sentence permitted the offender to be released into the community on strict
conditions.

in april of 2024, within two months of her
release on the cso, the offender committed new offences of a similar nature,
victimizing two more doulas, and thereby breaching a condition of the cso that
she keep the peace and be of good behaviour. the offender did not return before
justice gee to address the allegation that she had breached her cso.

instead, she remained in custody until january
7, 2025, when she attended before me for the first time and entered guilty
pleas to the new offences and acknowledged that she breached the cso under
s.
742.6
of the
criminal code. crown and defence counsel made a joint
submission, asking me to terminate the cso, direct that the offender serve the unexpired
portion of the cso in custody, and impose a global 3-year jail sentence for the
new charges to be served consecutively. i advised counsel that the sentence
they were jointly proposing would result in a substantial period of
incarceration for the offender and that i required more information to properly
consider their joint submission, including transcripts of the sentencing
proceedings before justice gee and a fulsome agreed statement of facts for the
new offences. the sentencing date was adjourned.

sentencing submissions were made on may 16, 2025.
by then, counsel had provided further documentation including transcripts of
the prior proceedings. the crown and defence counsel advanced the same joint
submission. in accordance with
r. v. anthony-cook,

i advised counsel that i was
considering “undercutting” the joint submission and provided them with an
opportunity to defend their joint proposal.

these reasons explain why i considered “undercutting”
the joint submission, but also why i find that i must accede to it.
the original offences and the cso

the offender committed the original offences
between june 2022 and march 2023. she entered guilty pleas before justice gee
to charges relating to eleven doulas and admitted facts relating to offences
committed against five other doulas for which guilty pleas were not entered.
pursuant to the principles in
r. v. garcia and silva

and
s. 725
of the
criminal
code, the parties agreed that justice gee could consider these additional
facts when sentencing the offender. the facts relating
to the original offences are contained in the transcript of the proceedings
before justice gee on december 7, 2023. the transcript is exhibit 6 on this
sentencing hearing. a concise summary will suffice to portray the gravity of
the offences.

the offender contacted the doulas claiming to be
pregnant when she was not. on all but two occasions she told the doulas that
she was pregnant because of a sexual assault. twice she said the perpetrator of
the sexual assault was her brother. once she said the pregnancy resulted from a
sexual assault that occurred in a hospital. the services the doulas provided to
the offender were often free of charge because of the sympathetic circumstances
relayed to them by the offender, all of which were lies. sometimes the offender
agreed to pay for the services but did not. the support services the doulas
provided, often over multiple days, were through text messages, facetime, phone
calls, and in person at the offender’s residence, various hospitals, and
airbnb’s.

at least seven of the doulas who provided in
person services were the victims of indecent acts. these ranged from the
offender asking for and receiving massages to help induce labour, the offender
receiving a massage or back rub while she was naked, the offender using a
breast pump for nipple stimulation, purportedly to induce labour, the offender
asking a doula to sit beside her on the bed while she was shirtless and using a
breast pump, the offender pressing herself up against a doula while the
offender was naked, the offender having a doula rub her back and buttocks while
naked or partially naked, the offender taking her shirt off and crawling on the
floor. with one of the doulas, the offender would disrobe and ask the doula to
rub her shoulders and physically assist her to get in and out of the tub,
making the doula feel like her sexual integrity was violated. this same doula
walked into the bedroom of the airbnb and observed the offender on the bed on
her hands and knees, touching her vaginal area.

during her interactions with the doulas, whether
virtually or in person, the offender would typically feign being in labour and
having contractions, breathing heavily, screaming, moaning, and crying. on one
occasion, while on the phone with two doulas, the offender reported that she was
sexually assaulted by doctors operating on her. on another occasion, the
offender told a doula that she had given birth to a stillborn baby and then had
a fictitious friend “jenna” take over communication with the doula informing
the doula that the offender had been rushed to the operating room as she was
dying from hemorrhaging. on two occasions, as part of her deception, she sent
an image of a stillborn baby to the doulas after purportedly giving birth, and
another time she sent an image of an ultrasound. one doula spent an afternoon
with the offender at the mall shopping for an outfit for her stillborn and a
build-a-bear doll.

numerous doulas spent hours, days, and weeks
with the offender, to provide support for a false pregnancy. they developed an
emotional connection with the offender and some disclosed intimate details of
their own lives to her. victim impact statements for some of the doulas were
read into the court record before justice gee on january 17, 2024. the
transcript of the proceedings for that day is exhibit 7 on this sentencing
hearing. many of these victims suffered financial losses from being unable to
return to work, emotional harm, shame, anger, and loss of trust in people. many
of the victims say their relationships with family members, including spouses
and children have been negatively affected because those family members have
had to witness and deal with the emotional trauma experienced by the victims.

the offender also entered a guilty plea to a public
mischief charge as part of the original resolution. on february 21, 2023, she
contacted brantford police to report that she had been sexually assaulted by
a.w. the offender attended brantford general hospital for a sexual assault
evidence kit. on february 22, 2023, the offender provided an audio and
videorecorded
kgb
statement to a police detective in which she detailed
the sexual assault. the offender then sent an e-mail to the brantford police
detective on the same date stating that she lied about the sexual assault on
february 21
st. in the e-mail she said, “i understand that this was
wrong. i also understand that i was under oath, and you can now charge me”. the
biology report from the centre of forensic sciences relating to the sexual
assault evidence kit that was submitted showed no dna other than the offender’s.

a.w. provided a victim impact statement. in it she
said she suffers from bipolar i and bipolar ii disorder and was in a manic
state for weeks after the offender made the sexual assault allegation. the
false allegation had an emotional toll on her and diminished her ability to
trust others.

when justice gee sentenced the offender on february
14, 2024, she had served the equivalent of 509 days or 16.7 months of
pre-sentence custody with
summers
credit. as part of the joint
submission, the crown and defence counsel asked justice gee not to credit the
offender for this pre-sentence custody and impose the two years less a day cso
with maximum probation to follow. justice gee expressed concern about counsels’
request regarding the pre-sentence custody but acceded to their request and
imposed the concurrent cso on all twenty-one charges followed by three years of
probation.

from a review of the record before me, it does not appear that
counsel provided justice gee with any caselaw to support their joint
submission, nor did they ask him to assess the appropriate sentence for each
offence, consider whether the sentences should be served consecutively or
concurrently, and then determine if the combined sentence would be unduly long
or harsh. the parties simply asked that justice gee impose the maximum cso and maximum
probation order concurrent on all counts, which he did.
circumstances of the new offences and
impact on the victims

the offender committed the new offences in april
2024. these offences relate to safe families canada and tracy lee robb, and sydney
poff.
safe families canada and tracy
lee robb

the crown proceeded by summary conviction on information
number 24-47102470. the offender entered guilty pleas to two offences that
occurred on or between april 17 and 18, 2024: (i) that she did by a false
pretence, with intent to defraud, obtain from safe families canada pregnancy
services having a value not exceeding $5000:
s. 362(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code; and (ii) that she did, without lawful excuse and with intent to
harass tracy lee robb, make or cause to be made repeated telephone calls to
her:
s. 372(3)
of the
criminal code.

on april 17, 2024, the offender contacted safe families
canada, a christian charitable organization that provides support to parents in
crisis. the offender identified herself by a false name, “kate baker”, and
claimed that she was about to undergo a stillbirth at nineteen weeks. tracy lee
robb was employed as a support worker with safe families, both in a paid and a
volunteer capacity.

the offender and ms. robb initially connected by
text message and subsequently by voice call. they communicated for about eighteen
hours between april 17
th
and april 18
th. the offender
told ms. robb that she was at mcmaster childrens’ hospital in labour. the
offender provided ms. robb with details about her physical and mental states as
time went on. at one point, she described undergoing contractions of increasing
frequency. at other points, they discussed the soon-to-be stillborn child. the
offender said the child would be named adelaide, and provided details about why
she chose this name.

the offender told ms. robb a detailed story
about how she became pregnant as a result of a sexual assault and found out
about her pregnancy at eleven weeks. she talked about how small the baby would
be. she described the details of her medical treatment, for example that she was
being given increased doses of pitocin and was worried that she would need a caesarean
section. the offender and ms. robb also talked at length about their religious
faith and the offender discussed whether she would have the child baptized.

the offender also asked ms. robb for details
about ms. robb’s own deliveries of her children. at one point, while listening
to these details the offender began to make vocalizations that ms. robb later believed
to be sexual in nature, although the offender denies that this was her
motivation. the offender provided very detailed descriptions of her bodily
processes as she progressed through her labour.

at various points, ms. robb offered to attend the
hospital to support the offender in person. however, the offender kept making
excuses as to why this could not happen. ms. robb continued to support the
offender remotely as she provided details of the trauma she was going through.

all of the offender’s representations to ms.
robb were false. there was no stillbirth; she was not pregnant; she did not
attend hospital. copies of the text message exchanges between the offender and
ms. robb are attached to the agreed statement of facts which is exhibit 9 on
the sentencing hearing.

in her victim impact statement, ms. robb described
the profound impact the offences have had on every aspect of her life. she has
lost trust in people which has resulted in loss of employment opportunities.
the emotional toll has been devastating. she lives in constant fear of being
deceived. being victimized by the offender has affected her family life. she
takes out her frustrations on her children and her relationship with her
husband has suffered, including their intimacy.
sydney poff

the crown proceeded by indictment on information
number 24-47102698. the offender entered guilty pleas to two offences that
occurred on or between april 28 and 30, 2024: (i) that she did by a false
pretence, with intent to defraud, obtain from sydney poff private doula
services having a value not exceeding $5000:
s. 362(2)
(b) of the
criminal
code; and (ii) that she did, with intent to injure or alarm any person, convey
by telephone text messages information that she knew was false:
s. 372(1)
of
the
criminal code.

on april 30, 2024, the offender contacted sydney
poff, who works as a doula. identifying herself as “jessica baker”, the
offender told ms. poff that she had lost her pregnancy at twenty-one weeks and
needed to attend hospital for a stillbirth. she told ms. poff that her partner
had left her because of this pregnancy loss.

the offender signed an electronic contract to
pay $250 for ms. poff’s doula services. over the next two days, the offender
and ms. poff exchanged over 600 text messages in which the offender provided
details about her medical condition. she described her water breaking. she asked
ms. poff to describe what her fetus would look like, to assist with her
“preparation”. the offender told ms. poff that she would name the child
adelaide.

all of the offender’s representations to ms.
poff were false. she was not pregnant and there was no stillbirth. the offender
never paid the agreed $250 for ms. poff’s services. copies of the text message
exchanges between the offender and ms. poff are attached to the agreed
statement of facts, exhibit 9 on the sentencing hearing.

in her victim impact statement, ms. poff describes
the financial and emotional impact of the crime. she too speaks of how it has
negatively affected her family life. ms. poff explains how she felt empathy for
the person she thought was jessica baker and how she wanted to do anything she
could to support her. those feelings changed to disgust and the feeling of violation
when she learned of the offender’s fabrications.
circumstances of the offender

the offender is 26 years old. prior to committing
the offences for which she received the cso, she had no criminal record. the
offender is single and has no children. in the pre-sentence report (psr), she
characterized her upbringing as complicated due to her parents’ divorce when
she was four years old, the financial difficulties of being raised by a single
mother, and a strained relationship with her father, who would often miss or
cancel visits with her. the offender remembers being very anxious as a child
and experiencing irrational fears that her mother would also leave her.

the offender did well academically and socially while
in school. she had excellent marks in high school, participated in mainstream
classes, took university level courses, and completed a french immersion
program. according to her mother, she had many friends, a positive peer group,
and no issues with authority figures. she received her bachelor of social work
degree from wilfrid laurier university, brantford campus, in april 2020.

the offender was ordered to undergo a
psychiatric assessment after being charged with the initial offences. dr. gary
chaimowitz and dr. shawn baldeo produced a report dated august 31, 2023 (the
“psychiatric assessment report”) which sets out the offender’s diagnosed mental
disorders, her history of deception and dishonesty, and an assessment of her risk
to re-offend and cause psychological harm to the public.

the offender has worked as a registered social
worker in a variety of roles. she advised the clinical team involved in
preparing the psychiatric assessment report that she often quit jobs before she
was fired due to issues related to her dishonesty. she reported being fired
from her last job for making a false complaint of sexual assault against her
11-year-old client. as a result of her criminal charges and convictions, her
registration with the ontario college of social workers and social service
workers was suspended.

the offender’s health records indicate a long
history of suicidal ideation and behaviour beginning at 17 years old. in these
records, she reports issues with self harm by scratching, cutting, and burning
herself since she was 11 years old. however, the offender admitted that, in the
over eleven-year period between 2011 and 2023, she attended for approximately
178 hospital visits with presenting issues that she feigned or self-inflicted to
obtain medical intervention.

the psychiatric assessment report refers to the
opp having flagged the offender “due to approximately 60 sexual assault accusations
across the province, at various hospitals, which were determined to be false”.

the offender’s mother reported
that the offender lied about her father and brother sexually assaulting her,
about having cancer, about work issues, and about the death of several family
members. she also lied about issues reported in her medical file such as her
brother committing suicide, her mother dying from injuries sustained in a car
accident, ongoing sexual assaults including one following a home invasion, and
others by former colleagues and clients. the offender has been investigated by
multiple healthcare programs and has been cautioned by police about potential
charges relating to these false claims.

the psychological testing completed with the
offender and included as part of the psychiatric assessment report suggested a
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder with traits of antisocial
personality disorder, and other subsumed diagnoses of persistent depressive
disorder, likely with periods during which criteria were also met for major
depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder.


the psychiatric assessment report also addresses
a historical diagnosis of factitious disorder, a diagnosis which is “made when
an individual falsifies or induces physical or psychological symptoms to
present themselves as ill, injured, or impaired for the purpose of receiving
attention and care in a medical setting”.

the individual is often unaware of their illness or its motivation. the motivation
is to meet an internal need rather than some secondary motivation such as
financial gain or to avoid return to work. those diagnosed with factitious
disorder usually deny falsifying symptoms and demand even more medical
attention.

according to the assessors, the sheer number and
diversity of conditions the offender reported, both medical and psychological,
is atypical of factitious disorder. for instance, false allegations of sexual
assault are rare for this disorder and the offender also made false reports
beyond medical and healthcare professionals to family, friends, professors,
employers, doulas, and police, which raises questions about the motivation for
her behaviour.

ultimately, the findings of the psychiatric
assessment report are that the offender’s “deception was fully conscious,
purposeful, and deliberate”.

when confronted with her deception, she acknowledged it, apologized, and sought
forgiveness which is unlike those with factitious disorder who insist there is
a mistake or that further interventions were required to verify their claims. the
assessors found the offender “to possess a good deal of knowledge about
factitious disorder” and to be “invested in this diagnosis, going so far as to
suggest she was not criminally responsible because of it”.

it was noted that she
declined hospital admission or community follow-up on a number of occasions,
which would have extended the attention and sympathy she said she was seeking.
again, this was another indicator against a diagnosis of factitious disorder.

ultimately, borderline personality disorder was
found to be an appropriate diagnosis for the offender. based on the testing
performed for the psychological risk assessment, likely motivations for the
offender’s falsified or induced medical symptoms and accusations of sexual
assault “include reducing isolation by having people with whom she could
socialize (albeit often virtually), seeing professionals and paraprofessionals
as substitute friends, experiencing enjoyment or pleasure at the escalating
risks she was taking, and exploring aspects of her sexual identity she felt
unable or unwilling to explore in a more appropriate, healthy manner”.


the psychiatric assessment report then states
the following:
ms. braun’s behaviours-feigning
pregnancy and labour, accusing family members and clients of sexual assault,
claiming to have been sexually assaulted by strangers, as well as her behaviour
with some of the doulas, strongly suggest the possibility of a sexual secondary
motive..


while being assessed the offender identified
herself as a lesbian. the authors of the report stated:
further, given her sexual preference
for women, there is a likelihood that there was an element of secondary gain in
the form of sexual gratification. specifically, ms. braun underwent a number of
invasive procedures, including the use of rape kits and vaginal exams including
pap smears, she disrobed in front of others, received massages while naked or
partially naked, and was seen to be masturbating on at least one occasion by a
doula.


the risk assessment portion of the psychiatric
assessment report placed the offender’s risk of re-offending in a manner
similar to the original charges as likely high because of the number of charges
related to doulas, her at least 60 false allegations of sexual assault, and
numerous attendances at emergency departments in the year leading up to her
first arrest.

the report goes on to say:
ms. braun also demonstrates limited
insight, poor self-control, severe emotional dysregulation, and a surprising
lack of empathy or remorse for her behaviour. despite being under the care of
both a psychiatrist and psychotherapist at the time, she had not availed
herself of the assistance that was available. untreated, her risk for
reoffending would be considered high, with her behaviour high risk for causing
psychological harm and low risk for causing physical harm.


the finding that the offender was a high risk to
reoffend in a criminal manner in the community was arrived at when considering her
major mental health diagnoses, her childhood history of dependency and fear of
being abandoned, and her lack of insight and remorse. the specific circumstances
of her original offences, their longevity, and the deception involved
demonstrated an escalating level of high-risk behaviours. according to the
authors of the psychiatric assessment report “[h]er underlying borderline and
antisocial traits predispose her to engage in behaviours which can cause
psychological harm to the public” and “the victims of her reoffending will
likely be random in nature”.


to mitigate her risk of recidivism, dr.
chaimowitz and dr. baldeo recommended structured dialectical behaviour therapy
(dbt), other psychotherapeutic programs to develop insight, coping and mood
regulation, and ongoing adherence to medications to manage her mood and anxiety
disorders. however, they stated that the prognosis is guarded because “[w]hile
she has had structured psychotherapy, her level of genuine engagement and inability
to be truthful with her healthcare providers have interfered with the efficacy
of her treatment”.


dr. chaimowitz and dr. baldeo opined that the
offender would benefit from an intense dbt program with a follow up skills
group with a practitioner who is fully aware of her history. however, they
conclude their report as follows:
ms. braun is very likely to continue
to offend and create victims. her various diagnoses do not capture the
deliberate component of her risk behaviours. given the severity of her
maladaptive personality, treatment may modify offending frequency, but will
not, in our opinion, stop it.


the offender’s mother is the only family member
who maintains a relationship with her. her two older siblings are estranged
from her due to her involvement in the criminal justice system. the offender told
the author of the psr that she feels her mother has tried to make her
accountable for her criminal behaviour, but the offender recognizes that she
can take advantage of or easily manipulate her mother, which has negatively
impacted their relationship. she feels her mother completely distrusts her.

amber johnson, a court services case manager
with the brant-haldimand-norfolk canadian mental health association (cmha), who
has worked with the offender and her mother since march of 2023 corroborated the
offender’s characterization of her relationship with her mother. ms. johnson described
the offender’s mother as loving and supportive and someone who would attempt to
ensure the offender’s compliance with conditions. however, the offender does
not see her mother as an authoritative figure but rather someone she can
manipulate. ms. johnson expressed her concern to the author of the psr that the
offender’s mother lacks the necessary skills to deal with the offender’s mental
health issues and manipulative behaviours without additional supports.

the offender’s mother spoke with the probation
and parole officer to provide her input for the psr. she acknowledged that her
daughter can manipulate her and that she knows very little about her mental
health issues, specifically borderline personality disorder, but she is
committed to offering her daughter emotional and financial support when she is
released from custody. the offender has no income, no savings and is
financially dependent on her mother.

the offender’s mother advised the author of the
psr that she was surprised that her daughter reoffended after being released on
the cso. she reported that for the brief time that she was serving the cso in
the community, her daughter was working through dbt workbooks on her own, was
attending group, had the support of a nurse practitioner and was under the care
of a psychiatrist. the author of the psr confirmed that while serving the cso
in the community, the offender was participating in therapy and group sessions.
although she had the support of her cmha worker, group counselling, a nurse
practitioner, a cso supervisor and a psychiatrist, the offender committed the
new offences relating to ms. robb and ms. poff. accordingly, and due to the
offender’s limited insight into her behaviour and intensive mental health needs,
the author of the psr deemed her not suitable for community supervision.
legal principles

the public interest test is used to measure the
acceptability of joint submissions.

a sentencing judge should not depart from a joint submission
on sentence unless the proposed sentence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute or is otherwise contrary to the public
interest.

this is a stringent test. the high threshold for rejecting a joint submission
is met when, despite the public interest considerations that support imposing
the jointly proposed sentence, it is so “markedly out of line with the
expectations of reasonable persons aware of the circumstances of the case that
they would view it as a break down in the proper functioning of the criminal
justice system”.

when assessing a joint submission, sentencing judges should “avoid rendering a
decision that causes an informed and reasonable public to lose confidence in
the institution of the courts”.


the public interest test is a
stringent one because properly conducted plea resolutions “benefit not only the
accused, but also victims, witnesses, counsel, and the administration of
justice generally”.

the most important factor is certainty.

accused persons benefit from joint submissions because
“
the crown agrees to recommend a sentence that the accused
is prepared to accept”, and “[t]his recommendation is likely to be more
lenient than the accused might expect after a trial and/or contested sentencing
hearing”.

accused persons are less likely to give up their right to a trial on the merits
unless they have “some assurance that [trial judges] will in most instances
honour agreements entered into by the crown”.


the stringent test for rejection of joint
submissions also provides certainty for the crown
“because there is less
risk that what crown counsel concludes is an appropriate resolution of the case
in the public interest will be undercut”.

the certain or near certain acceptance of joint submissions provides potential
benefits for the crown, such as the guarantee of a conviction, avoiding the
potential for an acquittal even on cases that may suffer from flaws.

resolution of cases by way of a guilty plea in exchange for a joint submission
benefits victims and witnesses, who are spared “the emotional cost of a trial”.

the guilty plea may provide comfort to victims as it indicates the accused’s
acknowledgment of responsibility and expression of remorse.


joint submissions also “
play a vital role in contributing to the administration
of justice at large
”.

if there is a high degree of certainty that joint submissions will be accepted,
it encourages accused persons to plead guilty and guilty pleas save the justice
system time, resources and expenses which can be used for other matters.

this provides a significant
benefit. joint submissions on sentence that avoid trials permit the justice
system to function more efficiently or as justice moldaver stated in
anthony-cook,
“[i]ndeed, i would argue that they permit it to function. without
them, our justice system would be brought to its knees, and eventually collapse
under its own weight”.

the parties must have a high degree of confidence that joint submissions will be
accepted. otherwise, “
the parties may choose
instead to accept the risks of a trial or a contested sentencing hearing”,

and the benefits to the
administration of justice at large will be lost.

therefore, sentencing judges must exhibit
restraint by
“rejecting joint submissions
only where the proposed sentence would be viewed by reasonable and informed
persons as a breakdown in the proper functioning of the justice system”.

however, certainty is “not the
ultimate goal of the sentencing process. certainty must yield where the harm
caused by accepting the joint submission is beyond the value gained by
promoting certainty of result”.


sentencing judges must apply the public interest
test when they are considering “jumping” or “undercutting” a joint submission.

a judge who is concerned that
the severity of a joint submission may offend
the
public interest, “should be mindful of the power imbalance that may exist
between the crown and defence, particularly where the accused is
self-represented or in custody at the time of sentencing”.

these are
factors which “
may temper the public
interest in certainty and justify ‘undercutting’ in limited circumstances”.

however, a judge who is
considering “undercutting” a joint submission “should bear in mind that the
community’s confidence in the administration of justice may suffer if an
accused enjoys the benefits of a joint submission without having to serve the
agreed-upon sentence”.


although the scc in
anthony-cook
rejected
the “fitness test” and “demonstrably unfit test” for assessing joint
submissions in favour of the more stringent public interest test, the fitness
of the proposed sentence is “a relevant consideration in applying the public
interest test”.

as the majority of the alberta court of appeal said in
r. v. naslund,
“whether
a joint submission is fit on the basis of conventional sentencing principles is
a
relevant, though not determinative, consideration when deciding
whether accepting such a sentence would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute”.

the alberta court of appeal cited jurisprudence from newfoundland and labrador,
a jurisdiction that has long utilized the “public interest” test ultimately
adopted in
anthony-cook.

the newfoundland and labrador court of appeal said this in
r. v. oxford:
that is not to say that consideration of basic
sentencing principles is to be jettisoned completely when considering a joint
submission. of course they are relevant; however, their relevance is to provide
a screen, along with other considerations, to analyze the appropriateness of
the joint submission in the context of the circumstances leading to the guilty
plea and the “bargained” proposed sentence but always for the purpose of
determining whether, if the proposal is accepted, the administration of justice
would be brought into disrepute or it would be contrary to the public interest.


in
oxford, the newfoundland and labrador
court of appeal noted that determining whether a joint submission is contrary
to the public interest
“requires examination
of the sentences that could be expected to be imposed in circumstances not
involving a joint submission”.


in
anthony-cook,
the
scc affirmed the newfoundland and labrador court of appeal
case of
r. v. druken
for having adopted the proper test regarding joint
submissions.

in
druken,
rowe j.a. (as he then was) said that “the question of
whether the sentence is unreasonable must be considered” when making the public
interest determination.

the newfoundland and labrador court of appeal then said that
“there must be some minimum, having regard to the facts
of each case, below which a proposed sentence cannot be accepted”.


the majority of the alberta court of appeal in
naslund
added “
that there must likewise be some
maximum
sentence above which the joint submission cannot be accepted”.

the majority of the alberta court
of appeal explained why a sentencing judge must consider both the benefits of
the joint submission process and the fitness of the proposed sentence:
this makes eminent sense. indeed, were the
reasonableness of the sentence not part of the equation, it would be impossible
to determine whether the sentence was “unhinged from the
circumstances of
the offence and the offender
”:
anthony-cook, para
34, emphasis
added. after all, a sentence cannot be “unhinged” in the abstract; it is
unhinged
from something, namely the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender. proportionality is thus a necessary
(though not sufficient) consideration when determining whether a joint
submission meets the “public interest” test.

application of the legal principles

on january 7, 2025, when the crown and defence
counsel initially put forward their joint submission proposing termination of
the cso and a consecutive 3-year penitentiary sentence, the transcripts of the
proceedings before justice gee were not available. i was concerned at that time
that the proposed sentence may be unduly harsh and expressed my concern to
counsel.

subsequently, transcripts of the sentencing
proceedings relating to the original charges were produced. they contained the
facts admitted by the offender in support of her guilty pleas to the twenty-one
charges, the additional facts she was prepared to admit relating to additional victims,
the victim impact statements, the submissions of counsel in support of their
joint submission that a cso was appropriate, and justice gee’s reasons for
accepting their joint submission. the transcripts also disclosed the
pre-sentence custody that the offender had served up to the date of sentencing.
as i stated earlier in these reasons, the 16.7 months of pre-sentence custody
was not attributed to any of the charges to which the offender entered guilty
pleas.

on may 16, 2025, at the sentencing hearing, i
again advised counsel that i was considering “undercutting” the joint
submission. the specific concerns i raised with counsel focused on the net
effect of terminating the cso and imposing the consecutive penitentiary sentence
proposed. i also asked counsel to provide submissions on how i should deal with
the fact that the offender served 16.7 months of pre-sentence custody before
being sentenced to the maximum cso which she breached within two months.

i pointed out that, at the sentencing hearing before
justice gee, the crown and defence counsel made an alternative joint submission.
the parties jointly submitted that a sentence of 2 years jail less pre-sentence
custody was appropriate if justice gee were to find that a cso was unavailable
or inappropriate. had justice gee accepted this alternative joint submission,
it would have resulted in the offender being sentenced to serve a further 7.3
months in jail rather than being placed on a cso of maximum duration. i asked
counsel whether the principle of totality required me to give some
consideration to the foregoing circumstances.

first, i note that the crown and defence counsel
remained steadfast in advancing the joint submission. defence counsel stated
that she had firm instructions from the offender to accept the sentence she had
bargained for with the crown, a sentence that was more lenient than the crown
would have proposed after a trial or contested sentencing hearing. defence
counsel urged me on behalf of her client to terminate the cso and impose the
penitentiary sentence to permit the offender to obtain dbt which is available to
women offenders according to the correctional service canada website.

a sentencing judge cannot rely only on the
judgment of counsel that a joint submission is appropriate. instead, the
sentencing judge must arrive at an independent conclusion, based on an adequate
record, that the joint submission does not
bring
the administration of justice into disrepute or would otherwise be contrary to
the public interest.


crown counsel, mr. mcnaughton, submits that an
offender who receives a cso, receives a more lenient disposition than a
sentence served in a reformatory. this is especially so in the offender’s case.
she and defence counsel made a joint submission to justice gee not to credit
her with any pre-sentence custody to make a cso available. the goal the parties
jointly advanced at that time was to have the offender supervised in the
community for the maximum duration possible. mr. mcnaughton says that there is
a need for finality in sentencing proceedings. the offender cannot now seek to
revisit the propriety of the sentence she received, including the component of
the joint submission which asked the judge not to give credit for her
pre-sentence custody. she cannot now say that she made a bad deal and should
have accepted a custodial sentence of shorter duration than the cso instead. mr.
mcnaughton maintains that the offender is the author of her own misfortune for
having blatantly breached the cso by committing new offences a short time after
it was imposed.

i accept the crown’s submissions on this point.
the offender did not appeal the sentence imposed by justice gee and defence
counsel did not question its validity at the sentencing hearing before me when
i raised my concerns. it is not my role to revisit the appropriateness of the
cso that was imposed but rather to determine whether it should now be
terminated.

where an offender breaches a condition of a cso,
there is a presumption that they serve the remainder of the sentence in jail.

however, s. 742.6(9) of the
criminal
code
provides sentencing judges with a variety of possible orders when an
offender breaches a cso. the sentencing judge has discretion to determine which
of the available orders is appropriate in all of the circumstances.

in deciding on which order is
appropriate, “
the sentencing judge must
consider all of the circumstances, including the nature and circumstances of
the breach; the circumstances of the offender; the time remaining on the
conditional sentence order; and the ordinary principles of sentencing
(including, for example, denunciation, general and specific deterrence,
proportionality, and restraint)”.

in
r. v. antaya,
the ontario court of appeal said that in cases where
the cso imposed
was longer than an appropriate
sentence of incarceration would have been, this may also be a relevant factor
in deciding not to terminate it. the court noted that “[t]hese factors must be
considered within the particular context of the conditional sentencing regime”.


the crown and defence counsel have jointly
submitted that termination of the cso is the appropriate order. it is difficult
to apply the
anthony-cook
principles to a joint submission made
in respect of a breach of a condition of a cso. this is especially so in the
present case where the joint submission is that i should make the most restrictive
order. furthermore, the administration of justice does not benefit from joint
submissions made in respect of cso breaches to the same extent as joint
submissions made after negotiated guilty pleas. cso breach hearings are meant
to be conducted expeditiously and most times on a paper record without
viva voce
evidence. the saving of time, expenses and court resources is not as
significant.

notwithstanding these observations, i find that in the offender’s
case it is appropriate to terminate the cso and order that the offender serve
the remainder of the sentence in jail as jointly recommended. although the cso
imposed was longer than the sentence of incarceration that would have been
imposed had justice gee accepted the alternative joint submission, the nature
and circumstances of the breach were egregious.

a short time after the imposition of the cso, the offender
breached it by committing the same offences for which it had been imposed, causing
lasting emotional and other consequences to two additional victims. the
breaches were deliberate. permitting the offender to serve the remaining
portion of the sentence in the community would endanger the safety of the
community. while in the community, the offender has proven herself to be unable
or unwilling to complete the dbt necessary to reduce the risk of her committing
further offences and causing psychological harm to further victims. without dbt
in a structured setting, the offender poses
a
significant level of ongoing threat. considering all of the circumstances and the
ordinary principles of sentencing, termination of the cso is the most
appropriate order.

i turn now to the joint submission in respect of
the new offences. the crown and defence counsel were unable to provide caselaw to
support their joint submission of 3 years jail to be served consecutively. this
is not surprising. the offences committed by the offender against ms. robb and
ms. poff are unique and do not fit easily within an established range of
sentence.

this poses challenges in assessing the reasonableness or fitness of the
sentence, a relevant consideration when applying the public interest test.

notwithstanding the absence of comparator cases,
with similar circumstances to the offender’s case, it is incumbent on me to
determine whether the joint submission is unhinged from the circumstances of
the offences and the offender. i find that it is not. the offender is a repeat
offender who poses a significant continuing threat to the community. the
offences she committed had a significant impact on the victims, ms. robb and
ms. poff. the sanction i impose must consider the objective of separation of
the offender from society where necessary, which is a relevant consideration in
this case.

crown counsel states that the jump principle is at
play. i find that the sentence proposed is harsher than the sentence the
offender received for her previous offences but moderate enough to not be
crushing or discourage rehabilitation efforts. it also takes into account the
offender’s mental health issues. in fact, the parties jointly submit that the
sentence has a rehabilitative component since it is hoped that the offender
will receive dbt while incarcerated. a consideration of the remaining principles
of sentencing including denunciation and deterrence, especially specific
deterrence, support the imposition of a 3-year sentence in this case.

i am mindful of the caution the scc gave in
anthony-cook
to judges who are considering “undercutting” a joint submission. the
community’s confidence in the administration of justice may suffer if an
offender “enjoys the benefits of a joint submission without having to serve the
agreed-upon sentence”.

although the offender is in custody at the time of sentencing, she has been
represented by a lawyer throughout these proceedings and the proceedings before
justice gee. i find that the power imbalance which may exist between the crown
and defence is not a consideration that tempers the public interest in the
certainty of the joint submission in this case. the offender made an informed
decision to accept the agreed-upon sentence to avoid the risk of a harsher
sentence after a trial or a contested sentencing hearing.

in my view, if i were to impose a sentence other
than the sentence that has been jointly proposed, i would merely be
substituting my view of what a fit sentence is in the circumstances. the joint
submission is not so unhinged from the gravity of the offences and the
degree of responsibility of the offender that it would bring the administration
of justice into disrepute or be contrary to the public interest.

i terminate the cso and direct that the offender serve the remainder
of the sentence in jail. in respect of the two offences relating to ms. poff, i
impose a 2-year jail sentence concurrent to each other but consecutive to the
remainder of the cso. in respect of the two offences relating to ms. robb, for
which the crown proceeded summarily, i impose a 1-year jail sentence concurrent
to each other but consecutive to the offences relating to ms. poff and
consecutive to the remainder of the cso. this results in a global sentence of 3
years jail for the new offences consecutive to the time the offender has left
to serve on the cso. it is appropriate that the offender serve the sentences
relating to the new offences consecutively to the cso. they do
not arise out of the same event or series of events as the offences for which
she received the cso.
released: june 9, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci

r. v. anthony-cook,
2016 scc 43.

r. v. garcia and silva,
1969 canlii 450 (on ca), 3 c.c.c. 124 (ont. c.a.).

psychiatric assessment report, st. joseph’s healthcare hamilton, dr. gary a. chaimowitz
and dr. shawn baldeo, august 31, 2023, p. 22: exhibit 5 on the sentencing
hearing.

ibid,
at p. 34.

ibid,
at p. 35.

ibid,
at p. 35.

ibid,
at p. 35.

ibid,
at p. 35.

ibid,
at p. 35.

ibid,
at p. 39.

ibid,
at p. 36.

ibid,
at p. 36.

ibid,
at p. 41.

ibid,
at p. 41.

ibid,
at p. 42.

r. v. anthony-cook, supra,
at paras.
32-34.

ibid,
at para. 32.

ibid,
at para. 33.

ibid,
at para. 33, citing
r. v. o.(b.j.),
2010 nlca 19, at para.
56.

ibid,
at para. 35, citing
report of the
attorney general’s advisory committee on charge screening, disclosure, and
resolution discussions
(1993) (the
“martin committee report”), at p. 281.

ibid,
at para. 37.

ibid,
at para. 36.

ibid,
at para. 37, citing
r. v. cerasuolo
(2001),
2001 canlii 24172 (on ca), 151 c.c.c. (3d)
445 (ont. c.a.), at para.
9.

ibid,
at para. 38, citing martin committee report, at p. 328.

ibid,
at para. 39.

ibid,
at para. 39.

ibid,
at para. 39.

ibid,
at para. 40.

ibid,
at para. 40.

ibid,
at para. 40.

ibid,
at para. 41.

ibid,
at para. 42.

ibid,
at para. 43, citing
r. v. desousa,
2012 onca 254, per
doherty j.a., at para. 22.

ibid,
at para. 52.

ibid,
at para. 52.

ibid,
at para. 52.

ibid,
at para. 52, citing
r. v. desousa, supra,
at paras.
23-24.

r. v. naslund,
2022 abca 6, at para.
68;
r. v. huston,
2024 bcca
179, at paras.
12 and 16.

r. v. naslund, ibid,
at para.
67, (emphasis in original).

ibid,
at para. 69.

r. v. oxford,
2010 nlca 45, at para.
68.

ibid,
at para. 83.

r. v. anthony-cook, supra,
at para.
29, citing
r. v. druken,
2006
nlca 67, at paras.
29 and 33.

r. v. druken, ibid,
at para.
18.

ibid,
at para. 19.

r. v. naslund, supra,
at para.
71,
(emphasis
in original).

ibid,
at para. 73, (emphasis in original).

ibid,
at para. 89.

r. v. proulx,
2000 scc 5, at paras.
21 and 38-39;
r. v. antaya,
2022
onca 819.

r. v. antaya, ibid,
at para.
7.

ibid,
at para. 9.

ibid,
at para. 9.

r. v. harasuik,
2023 onca 594.

r. v. anthony-cook, supra,
at para.
52.