source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj388/2025oncj388.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. hoggar,
2025 oncj 388
date: 2025 07 18
court file no.: sudbury 4011-998-23-40101335-00
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
joseph hoggar
before justice leonard kim
heard on june 20, 2025
reasons for sentencing released on july
18, 2025
d.
bradley……………………………………………………….counsel for the federal crown
m.
ansell……………………………………………………counsel for the provincial crown
c.
bottomley................................................................. counsel
for the accused joseph hoggar
kim l. j.:
overview

after a
four-day trial, mr. hoggar was convicted on october 17, 2024, of seven counts
on the information:

a)
resisting
arrest, s. 129(a) of the
criminal code;
b)
possession of a
firearm knowing its possession was unauthorized,
s. 92(1)
of the
criminal
code;
c)
being an
occupant in a vehicle knowing there was a firearm (9mm glock 26 gen 5 handgun),
s. 94
of the
criminal code;
d)
unlawful
possession of a loaded prohibited firearm without having authorization or
license and a registration certificate (9mm glock 26 gen 5 handgun),
s. 95(1)
of the
criminal code;
e)
unlawful
possession of fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking, s. 5(2) of the
controlled
drugs and substances act (“cdsa”);
f)
unlawful
possession of cocaine for the purposes of trafficking, s. 5(2) of the
cdsa;
g)
possession of
property obtained by crime (canadian currency of a value exceeding $5000)
knowing that all or part of the property was obtained by an offence punishable
by indictment,
s. 354(1)
(a) of the
criminal code.

the
gravity of these offences includes the fact that mr. hoggar was trafficking significant
amounts of fentanyl and cocaine to a vulnerable, at-risk population in northern
ontario that has suffered exponential harm. additionally, the real danger posed
by possessing a loaded handgun elevated the risk of death or serious bodily
harm in this context. this must be balanced with the many mitigating circumstances
of mr. hoggar that include his own traumatic upbringing, breaches of his
charter
rights under s. 10(a) and (b), his employability and the impact a lengthy
custodial term will have on his common-law partner and their young son.

however,
even after i account for the totality of the significantly mitigating factors, i
am of the view that a proportionate sentence of 12 years is warranted to
accurately reflect the gravity of these serious offences and degree of moral
blameworthiness attributable to mr. hoggar. upon application of the totality
principle, the 12-year sentence shall be reduced by 1 year for each of the lead
counts for a total sentence of 10 years. i will attempt to explain how i came
to this conclusion in these
reasons.
the
specific counts focused in this sentencing

it would be
prudent to initially determine precisely which counts should be subject to
the
principle in
kienapple, which protects against multiple convictions for
offences where substantially similar factual and legal elements have been met
on essentially the same facts.

the offences pursuant to
s. 92(1)
and
94
of the
criminal code
are
captured by this principle considering the conviction pursuant to
s. 95(1). furthermore,
the count of possession for the purposes of trafficking in cocaine shall also
be subject to
kienapple,
due to the conviction for possession for the
purposes of trafficking in fentanyl, which is the lead count pursuant to the
cdsa.

the remaining
counts of resisting arrest and possession of property obtained by crime (cad.
currency) shall be sentenced concurrently. therefore, my sentencing analysis
shall be focused on the offences under
s. 95(1)
of the
criminal code
and
s. 5(2) of the
cdsa
for trafficking in fentanyl.

trafficking in
fentanyl while possessing a loaded, prohibited firearm involves offences that
have distinct legal interests that require consecutive sentences.

the
cdsa
aims to
control substances that
can alter mental processes and that pose risks to public health and public
safety when used inappropriately or diverted to the illegal market.

the objective of
s. 95
of the
criminal code
is to
protect the public by criminalizing the possession of potentially dangerous
firearms in circumstances that increase the danger posed to the public.


while captured
within one factual transaction, the court will exercise its discretion to
impose consecutive sentences
to properly account for
the violation of the distinct legal interests for these very different
offences committed by mr. hoggar.

after determining the appropriate sentences, the principle of totality must be
applied to ensure that the overall sentence is not disproportionate or overly
harsh to the gravity of the offences and his moral culpability.
procedural
delays in obtaining the pre-sentence report

a sentencing
date of february 3, 2025, was promptly set upon conviction and a pre-sentence
report (“psr”) was ordered. in a letter addressed to the court dated december
17, 2024, probation services outlined their unsuccessful efforts in establishing
contact with the offender for the purposes of completing the psr.

on january 21,
2025, counsel appeared before me to check in on the status of this matter. the
court learned that at some point after mr. hoggar was convicted, his surety
revoked. he was arrested on unrelated charges and happened to be in custody in
edmonton, alberta. with the assistance of mr. bottomley, the specific custodial
location in edmonton was confirmed. on consent, the initial sentencing date of
february 3, 2025, was adjourned with a new date of june 20, 2025, set for a
contested hearing.

after the
initial sentencing date was adjourned, the arrest of mr. hoggar in edmonton,
alberta, prevented him from being able to meet with a probation officer to
complete the psr in a timely manner.

all
involved stakeholders promptly made arrangements to have a probation officer
meet with mr. hoggar by video from the edmonton remand centre. those efforts
proved to be fruitful and the psr was completed on march 13, 2025.
circumstances
of the offences

mr. hoggar was
the driver and sole occupant of the green 2007 nissan altima bearing the
license plate cyar 452 at the time of his arrest on april 19, 2023.

the evidence in
support of the above charges was seized by police pursuant to a search incident
to arrest for the offences of possession of cocaine and fentanyl for the
purposes of trafficking on april 19, 2023. a comprehensive search of mr. hoggar
personally and the motor vehicle he was operating included the following
evidence:
i)
cocaine 668.8
grams with an estimated street value between $41,000 and $68,000;
ii)
fentanyl 141.59
grams with an estimated street value between $28,200 and $42,300;
iii)
$50,836.20 in
canadian currency of which $234.10 was located from mr. hoggar’s right pocket
and $6532.10 from his left pocket. $44,070 was found in various hidden areas of
a 2007 green nissan altima operated by mr. hoggar;
iv)
a 9 mm glock 26
gen 5 handgun (prohibited firearm) and two loaded magazines hidden inside the
rear driver’s side door of the nissan;
v)
packaging
material inside the nissan;
vi)
three cell
phones.

on the date of
the arrest, the investigating officer, cst. bonish, conducted surveillance on
mr. hoggar within the immediate vicinity of a known drug house in sudbury. mr.
hoggar was the driver and sole occupant of the nissan throughout the entirety
of these observations on the date of his arrest. he was observed to have two
interactions in and around a residence with individuals
briefly coming and going and a separate brief encounter with a lone male at a
townhouse complex next to a local elementary school parking lot.

the evidence
found on mr. hoggar personally and in the vehicle he was operating throughout
those brief encounters leading up to his arrest had all the hallmarks of what
appeared to be an active drug trafficking business he was operating in sudbury.

the total
street value of fentanyl and cocaine found was agreed to be between $69,200 to
$110,300.

a total of
$50,836.20 in canadian currency was seized. there is no evidence that anyone
other than mr. hoggar had operated this vehicle the morning of his arrest.

the combined
value of the drugs and cash found deeply hidden within the nissan was between
$120,036.20 to $161,136.20.

the
circumstances of the arrest where mr. hoggar resisted cst. porringa are
described at paragraphs 336 – 341 of my
reasons.
when this officer
identified himself, mr. hoggar, while situated in the driver’s seat of the
nissan, immediately shut the driver’s side door. the officer attempted to open
the door while mr. hoggar simultaneously attempted to pull it shut.

at this early
stage of engagement, it was unknown to this officer if any other occupants were
inside the vehicle, as the windows were tinted. cst. porringa was able to
observe mr. hoggar shifting around inside the vehicle. he ignored the officer’s
orders which prompted the officer to utilize his baton to smash the driver’s
side window to successfully open the door while a second officer approached
from the passenger side of the vehicle. mr. hoggar then exited the vehicle and
complied with the arrest.

the loaded
handgun is a prohibited firearm with a fully loaded, extended magazine and a
bullet in the chamber. there was also a second magazine hidden inside the
vehicle loaded with ammunition.

mr. hoggar was not a holder of a license or authorization to possess the seized
magazines and the loaded, prohibited firearm.
circumstances
of mr. hoggar

mr. hoggar is
34 years old and has never met his biological father. he was raised by his
mother and stepfather in toronto and lived in subsidized housing with his
siblings in an under privileged area of toronto. he was placed in a foster home
at eight or nine years of age. as a vulnerable child in care, he was sexually
assaulted while in a foster home and has never reported this victimization to
the authorities.

because his
mother was concerned about the negative influences permeating his surroundings,
his mother sent him overseas to ghana at the age of 15. this displaced him away
from his siblings and his parents for some five years. while in africa, he ran
away from the home that he was living in due to abuse and neglect and
ultimately was homeless in this foreign country. he expressed to the psr writer
that at one point, he was captured by rebels and tortured for two days. he
returned to canada some five years later at the age of 20 but never dealt with
the stress and trauma that he experienced throughout his formative years.

he turned to
drugs and found himself to be addicted to crack cocaine as a coping mechanism.
to his credit, he has managed to be clean from any drug use for the past six
years.

he is currently
involved in a stable and long-term relationship with his common law spouse.
they share a 2-year-old boy.

mr. hoggar has
graduated from high school and in 2018, owned and operated his own trucking
company. however, due to the negative publicity related to the current charges,
he lost all his business contracts and his two residences he shared with his
partner. the economic impact suffered is profound.

the psr outlines
mr. hoggar’s criminal record, that includes two prior convictions for
possession for the purposes of trafficking a scheduled substance in st.
catharines, ontario in january 2015. those convictions resulted in a mandatory
weapons prohibition pursuant to s. 109 but the crown has not introduced any
evidence to prove it was effective at the time of the current offences in
sudbury in april 2023.
positions
of the parties

mr. bradley for
the federal crown is seeking a penitentiary sentence of eight years for the
trafficking of fentanyl, five years concurrent for trafficking in cocaine, one
year concurrent on the possession of $50,836 cash obtained by the commission of
indictable offence and 30 days concurrent on the resisting arrest. he
highlights the fact that mr. hoggar was found to be in possession of a high
volume of two so-called “hard drugs”, fentanyl and cocaine, for the purposes of
trafficking. in his submission, it is well known that these drugs wreak havoc
on the local community and northern ontario region. the ripple effect of
selling these substances in the community can be seen through the associated
consequences on the lives of human beings that suffer with addictions to these
substances.

it is
particularly aggravating that mr. hoggar was trafficking in fentanyl, a known
toxic substance that has claimed the lives of so many people in our country and
particularly here in sudbury. mr. hoggar’s decision to profit from the
suffering of the most vulnerable members of this community was rooted in greed
and disconnected in any way to fuel a personal addiction of any sort. mr.
bradley highlights the offender’s prior, related criminal record, that includes
two prior convictions for possession for the purposes of trafficking in a
schedule substance and offences related to resisting arrest.

mr. ansell for
the provincial crown is seeking four years consecutive for possession of a
loaded prohibited firearm contrary to
s. 95(1)
of the
criminal code.

on behalf of
mr. hoggar, mr. bottomley submits that a global sentence of seven years in the
penitentiary would achieve the balancing necessary to account for the
seriousness of these offences but without losing sight of the hope that remains
for mr. hoggar to achieve rehabilitation and lead pro-social life upon his
release. he acknowledges the seriousness of the trafficking and firearm
offences, and the adverse impact on the community particularly as it relates to
the scourge that fentanyl has on the lives of many local human beings.

however, he
emphasizes the principles of restraint, totality and rehabilitation for an
offender with significant gaps in his criminal record, a history of medical
challenges, family obligations to his partner and young son and a traumatic
childhood that effectively lowers his moral culpability. in sentencing this
offender to his first penitentiary term, i am to impose the lowest possible
sentence that can still achieve the paramount principle of proportionality.

mr. bottomley
also highlights the existence of additional factors that would support the
application of further mitigation on sentence. he submits that mr. hoggar is
entitled to
downes
credit due to time spent on tight bail conditions
that included house arrest and the requirement to wear an ankle monitor from
approximately june 2023 to november 2024. additional mitigation is also
required due to the breaches of mr. hoggar’s
charter
rights pursuant to
sections 10(a) and (b) due to the delay in notifying him of the change in
jeopardy and corresponding second opportunity to consult with counsel.

finally, he
reminds me of the presence of
morris
factors

that apply due to mr. hoggar’s status as a black canadian offender. relevant
social context evidence should be considered through judicial notice of the existence
of overt and systemic anti-black racism together with mr. hoggar’s traumatic
childhood as documented in the pre-sentence report (“psr”). the application of
these principles has the potential to lower his moral blameworthiness and is
mitigating on sentence.
sentencing
principles

the
fundamental principle of sentencing is proportionality. a sentence imposed must
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender
in
consideration of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of this case in
conjunction with the principles of totality, restraint and parity.


the fundamental
purpose of sentencing in
s. 718
of the
criminal code
is to protect
society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, respect for
the law and maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society by imposing just
sanctions that include one or more of several objectives, including deterrence,
denunciation, separation from society, rehabilitation of the offender and to
promote a sense of responsibility in that offender.

parity, an
expression of proportionality,

requires a sentence to be similar
to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed under
similar circumstances. sentencing is, however, an individualized process which
necessarily means that sentences imposed for similar offences may not be
identical.


the individualization
of the sentencing process requires sentencing judges to prioritize and blend
the different objectives of sentencing to properly reflect the gravity of the
offences and the responsibility of the offender.


for the
sentence i impose to be appropriate, it must be tailored to mr. hoggar’s
circumstances, and the circumstances of the offences he committed.

it is well
established that the principles of denunciation and deterrence are at the
forefront of the analysis involving cases of drug trafficking and possession of
prohibited firearms. specific deterrence may be particularly pertinent because
mr. hoggar has a criminal history that includes prior convictions for
trafficking and obstruction of justice related offences.

however, i am
still required to apply each of the sentencing principles enacted in
s. 718
of
the
criminal code,
including the principles of restraint, totality and
rehabilitation. i have carefully applied those principles to the facts of this
case in arriving at what i see to be a fit sentence.

the total
sentence i impose must not be excessive and may need to be adjusted if it is
disproportionate to the gravity of the offences.


section 10(2)
of the
cdsa
also requires me to consider certain aggravating factors on
sentencing. in this case, the following subsections are applicable:
“
factors to take into
consideration
(2)
if a person is
convicted of a designated substance offence, the court imposing sentence on the
person shall consider any relevant aggravating factors including that the person
(a)
in relation to
the commission of the offence,
(i)
carried, used or
threatened to use a weapon
…
(iii)
trafficked in a
substance included in schedule i, ii, iii, iv or v, or possessed such a
substance for the purpose of trafficking, in or near a school, on or near
school grounds or in or near any other public place usually frequented by
persons under the age of 18 years, or
…
(b)
was previously
convicted of a
designated
substance offence, as defined in subsection
2(1) of this act, or a
designated offence, as defined in
subsection 2(1) of the
cannabis act;”
the
aggravating and mitigating factors of this case

pursuant to
s.
718.2
of the
criminal code,
a sentence should be increased or reduced to
account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to
the offence or the offender. the aggravating and mitigating factors are noted
as follows:
aggravating
factors
a)
possessing
a loaded firearm in conjunction with drug trafficking is particularly
dangerous. the glock 26 gen 5 handgun was loaded and ready to discharge.
additional ammunition accessible in the form of two loaded magazines was inside
the vehicle. given the concealed manner of the loaded handgun, any police
officers or members of the public who came into contact with mr. hoggar were
unknowingly facing the prospect of imminent harm or death with little warning;
b)
the
quantity of fentanyl (141.59 g), cocaine (668.8 g) and cash ($50,836.20 cdn)
seized was significant and illustrated a sophisticated and highly lucrative
drug trafficking business. the combined street value of the drugs was $69,200
to $110,300;
c)
mr.
hoggar was motivated by personal greed at the detriment of other people (there
is no evidence he engaged in trafficking to support a drug addiction;
d)
sudbury
is one of many northern communities that has suffered amongst the highest rates
of opioid toxicity mortality rates in 2023, the same year mr. hoggar was caught
actively trafficking in fentanyl and cocaine in sudbury. his illicit activities
were motivated by financial gain and increased the risk of death and serious
bodily harm to an already vulnerable population in the northern region of the
province;

e)
he
was trafficking in a scheduled substance directly beside an elementary school
and in residential areas;
f)
mr.
hoggar is a repeat offender with a criminal record for similar offences. he
appears undeterred by legal sanctions imposed upon him for two similar offences
of drug trafficking, possessing of property obtained by crime, and obstruction
or resisting a peace officer.
mitigating
factors
a)
as a young black man, mr.
hoggar experienced significant trauma in his formative years that included
being the victim of child sexual abuse while placed in a foster home. he was
raised by his mother and stepfather and resided in subsidized housing in an
underprivileged area of toronto. he has never met his biological father. at
the age of 15, his mother sent him to ghana to shield him from the negative
influences in his surroundings. he lived there for five years and suffered
further trauma after running away and becoming homeless. he was captured by
rebels and tortured for two days;
b)
he turned to drugs
(crack-cocaine) to cope with this stress and trauma. however, he has been clean
from this addiction for at least six years. given this achievement, and the
notable gaps in this criminal record, he has demonstrated rehabilitative
potential;
c)
mr. hoggar has proven to
be employable in recent years. from 2018, he had owned and operated his own
trucking company. since the charges were laid in april 2023, he has lost all
business contracts due to the negative media attention. he is in the process of
re-establishing a similar business with his brother’s assistance;
d)
he is in a stable,
long-term relationship with his common-law spouse and they are raising a
two-year old son together. there is collateral damage suffered by his family
due to these charges that has directly impacted their economic and emotional
stability as a family;
e)
in june 2024, mr. hoggar
suffered a brain aneurysm that required surgery. evidence of his
hospitalization as previously presented by mr. bottomley in these proceedings
is acknowledged. according to mr. hoggar’s common-law spouse, this medical
condition affects mr. hoggar’s frontal lobe which controls decision-making,
impulse control and judgment;
f)
the police breached mr. hoggar’s
charter
rights under s. 10(a) and (b). notification of the discovery of the loaded,
prohibited firearm, ammunition, cash, cocaine and fentanyl and the ensuing
charges by the police was unjustifiably delayed. this notice resulted in a
delayed second opportunity to consult with his counsel of choice while in
custody.
g)
he spent 500 days on release
subject to tight bail terms that included house arrest and the requirement to
wear an ankle monitoring device (
downes
credit);
h)
he was subject to three days of
lock down at the sudbury district jail (
duncan
credit).
the
sentence range for unlawful possession of a loaded handgun

given the ease
in which a handgun can be concealed and the obvious criminal intent it serves
to achieve, its threat to public safety has been the subject of much discussion
in the appellate courts for some time. in this context, these firearms exist
explicitly for the purposes of killing or wounding other human beings. in other
words, they do not serve any legitimate hunting or target shooting purpose.

as stated by the supreme court of canada in
nur,
“outside of law
enforcement, these guns are primarily found in the hands of criminals who use
them to intimidate, wound, maim, and kill.”

in
morris,
the court of appeal emphasized the dangers loaded firearms pose to the general
public:

“gun
crimes involving the possession of loaded, concealed firearms in public places
pose a real and immediate danger to the public, especially anyone who interacts
with the gun holder. when the person with the gun is confronted by the police,
who are engaged in the lawful execution of their duties, the risk increases
dramatically. it increases yet again when the gun holder flees, and still again
when the gun holder discards the weapon in a public place. a person who carries
a concealed, loaded handgun in public undermines the community's sense of
safety and security. carrying a concealed, loaded handgun in a public place in
canada is antithetical to the canadian concept of a free and ordered society:
see nur (onca), at paras. 82, 206; r. v. felawka,
1993 canlii 36 (scc),
 4 s.c.r. 199,

s.c.j. no. 117, at pp. 214-15
s.c.r.”

as expressed by
doherty j.a., offenders who engage in truly criminal conduct or conduct that
poses
a real and immediate danger to the public
should receive
exemplary sentences that emphasize deterrence and denunciation.

given these recognized risks to public safety, the common law floor for “true
crime” possession of a loaded firearm is three years imprisonment, even for
first-time offenders.


the case law
points to sentences longer than three years imprisonment in cases where loaded
firearms are possessed while engaging in other criminal activity such as drug
trafficking. the range appears to be three to five years in these
circumstances.


it is an
undeniable fact that the 9 mm glock 26 gen 5 handgun, a loaded prohibited
firearm, and the two loaded magazines, falls squarely within the true crime end
of the spectrum for offences of this nature. possession of loaded firearms
increases the likelihood of tragedy in the form of death or serious bodily harm
to the general public. as succinctly
expressed by justice campbell in
st.
clair,
“to combat this serious societal problem, these offences must be met
with exemplary custodial sentences that proportionately reflect the sheer
gravity of the crime, and which appropriately stress the need to denounce and
deter such crimes.”


mr. hoggar
possessed these items as he briefly met with civilians on the day of his arrest
in residential areas and beside an elementary school. given the substantially
high value of the total drugs and cash within the vehicle he was operating, the
loaded handgun was an essential tool of his illicit drug trade when i consider
the extent to which the handgun and ammunition were concealed within the
vehicle, his conduct and the collective presence of fentanyl, cocaine, large
sums of cash, packaging material and three cell phones.

more
importantly, possessing a concealed, loaded handgun with ammunition of this
amount served no other purpose but to ready mr. hoggar to
intimidate, wound, maim, and kill at his will and without
warning. for example, when mr. hoggar was confronted by the arresting officers
who were engaged in the lawful execution of their duties, the real and
immediate danger to them and the public, increased dramatically. the handgun
was loaded, accessible and unsafely stored within the vehicle. the dynamic
circumstances of the arrest
presented a highly volatile situation that
elevated the ultimate threat of death to the civilians and police officers that
were within the vicinity of mr. hoggar on april 19, 2023.

clearly, in
this context, mr. hoggar’s unlawful possession of the loaded, prohibited
firearm falls within the “true crime” characterization of these offences and
the appropriate range is three to five years imprisonment.
the
range for trafficking in cocaine and fentanyl as a mid-level dealer

sentencing
ranges in the case law for particular offences are guidelines for me to
consider, rather than hard and fast rules. general ranges encourage consistency
and parity while permitting judges to exercise discretion. all the circumstances
of the offence and the offender must be considered in consideration of the
needs of the community in which the offence occurred, balanced with the
principles and objectives of sentencing.


the
characterization of mr. hoggar’s drug dealing activities is a relevant factor
to consider in determining a fit sentence. mr. bottomley submits that the
quantity of substances seized, and the monetary amount of cash present supports
a reasonable inference that mr. hoggar was functioning as a mid-level drug
dealer and is supportive of a four to seven and half year range. this does not
appear to be in dispute when i examine the federal crown’s book of authorities.

the range for
cocaine trafficking of slightly more than a pound of cocaine for an individual
without a criminal record is five to eight years penitentiary.

here, mr. hoggar was found to be in possession of 668.8 grams of cocaine,
equivalent to 1.474 pounds or 23.59 ounces. i agree with the federal crown that
given mr. hoggar’s criminal record that includes two prior convictions for
trafficking in a controlled substance eight years prior to the commission of
these offences, that a sentence closer to the eight-year end of the range would
be most appropriate.

however, this
does not account for the inclusion of the additional serious charges of
fentanyl trafficking (141.59 grams) to be sentenced concurrently to trafficking
in cocaine and possessing a loaded firearm which shall be sentenced consecutively.

as it relates
to the lead count of fentanyl trafficking, i have carefully reviewed each of
the cases provided to me by the lawyers. they have assisted me greatly in
appreciating the range of sentences for mid-level trafficking in hard drugs such
as fentanyl and cocaine. as in most sentencing decisions, i am mindful of the
distinguishing features in each of the cases highlighted by counsel. the cases
filed by the crown provide a clear picture of what the range of custody would
be for mid-level, cocaine and fentanyl dealers.

however, i note
that while the quantities of fentanyl were generally similar and the length of
custody aligned with what the crown was seeking, mitigating factors absent in
the present case were prevalent in some of those cases. factors such as lesser
quantities of cocaine and with offenders who had no prior record or suffered unique
hardship during the covid-19 pandemic. in other words, the cases filed by the
crown appear to strongly suggest that the range applicable to the facts of this
case is higher than what mr. bottomley quantitively suggests to be the case for
fentanyl trafficking.

a number of the
cases i reference below were included in mr. bottomely’s casebook and were
directly on point from a legal perspective.

however, some of those decisions included facts with diluted substances or
quantities of fentanyl significantly less than what mr. hoggar possessed or
offenders with a lower level of culpability. other cases presented with
additional mitigating features that reduced their moral culpability in the form
of personal struggles that contributed to their offending behaviour, such as an
addiction to substances. those specific mitigating facts have no application to
mr. hoggar as the record is clear that he was motivated purely by financial
profit while opportunities for
bona fide
employment in the form of his
trucking business were readily available to him.


while no two
cases are alike, there are some that are more factually similar which will focus
my ability to determine a fit sentence that is proportionate to the gravity of
these offences in conjunction with mr. hoggar’s moral culpability.

in addition to
the cases filed by counsel, i have also considered the following sentencing
decisions in determining the range of fentanyl trafficking in ontario for a
mid-level dealer such is in the eight-to-11-year range when i consider the
specific quantities of fentanyl (141.59 g) and cocaine (668.8 g) of this case:
1.
r. v.
johnson,
2025 onsc 798
–
11.5 years for possessing 448.6 grams of fentanyl and 89.7 grams of cocaine for
the purposes of trafficking. justice j.s. fregeau held that it was a
significant aggravating factor that fentanyl and cocaine were being trafficked
in northern ontario given the highly vulnerable communities in the region.
relying
on
parranto,
the court held that trafficking in fentanyl and cocaine to
vulnerable northern communities was a significant aggravating factor in
recognition of the extreme danger and lives destroyed that has contributed to
the decline of communities across northern ontario.

no weapon of any kind was involved.
2.
r. v.
owusu,
2024
onsc 671
– 9
years, but reduced to 7 on totality for possessing 127.5 grams of fentanyl with
a street value between $13,000 and $27,000. at para. 39, this was described by
mr. justice m. code as a “relatively large quantity of fentanyl” that presented
“a significant risk of death to many vulnerable addicts and drug users who were
being exploited for the sole purpose of financial gain.” code j. characterized
this accused as a mid-level drug dealer taken into consideration the quantity,
value and manner in which the fentanyl was packaged. he was convicted of
firearm related offences in the same incident. the accused was 27 years old at
sentencing but 23 at the time of the offences. he had a serious youth record for
violence and firearm related offences.
3.
r. v.
gordon-brown,
2024 onsc 1300
– 9
years for trafficking in one ounce (28.35 g) of fentanyl but reduced on
totality to 5 years after a guilty plea. he was also sentenced to 6 years for
trafficking 10.5 grams of cocaine, two firearms offences and proceeds of crime,
served concurrently. mr. gordon-brown was 26 years old at the time of the
offences and had no prior record. in citing his prior
decision in
owusu, mr.
justice m. code concluded that
“ounce and multi-ounce traffickers in
fentanyl have received deterrent and denunciatory sentences in the eight to 11
year range.” [emphasis added]
mr. hoggar,
at 141.59 grams of fentanyl (4.99 ounces), falls directly within this range.
4.
r. v.
musa,
2022
onsc 3734
– i
found this case to of great assistance in determining a proportionate sentence
due to the similarities in the amount of fentanyl seized combined with the
presence of a loaded firearm. at paras. 24 to 28, the court summarized several
ontario cases from recent years that were consistently in the 5-to-8-year range
for lower amounts of fentanyl than what mr. hoggar possessed. some of these
individuals had related criminal records for trafficking.
with no prior
record at the time of these offences, mr. musa received 8 years for possessing
130 grams of fentanyl to be served concurrently for additional offences of
possessing 59 grams of cocaine, 36 grams of crack cocaine and 39 grams of
methamphetamine. the court imposed a further 3.5 years consecutive for
possessing a prohibited firearm for a total sentence of 11.5 years, reduced to
9.75 months on totality.
5.
r. v.
schramek,
2021 onsc 436
–
7.5 years for possessing 156.7 grams of fentanyl along with smaller amounts of
cocaine and methamphetamine. the accused had no prior criminal record at the
time of the offences and struggled with an addiction to opiates. there were
significant mitigating circumstances and there was some optimism noted in the
psr regarding his prospects of rehabilitation.
6.
r. v.
aden,
2021
onsc 2370
– 7
years for possessing 113.9 grams of fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking.
the accused had a related record for trafficking as a youth and as an adult but
had expressed remorse and insight into his actions. he was a post-secondary
student with optimistic rehabilitative potential and extensive support from his
family.
unique
mitigating factors from being incarcerated during the covid-19 pandemic also
factored into justice london-weinstein’s analysis in arriving at this sentence.
it was explicitly noted at the end of that decision that this sentence was well
below the range. i note that the sentencing judge in this case did not have the
benefit of the supreme court’s
decision in
parranto.
7.
r. v.
disher,
2020 onca 710
– 8
years reduced by the court of appeal from 12 due to the sentencing judge’s
error by failing to consider mr. disher’s rehabilitative prospects. he pleaded
guilty to several drug offences due to possessing 47.5 grams of marijuana and heroin
that was mixed with cocaine, fentanyl, analogues of fentanyl and carfentanil.
he was also convicted of possessing a prohibited weapon and breaches of court
orders and had a record for related drug offences. notably, he suffered from a
prolonged addiction to drugs and demonstrated some rehabilitative potential
through programming prior to sentencing. this was another decision released
prior to
parranto.

of note, with
the exception of
johnson,
these cases did not involve trafficking of
fentanyl or cocaine in northern ontario. therefore, factors related to the
increased gravity and moral culpability of trafficking fentanyl in remote,
vulnerable northern communities was not a material aggravating factor. this is
a significant consideration that will inform my analysis in determining a fit
sentence in this case.

given the
amount of fentanyl and cocaine seized,
in combination with the amount of cash and other items, the case law filed by both
counsels does support the assertion that at the time of these offences, mr.
hoggar was operating as a mid-level dealer in sudbury.

when i include
the quantity of fentanyl, i find on the facts of this case that the range for a
mid-level dealer of fentanyl such as mr. hoggar is the eight-to-11-year range,
as
held by code j. in
owusu
and
gordon-brown.
the
exponential harm caused by fentanyl trafficking

trafficking of hard
drugs are not victimless crimes. rather, they provide potent fuel to the fan
the flames of violence, poverty, family breakdown and death amongst our most
vulnerable citizens.

but the dangers
of cocaine and other hard drugs do not come close to the degree of harm fentanyl
causes each day in our country. in recent years, fentanyl has emerged as a
potent killer of individuals from coast to coast and has exponentially harmful
impacts on the lives of so many today.

in the supreme
court of canada decision of
parranto,
justice moldaver made a point of
explicitly stating the dangers posed by large scale fentanyl trafficking:
“in
many ways, “[t]rafficking in fentanyl is almost the equivalent of putting
multiple bullets in the chambers of a revolver and playing russian roulette. it
is the most efficient killer of drug users on the market today” (r. v. frazer,
2017 abpc 116,
58 alta. l.r. (6th) 185, at para.
11
). put simply, it is a
crime that can be expected to not only destroy lives, but to undermine the very
foundations of our society.”

although
parranto
dealt with wholesale traffickers,
in
lynch,
the court of appeal asserted
that those who are not at the top of the drug dealing empire do not necessarily
benefit from a reduced level of moral blameworthiness:

“
of course, those at the top of the supply chain
deserve harsher sentences.
but the fact that the respondent was not at the
pinnacle of the drug dealing empire does not reduce the respondent's level of
moral blameworthiness or mean that his actions are not serious. the producers
of a product cannot get it into the hands of the consumer if there is no one to
sell and deliver it.” [emphasis added]

there is wisdom
to this logic when one considers the necessary role that mr. hoggar played as a
mid-level drug dealer in sudbury and the significant quantity of cocaine,
fentanyl and cash he possessed leading up to his arrest after brief meetings
with individuals in a residential area and directly beside an elementary school.

it is well
understood that the moral culpability of a drug trafficker rises with the risk
of serious harm or death they expose others to. as
expressed by the court of
appeal in
lynch,
their choices have far-reaching impacts that costs our
society dearly:

“the
problems that dangerous drugs pose for our society are well known. they involve
drug addiction, adverse health consequences and, unfortunately all too often,
death. further, drugs are often sold to already vulnerable people thereby
exacerbating their difficult circumstances. still further, there are the
indirect costs to society through increased health care expense, increased
demands on the health care system, increases in robberies or other forms of
criminal activity, an increases in violence.
simply put, the greater those
risks are when a particular drug is being trafficked, the greater the offender’s
culpability or moral blameworthiness for choosing to traffic in that drug.”
[emphasis added]
the
vulnerability of at-risk populations in northern ontario

trafficking in
fentanyl and cocaine in northern ontario has additional considerations that are
unique to our geography when i consider the prevalence of indigenous
communities, our remoteness from major urban centers and access to medical and
treatment resources. as indicated, sudbury is one of many northern communities
that has suffered amongst the highest rates of opioid toxicity mortality rates
in 2023, the same year mr. hoggar was actively trafficking in fentanyl and
cocaine locally.

in
parranto,
the supreme court of canada specifically acknowledged the gravity of
trafficking in fentanyl, particularly in conjunction with an offender’s
willingness to exploit at-risk populations and communities in the name of
profit.

that choice, that demonstrates a reckless disregard for human life, not only
increases the gravity of the offence and the offender’s moral culpability but
may also prove to be an aggravating factor on sentencing.

significantly,
the supreme court made explicit reference to giving special consideration to
the disproportionate harm caused to vulnerable northern communities, including
northern ontario:

“
while all people and places merit
protection, sentencing judges may, as they consider appropriate, give special
consideration to the disproportionate harm caused to particularly vulnerable
groups and/or vulnerable and remote locations, where escaping traffickers is
more difficult and resources for combating addiction are more sparse.
here, for example, mr. felix was trafficking fentanyl
destined for resale in the remote communities comprising the territory of
nunavut. as an outsider, he chose to traffic drugs to those vulnerable
communities for easy money. it would have been open to the courts below to
consider this as a significantly aggravating factor.
…
similarly,
in ontario, trafficking fentanyl to vulnerable northern communities has been
found to be an aggravating factor (solano‑santana, at para. 28
(canlii)).”

recently in
branco,
madame justice s. stothart highlighted the vulnerability of at-risk populations
in sudbury and neighbouring manitoulin district that have felt the impact of rising
numbers of overdose deaths in their respective northern communities where the
accused was trafficking large amounts of fentanyl.

specifically, her
honour treated this as an aggravating factor:
“there
are aggravating factors in this case. as i’ve already indicated, the accused
was involved in the trafficking or possession for the purposes of trafficking
of extremely large amount of fentanyl, he was involved in this actively in
sudbury and manitoulin which i consider to be both at risk northern populations
and communities. manitoulin is an at-risk indigenous population in northern
canada, and they are particularly in a crisis when it comes to the deaths that
are occurring on manitoulin island, and that’s not to diminish the seriousness
of the deaths that are occurring in sudbury.
in
sudbury there’s a monument by the theatre where there are a number of white
crosses where they’ve run out of room. they can’t put any more crosses there
because so many people have died. and it’s a location that many sudburians
drive by every day and it’s a reminder of the loss of all of those lives and
the impact that it would have had on their families.”

the devastation
upon the lives and families of vulnerable human beings in sudbury and other
parts of northern ontario are extensive and permanent. as evidenced in the
quantity of drugs and cash seized, the undisputable motive of financial profit
at the expense and suffering of real human lives substantially elevates the
moral blameworthiness of mr. hoggar’s conduct.

this degree of suffering
that has devastated sudbury and many northern communities calls out for a
significantly lengthy penitentiary term that is truly proportionate to the
gravity of these offences. this is particularly necessary to deter mr. hoggar
and those that may consider committing similar offences that are motivated by
greed and a desire for easy money at the expense of our most vulnerable fellow
citizens, that has the potential to cause exponentially more harm here in
northern ontario. judicial recognition of this additional layer of
vulnerability is well recognized as an aggravating factor in sentencing.


as
expressed by
justice
m.
j. moldaver at paragraph
86
in
parranto,
given the gravity of
the offence of trafficking in fentanyl for personal gain and the need to impose
severe penalties, lengthier custodial terms are warranted:

“specifically,
i wish to focus on the gravity of largescale trafficking in fentanyl for
personal gain and the need to impose severe penalties, ranging from mid‑level
double digit penitentiary terms up to and including life imprisonment, for
those who do so.
in r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9, this court held that
appellate courts can and should depart from prior sentencing precedents when
those precedents no longer reflect “society’s current understanding and
awareness of the gravity of a particular offence and blameworthiness of
particular offenders” (para. 35; see also paras. 108 and 110). in my
view, society’s understanding of the gravity of largescale fentanyl trafficking
has increased such that an upward departure is mandated.”

although this
observation was in relation to largescale fentanyl traffickers, justice
moldaver’s observations are no less in this case, with mr. hoggar operating in
sudbury as a mid-level drug dealer, given the potential to inflict death and suffering
on the vulnerable citizens of northern ontario.

the same motive for profit at the expense of vulnerable human beings exists
regardless of the precise scale of fentanyl trafficked.

there must be a
renewed recognition of the high moral blameworthiness that accurately reflects
the gravity of these offences when fentanyl traffickers choose the path to easy
money at the expense of vulnerable people in northern ontario.


as sudbury
maintains one of the highest jurisdictions for opioid overdoses in the
province, so too must there be an upward trend in the length of penitentiary
sentences to be imposed by our courts.

anything less would send the wrong message to those that contemplate the
business decision to exploit the lives of vulnerable drug addicts for easy
money.

mr. hoggar’s
choice in making the business decision to exploit the vulnerable, at-risk
population in sudbury in what is evidently a sophisticated, highly profitable
enterprise motivated by his desire for easy money is highly aggravating and
must be denounced in the strongest of terms.


he was found to
possess 141.59 grams of fentanyl and 668.8 grams of cocaine for the purposes of
trafficking. the potential to cause prolonged human suffering and death was
very real given these significant quantities of hard drugs. the total quantity
of fentanyl, cocaine and cash found deeply hidden within the nissan he was
operating was between $120,036.20 to $161,136.20.

the packaging
material, multiple cell phones and loaded firearm with a significant amount of
ammunition to cause death or bodily harm illustrates a high level of
sophistication and premeditation in launching his illicit drug enterprise in a
vulnerable, northern community. his actions, while preying on our most
vulnerable, proved to be lucrative. this level of premeditation demonstrates a
callous disregard for human life for his own financial gain. it elevates the
gravity of these trafficking offences and increases his moral culpability
significantly.

with respect to
the second brief meeting on april 19, 2023, i note that this fell on a
wednesday, and that this brief meeting in his vehicle with the young male took
place at 11: 55 a.m. in row houses directly beside felix ricard elementary
school. the likelihood of young children within the immediate vicinity was almost
certain. the fact that mr. hoggar was actively trafficking in fentanyl or
cocaine or possessed these substances for the purposes of trafficking in
residential areas including directly next to an elementary school is
statutorily aggravating pursuant to s. 10(2)(a)(iii) of the
cdsa.

additionally,
the very presence of a loaded,
prohibited handgun with a bullet in the barrel and two loaded magazines posed
an imminent threat to the safety of himself, the responding police officers,
and the general public. the potential danger posed to everyone involved including
members of the public in the location of the arrest

was elevated particularly when i consider mr. hoggar’s resistance to the arrest.
we are quite fortunate that an already volatile situation did not result in the
loss of life or serious harm when the officers were initially unaware of the
number of occupants inside the vehicle as mr. hoggar shifted about ignoring the
officer’s orders while under arrest.

undeterred by
his two prior convictions for trafficking in controlled substances, he has
preyed on the most vulnerable members of this northern community for personal
financial gain. there is a requirement to specifically deter mr. hoggar and
generally deter the public from committing similar offences.

i find this to
be significantly aggravating factor given this level of objective harm, including
the potential for future harm, on a vulnerable community in northern ontario.
it is expected that he receives a sentence that holds him accountable to
accurately reflect the wrongfulness of this behaviour.

charter
breaches
as a mitigating factor

while under
arrest for the initial trafficking offence and after mr. hoggar had exercised
his rights to counsel, mr. hoggar’s
charter
rights under s. 10(a) and
(b) were breached due to the significant delay in notifying him of the change
in his jeopardy. notification of the discovery of the loaded, prohibited
firearm, ammunition, cash, cocaine and fentanyl and the ensuing charges by the
police was unjustifiably delayed. there were corresponding delays in fulfilling
a second opportunity to receive rights to counsel and in the implementation of
this right.

no
incriminating evidence was sought or obtained by the police from mr. hoggar
during this period. in paragraphs 227 – 267 of my
reasons for judgment,
i found these breaches to be generally serious, but at the lower end of the
spectrum and the actual impact on his
charter
-protected interests to be
minimal. ultimately, the breaches had no impact on the progress of the police investigation
and did not produce any relevant evidence or advantage for the crown in their
prosecution. to this end, and in a narrower sense, the violations were not
serious.


still, there is
no question in my mind that the nature of the
charter
breaches should be
considered mitigating on sentence, but it should not be overstated.

while there is no mathematical calculation as to what this mitigation amounts
to, i have considered this as an additional mitigating factor that will be
accounted for in the total sentence.
duncan
credit

the
conditions of pretrial custody are relevant in determining a fit sentence for
an offender. the statutorily capped 1.5 to 1 "
summers
"
credit already takes into account the difficult and restrictive circumstances
that offenders often encounter during pretrial custody.


the court of
appeal
in
duncan
held that where an accused has experienced
exceptionally punitive conditions during remand which go well beyond the normal
restrictions, additional credit may be provided to reflect the accused’s
experiences as a mitigating factor.

unlike
summers
credit,
duncan
credit is not a quantification of a deduction from the otherwise
appropriate sentence. rather, it is one of the mitigating factors to be taken
into account in determining the appropriate sentence.

it
is a deduction from the appropriate sentence as determined by the trial judge.

although treated as a mitigating factor,
duncan
credit cannot justify
the imposition of a sentence which is inappropriate, having regard to all of
the relevant mitigating or aggravating factors.


a common factor
in determining whether to apply any
duncan
credit is the presence of
lockdowns. lockdowns deprive inmates of yard time, meaningful visits and
contact with their families and their lawyer. it makes each day spent within
the custodial institution that much more stressful and elevates the risk of
conflict and violence for staff and prisoners.

here,
the evidence in support of
duncan
credit is minimal.
the records filed by mr. bottomley
indicate that mr. hoggar has spent a total of three days in some form of
lockdown while at the sudbury district jail
between
his arrest on april 19, 2023, to being granted bail on june 22, 2023.

shortly
after i convicted him of these offences, he was brought back into custody at
the edmonton remand centre on november 2, 2024, where he is currently situated.
a letter from alberta public safety confirms that he has and continues to
receive 10 hours of time outside of his cell each day and has not been subject
to any lock downs while in custody at that institution.

the
crown does not dispute the accuracy of these records, nor the remedy of
additional credit sought by mr. hoggar. he
shall be entitled to some mitigation for the three days of lock down he endured
at the sudbury district jail, but the degree of mitigation will be slight.
downes
credit for house arrest on bail

should
additional credit be applied towards mr. hoggar’s sentence for being released
on tight bail terms that included house arrest? this is a highly discretionary
exercise, and the law is clear that there are no mathematical formulas in
determining whether any pre-trial credit should apply.


the
court of appeal has repeatedly stated that stringent bail terms such as house
arrest can be a mitigating factor in assessing a fit sentence.

the logic being that
strict bail terms are analogous to punishment and mirror the experience of
serving time in custody. in assessing the weight of the mitigation to be
given, the court should consider the amount of time spent on bail conditions;
the stringency of those conditions; their impact on the offender's liberty; and
the ability of the offender to carry on normal relationships, employment and
activities.

recently
in
lowe,

the court of appeal re-affirmed that
downes
credit is best conceptualized as a mitigating
factor but sentencing judges can exercise their discretion to grant numerical
credit provided that it is “not necessarily inappropriate” so long as it does
not “skew the calculation of the ultimate sentence” by giving the credit
unwarranted significance:
r. v.
joseph,
2020 onca
733,
153 o.r. (3d) 145, at paras.
107-8, 112-4;
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344, at para.
53.

for the
purposes of potential
downes
credit, the relevant time frame is june 22,
2023, to november 2, 2024, which amounts to 500 days where mr. hoggar was bound
by tight bail terms that included house arrest. mr. bottomley submits, and mr.
bradley concedes, that an appropriate amount of credit should be one third or
approximately 170 days.

clearly, the
bail terms including house arrest were stringent. mr. hoggar was also required
to wear an ankle bracelet with gsp monitoring. the only exception to house
arrest was if mr. hoggar were to be with one of his three his sureties.

while i fully
acknowledge the stringent nature of these bail terms, i do not have any
evidence that speaks to the adverse impact on mr. hoggar’s liberty including
his ability to carry on normal relationships, employment and activities.

according to
mr. hoggar, it appears that despite the stringent bail terms, he was still able
to drive to edmonton to try and sell his trucks from his business with one of
his sureties accompanying him.


for the
purposes of considering the applicability of
downes
credit and the
impact that these strict bail terms have had on mr. hoggar, i cannot ignore the
fact that he was still able to exercise the freedom to travel some distance
away from this jurisdiction and the residence he was ordered to reside in, in
accordance with these very terms of release.

nonetheless, i
am prepared to take judicial notice that for anyone to wear an ankle bracelet
while bound by house arrest and comply without any breaches for 500 days, some
mitigation is warranted. i acknowledge the significant impact these
restrictions have had on mr. hoggar’s personal liberty. in this regard, i am
exercising my discretion to grant him
downes
credit in what i perceive
to be a significantly mitigating factor in his favour.
the
impact of anti-black racism in conjunction with mr. hoggar’s background

there is no
question that criminal conduct that includes the trafficking of illicit
substances and possession of a loaded, prohibited firearm requires a
denunciatory sentence due to the gravity of these offences. the degree of moral
culpability for mr. hoggar increases with his related criminal record and his
choice to profit off the vulnerability of people addicted to these substances
in northern ontario.

however, as
noted by the court of appeal in
morris,
i take judicial notice of the existence of anti-black racism in canadian
society in conjunction with mr. hoggar’s identity as a black-canadian. although
i do not have any specific evidence of mr. hoggar’s experiences of anti-black
racism, the degree of hardship he suffered during his upbringing highlights the
need for me to be consciously aware of the over-representation of black
offenders in our prisons and the reasonable likelihood that these social
conditions contributed to his decision to commit these offences.

i remind myself
that for there to be mitigation on sentence on account of anti-black racism,
there must be some connection between the overt and systemic racism identified
and the circumstances or events that may explain his criminal conduct.


the psr
provides a glimpse of his socio-economic reality growing up in subsidized
housing in an under-privileged area of toronto without ever knowing his
biological father. he was placed in a foster home at the tender age of eight or
nine and was sexually abused. ironically, his mother’s efforts to remove him
from negative influences in his surroundings resulted in further trauma,
isolation and suffering when he was sent to live overseas in ghana, away from
his mother and siblings from the age of 15 to 20.

i acknowledge
that characteristics of his upbringing during his formative years are
strikingly similar to many black canadians involved with the criminal justice
system today. in mr. hoggar’s case, it is not difficult to understand how this
level of prolonged trauma beginning at such a young age would have limited his
opportunities to prosper and increased the likelihood that he would choose some
form of criminality as a young adult. ultimately, none of these factors excuses
his conduct or reduces the gravity of the offences but it does diminish his
level of moral blameworthiness due to his lived reality.

balancing
the impact on mr. hoggar’s family and preserving the hope of rehabilitation

i am
reminded that i must consider the impact that a sentence of incarceration will
have on mr. hoggar's family. as
instructed by c.j.o. tulloch in
r. v.
habib,
2024 onca 830
at paras.
44-45, i must give “…serious and sufficient
consideration to family separation consequences.” such consequences may “…
justify a sentence adjustment or
departure from the range even for grave
offences
that require deterrence and denunciation.”

embedded
within this consideration exists totality and the principle of proportionality.
the
total length of the custodial period imposed must still reflect the variety of
sentencing objectives, including denunciation, deterrence (specific and
general), rehabilitation, the need to separate offenders from society where
necessary, and the general imperative of promoting respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society:
criminal code,
s. 718.


i
have a duty to ensure that the
sentence
i impose does not crush any hope of rehabilitation for mr. hoggar upon his
eventual release.

i also acknowledge that
at almost 35 years of age, he is not a youthful first time offender and this is
not his first custodial sentence.

nonetheless, even though he has
served a custodial term for each of the two prior trafficking convictions on
his record, i am mindful of that this will still be his first penitentiary
sentence.

he
has a history employment with his trucking business and there are some gaps in
his record since the trafficking convictions in 2015. combined with the support
from his common-law partner, there remains some hope that mr. hoggar can be
specifically deterred and make meaningful progress towards rehabilitation. this
tempers the degree of specific deterrence warranted in the face of two prior
convictions for trafficking in a scheduled substance and a history of
obstruction and proceeds of crime offences that are similar to the current
convictions.

restraint
must be exercised as a i balance the competing purposes in determining the
shortest possible sentence that will achieve the legal objectives and
principles in
s. 718
of the
criminal code
and the jurisprudence.
the
sentence:

as
enunciated by
the supreme court in
lacasse,
“the more serious the crime
and its consequences, or the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility,
the heavier the sentence will be.”

this is a delicate exercise, and i must be mindful that a sentence that is too
lenient or too harsh may undermine the public’s confidence in the
administration of justice.


i
have carefully considered the entire record before me and the submissions of counsel.
i acknowledge the totality of mitigating factors in favor of mr. hoggar
particularly due to the traumatic experiences he endured throughout his
formative years that included abuse suffered in a foster home and as a youth in
ghana. i have also considered the impact that a lengthy sentence will have on
mr. hoggar’s family and the likelihood that his personal circumstances are in
some material way, a product of anti-black racism in canadian society when i
consider his personal circumstances that resulted in his own victimization.
this social context mitigates his moral blameworthiness but does not reduce the
gravity of these offences.

additionally,
i am also mindful of the
charter
breaches under sections 10(a) and (b),
albeit of minimal impact on mr. hoggar and the investigation, prosecution and
adjudication as a whole.

i
have considered the mitigating aspect of mr. hoggar’s prior medical diagnosis
of a brain aneurysm suffered in june 2024 that has been asserted without
objection from the crown. however, there is no evidence presented to me that
illustrates a need to accommodate his condition in the form of a doctor’s
opinion, commentary from a correctional institution or update regarding the
current status of his recovery.

to
the extend that i am being asked to find that his ability to serve a jail term
would be more difficult than in the normal course, respectfully, the evidence
is thin. throughout his trial in july 2024, a month after this medical episode
and surgery, and during each of the court appearances for sentencing this year,
i did not observe any discernable impact on mr. hoggar’s ability to function
day to day. in short, i do not have an evidentiary basis to make such a
finding.

everyday,
fentanyl consumption claims the lives of canadians. it’s potency and ability to
kill is unlike any other type of drug our country has previously experienced.
it continues to be a scourge on our communities and exponentially destroy the
lives of our citizens and the communities we live in. many addicts of fentanyl are
among the most vulnerable in our neighbourhoods and are prone to poverty,
abuse, addiction, and an untimely death. mr. hoggar’s decision to exploit the
lives of vulnerable people for easy money is significantly aggravating and must
be sufficiently denounced to more accurately reflect northern ontario’s current
understanding and awareness of the gravity of the offences of trafficking in
fentanyl and other hard drugs. i remind myself that his motive was in no way
related to a personal addiction to substances.

because this was a conscious choice he made that was based entirely on financial
gain, it elevates his moral blameworthiness.

the
range for trafficking in fentanyl of an
ounce
and multi-ounce quantities is in the eight-to-11-year range in ontario.

mr. hoggar was
trafficking in 4.994 ounces (141.59 g) of fentanyl and 23.59 ounces of cocaine
(668.8 g). but ranges are not set in stone, and i am free to depart from them
in the appropriate case, if there is good reason to do so. having considered
the individual aggravating and mitigating factors, this is not such a case. the
sentence i am imposing for trafficking in fentanyl is within the range, but at
the lowest end of this range for fentanyl trafficking of an ounce and
multi-ounce quantities, because of
the mitigating factors in mr. hoggar’s circumstances. the sentence shall be 8
years in a federal penitentiary for possessing fentanyl for the purposes of
trafficking.

the appropriate
range for possession of a loaded, prohibited firearm without authorization is
three to five years imprisonment. mr. ansell, for the provincial crown,
emphasizes that the 9mm glock 26 gen 5 handgun possessed was fully loaded and
accompanied with two loaded magazines. the ease in which this firearm could
inflict death and bodily harm was high. accordingly, i am required to impose a
denunciatory sentence that communicates to mr. hoggar and the public that
choosing to arm oneself with such a dangerous weapon will be met with many
years in a federal penitentiary. the sentence shall be 4 years consecutive.

even
after i give strong consideration to the fact that mr. hoggar will be serving
his first penitentiary term, and in light of the principles of restraint and
rehabilitation and the totality of the mitigating factors in his favour, this
is the lowest sentence that i can justify when i carefully apply the principle
of proportionality to the gravity of these offences committed upon a vulnerable
community in northern ontario, the risk of death or bodily harm and the current
range of sentences for trafficking in fentanyl in conjunction with the
possession of a loaded firearm.

upon
application of the totality principle, the 12-year sentence shall be reduced by
1 year for each of the lead counts for a total sentence of 10 years.

downes
credit for strict bail
terms on house arrest including an ankle-bracelet shall be 170 days.

duncan
credit to
account for three days of lockdowns at the sudbury district jail has been
incorporated into this total sentence as a mitigating factor. the total
summers
credit shall be 486 days enhanced at the standard 1.5 days for each of the 324
actual days spent in presentence custody.


10
years is equivalent to 3650 days. with a total credit of 656 days, this leaves 2994
days remaining as of today (approx. 8.2 years).
conclusion:

the sentence
shall be 8 years custody for possession of fentanyl for the purposes of
trafficking and 4 years consecutive for unlawful possession of a loaded,
prohibited firearm for a total sentence of 12 years custody, reduced to 10
years upon application of the totality principle.

all other
counts shall either be stayed or served concurrently:
count
6 – s. 5(2) of the cdsa, possession of fentanyl for the purposes of trafficking
–
8 years
(reduced to 7 years on
totality);
count
7 – s. 5(2) of the cdsa, possession of cocaine for the purposes of trafficking
–
5 years,
concurrent;
count
5 -
s. 95(1)
of the
criminal code,
unlawful possession of a loaded
prohibited firearm –
4
years, consecutive (reduced to 3 years on totality);
count
2 - possession of a firearm knowing its possession was unauthorized,
s. 92(1)
of the
criminal code
–
stayed;
count
4 - being an occupant in a vehicle knowing there was a firearm (9mm glock 26
gen 5 handgun),
s. 94
of the
criminal code
–
stayed;
count
1 -
s. 129
(a) of the
criminal code, resisting arrest –
30 days, concurrent;
count
10 - possession of property obtained by crime (canadian currency of a value
exceeding $5000) knowing that all or part of the property was obtained by an
offence punishable by indictment,
s. 354(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
–
12 months, concurrent.
ancillary
orders

there will be a
weapons prohibition pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal code
for
life and a forfeiture order pursuant to s. 16(1)(b) of the
cdsa.

i am also
ordering that a sample of blood be taken for inclusion on the national dna
databank, pursuant to
section 487.051(1)
of the
criminal code.

given the length
of time mr. hoggar will be in custody, the victim fine surcharges would cause
him undue hardship and shall be waived.

i wish to thank
the lawyers for their professional advocacy in this hearing.
released: 
july 18, 2025
justice leonard kim

the facts in support of the convictions are reported at
r. v.
hoggar,
2024, oncj 546.

r. v. kienapple
(1975),
1974 canlii 14 (scc),
15 c.c.c. (2d) 524
(s.c.c.).

r. v. musa,
2022 onsc 3734
at para.
41;
r. v. graham,
2018 onsc 6817
at para.
43;
r. v. crevier,
2013 onsc 2630, aff’d
2015
onca 619, at paras.
128-129;
r. v. ansah,
2021 onsc 6339, at para.
58.

see
“legislative framework for controlled substances”,
canada gazette, part 1, volume
158, number 22: controlled substances regulations.

r. v. nur,
2013 onca 677
at para.
55.

r. v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26
at paras.
94, 95, 97,
98.

i agree with mr. bottomley that mr. hoggar is entitled to the
presumption of innocence. despite the surety revocation and the fact that he
currently finds himself in custody out of province on unrelated matters, i make
no adverse inference from this.

during the trial, the federal crown invited me to enter a verdict
of not guilty on count 3, possession of prohibited ammunition, to wit, two
loaded magazines containing ammunition without a license contrary to
s. 92(2)
of the
criminal code.
this was due to a technical issue with the wording
of this count. while i am conscious of this legal outcome, it is factually
admitted that the police seized two loaded magazines one of which included an
extended magazine that is a prohibited device.

r. v. morris,
2023 onca 816
at para.
36.

see
s. 718.1 and 718.2 of the
criminal
code;
r. v. omoragbon,
2020 onca 336
at para.
28.

r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para.
31, 32.

r. v. cox,
2011 onca 58;
r. c. m. (l.),
2008 scc 31 (canlii), 2 s.c.r.
163.

r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
at para.
13.

r. v. m.
(c.a.),
1996 canlii 230 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 500, at para.
42.

in
r. v. branco,
unreported
reasons
on sentencing, scj sudbury, january 10, 2025, madame justice s. stothart
made explicit reference to the at-risk populations of sudbury and manitoulin
districts as being particularly vulnerable northern communities when it comes
to trafficking in fentanyl in the context of a guilty plea for an offender with
no criminal record. specifically, she cited the high number of overdose deaths
in these northern communities and treated this as an aggravating factor in
accepting a joint submission of 12 years penitentiary on similar charges,
albeit with a significantly higher quantity of fentanyl (in excess of 500
grams).

the inherent danger and risk of death posed by the mere presence of
a restricted or prohibited firearm has been emphasized by the supreme court in
r.
v. nur,
2015 scc 15
at para.
136.

r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
para.
68

r. v. nur,
2013 onca 677
at paras.
51, 206.

r. v. nur,
2015 scc 15, affirming
r. v. nur,
2013
onca 677.

r. v. marong,
2020 onca 598.

r. v. st. clair,
2018 onsc 7028
at para.
47, cited in
r.
v. musa,
2022 onsc 3734 (canlii), 2022 onsc3734 at para.
30.

r. v. nasogaluak,
2010 scc 6
at para.
44.

r. v. bryan,
2011 onca 273
at para.
1.

see for example,
r. v. williams,
2023
onsc 6273
at paras.
36, 39, where the cases referenced by mr. bottomley in his
oral submissions include some of the cases that i explicitly reference in my
reasons.

see mr. hoggar’s psr at page 4, where he confirms that he has been
clean from a past drug addiction to crack-cocaine for six years, currently reports
no issues with alcohol and has owned his own trucking business since 2018. although
his common-law spouse indicates they lost their trucking business and their two
residences due to negative media attention from these charges, this level of
financial and business prosperity suggests that mr. hoggar was not suffering
from a desperate set of circumstances related to an addiction to substances
while trafficking in fentanyl and cocaine. on this point, mr. hoggar’s level of
moral blameworthiness is substantially distinguishable from jurisprudence
involving offenders addicted to drugs.

r. v. johnson,
2025 onsc 798
at paras.
50-53.

r. v. lynch,
2022 onca 109
at para.
15.

lynch,
at para.
17.

parranto,
at para.
70.

parranto,
at para.
71.

this was a guilty plea in which madame justice
s. stothart accepted a joint submission for 12 years penitentiary on charges of
trafficking in fentanyl, cocaine and firearm charges, albeit with a
significantly higher quantity of fentanyl (total in excess of 500 grams). mr. branco had no criminal record and the court expressed that
significant credit was awarded due to the guilty plea:
r. v. branco,
reasons on sentencing,
scj sudbury, january 10, 2025, pg. 32, 39, 40, 41: unreported, cr1324-23, cr1466-24, cr1324-23, cr-1324-23.

see
r. v. christiansen,
2016 onsc 3820
at para.
29;
r. v.
johnson,
2025 onsc 798
at paras.
24, 25, 50-53;
r. v. parranto,
2021
scc 46
at paras.
70, 71;
r. v. lynch,
2022 onca 109
at para.
17;
r.
v. puentes-reed,
2023 onsc 2555
at para.
16.

parranto,
at para.
86.

parranto,
at paras.
70, 71.

parranto,
at para.
86.

the opioid toxicity mortality rate
in sudbury is among the highest in ontario.
in
r. v. johnson,
2025 onsc
798
at para.
25, sudbury is noted as the third highest in ontario by reference
to 2023 statistics from the northwestern health unit.

parranto,
at para.
71

in the back laneway of the residence to 299 elm street, sudbury.

parranto,
at para.
71.

r. v. collins,
2023 onsc 5768
at para.
70.

collins,
at para.
69.

r. v.
summers,
2014
scc 26
at paras.
28-29.

r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754
at para.
50.

r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344
at para.
52.

marshall,
at para.
51.

marshall,
at para.
52.

r. v. dodman,
2021 onca 543
at para.
10.

r. v. joseph,
2020 onca 733
at para.
108;
r. v.
downes,
(2006),
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca),
205
c.c.c. (3d) 488
(ont. c.a.), at paras.
33-37.

r. v. lowe,
2025 onca 475
at para.
17.

this appears to be a
bona fide
business purpose. i make no
adverse inference of the fact that he now finds himself in custody in edmonton.

r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
at para.
1;
r. v. morris,
2023 onca 816.

r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680
at para.
97.

r. v. charley,
2025
onsc 2490
at paras.
30-31;
r. v. l.c.,
2022 onca 863
at
para.
37.

r. v. johnson,
2012 onca 339
at para.
18.

johnson,
at para. 16.

r. v. borde,
2003 canlii 4187 (on ca), o.j. no. 354 (ont. c.a.).

r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
at para.
12.

lacasse,
at para.
12.

courts have considered this
distinction on motive in weighing the moral blameworthiness of an offender for engaging
in trafficking offences. see in this regard:
r. v. draper
(2010),
253 c.c.c. (3d)
351,
 8 w.w.r. 609,
478 w.a.c. 267,
251 man. r. (2d) 267,
87 w.c.b. (2d)
448,
 m.j. no. 94,
2010 mbca 35,
2010 carswellman 98
(man. c.a.), at para.
24;
r. v. mcculloch
(2011),
94
w.c.b. (2d) 339,
 a.j. no. 448,
2011 abca 124,
2011 carswellalta 666
(c.a.).

r. v. gordon-brown,
2024 onsc 1300.

as submitted by mr. bottomley, one third of 500 days is to be
allotted as
downes
credit, with no objection from the crown. this
amounts to 170 days.

presentence credit of 324 days enhanced with the standard 1.5
equals 486 days
summers
credit up to july 18/25.