source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj114/2025oncj114.html

ontario court of
 justice
citation:
r. v. clarke, 2025 oncj
114
date: 2025·02·27
newmarket
between:
his
 majesty the king
—
 and —
shuntwon
clarke
sentencing
evidence and
submissions: february 27, 2025
delivered: february
27, 2025.
ms. roxana jahani-geran..................................................................... 
counsel for the crown
mr. stefan rinas............................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
kenkel
j.:
introduction

mr. clarke pleaded
guilty to five offences on four informations:
•
9180 – assault 266 on m.c.
•
7426 – utter death
threat 264.1 m.c.
•
3736 – assault with a
weapon s 267(a)
•
5468 – [indictment]
material benefit sexual services 286.2(1), assault 266

the complainant
worked in the sex trade prior to meeting mr. clarke. they became involved in a
romantic relationship, and she let him live in her condo apartment for free.
unfortunately, the short relationship was one of violence and exploitation.

the first assault
was on january 29, 2024, at a hotel where mr. clarke chased the complainant
from a room, grabbed her by the hair and pushed her into a glass wall. he
threatened to kill her grandfather.

less than a month
later on february 24, 2024, he threatened to kill the complainant because $2000
that she had made was stolen from her.

on april 20, 2024,
there was an argument in which mr. clarke slapped the complainant across the
face. he threw a glass jar with a candle in it at her and then threw chairs at
her. she avoided being hit. a warrant was issued for his arrest.

that warrant was
executed after police responded to yet another violent incident on june 9,
2024. mr. clarke insulted the complainant because she had not taken any
“clients” for a month due to her mental health. he pushed her into a wall and
slapped her face. he walked away then returned and slapped her face again. he
threw her cellphone across the room causing the screen to shatter. he smashed
multiple items of hers in the bathroom. he threatened to burn the items. she
left the condo, and he sent her text messages threatening to throw her cat off
the balcony if she didn’t return within minutes. mr. clarke had taken $3000
that she made that evening. when mr. clarke was arrested, her money was found on
his person.

mr. clarke has an
extensive adult criminal record dating back to 2013. the record includes
several convictions for violent offences – assault 2013, assault causing
bodily harm 2015, robbery 2020, assault 2021.

the crown submits
that a global custodial sentence of 24 months less credit for pre-trial custody
is required to meet the sentencing principles engaged in this case. the defence
submits that the 264 days served is sufficient punishment. both parties agree
that a period of probation supervision following release is required despite
mr. clarke’s history of non-compliance with such orders.
aggravating
factors

several factors
aggravate sentence:
•
the offences were
committed against a person who was vulnerable due to mental health circumstances.
•
the offences of
violence were related to the exploitation of the complainant.
•
the offences involved
intimate partner violence.
•
the fact of repeated
offences within a short period.
•
the impact of the
offences on the victim as described in the pre-sentence report (psr – ex.2).
•
mr. clarke’s past
record for violent offences (ex.3) including prior domestic violence in
relation to other victims.
•
mr. clarke was on
probation at the time of the offences.
mitigating
factors

there are four important
mitigating factors:
•
mr. clarke’s guilty
plea prior to any trial date being set and his statements of remorse in the
psr, in his apology letter and at the time of sentence.
•
his pre-trial custody
of 264 days (13 months 1 day).
•
the circumstances of
his incarceration at central east correctional centre (ex.4).
•
the very difficult
circumstances of his childhood as set out in the psr.
analysis

the crown’s
position was 16 months on a joint submission but is now 24 months on open
submissions. in my view that initial position was a generous one, at the lower
end of the range for this offender and these offences. i agree with the crown
that a significant custodial sentence must result, and that mr. clarke is not
at time served.

i agree with the
defence that the conditions of incarceration at the central east correctional
centre are relevant to sentence. the courts in newmarket are well aware of the
regular triple bunking of inmates and lockdown periods due to staffing and
facility issues. the central east record specific to mr. clarke marked as
exhibit 4 confirms that he too experienced those conditions.

not every goal of
sentencing is met by a jail sentence. all of the evidence shows that whenever
mr. clarke is released there’s a high risk he will re-offend.

prior attempts to
mitigate that risk through probation conditions have failed. while incarcerated
in 2023 for other offences, mr. clarke completed several courses in healthy
relationships, managing stress, problem solving. none of that prevented these
offences which started months after his release.

it’s not time yet
to give up on mr. clarke. he mentioned in the psr how his father changed in
later years and is a positive role model. mr. clarke is himself the father of a
12-year-old daughter. he thinks of their relationship as close, but over those
12 years he’s spent most of that time in jail. he does have that special reason
to make genuine changes in his life, but so far that hasn’t been important
enough to cause him to try. he hasn’t worked with probation officers and others
trying to help him build a more stable life. he said in his apology letter that
at 30 he’s ready for a fresh start. i hope he means that.

the pre-sentence
report identified several areas of counselling that would help mr. clarke start
down a different path. mr. clarke will be ordered to engage in that counselling
and work with the probation officer to create a stable life that doesn’t
involve the exploitation of others. there will also be terms to protect the
victim in this case and protect the community.

mr. clarke has
served 264 days in pre-trial custody. statutory credit (264 x 1.5 = 396)
results in pre-trial custody considered as 396 days or 13 months and 1 day on
each count.

i agree with both
counsel that in determining a fit sentence, the difficult circumstances of
incarceration over the past 13 months are an important mitigating factor.
sentence

mr. clarke will
serve 3 months further on each count concurrent for a further global sentence
of 3 months.

that sentence will be
followed by a period of probation for three years on the following conditions:
•
keep the peace and be
of good behaviour.
•
report by phone to
probation within 48 hours of your release and thereafter as directed by the
probation officer.
•
reside at an address
approved of by your probation officer
•
attend and participate
in any assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed by
probation and sign any releases required for them to monitor your compliance
with this condition.
•
do not possess or carry
any weapons as defined by the
criminal code.
•
have no contact
directly or indirectly including via social media with (the complainant).
•
do not attend within
100 metres of any known place of residence or employment of (the complainant).

the crown proceeded
by indictment on the s 286.2(1) material benefits count. that is an indictable
offence for which a person may be incarcerated for 10 years. violence was used
in the commission of that offence and that violence was directed at mr. clarke’s
intimate partner. the mandatory firearms and other weapons prohibition in s 109
applies. he’s been the subject of at least 4 prior s 109 orders. i find it
necessary to prohibit mr. clarke from possessing any firearms or other weapons
set out in s 109 for life.

assault with a
weapon s 267 is a primary compulsory designated offence for the purpose of dna
registration. the s 286.2(1) count is a primary presumptive offence. assault s
266 is a secondary offence regardless of the election as is the s 264.1
uttering threats count. a dna order is plainly required on all of these counts.
delivered: february
27, 2025.
justice joseph
f. kenkel