source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj286/2025oncj286.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. dashner, 2025 oncj 286
date: 
2025 05 27
court
file no.: sudbury 4011-998-23-40103002-02
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ransom dashner
before
justice leonard kim
heard
on april 24, 2025
reasons
for sentencing released on may 27, 2025
ms. a. jay............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
mr. l. walker................................................ 
counsel for the accused ransom dashner
l. kim j.:
overview

on june 14, 2024, mr. dashner pleaded guilty
before justice louise serre to the offences of assault with a weapon and breach
of probation by failing to keep the peace and be of good behaviour, as required
under a valid probation order.

upon entering the guilty pleas, a pre-sentence
report (“psr”) was ordered by her honour and the sentencing was adjourned
pending the completion of that report. this was completed by september 2024.
however, in october 2024, a gladue report was formally requested from
aboriginal legal services, which resulted in the completion of such a report in
march of 2025.

the matter was back before me on april 24, 2025.
the prior guilty pleas before her honour were struck and re-entered before me.
facts were produced that included video footage of the incident that resulted
in these charges. after entering convictions to both counts, sentencing
commenced before me on the same date.

having considered the facts of this case, the
totality of the evidence and the principles of sentencing, i am of the view
that a fit sentence for this offender in these circumstances is one of 12
months imprisonment to be served in the community, considering any applicable
credit, and appropriate ancillary orders.
the circumstances of the offences

on september 12, 2023, at approximately 10:00 p.m., police were called
to downtown sudbury in response to a complaint that 13 people were fighting and
one of those individuals was seen holding a knife. by the time police arrived a
few minutes later, all parties had dispersed. they spoke to the complainant,
logan bass, an employee at vianet, who provided police with a surveillance
video that was more than two minutes in length.

that video footage showed a large group of male individuals in a parking
lot on larch street fighting amongst themselves. mr. dashner could be seen
removing what appeared to be a black handgun from his waistband and pointing it
at another male individual. he was observed to swing the weapon twice towards
this male person attempting to strike him with it. fortunately, the male person
was able to avoid these attempts in a defensive gesture that prevented physical
contact from being made. mr. walker concedes that his actions nonetheless still
meet the legal definition of an assault pursuant to
s. 265(1)
(b) of the
criminal
code.

mr. dashner is seen on the video to hand the weapon to matthew berger,
the co-accused on this information. mr. berger is observed to receive the
weapon and conceal it in his front waistband and distance himself from the
fighting parties. moments later, he is seen to “rack the slide” on the handgun
before concealing it back in his pants.

video footage from sudbury transit and tom davies square was taken close
in proximity to this group altercation and confirmed the identities of mr.
dashner and mr. berger. at the time of this incident, mr. dashner was bound by
a valid probation order i issued to him on april 13, 2023, that included a
condition to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. both individuals were
arrested the following day. during the search incident to arrest, a black
pellet handgun was seized from mr. berger’s backpack. the weapon seized is
believed to be the weapon seen on the video footage of the altercation.

a firearms analysis was completed by the greater sudbury police service
on february 20, 2024. the bb gun (beretta apx c0-2 powered) was not deemed to
be a “firearm” due to its low velocity after being test-fired. however, the
weapon still had the ability to cause bodily harm.
the circumstances of the offender, mr. dashner

mr.
dashner is 23 years old and is a registered member of the walpole island first
nation, located in southwestern ontario. as provided in the gladue report, he
identifies as ojibway. his grandmother and great grandmother attended
residential schools and his biological mother and uncle attended walpole island
day school.

mr.
dashner was apprehended by child protection authorities at the young age of 18
months as his parents struggled with drug and alcohol abuse. his parents passed
away when he was 9 years old. losing both parents at that young age had a
traumatic impact on him. while in care, he was diagnosed with attention deficit
disorder (“adhd”) and oppositional defiant disorder (“odd”). he was the only
child amongst his siblings not diagnosed with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
(“fasd”).

he,
along with his siblings and a cousin were all raised in a non-indigenous foster
home by lorna macdonald and her husband. the foster parents made a concerted
effort to maintain the children’s connection with their indigenous culture and
family roots that included the ongoing love and support provided by his
paternal aunt. he remained in care until the age of 15.

during
his teen years, mr. dashner began to show signs of alcohol abuse and to a
lesser extent, drug use. according to his foster sister, shannon macdonald, mr.
dashner has no memory of his parents, and this lack of familial connection has
caused him to struggle with his identity. he developed anger issues at the same
time his alcohol abuse worsened as he struggled with homelessness for several
years after the age of 15. the profound effects of alcohol abuse on mr.
dashner’s general disposition were concisely stated by ms. macdonald. according
to her, when he was not drinking, she described him as a “completely different
person.”

he
has a history of taking programming for at-risk indigenous teens for alcohol
abuse. however, largely due to the passing of his foster father in 2023, he was
unable to achieve a level of sobriety that would permit him to lead a
pro-social life. he slipped back into the “wrong crowd” and found himself to be
drinking excessively again.

however,
to mr. dashner’s credit, he was unsatisfied with the repetitive cycle of
addiction that resulted in him being brought before the criminal justice system
in recent years. as evidenced in the exhibits filed at the sentencing hearing,
mr. dashner has completed a workbook on “understanding the addiction cycle,”
with st. albert’s learning centre in november 2023 and a 1-day substance abuse
education and awareness program offered by the john howard society, prior to
the commission of the current offences.

more
recently, mr. dashner completed a 45-day residential treatment program in
cobourg, ontario, in january 2024, and has been sober since then. his foster
sister described him to be a different person. this treatment program was
funded by kina gbezhgomi child and family services, an indigenous-based child
protection agency. the existence of such funding provides some evidence of mr.
dashner’s historical connection to his traumatic experiences as an indigenous
child in care for almost the entirety of his developmental years. it also
recognizes the connection between the trauma he suffered as a child, and the
support he needs today as a young adult to heal from it.

today,
mr. dashner desires to reconnect with his indigenous cultural roots and
community by moving back to his first nation and building a life there. he has
achieved sobriety now for approximately 16 months and appears motivated to stay
sober.

he
was in a long-term relationship with the same woman and developed meaningful
relationships with her children. although that relationship is no more, he
continues to take on a role as a father-figure for these children.

mr.
dashner left high school in grade 11 but later completed his high school
diploma in an alternative program in sudbury. he aspires to find a vocation that
will permit him to use “hands-on” skills he continues to develop. for example,
after a year’s worth of experience working for a local plumbing and renovations
company, he is actively seeking training and employment in the mining industry
with the financial support of the native friendship centre and kina gbezhgomi
child and family services.

he
continues to benefit from the support of his foster family and has secured
housing with their support.
the position of the parties

on
behalf of the crown, ms. jay acknowledges that mr. ransom should be given
credit for the pre-trial custody he has served and recognizes the progress he
has made. this progress permits me to find that the safety of the community
would not be at risk if i were to impose a conditional sentence order. however,
the essence of her position is that further imprisonment should follow in order
to adequately account for the principles of deterrence and denunciation. she
submits that a sentence of 18 months imprisonment to be served in the community
through a conditional sentence order is appropriate to address the seriousness
of this violent offence while he was on probation and a prohibition for similar
offences.

for
the accused, mr. walker argues that a suspended sentence and 12 months probation
with ancillary orders would amount to a fit sentence due to the reduced moral
culpability of mr. dashner. he reminds me of the principles in the leading case
of
r. v. gladue,

and affirmed in
r. v. ipeelee,

that require me to consider the unique historical injustices suffered by
indigenous people and the systemic impact of residential schools and
intergenerational trauma that have contributed to mr. dashner’s offending
today.

he
emphasizes the strong evidence of his rehabilitative efforts to date and
suggests that no further custody is needed in consideration of the 64 actual
days in jail he has already served, that amounts to a total pre-sentence
custody of 96 days. additionally, he argues that proof of mr. dashner’s
rehabilitation speaks for itself when one considers the evidence of residential
treatment and a lack of further offences upon being released on very tight bail
terms that included house arrest. on this latter point, he submits that mr.
dashner should be given downes credit to acknowledge the hardship he suffered
while he was bound by terms of house arrest for at least nine months.
relevant law

the
fundamental purpose of sentencing in
s. 718
of the
criminal code
is to
protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives,
respect for the law and maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe society by
imposing just sanctions that include one or more of several objectives,
including deterrence, denunciation, separation from society, rehabilitation of
the offender and to promote a sense of responsibility in that offender.

the
fundamental principle of sentencing is proportionality. a sentence imposed must
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender in consideration of the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances of this case in conjunction with the principles of totality,
restraint and parity:
criminal code, s. 718.1.

the
principle of rehabilitation is particularly important because i am sentencing a
young indigenous man who has experienced firsthand, the historical injustices
suffered by indigenous people in our country.

all
other sanctions other than incarceration must be considered with particular
attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders, as mandated in
s.
718.2
(e) of the
criminal code.
as instructed by the supreme court in
gladue,
this section
is remedial in nature. its purpose is to
ameliorate the serious problem of overrepresentation of aboriginal people in
prisons, and to encourage sentencing judges to have recourse to a restorative
approach to sentencing. there is a judicial duty to give the provision’s
remedial purpose real force.

aggravating factors

pursuant
to
s. 718.2
of the
criminal code,
a sentence should be increased or
reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances
relating to the offence or the offender.

here,
the aggravating factors are as follows:
i)
the bb gun, or imitation firearm, was capable of discharging projectiles
that could cause serious bodily harm;
ii)
it was handled in an aggressive and threatening manner that was
purported to be ready to discharge;
iii)
given the time of night, the concealed manner in which mr. dashner
possessed the weapon, and the similarity to an actual firearm, any members of
the public who came into contact with him would have perceived to be at risk of
imminent harm or death;
iv)
due to the similarity to an actual firearm, the risk of a police officer
perceiving it as such and reacting with lethal force was real;
v)
mr. dashner reported a high-level of intoxication while handling such a
weapon elevated the risk of serious bodily harm for everyone involved,
including the other people present for this confrontation but also innocent
bystanders reasonably expected to be within the immediate vicinity in sudbury’s
downtown core;
vi)
he was bound by a valid conditional sentence order for a violent offence
at the time of the current offences. however, i am mindful that this order had
nearly expired;
vii)
he has a recent and relevant criminal record for serious violence
between 2019 to 2023 and was on probation for assault that required him to keep
the peace and be of good behaviour at the time of these offences.
mitigating factors

the mitigating factors are as follows:
i)
mr. dashner has pleaded guilty and given up his
right to a trial. in doing so, he has demonstrated a willingness to take
responsibility for his actions. he is genuinely remorseful for his conduct;
ii)
his personal circumstances provide a clear connection
with historical injustices suffered by indigenous people in canada. as
documented in the gladue report, his relatives attended residential schools and
both of his parents struggled with addictions to substances and passed away
when he was 9 years old. he was in the care of child protection authorities
from the tender age of 18 months through to the age of 15 and was raised in
foster care by a non-indigenous family. while they were a strong source of
support, he has lost a sense of his own identity which has translated to an
ongoing source of emptiness in his life. he has struggled for most of his life
with this trauma, his lost indigenous identity and the corresponding anger and
addiction to alcohol and drugs. these experiences, as provided in the psr and
gladue report, highlight the legacy of residential schools and
intergenerational trauma: factors that are well beyond the control of mr.
dashner. this dramatically lowers his level of moral blameworthiness and
requires me to understand his criminality at a level that goes beyond mere
books and legislation;
iii)
through his foster sister and his former partner
and their children, he has the benefit of family support. this lowers his risk
to re-offend in a violent way;
iv)
mr. dashner is highly motivated to seek new
training in skills to become employed in the mining industry. he is eager to
make a living for himself and his loved ones;
v)
he has achieved sobriety after voluntarily
completing a 45-day residential treatment program in january 2024, among other
rehabilitative programming;
vi)
he was on house arrest for approximately 9
months and has been compliant with the law since the fall of 2023 when those
terms came into force.
downes
credit for house arrest on bail

the lawyers disagree as to whether mr. dashner
should be given any credit towards his sentence for being released on tight
bail terms in the community prior to sentencing. this is a highly discretionary
exercise, and the law is clear that there are no mathematical formulas in
determining whether any pre-trial credit should apply.

the court of appeal has
repeatedly stated that stringent bail terms such as house arrest can be a
mitigating factor in assessing a fit sentence.

the logic being that strict bail terms are analogous to punishment and mirror
the experience of serving time in custody.

in assessing the weight of the mitigation to be
given, the court should consider the amount of time spent on bail conditions;
the stringency of those conditions; their impact on the offender's liberty; and
the ability of the offender to carry on normal relationships, employment and
activity.

mr. dashner submits that the prolonged length of
these proceedings while he was on tight bail conditions were akin to
punishment. specifically, the house arrest portion of his bail was so
restrictive because it required his surety to be with him at each moment he was
outside his residence. this proved to be quite onerous and prevented him from
applying for employment due to the unavailability of his surety during business
hours.

additionally, i am told by mr. walker that being
confined to his home caused him to lose a significant amount of weight.
furthermore, his efforts at rehabilitation were somewhat frustrated when he was
required to leave the aftercare program at the cobourg rehabilitation centre
because an individual he was not permitted to associate with was a participant.
these restrictions appear to have had an adverse impact on his mental health,
as noted in the pre-sentence report. mr. dashner submits that this experience
should entitle him to downes credit for a reduction in his sentence.

the crown does not necessarily dispute these
facts but is opposed to the legal position of granting any credit for being on
house arrest. ms. jay submits that mr. dashner was not forced to wait several
months prior to seeking the crown’s consent to apply for a variance, or
relaxation of the house arrest terms. this was a choice he consciously made,
and he should not be permitted to benefit from this at the sentencing stage.

although i don’t have an affidavit with medical
documentation to substantiate these claims, those facts are not in dispute, and
i accept that mr. dashner’s overall physical and mental health suffered while
he was on house arrest for approximately nine months. however, there is an
intervening fact that should not be glossed over in this analysis.

as far as i can discern, the purpose of the
tight bail conditions were not to cause undue hardship upon mr. dashner.
rather, tight conditions such as house arrest were a necessary alternative to
remaining in jail to balance the risks of re-offending while mr. dashner’s case
moved through the justice system, and while the court waited for the completion
of the psr and for him to co-operate with the gladue writer to promote
completion of that report. i remind myself that both reports were intended to
assist the court in deciding a fit sentence and have proven to be effective in
my ability to do so.

the unavailability of his own surety, one that
he selected and asked the court to endorse, was not the responsibility of the
court or the crown. during the term of house arrest, there existed an option to
come back to court to replace that surety, if his unavailability during
business hours unduly restricted mr. dashner’s freedom. no such efforts were
made, but that does not mean that the adverse impact of being on house arrest
should be attributed to the restrictive nature of the bail terms themselves.
quite simply, they were not.

the exceptions to house arrest were sufficient
to increase mr. dashner’s freedom while on bail. unfortunately, the surety he
had selected did not provide him with adequate flexibility to the degree he so
desired. that is not the responsibility of the court or the crown and it should
not entitle him to additional credit towards his sentence.

therefore, i am unable to make a causal link between
the imposition of house arrest bail and the impact, if any on mr. dashner’s
mental or physical health during that period of nine months. accordingly, the
claim for any downes credit is dismissed.

however, regardless of the specific reasons why,
it is clear to me that the experience of being on house arrest was difficult
for mr. dashner to endure mentally and physically. that level of hardship,
regardless of the underlying cause, will be treated as a mitigating factor on
sentence.
analysis

it is clear to me that mr. dashner poses a low
risk to re-offend. through his own voluntary efforts, he has completed a 45-day
residential treatment program and has achieved sobriety since january 2024. he
is in every respect, likely to land employment in the skilled trades and upon
completion of certain courses, will present as highly employable. he has
aspirations to take on a more active parenting role in the life of a child
through his prior long-term relationship. he presents with a level of maturity
rarely seen for young men who are fortunate enough to say they have survived,
despite the clear legacy of intergenerational trauma from residential schools
inflicted upon his community and his family.

i agree with the submission of his counsel, that
for a young man of 23 years, he has endured and survived through indescribable
obstacles, only to emerge as relatively pro-social, and with great potential to
succeed.

this accomplishment on its own cannot be glossed
over and i commend mr. dashner for his courage, resilience and strength to
bring about real change in his life since that regretful night in september
2023.

i am being asked by the crown to consider a term
of imprisonment of 18 months but to permit mr. dashner to serve this in the
community through a conditional sentence order pursuant to
s. 742.1
of the
criminal
code. it is conceded that this case meets each of the statutory
pre-requisites in that section for a conditional sentence to be imposed.

i am mindful of the relatively stringent bail
conditions mr. dashner had endured for a lengthy period of time. this provides
clear evidence of his ability and willingness to abide by the terms of a
lengthy conditional sentence order. i am satisfied that an imposition of a
conditional sentence would not endanger the safety of the community. the other
pre-requisites in
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code
apply and need not be
addressed. a conditional sentence is legally open for me to issue.

i have considered the amount of pre-sentence
custody served by mr. dashner. he is to be given a total pre-sentence credit of
96 days for serving 64 actual days in custody prior to being sentenced.

however, with the greatest of respect to mr.
dashner, i do not accept that a suspended sentence of 12 months probation on
the facts of this case with this offender would be consistent with the
fundamental purposes and principles of sentencing. such a sentence would send
the wrong message to the public; one that suggests that our courts minimize the
inherent seriousness of weapons offences of this nature where violence was
intended by a repeat, violent offender.

upon careful review of the video of this street
fight, the prolonged nature of the violent interaction presented many
opportunities for mr. ransom to cease or leave the confrontation. he chose to
remain and wielded the imitation firearm in an assaultive manner with the
intent to injure the other individual on two separate attempts.

the imitation firearm that mr. dashner
brandished in an assaultive manner in the context of a street fight increases
the severity of this offence, even if he did not make good on his efforts to
hit the unknown male with it. the only reason mr. dashner was unsuccessful in
his attempts to strike the victim, was because that individual dodged those attempts.
had he made contact, injuries would have been caused, and the conflict would
have escalated.

having reviewed the photos of the weapon in the
case before me, the imitation firearm presents as being strikingly similar to
an actual firearm. furthermore, it was test fired and still has the potential
to inflict bodily harm.

adding to its seriousness is the fact that mr.
dashner was bound by a probation order for the violent offences of assault
causing bodily harm and assault in 2023. i must weigh this with the realization
that he has additional convictions for assault with a weapon and pointing a firearm
in 2019, as a youth.

there is also the residual impact of mr. dashner
arming himself with an imitation firearm and attempting to strike another
person with it. when individuals choose to arm themselves with weapons and
demonstrate a clear purpose to cause serious bodily harm, it promotes a local
arms race of sorts. those members of the public who are the recipients of such
threats, robberies and assaults are more likely to see it necessary to also arm
themselves with knives, imitation firearms, or other potentially deadly
weapons, in a proportionate and consistent response.

this promotes an overall increase in the
possession and use of weapons as a whole by members of the general public,
particularly amongst those that happen to live on the street or are otherwise
engaged in a life of ongoing criminality. the net impact on the safety of the
public is that we are all more at risk of being harmed due to the increased
prevalence of dangerous weapons in our community.

this cycle promotes the gradual deterioration of
a community, and it has already begun in sudbury’s downtown, as evident on this
video of the street fight with no less than 13 men, some of whom were also
armed with weapons such as a metal pipe, and possibly a knife, in addition to
mr. dashner’s imitation firearm. all individuals present for the brawl appeared
willing to inflict violence and as part of that endeavor and utilize a weapon to
affect their intended purposes. mr. dashner was a willing participant
throughout. this is the necessary context that i view these offences.

the
choice to arm oneself with a dangerous weapon must not be condoned. given the
prevalence of these items and the potential to cause serious bodily harm, there
is a need for our courts to deter those individuals who will consider arming
themselves with an imitation firearm, knife or other similar tools of violence.
that deterrence must come in the form of a promise of imprisonment, especially
to those that ignore the orders of justices prohibiting the possession of such
dangerous weapons.

i acknowledge the mitigating factors in favor of
mr. ransom are extensive particularly due to the gladue factors tied to his upbringing
and heritage as an indigenous child raised in a foster home and his experience
of intergenerational trauma. i am mindful of the current evidence of meaningful
progress in his efforts to address alcohol abuse through treatment and the
support he has from his foster family and former partner.

however, i am of the view that a further term of
imprisonment is required when i balance the gravity of these offences, the
reduced moral blameworthiness of the offender and the seriousness of weapons
offences in our communities due to the risk they pose to public safety.

had it not been for the extensive efforts of mr.
dashner in completing a residential treatment program to achieve sobriety, i
would issue a jail sentence of 6 months, less credit for time already served.

i am also cognizant of my responsibility to
avoid adding to the problem of the overincarceration of indigenous people in
our canadian criminal justice system. a conditional sentence would strike the
right balance because it adequately addresses the fundamental purposes of
sentencing, meaning it is proportionate to the gravity of this offence and the
circumstances of mr. dashner, and it demonstrates my intent to exercise
restraint and focus on the principle of rehabilitation.

additionally, a conditional sentence will assist
the court’s objective of promoting a sense of responsibility in mr. dashner and
provide him an opportunity to restore what he has taken from our local
community with his actions on the date in question. accordingly, a significant
number of community service hours is warranted and will also encourage mr.
dashner to learn about his own strengths and abilities to contribute to our
society in a meaningful way.

taking into account the gravity of the offences
and the paramount need for deterrence and denunciation involving imitation
firearms and other weapons capable of inflicting serious bodily harm, and the
purpose, objectives and principles of sentencing, including the principles of
rehabilitation, restraint and gladue factors that apply to indigenous
offenders, i am of the view that a suspended sentence and 12 months’ probation
would not sufficiently reflect the degree of moral blameworthiness, history of
violence and weapons offences and the gravity of the current offences and the
risk to public safety.
disposition:

a fit sentence is a term of imprisonment to be
served in the community as a conditional sentence order of 12 months
imprisonment for both offences to be served concurrently.

for the offence of assault with a weapon
contrary to
s. 267
(a) of the
criminal code,
i am noting a total
pre-sentence custody of 64 actual days in custody for a total 96 days of
pre-sentence credit and sentence mr. dashner to a conditional sentence of 12
months.

for the offence of failing to comply with a
probation order contrary to
s. 733.1
of the
criminal code,
i am noting a
total pre-sentence custody of 64 actual days in custody for a total 96 days of
pre-sentence credit and sentence him to a conditional sentence of 12 months to
be served concurrently.

the terms of the conditional sentence order are
follows:
a.
report to a conditional sentence supervisor within two working days
upon your release from custody, and thereafter when required by that
supervisor;
b.
sign any release of information forms that will enable the supervisor
to monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.
c.
house arrest:
for the first 6 months of
this order, there will be a term of house arrest. you are required to remain
within your residence or on the property of your residence except for:
1.
between (i.e. 12-4 p.m. on saturdays) to acquire
the necessities of life;
2.
for any medical emergencies involving yourself
(or spouse, child, parent, sibling);
3.
for going directly to and from or while being at
school / employment / court / religious services / legal / medical / dental
appointments;
4.
for going directly to and from or while being at
assessment, treatment or counselling sessions;
5.
you must complete 100 community service hours to
the satisfaction of your supervisor by the completion of this order.
6.
for going directly to and from or while
performing community service hours;
7.
you will confirm the schedule in advance with
supervisor setting out times for these activities;
8.
with the prior written approval of the
supervisor. this written approval is to be carried with you at all times while
outside your residence;
9.
for carrying out any legal obligations regarding
compliance with this order
d.
during your house arrest, you are not to purchase, possess or
consume alcohol or any intoxicating substances except in accordance with a
valid medical prescription;
e.
curfew:
following the home confinement,
for the balance of this order you must remain in your residence (or on the
property) daily between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except for medical
emergencies involving you or your immediate family, employment purposes or any
other reason as approved by your supervisor in advance which must be documented
and carried on your person;
f.
during the entirety of this order, you must also
present yourself at your doorway upon the request of your supervisor or a peace
officer for the purpose of verifying your compliance with this order;
g.
reside at an address approved by a supervisor and not change that
address unless you receive the permission of your officer in advance.
h.
attend and actively participate in all assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed and complete them to the satisfaction of
your supervisor including but not limited to alcohol abuse with the support of
the n’swakamok native friendship centre’s drug and alcohol program; life
skills.
i.
you are encouraged to access the apatisiwin
employment and training program for employment and training support;
j.
do not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal
code.
ancillary orders

there will also be a weapons prohibition
pursuant to
s. 110
of the
criminal code
for five years and a forfeiture
order pursuant to
s. 491
with respect to the imitation firearm, a beretta apx
bb gun.

i am also ordering that a sample of his blood be
taken for inclusion on the national dna databank, pursuant to
section
487.051(1)
of the
criminal code.

finally, because of mr. dashner is of very
limited financial means and his pending support obligations, the victim fine
surcharges of hundreds of dollars would cause him undue hardship and shall be
waived.

i wish to thank mr. walker and ms. jay for their
highly professional presentation in this case.
released: may 27, 2025
justice
leonard kim

r. v. gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 688.

r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13.

gladue,
at para.
93.

r. v. dodman,
2021 onca 543
at para.
10.

r. v.
joseph,
2020 onca 733
at para.
108;
r. v. downes,
(2006),
2006 canlii 3957 (on ca),
205
c.c.c. (3d) 488
(ont. c.a.), at paras.
33-37.