source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj584/2025oncj584.html

warning
the court
hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order restricting
publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to
subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that
any information that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be
published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in
proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155,
160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272,
273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or
347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read from time to
time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct
alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on
or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with in the same
proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on application
—
in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
)
or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness
under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right to make an
application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the prosecutor or
any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every
person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v.
collinge, 2025 oncj 584
date: 2025 07 17
court file no.: brampton
(central west) 23-31106771
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
shawn collinge
before justice a. neil
singh
heard on march 18 &
july 4, 2025
reasons for judgment
released on july 17, 2025
gregory hendry..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alan sobcuff........................................................... counsel
for the accused shawn collinge
singh j.:
introduction

shawn
collinge was found guilty after trial of three child luring offences. he
communicated with h.o., a person under 16, to facilitate: (1) sexual
interference, (2) invitation to sexual touching, and (3) obtaining sexual
services for consideration.

mr.
collinge appears before me today to be sentenced for his crimes.
factual background

my
detailed findings are reported and can be
found at
2025 oncj 99. for this
ruling, i provide a summary but rely on the full findings from trial.

on
april 1, 2023, mr. collinge contacted h.o. on facebook messenger. he was 36 years
old. h.o. is a real person. she was 14 years old.

over
the next few days, through texts and a call on facebook messenger, mr. collinge
tried to facilitate sexual contact between himself and h.o.
•
mr.
collinge first suggests giving h.o. a foot massage. he tells her he wants her
feet in his lap.
•
he
then says he wants a footjob.
•
mr.
collinge asks h.o. if she made her boyfriend cum with her feet.
•
mr.
collinge asks h.o., “will you do a footjob on me and make me cum”?
•
mr.
collinge tells h.o. “i want to go inside you”
•
mr.
collinge asks h.o., “wanna squeeze my cock with your red toes to stiffen it
up”?
•
mr.
collinge says to h.o. “i hope your toes and heels are extremely red and super
sweaty”
•
mr.
collinge then says, “i love when a girl makes me cum with her sexy feet.”
•
he
says to h.o. “if my hard cock goes inside you i want you to push it further
inside with your feet.”
•
and
later, “i hope you like guys with a serious foot fetish”
•
then,
“how long does it take for you to make your boyfriend cum with your hot and
sexy red toes and red heels during a footjob”
•
followed
by, “i bet you love that hard cock after jerking it off with your feet.”
•
the
last message captured from mr. collinge to h.o. reads, “babe how long can you
jerk off my cock without stopping to make my body shake and eyes roll.”
•
in
the recorded call, mr. collinge mentions doing “vaginal” with h.o. he asked her
how long it takes for her to make a guy cum and asked if she keeps going after.

regarding
the obtaining of sexual services for consideration, h.o. asked mr. collinge for
money in exchange for photos and sexual services. mr. collinge eventually
agreed to pay h.o. upwards of $100 to have sex with her.

mr.
collinge confirmed during his testimony:
1.
that when he communicated
to h.o., he wanted to penetrate her vaginally with his penis.
2.
that he wanted
to go into her bedroom and have sex with her.
3.
that he told h.o.
she could make his erection harder by squeezing it with her feet.
4.
that he
invited her to squeeze his cock with her feet.
5.
that he was
trying to get h.o. to make him cum with her feet
6.
that much of
the texts communicated his intention to have sexual relations with h.o.
7.
that he was
willing to pay h.o. for her sexual services, and that was his intention at the
time he sent the messages.
8.
that at the
time he sent the messages, he wanted to do these things with h.o., but then
changed his mind.
9.
in fact,
everything he said to h.o. represented his intentions at the time he sent the
messages or said what he said
victim
impact evidence

h.o.
did not provide any victim impact statement.
circumstances of shawn collinge

the
court received extensive background information on mr. collinge through counsel
submissions and two mental health assessments: one from the defence (may 2007)
and one ordered under s.21 of the mental health act (june 2025).

mr.
collinge, 39, has a history marked by early adversity, intellectual disability,
and problematic sexual behaviour. he experienced developmental delays, was
apprehended by child welfare authorities at age 7, and spent much of his youth
in group homes. his upbringing included exposure to sexual abuse and
pornography. despite this, he maintains supportive relationships with his
mother and brother.

he
completed high school and post-secondary studies in hospitality despite adhd
and learning disabilities. his employment history is consistent, and includes
various short-term roles in food service, retail, and airport operations.

socially
isolated, mr. collinge had one long-term relationship. he denied substance
abuse and major mental illness but acknowledged stress-related increases in
sexual urges. assessments noted no current psychosis but documented a history
of sexually inappropriate conduct. these behaviours included public
masturbation, voyeurism, and coercive acts involving minors, particularly
during his time in group homes.

diagnosed
with an unspecified intellectual disability and possible paraphilic disorder,
mr. collinge’s past included planned, coercive sexual acts involving minors.
despite denying current paraphilic interests, his history and recent offences
indicate ongoing risk.

in
2025, he denied prior misconduct, contradicting his 2007 admissions of public
masturbation, voyeurism, and coercive acts involving children. the 2025
assessment found his denials inconsistent with his documented history of
sexually inappropriate and coercive behaviours.

in
the 2007 report, mr. collinge himself admitted to engaging in multiple
instances of public masturbation, masturbating while watching children through
a window of his mother’s home, inviting younger boys (including a lower-functioning
peer) to touch and rub his penis, coercive instances with an 8-year old boy
where he had him rub his penis with his feet and hands on multiple occasions, and
touching a staff member of his group home on their buttocks and rubbing his
pelvis against them.

mr.
collinge expressed remorse, attributing his actions to stress and describing
them as a terrible mistake. he claimed no prior contact with minors.

he is
open to treatment, including sex offender programming and assessment at camh’s
sexual behaviours clinic. recommendations include strict supervision, avoidance
of unsupervised contact with minors, and possible use of sex-drive reducing
medication. his case reflects the intersection of developmental disability,
trauma, and sexual risk.
community
supports

mr.
collinge has community support through the john howard society, which has
committed to assisting with his reintegration upon release.

he
will have access to housing and mental health services. the john howard society
has coordinated with camh to connect him with the sexual behaviours clinic, and
mr. collinge has expressed willingness to participate.

the
john howard society will support mr. collinge with establishing stable housing
and treatment referrals upon his release. so long as mr. collinge continues to
engage with them, they will continue to support him.

community
living toronto has also pledged support, assisting with housing, employment,
and mental health services.
presentence custody

mr.
collinge is currently held at maplehurst correctional complex. records obtained
by subpoena detail his presentence custody.

mr.
collinge has been in custody for 468 real days.

institutional
records from maplehurst correctional complex were provided, current as of june
18, 2025. at that time, mr. collinge had been in custody for 437 days. he had
been subject to partial or full lockdown a total of 310 days, 71% of his time.

mr.
collinge has been on full lockdown for 152 days, or 35% of his time in custody.
during those days, mr. collinge would not have access to showers, the dayroom,
phone or television access, or fresh air access).

mr.
collinge was also triple bunked for 410 days in a cell designed for two people.
mr. collinge was in a cell that was at 133% capacity for over 95% of his time
in custody.

mr.
collinge has had two findings of misconduct while in custody (april 8 & 11,
2025). the records suggest that the april 11, 2025, misconduct was as the
result of mr. collinge committing or threatening an assault on another person.
the records also suggest that mr. collinge was the victim of an assault on
april 8, 2025, at 10:02 a.m., in what appeared to be an unprovoked attack by
another inmate. oddly, he incurred a misconduct finding as a result of being
the victim of this assault. he has a misconduct arising from that very date and
time.

mr.
collinge has also completed a number of rehabilitative programs while in
custody including anger management, thoughts to action, managing stress, use of
leisure time, understanding feelings.
position
of the parties

the
defence argues that mr. collinge has served an adequate period of custody. the
defence submits that once credit is given for mr. collinge’s presentence
custody, enhanced due to the harshness of his presentence custody, the
appropriate sentence is a suspended sentence to be followed by a lengthy term
of probation that focuses on getting mr. collinge counselling that will support
him in his rehabilitation.

the
crown submits that a sentence in the range of 3-4 years is the appropriate
sentence. the crown seeks a
soira
order for 20 years, a dna databank
order, and a s.161 prohibition for 10 years.
analysis
& discussion
sentencing objectives & principles

the
goal of any criminal sentence is to protect society, contribute to respect for
the law and help maintain a just, peaceful, and safe society.

in
sentencing offenders, the sanctions imposed by the court must consider the
following objectives:
•
to
denounce unlawful conduct
•
to
deter the offender and other persons from committing similar offences
•
to
separate offenders from society, where necessary
•
to
assist in rehabilitating offenders
•
to
provide reparations for harm done to victims or the community
•
to
promote a sense of responsibility in the offenders and an acknowledgement of
the harm done to victims or the community.

for
sexual offences against children, deterrence and denunciation are the primary
principles engaged. since 2020, an upward departure from past ranges for such
offences has been required (
see
r v. mahbub,
2025 oncj 317
at para
23
citing
r v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
at paras
109-114
). both parties agree
that a significant custodial sentence is warranted.

mr.
collinge preyed upon a child under the age of 18 years old. this is a statutory
aggravating factor and confirms the primacy of deterrence and denunciation as sentencing
principles:
see
ss. 718.1 and 718.2(a)(ii.2). for first time offenders,
rehabilitation and reintegration must also be considered in determining the
appropriate term of incarceration, but here they must take a secondary role to
the primary sentencing objectives.

i am
mindful that my sentence must be the least restrictive sentence available that
will adequately consider and apply the relevant sentencing principles. in cases
where offenders prey upon and victimize children, human emotion has the ability
to overwhelm. i must resist the temptation to sentence mr. collinge to any more
time than is necessary in the circumstances.

my
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and degree of
responsibility of mr. collinge. the principle of parity, codified in s.718.2(b)
must also be considered.
aggravating and mitigating circumstances

in
arriving at an appropriate sentence, i must also consider the relevant
aggravating and mitigating circumstances.

the
aggravating factors are:
•
luring
a child well under the age of 16.
mr. collinge sought out and lured a 14-year-old
child. she was unable to consent to any sexual activity with mr. collinge. any sexual
interaction with h.o. was illegal. she was particularly young. these
considerations heighten his moral blameworthiness.
•
real
victim.
mr. collinge’s actions involved a real victim. unlike a sting operation, h.o.
was a real person that mr. collinge sought out for his sexual gratification.
this posed a risk to a real person. it matters not that h.o. never intended on
meeting mr. collinge as he clearly did not know that during his communications
with her.
•
age
gap.
mr.
collinge is 36. h.o. is 14 years old. this significant age gap is aggravating.
as opposed to someone who had just barely breached the cusp of adulthood, mr.
collinge was well into his when he preyed upon h.o.
•
arranged
meetings.
the
luring involved mr. collinge attempting to arrange a physical meeting with h.o.
in order to facilitate the index crimes of sexual interference, invitation to
sexual touching, and obtaining sexual services for consideration. the accused
took steps to try to meet h.o. to commit these offences.
•
procuring
and communicating with a child for sexual service.
mr. collinge was willing
to and prepared to pay h.o. in order to facilitate the crimes he sought to
commit against her.
•
planned
and deliberate conduct.
mr. collinge sought out h.o. he initiated conduct with her. his
actions were intentional and sustained, over approximately three days. knowing
she was 14, he propositioned h.o. repeatedly. he discussed involving others in
the sexual activity. he persisted even though he knew his actions were wrong. he
stated he was ‘ok with it’ if h.o. was, after she disclosed her age to him.

the
mitigating factors are:
•
mr.
collinge has no prior criminal record.
•
difficult
upbringing.
mr. collinge had a tumultuous upbringing that was the subject of significant
challenges. he was exposed to unsanitary conditions and domestic violence. he
was the victim of predatory sexual abuse at a young age. he was removed from
his home from the children’s aid society.
•
mental
health status.
mr.
collinge has adhd and borderline developmental disability. despite this he graduated
high school and attended post-secondary educational programs.
•
employment
history.
despite his many challenges, mr. collinge has a consistent record of
employment. he has worked a number of jobs, including at pearson international
airport. this history demonstrates that when mr. collinge is focused on
prosocial pursuits, he is quite capable.
•
community
supports.
mr.
collinge continues to have the support of his mother and brother. he has
engaged with the john howard society and community living toronto who are
willing to support mr. collinge’s rehabilitation and reintegration into society
upon his release from custody. mr. collinge is willing to engage with these
community supports.
•
rehabilitative
efforts.
programming in presentence custody is notoriously wanting. despite that, mr.
collinge was able to complete a number of programs offered at maplehurst. while
i note that the programs may not be best suited to his particular
circumstances, they show that he did not sit idly by while in custody. the
programs he completed are all focused on behaving in a prosocial manner.
•
expressed
remorse for actions.
mr. collinge has apologized for his actions. he has expressed regret and
remorse for his crimes. although it comes after his trial and a finding of
guilt, it is still a mitigating factor for the court to consider.
•
harsh
pre-sentence custody.
the conditions of mr. collinge’s presentence custody were nothing short of
horrific. he has been the subject of numerous and persistent lockdowns. he has
been triple bunked for a significant period of his incarceration. he has been the
victim of numerous assaults from other inmates. one assault resulted in
hospitalization and a fractured rib.. there are multiple reports demonstrating
various injuries mr. collinge has suffered during his time in custody due to
these assaults.

there
is another factor to consider that is neither aggravating nor mitigating.
•
the
court must consider what appears to be mr. collinge’s minimization of
responsibility. he claimed his request for sex was accidental. the court must
also consider mr. collinge’s minimization and denial of his past sexual conduct
that he previously admitted to. these factors will need to be balanced against
his stated expressions of remorse. they will also need to be considered when
assessing his rehabilitative prospects and any ongoing risk to the public that
he poses.
discussion
kienapple

the
parties are jointly submitting that count 2 (luring to facilitate invitation to
sexual touching) be stayed pursuant to
the principles of
r v. kienapple,
1974 canlii 14 (scc),

1 scr 729. the parties submit that the factual and legal nexus between count 1
(luring to facilitate sexual interference) and count 2 are the same. i agree. both
offences arise from the same delict. the same transactions ground both charges.
there is no additional and distinguishing element that differentiates the two
offences in the circumstances of this case.

accordingly,
count 2 will be conditionally stayed.
child luring – the appropriate range

child
luring is a serious offence. the conduct involved is abhorrent and insidious.
offenders prey upon children for their own sexual gratification. our courts
have repeatedly spoken about this.

in
r v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26
at para
7 & 8,
the supreme
court of canada recently stated:
to protect a range of
societal interests, parliament enacted the offence of “luring a child”…the
online world and digital communications between adults and children warrant
special regulation because children are particularly vulnerable to manipulation
in online settings…the internet has infinitely expanded the opportunity for
offenders to attract or ensnare children and the enactment of a distinct crime
protects them from the possibility of sexual exploitation facilitated by the
internet…the luring offence helps keep children safe in a virtual environment
and was intended to meet “the very specific danger posed by certain kinds of
communications via computer systems”…
the purpose of s.172.1 is
both remedial and preventative. it was enacted “to combat the very real threat
posed by adult predators who attempt to groom or lure children by electronic
means”…the provision seeks to safeguard children from sexual abuse by
identifying and apprehending offenders before they commit a designated offence.

as
justice ghosh
in
r v. mahbub, supra
noted at paras
40-43:
the supreme court in
friesen
accepted evidence that
incidents of child luring had more than
doubled between 2010 and 2017. this must be juxtaposed with the proximate
development that parliament twice increased the maximum sentence for this
offence in 2007 (from 5 to 10 years) and 2015 (from 10 to 14 years).
increases in maximum
sentences signal parliament’s intention that related custodial sentences
increase in length. as far back as 2006, our court of appeal observed that
trial level rulings seemed to support a sentencing range for child luring of
12-24 months. by 2011, the same court questioned whether that decision even
supported a range but reflected that any such range “needs to be revised” as
too low, given the 2007 increase in maximum sentence (
see r v. woodward,
2011
onca 610
at para
58
). it is certainly insufficient by today’s appellate
standards, given the subsequent increase in the maximum sentence and the
guidance
in
friesen.
several courts have now
acknowledged that the sentencing range for child luring may be 3-5 years when
the crown proceeds by indictment. in 2023, our court of appeal in
r. v. m.v.,
2023 onca 724
at para
87, confirmed
the upper range for child luring is now
5 years, while expressing reasoned apprehension in setting any lower range.
as far back as 2011
in
woodward,
the same court held that a range of 3-5 years would be proper if the child
luring became a “pervasive social problem.” as the court confirmed
in
friesen,
the problem had certainly become pervasive, as it inferentially may have
commended this prospective range
in
woodward. the 3–5-year range for
child luring was soon further and explicitly supported by our superior court in
r v. moola.

a
number of cases were submitted by both the crown and defence. while i will not
mention all of them here, i have considered them.

in
r v. m.v.,
supra, the court of appeal determined that a fit sentence for
the first-time offender for the child luring offence was 4 years before
totality was applied. the luring involved two sisters aged 8 and 10 over a
period of 3 months. he had also sent them various images of child pornography
and videos of himself masturbating. he never attempted to meet or abuse the
girls. as stated above, the court endorsed an upper range of 5 years, but
refused to fix a low end of the range.

in
r v. moola,
2021 onsc 3702, justice code endorsed a range of 3-5 years
for child luring offences. his honour suggested that a sentence of 4-5 years
was appropriate in a situation where there was a real child victim.
in r v.
fardshisheh,
2023 onsc 1334, the court
found that
friesen
sent a
clear message that a reformatory sentence is not appropriate in cases where
there is a real child involved.

other
cases,
including
r v. gould,
2022 oncj 187,
r v. raisah,
2021
oncj 584,
r v. lypaczewski,
2023 onsc 3696, and
r v. kavanagh,
2023
onsc 283, involved varying degrees of contact and sentencing outcomes ranging
from 12 to 18 months often influenced by mitigating factors such as guilty
pleas, lack of intent to meet, difficult backgrounds, or participation in
counselling.

the
cases underscore that sentencing is a highly individualized and nuanced
process. there are multiple factors that must be considered. courts must consider
the facts of the case, the offenders background, and balance aggravating and
mitigating circumstances in crafting a fit sentence that addresses the relevant
principles of sentencing at play.

the
case law supports an upper sentencing range of 5 years for child luring.
while
moola
and
fardshisheh
collectively
suggest a lower range of 2-3 years, i find that i am not bound by these as the
court of appeal specifically declined to endorse a lower limit
in
r v.
m.v.
(
see also
r v. mahbub,
2025 oncj 317
at para
45
).
the appropriate sentence

given
the facts and circumstances present here, a penitentiary sentence is warranted.
ordinarily, a 3-year term—at the low end of the crown’s proposed range—would be
appropriate.

the
aggravating factors have been discussed and are apparent. mr. collinge
deliberately pursued a 14-year-old for sexual gratification. he was persistent,
increasingly explicit, and attempted to involve others. despite knowing her
age, he continued to communicate with her and offered payment for sexual
services. his conduct was planned, calculated, and sustained.

on
the mitigating side, mr. collinge is a first offender. he has no prior criminal
record. he has expressed remorse for his actions. he has had a difficult
upbringing. he was a victim of sexual abuse himself. he has serious cognitive
disabilities. despite his difficulties, he has the ability to engage in
prosocial pursuits as evidenced by his employment history. he has endured
significant hardship as a result of his presentence custody, an issue i will
discuss in further detail shortly.

despite
having no prior convictions, mr. collinge has a documented history of sexually
deviant behaviour dating back to his youth. while he admitted to this conduct
in the 2007 report, he denied it entirely in the 2025 assessment..

he
also minimized his responsibility before the court, claiming he “accidentally
asked for sex” – a claim clearly contradicted by his deliberate and graphic
communications with h.o.

this
minimization, both past and present, raises serious concerns about his insight
and accountability. while i accept that he is remorseful, the evidence before
me suggests that mr. collinge presents a continued risk to the public and has
diminished rehabilitative prospects. these factors require i ensure specific
deterrence is addressed by imposing an appropriate term of incarceration.

balancing
all factors, i find the gravity of the offences to be very high. while mr.
collinge’s challenges blunt what otherwise would be moral blameworthiness at
the very highest end of the spectrum, it still remains significant. his actions
were planned, deliberate, and persistent, and he showed no signs of stopping.
he knew his actions were wrong. i believe he would have followed through had
the opportunity arisen.

fortunately,
h.o. never intended to meet him. h.o. recognized his intentions early and finessed
him by gathering evidence and reporting him to the police.
“duncan” credit

mr.
collinge’s conditions spent in presentence custody warrant significant
mitigation. mr. collinge has been subject to very difficult and inhumane
conditions. he has been subjected to significant lockdowns and triple-bunking.
he has been assaulted on numerous occasions suffering many injuries that are
well documented in the records including visible bruising, a rib fracture,
swelling to the groin. inexplicably, on one of those occasions, he was given a
misconduct in what was described in the records as an unprovoked attack.

the
misconduct for being the victim of an assault calls into question the
legitimacy of his other misconduct. if the victim of an unprovoked attack is subject
to institutional discipline by the ministry of the solicitor general, i am not
prepared to accept that mr. collinge misbehaved absent further information.

the
problems regarding maplehurst correctional complex are well documented. sentencing
courts have repeatedly spoken about the problems there. in
r v. r.d.,
2024 onsc 6549
at paragraphs
65
stated
the following:
the persistence of lockdowns, triple-bunking and
unsanitary conditions at mcc has led to the awarding of
duncan
credit
in the following reported
cases:
r. v. simeu,
2024 onsc
5958;
r. v. raja,
2024 oncj 456;
r. v. mitchell,
2024
onsc 5003;
r. v. sitladeen,
2024 onsc 4344;
r. v.
rooplal,
2024 onsc 3729;
r. v. donacien,
2024 onsc
3573;
r. v. bleck,
2024 onsc 3461;
r. v. aiken,
2024
onca 326;
r. v. perez,
2024 onsc 2247;
r. v. vincent,
2024
oncj 178;
r. v. hasan,
2023 onsc 5323;
r. v. cormier,
2023
onsc 4640;
r. v. singh,
2023 onsc 4949;
r. v. abraham,
2023
onsc 4592;
r. v. reid,
2023 onsc 4452;
r. v. whetham,
2023
oncj 379;
r. v. joseph,
2023 oncj 207;
r. v. solomon,
2023
onsc 2602;
r. v. dalia,
2023 onsc 2114;
r. v.
cassanova-alman,
2023 onsc 1470;
r. v. de la cruz,
2023
onsc 314,
r. v. alvarado,
2022 oncj 577;
r. v.
mcintosh,
2022 onsc 6437;
r. v. walters,
2022 oncj
484;
r. v. brooks,
2022 oncj 242;
r. v. robertson,
2022
oncj 240;
r. v. thomas,
2022 oncj 232;
r. v. doyle,
2022
onsc 2489;
r. v. dienaar,
2022 oncj 196;
r. v. hamas
khan,
2022 onsc 410; and
r. v.
chang,
2021
onsc 7954.

at
paragraph 67, justice gibson states:
the protracted continuation of lockdowns and
overcrowding at mcc, now persisting past the exceptional circumstance of the
covid-19 pandemic, is no doubt a complex phenomenon with multiple causal
factors not susceptible to a facile analysis or a quick fix, but the bottom
line is this: it is inhumane and of grave concern to the
court. it infringes the dignity of prisoners. it is unworthy of us as a
society. it derogates substantially from the appropriate standard of
justice in canada in 2024. there is a systemic problem, as illustrated by
the large number of cases cited above in which courts have given
duncan
credit
arising from conditions at mcc. measures to alleviate it are urgently
required as a moral and legal imperative.
in
r. v. simeu,
2024
onsc 5958, at para.
18, conlan j. stated: “this court would describe
simeu’s experience at mcc, overall, as being disgraceful.” regretfully, i
must echo that comment in the circumstances of this case.

jurist
after jurist, including myself have repeatedly expressed similar sentiments. our
treatment of inmates at maplehurst, is a damning indictment on our society. nobody
should be treated this way. we must do better.

in
r.d.,
the accused’s sentence was mitigated by 6 months due to his
presentence custody. he spent 242 total days in presentence custody, over 90%
triple bunked, and 42% in full or partial lockdown.

by
comparison, mr. collinge has spent just over two times the number of days as
in
r.d.
during that time, not only has mr. collinge spent approximately 95%
of his time in custody triple bunked, and he has been in full or partial
lockdown for over 70% of his incarceration. he has also been assaulted (suffering
various injuries including a fractured rib) and was even given an unwarranted
misconduct for being the victim of this assault.

the
situation at maplehurst continues to get worse. the lockdowns are becoming more
frequent. triple bunking is the norm. courts have for years spoken out against
these atrocious conditions, yet these concerns seem to be falling on deaf ears
as if those who are subject to presentence custody are second-class citizens.
as the problems at maplehurst continue to deteriorate, the sentence mitigation
afforded to people who are subject to these increasingly harsh conditions must respond
in kind. to use the phrase of
the ontario court of appeal in
woodward
and endorsed
in
friesen:
the conditions at maplehurst present a “pervasive
social problem.”

the
ontario court of appeal in
marshall
permits sentencing judges to treat
duncan
credit as a mitigating factor without quantifying the amount of credit. it
is important to note, however, the court in
marshall
specifically ruled
that it is permissible to quantify the sentence reduction for
duncan
credit,
provided that it does not result in an unfit sentence (
see r v. marshall,
2021
onca 344
at paragraph
53;
r v. shaikh and tanoli,
2024 onsc 774
at
paragraph
21
).

this
is an appropriate case for quantification of
duncan
credit.
i agree with
and adopt the reasoning of justice molloy in
shaikh and tanoli,
supra
from paragraphs
22-30. the following is a summary of her honour’s guidance:
(i)
it
is preferable to quantify the period of time by which presentence custody is
reduced to reflect the harsh and punitive conditions of presentence custody
(ii)
the
credit is still properly considered a mitigating factor and must not be used to
make a sentence unfit.
(iii)
if
a court gives
duncan
credit without specifying the credit, the accused,
the public, the government, nor correctional officials will know the extent to
which this has been done. this results in the public not knowing the impact of
deplorable conditions on sentences served by offenders while also providing
little incentive to those in authority to fix the problem.
(iv)
sentencing
transparency about the amount of reduction will also provide better opportunity
for appellate oversight and error correction.
(v)
sentencing
consistency is enhanced by quantifying
duncan
credit. first, judges will
have a better sense of the extent to which other judges are taking the credit
into account. second, if the sentence that would have been imposed but for the
duncan
credit is stated, it will assist in determining consistency in sentencing
for any given offence.
(vi)
quantification
of
duncan
credit is important to express the court’s condemnation of the
deplorable conditions an offender has been subjected to.
(vii)
simply
taking presentence conditions into account with a myriad of other mitigating
factors, without specifying the reduction in sentence attributed to the harsh
conditions in the institution, only serves to hide the impact of these
conditions on the amount of actual time offenders are being required to serve
for their crimes.
conclusion
–
the sentence

as
stated above, the appropriate sentence in the circumstances of this case is a
term of incarceration of 3 years (1,095 days). to account for the conditions of
his presentence custody, i will grant mr. collinge 1 year (365 days) of
duncan
credit. the sentence will be 2 years incarceration (730 days). this is a
similar quantification to that of justice gibson
in
r.d.
who was dealing
with similar percentages of triple-bunking at maplehurst.

from
the 2-year sentence,
summers
credit at 1.5 days for every day spent in
presentence custody will be deducted. mr. collinge has spent 468 days in
presentence custody. credit of 702 days will be deducted from the sentence
leaving 28 days left to serve. the sentence will apply concurrently to both
remaining counts.

a
three-year probationary term is warranted to assist mr. collinge in his
rehabilitation and reintegration, but also to protect the public from the
ongoing risk that he poses by directing that he take appropriate counselling as
directed along with conditions i have determined are necessary to achieve these
goals. recommendations for counselling will rely on the recommendations made in
the s.21 mental health act assessment. the terms of probation will be as
follows:
•
keep
the peace and be of good behaviour
•
appear
before the court when required to do so
•
notify
the court or your probation officer in advance of any change of name or
address; and promptly notify them of any change in employment or occupation
•
report
to your probation officer within 24 hours of your release from custody and
after that at all times and places as directed
•
you
are not to contact or communicate in any way, either directly or indirectly, by
any physical, electronic or other means, with h.o.
•
you
are not to be within 100m of the place where you know h.o. to live, work, go to
school, frequent or any place you know them to be
•
you
are to have no contact with or be in a position of authority with anyone under
the of 18 years except as approved of in advance by your probation officer
•
you
are not to possess any weapons as defined in the cc, which would include a
firearm, imitation firearm, crossbow, prohibited weapon or device, ammunition
or explosive substance or anything designed to be used or intended for use to
cause death or injury or to threaten or intimidate any person
•
you
are not to possess or consume any alcohol or unlawful drugs or substances as
prohibited by the cdsa
•
you
must attend and actively participate in all assessments, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed and complete them to the satisfaction of your probation
officer for: inappropriate sexual behaviours (including the camh sexual
behaviours clinic), sexual boundaries, sexual risk assessment counselling, mental
health issues, stress coping and reduction, impulsivity, or life skills.
•
you
shall not possess or use any computer or any other device that has access to
the internet or other digital network, except as approved of in advance (and in
writing) by your probation officer.

a
soira
order pursuant to the conditions of s.490.012(1) have been met in
this case. the order is mandatory. you will be required to comply the terms of
a
soira
order for 20 years.

this
is a primary compulsory designated offence, and a dna order will be made, and a
sample will be taken from you while in custody today.

this
is an offence where violence against h.o. was threatened. given the maximum
sentence of 14 years, i am required to impose a weapons prohibition against mr.
collinge pursuant to
s.109
of the
criminal code.
•
you
will be prohibited from possessing any firearm, crossbow, restricted weapon,
firearm part, ammunition and explosive substance effective from your release
from custody and for the next 10 years.
•
you
will also be prohibited from possessing any prohibited firearm, restricted
firearm, prohibited weapon, prohibited device and prohibited ammunition for
life.

a
s.161 prohibition has been considered and it is appropriate to make such an
order. it will be for 20 years to coincide and work in conjunction with the
soira
order.
upon your release from custody, you will be prohibited from
•
attending
a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years
are present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre,
schoolground, playground or community centre
•
seeking,
obtaining, or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment is
remunerated, or becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity that involves being
in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years
•
having
any contact – including communicating by any means – with a person who is under
the age of 16 years except as required in the course of lawful employment.
•
using
the internet or other digital network except as required in the course of
lawful employment. you will not directly or indirectly access any social media
sites, social network, internet discussion forum or chat room, or maintain a
personal profile on any such service (for example but not limited to kik,
signal, facebook, x, bluesky, instagram, snapchat, tiktok, whatsapp, telegram,
threema, threads, or any equivalent or similar service). you may have a
cellular phone for personal use as long as it is not capable of accessing the
internet.

given
mr. collinge has been in custody for a significant period of time, and has no
income, i find that to order he pay the victim fine surcharge, in the
circumstances of this case, would be an undue hardship. i will waive his obligation
to do so.

i
direct that a copy of the
mha
assessment be sent to mr. collinge’s
probation officer so that they can utilize the recommendations contained
therein to assist mr. collinge should they deem it appropriate.

my
thanks to counsel.
released: july 17, 2025
signed: justice a. neil
singh