source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj594/2025oncj594.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. wilhelm, 2025 oncj 594
date: 2025 11 13
court file no.: windsor
22-81101040
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
nicholas
wilhelm
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 9
september 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 13 november 2025
andrea harris...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
evan weber................................................................................. 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

on
5 september 2025, i found nicholas wilhelm (hereinafter “the offender”) guilty
of possessing child pornography. sentencing submissions were made on that
date. these are my reasons for sentence.
facts

the
windsor police service was made aware by the national centre for missing and
exploited children of a facebook user who was sharing child pornography. the
specific internet protocol (ip) address used for the sharing was investigated,
as was the related facebook account. the information gained in that
investigation led police to the offender. he was the facebook user, and the ip
address was related to his residence.

on
arrest, police searched the offender’s phone. a partial analysis was carried
out. the results of that analysis are summarized in the categorization report
filed as an exhibit. while there were 115,818 total images on the phone, only
20,961 were reviewed. of that number, police found 123 unique videos that met
the definition of child pornography. there were as well 100 images of child
pornography, but police determined that all but one was a thumbnail image that
corresponded to one of the found videos. these thumbnails were in the phone’s
cache file. as the report noted, “this means the video files were
viewed/accessed on the samsung galaxy s8, thereby creating the thumbnail images
of the videos.” i do not understand the crown to be arguing additional
culpability as a result of these images specifically as it appears they were
created without the input of the offender once the related videos were
accessed.

unlike
the images, the videos were not found in a cache file. rather, each was found
in the phone’s facebook messenger folder. they had been actively downloaded by
the offender.
the positions of the parties

for
the offender, counsel seeks a conditional sentence of 18 months. he points to
the offender’s taking of responsibility for his actions and also relies on
caselaw that confirms conditional sentences are not unheard of for this
offence.

crown
counsel seeks a sentence of 12 months jail, followed by probation, together
with various ancillary orders. while acknowledging that conditional sentences
are available, counsel argues it would be inappropriate in this case. the
crown also filed caselaw in support of its position.
the pre-sentence report

the
pre-sentence report (psr) in this case is mixed. it sets out the offender’s background,
which was largely positive. he enjoyed a good relationship with his mother and
had his needs met as a child. he was in a relationship for 25 years, which
produced three children. the relationship ended in 2006 when the offender was
charged with threatening his partner. he maintains some contact with his two
sons, but is closest to his daughter. he said both he and his partner had
issues with alcohol, which contributed to the demise of their marriage.

since
the end of the marriage, the offender has been in two other long-term
relationships: one of ten years’ duration, and his current relationship, which
began approximately five years ago.

the
offender has been employed for most of his adulthood. he worked at an
automotive company for 23 years and in roofing for 6 years. for the past four
years, he has worked as a process operator. he continues to hold that job. on
retirement, he would like to move out of the city.

regarding
addictions, the offender has struggled with alcohol for a long time. he
attended rehab in 2009 and maintained sobriety for 18 months before relapsing. 
currently, he told the psr author he drinks two beers a night. he doesn’t see
his drinking as a problem currently, but agreed he could probably benefit from
counselling just the same.

at
the time of the offence, the offender said he was drinking heavily. this, he
said, is no longer the case.

generally,
the above is positive. the offender has support from his family and is
employed. he appears to have his alcohol consumption under control. all of
these facts reflect well on him.

that
being said, the psr also produces some concern. this is from pages 4 and 5:
the subject stated he was heavily drinking
during this period of his life, and he was single during the time that he was
part of the “adult discussion groups”. when questioned about the nature of the
discussion groups, he remained vague and denied any pornographic content.

it
is curious that the offender would point to these adult discussion groups when
discussing the offence, but then deny there was any pornographic content in
them. later on page 5, the psr author noted:
…he demonstrated difficulty accepting
responsibility, indicating he was not aware of the content of the videos he had
saved.

this
issue was addressed in submissions. after hearing from both counsel and from
the offender himself, the following became clear: the offender downloaded adult
pornography through facebook. amongst the adult material, he also downloaded
child pornography. while that initial download may not have been intentional,
he soon realized what he had and took no steps to delete it. i am satisfied he
had the requisite knowledge and control to establish possession of the
material. i note further there is no suggestion this material sat unseen in
the messenger folder. as the categorization report stated, the thumbnail
images were only created after the videos were viewed. this was not a case of
a handful of child pornography files mixed unexpectedly into a long list of
other downloads. it was 123 unique videos of children and toddlers being
abused by adults. the offender saw what he had and intentionally kept it. respectfully,
his statement to me that “i was intending on removing it, i just hadn’t gotten
around to it yet” does not ring true. deleting a file from a cell phone is not
an onerous process. if he’d wanted to delete them, he would have.
principles of sentencing

parliament
has enacted several sections of the
criminal code
that are relevant to the
present case.

to
begin, s. 718 sets out the purpose and principles of sentencing. a sentence
should protect society and encourage respect for the law. it must consider
several objectives, like denunciation, deterrence, rehabilitation, and
reparation.

section
718.01 requires a sentencing court to prioritize denunciation and deterrence
when an offence involves the abuse of a person under 18 years old. while the
offence before me does not involve hands-on abuse of a child by the offender, it
clearly involves child abuse. i am mandated to emphasize denunciation and
deterrence in fashioning an appropriate sentence.

section
718.2(a)(ii.1) makes the abuse of a person under the age of 18 an aggravating
factor. again, while there was no hands-on abuse in the present case, as
stated by justice woolcombe in
r.
v.
john
2017 onsc 810 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 651
(s.c.j.), “inherent in the possession of child pornography is the abuse of
children” (see par. 26).

further,
a person should not be deprived of their liberty if other less restrictive
sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances, and any sentence imposed
should be similar to those imposed in similar cases.

finally,
and fundamentally, a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
caselaw

both
counsel relied on several cases in support of their positions. i begin by
noting that after submissions were completed, the supreme court of canada
released its decision in
quebec (attorney general)
v.
senneville
2025 scc 33. this case officially struck down the mandatory minimum sentence
of one year jail when the offence before me is prosecuted by indictment. i say
“officially”, as courts in ontario had been effectively functioning without
that minimum since the decision of our court of appeal
in
r.
v.
john
2018 onca 702.

while
senneville
has come under significant public scrutiny, justice pardu in
john
explained why minimum sentences for the present offence are not required. her
honour said this at paragraph 41:
the mandatory
minimum is entirely unnecessary. this court has recently emphasized the
importance of denunciation and deterrence for any offence involving abuse of a
child, and that those principles are the primary principles of sentencing
applicable for such offences involving child pornography: r. v. inksetter
(2018),
141 o.r. (3d) 161,
 o.j. no. 2702,
2018 onca 474, at para.
16. in
another recent decision, r. v. s. (j.),
 o.j. no. 4095,
2018 onca 675,
this court upheld a sentence of 18 years for sexual abuse of young children,
making child pornography depicting that abuse and distribution of that
material.

the
removal of any mandatory minimum sentence in this case really has little effect
on my decision. the possession of child abuse material was a gravely serious
offence before
senneville
and
john, and it remains so today.

the
defence cases largely support the imposition of a conditional sentence, while
the crown cases do not.

as
i have said elsewhere,
r.
v.
friesen
2020 scc 9 (canlii),
 1 s.c.r. 424
was a
watershed moment in canadian criminal jurisprudence. it stated clearly that
sentences for child abuse in canada were too short and needed to be increased. 
it recognized the permanent, horrible damage abuse can inflict on children. 
that applies both to children who are abused by the offenders before the court,
as well as those who are abused throughout the world to feed the demand for
child pornography. it must be further remembered that in the case of images or
videos of child abuse, those files can live forever online. each time they are
viewed, the child is victimized again. images and videos of abuse created
today will still be available years from now. thanks to the internet, the
abuse and victimization is perpetual.

all
sentencing decisions for this offence must take
friesen
into account.

r.
v.
pike
2024 onca 608
is a decision of chief justice tulloch. in this lengthy and detailed
ruling, the chief justice spoke powerfully of the effect this offence can have
on its victims. at paragraph 7, his honour said:
these offences against children are
abhorrent in nature and have lasting and widespread societal impact. by
possessing recordings depicting the sexual abuse and exploitation of children
over the course of three decades, mr. scott sexually abused children by
invading their privacy, wounding their dignity, and causing them serious
emotional harm. he shares culpability with those who produced the images
depicting the victimization of children that he possessed on his digital
devices. the offences for which he was charged normalize and increase the
demand for further child abuse and exploitation. they increase the risk of
sexual abuse of children and perpetuate demeaning messages that children are
property or objects and not people. a child-centered approach to sentencing
requires judges to consider child victims and the wrongs and harms that people
who possess child pornography inflict on them, to reject myths that minimize
the perpetrator’s responsibility and, finally, to apply a denunciatory
sentencing range that reflects the abhorrent and harmful nature of these
offences and their long-term negative impacts on children.

at
paragraphs 144 – 165, chief justice tulloch set out in detail the myriad ways
in which the possession of child pornography is a gravely serious offence that
harms victims and society. i will not repeat those paragraphs here but i do
rely on them in determining a fit sentence in the present case.

his
honour declined to set a lower end for sentencing ranges related to the
possession of child pornography. he did note the effect
friesen
had in
raising the upper end of any such ranges.

the
case of
r.
v.
rule
2023 onca 31
saw a 22-month jail sentence
upheld by the court of appeal for an offender with a large collection of images
and videos obtained over the course of several years. this case included the
rare circumstance of three victims being located by police and presenting
victim impact statements. despite the offender’s age and poor health, the
trial judge’s sentence, and her determination that a conditional sentence was
inappropriate, were both upheld.

the
offender
relied on
r.
v.
king
2020 abpc 219. in that case, king
was in possession of 1,112 images and 79 videos, as well as 500 written stories
of child pornography. while the offender was ultimately sentenced to 18 months
incarceration, justice fradsham did note that a conditional sentence was not
unavailable. his honour cited the manitoba provincial court
decision of
r.
v.
nepon
2020 mbpc 48
as an example of when it was found to be a proper
sentence.

in
nepon, the offender was partially blind and had been diagnosed as being
on the autism spectrum. the trial judge had the benefit of two experts who
testified that the offender’s physical and developmental limitations meant any
sort of custodial environment would be inordinately difficult. as one expert
testified, “
i
cannot imagine any correctional setting being a suitable place for him. he will
stand out significantly, be vulnerable and he would not even be able to
self-isolate if he felt frightened.” (see paragraph 144). justice devine found
a custodial sentence would be grossly disproportionate for that offender. as
her honour stated at paragraph 109:
this is a case where the circumstances of
the offender make it the exception to the rule.

in
imposing a conditional sentence, the court stated the following at paragraph 154:
the sentence will be a
12-month conditional sentence order (cso) followed by two years of
supervised probation. the length of the cso and the probation order are in
recognition of the unintentional punitive effect of the release conditions which
have been in place for over two years, of the over 18 months of effective sex
offender treatment mr. nepon has already completed, and his low risk to
reoffend.

respectfully,
i see none of the mitigating
factors in
nepon
reflected in the present
case. nepon was on a bail condition prohibiting him from using a cell phone,
but given his vision impairment, he needed his phone to zoom in on things like
street signs. he had already undergone significant treatment that the experts
said was working. it is not hard to agree with justice devine that
nepon
was an exceptional case.

in
the case of
r.
v.
friesen
2021 abpc 223
(a different friesen from
the supreme court case), a 21-year old offender who had 100 child pornography
images on his phone was given a conditional sentence of two years less a day. 
he had no prior record. his guilty plea was at an early stage of proceedings,
and he’d taken extensive counselling prior to sentencing. the sentencing judge
also noted the publicity that surrounded the case, and the impact public
knowledge of his offence had had on the offender.

a
conditional sentence was also imposed
in the case of
r.
v.
dutchession
2021 oncj 480. the offender in that case was 51 years old and had no prior
record. he was found to have 5,605 unique images of child pornography on his
laptop. justice mcleod found several mitigating factors to be present. this
is from paragraph 5:
i find the
following to be mitigating facts:
(1)the
plea of guilt;
(2)the lack of
prior criminal antecedents, which is enhanced by the defendant's age;
(3)the otherwise
good character and community involvement of the defendant, including service to
his country and deployment to combat zones;
(4)mr.
dutchession's mental health issues, subsequent and on-going treatment for same;
(5)mr.
dutchession's genuine expression of remorse;
(6)mr.
dutchession's expression of insight into the damage caused by child
pornography;
(7)the
images accessed were limited to images and not videos;
(8)the
collateral consequences suffered by mr. dutchession.

even
setting aside the question of whether a collection of images as opposed to
videos is a mitigating factor (in my view it is not), there were several
factors present for dutchession that are absent for the offender. notable is
the fact that he had been assessed by a psychologist and found to be motivated
to understand his offence and presented a manageable risk in the community. as
well, the covid-19 pandemic was cited by her honour in finding that
incarceration would be especially difficult.

finally,
the defence
relies on
r.
v.
jongsma
2021 onsc 796, where a
conditional sentence was imposed on an offender who had himself been the victim
of sexual abuse in childhood.

the
crown relied on several cases that speak against the imposition of a
conditional sentence.
r.
v.
rousseau
 o.j. no. 877 (c.j.)
involved a 66-year old offender who possessed 21 unique child pornography
images. these images were what has become known as modelling images; that is,
the victims are posed but are not engaged in sexual activity. this is not a
mitigating factor, but the nature of the images means this offender did not
bear the additional aggravation of depictions of active physical abuse.

while
finding a conditional sentence would not endanger the community, justice
shandler nonetheless imposed 12 months jail, saying the offence required a
denunciatory sentence.

in
r.
v.
snead
2021 onsc 7017
a conditional sentence was overturned
on appeal. the offender possessed six images of child pornography and had
engaged in online video calls with groups of men where child abuse videos were
shared. the summary conviction appeal court found the eight-month conditional
sentence to be manifestly unfit and replaced it with a 12-month jail sentence.

the
crown offered several other cases that all reiterated the same theme:
possession of child pornography is a very serious offence that requires a harsh,
denunciatory sentence. while i will not summarize all of the cases provided, i
have reviewed them.

i
will refer specifically to the court of appeal for ontario’s decision in
r.
v.
m.m.
2022 onca 441. a unanimous court said this at paragraphs 15 and
16:
15 the supreme
court's instructions from friesen could not be clearer: sentences for sexual
offences against children must increase. there are no qualifications here.
sentences have been too low for too long. denunciation and deterrence are of
primary importance:
r. v. inksetter,
2018 onca 474,
141 o.r. (3d) 161, at para.
3. those who commit sexual offences against children must understand that
carceral sentences will ordinarily follow.
16 conditional
sentences for sexual offences against children will only rarely be appropriate.
their availability must be limited to exceptional circumstances that render incarceration
inappropriate - for example, where it gives rise to a medical hardship that
could not adequately be addressed within the correctional facility. it would
not be appropriate to enumerate exceptional circumstances here and we make no
attempt to do so. suffice it to say that no exceptional circumstances are
present in this case. a sentence of imprisonment should have been imposed.

the
bottom line from all of these cases is this: while conditional sentences are
legally available for this offence, they are to be the rare exception. absent
significant extenuating circumstances, they will generally be contrary to the
purpose and principles of sentencing enacted by parliament and energized by appellate
courts since the 2020
friesen
decision.
aggravating and mitigating factors

in
aggravation, i note the following factors:
(1)
the
offender’s prior record;
(2)
the
size of the offender’s collection, while not as large as some cases, is larger
than several of the cited cases;
(3)
the
nature of the material goes beyond modelling and includes children as young as
two years old engaged in sexual activity with adults. in one video, a girl
approximately 9 – 10 years old can be heard crying and asking the adult male
assaulting her to stop. that video goes on for nearly three and a half minutes;
and
(4)
the
videos are of real children. they are not animations or written stories that
do not victimize actual people.

in
mitigation, i note the following factors:
(1)
the
offender’s guilty plea;
(2)
the
offender has the support of his partner and is gainfully employed;
(3)
the
offender has taken steps to deal with his alcohol addiction, which he said was
a contributing factor to his offending; and
(4)
the
offender expressed at least limited insight into his offence. to me directly,
he expressed shame at his conduct. to the psr author he said he was “sickened
and disgusted” with himself.
analysis

i
have already set out how appellate courts tell trial courts to deal with child
pornography offences. while each offender is an individual who must be treated
as such, these offences are gravely serious and must attract meaningful
sentences.

the
offender’s counsel seeks a conditional sentence of imprisonment. i agree the
sentence to be imposed here would be less than two years and that the offence
is not otherwise excluded from the conditional sentence regime. it is,
therefore, available.

would
a conditional sentence in this case endanger the safety of the community? taking
the circumstances of the offence into account, i find the answer is no. the
offender has taken steps to bring his drinking under control and is in a
long-term relationship. i find it would be possible to address any public
safety concerns through the imposition of an appropriately restrictive
conditional sentence.

a
conditional sentence, however, would not be consistent with the purpose and
principles of sentencing. in every case cited to me where such a sentence was
imposed, the offender enjoyed mitigating factors that are not present in this
case. the caselaw is very clear that conditional sentences for this offence
should be the rare exception. i see nothing in the case before me that brings
it within that definition. as i have stated elsewhere, a problem with
conditional sentences for this offence is that they confine the offender to
what are largely the circumstances under which the offence was committed: he
must stay in his house at all times. when a crime is committed by a person sitting
alone in their home, sentencing them to remain in their home is not especially
punitive.

i
say this recognizing that a conditional sentence can indeed achieve the goals
of denunciation and deterrence. i accept that as a principle of conditional
sentences. in the present case, however, it would not be sufficient.

the
offender possessed well over 100 videos of sickening child abuse. his moral
culpability is high. to emphasize the court’s and society’s condemnation of
his conduct, a jail sentence is necessary.

the
crown seeks a jail sentence of 12 months. this reflects what had been the
minimum mandatory sentence prior to
john
and
senneville. in my
view, taking
friesen,
pike, and other cases
into account, the
crown could have reasonably sought a higher sentence. courts should not be
hesitant in imposing sentences that truly reflect the horror this material represents. 
that said, this is not a case where i will go above what the crown seeks. i
did not advise counsel i was considering that option and so in fairness to the
offender i will not do so.
result

the
offender will be sentenced as follows:
(1)
he
will be imprisoned for a period of 12 months;
(2)
on
release, he will be bound by a probation order for 24 months on the following
terms, in addition to the statutory conditions:
(a)
report
in person to a probation officer within two working days of your release from
custody, and after that at all times and places as directed by your probation
officer or any person authorized by your probation officer to assist in your
supervision;
(b)
cooperate
with your probation officer. you must sign any releases necessary for your
probation officer to monitor your compliance, and you must provide proof of
compliance with any condition of this order to your probation officer on
request;
(c)
attend
and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed by the probation officer, and complete them to the
satisfaction of the probation officer, including but not limited to counselling
for alcohol abuse and psychiatric or psychological issues
(3)
he
will provide a sample of his dna to the windsor police service for inclusion in
the national dna databank on or before 31 december 2025;
(4)
he
will be bound by an order pursuant to
s. 161
of the
criminal code. the order
will be pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b) only, and will be for a period of
five years;
(5)
he
will register under the sex offenders information registry for a period of 20
years;
(6)
there
will be a $200 victim surcharge, payable within 90 days of today’s date.

i
have considered imposing a condition, either through the s. 161 order or the
probation order, prohibiting or restricting the offender’s use of the
internet. in my view, given the ubiquity of the internet in 2025, this
condition is largely unworkable and not warranted in this case. further, an
order prohibiting him from accessing child pornography would be redundant as
such conduct is already illegal. if these proceedings have not impressed on
the offender the consequences of illegal online activity, i doubt an additional
term on an order will either.
released: 
13 november 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt