source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj221/2025oncj221.html

ontario court of
justice
citation:
r. v. cassells-watson, 2025 oncj 221
date: 
april 22, 2025
court
file no.: toronto 23 48117806
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
connor-jay cassells-watson
before
justice p.f. band
reasons
for judgment released on april 22, 2025
ms. c. josic......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
mr. n. fitzmaurice.................................. counsel
for the accused mr. cassells-watson
band j.:
i.
introduction
the investigation and arrests

mr. cassells-watson was arrested along with his
co-accused shagghary scott on september 20, 2023. each of them was in
possession a firearm and both were charged accordingly.

prior to the arrests, mr. scott had been the
target of a
guns and gangs task force
(ggtf) investigation. members of
that task force had obtained warrants to search a car and two addresses that
were associated with him. one of those addresses was
110 mornelle court
in scarborough. on september 20, the officers planned to locate,
surveille and arrest mr. scott so that they could then execute the searches.

they set up at 110 mornelle court to try to
locate mr. scott. while there, they saw him interacting with mr.
cassells-watson in the parking lot. this included a transaction in which he appeared
to hand something to mr. cassells-watson, who then put the item in his hoody
pocket. after that, the two walked to a nearby gas station and entered the
kiosk. at that point, the officers were directed to arrest mr. scott and place mr.
cassells-watson under investigative detention. they entered the kiosk and
quickly took physical control of both men and grounded them. while searching
mr. scott incident to arrest, they found a handgun in his satchel. once mr.
cassells-watson was on the ground, an officer patted him down and found a
handgun tucked in the waistband of his pants. as a result, he too was arrested.
his arrival at the police station was delayed by the late arrival of uniformed
transport officers and a further wait for entry into the station at the sally
port. this delayed his ability to speak to counsel privately.
the charter
applications

the ito in support of the warrants relied
heavily on information provided by a confidential source (“cs”). accordingly,
it was substantially redacted. mr. scott brought a pre-trial “
garofoli
” application
pursuant to s. 8 of the
charter. he sought the exclusion of the firearm
and drugs that were found on his person, as well as other evidence found at one
of the addresses. i dismissed his application with written reasons dated
january 6, 2025:
r. v. scott,
2025 oncj 220. my publicly available
reasons contained redacted passages. an unredacted version exists under seal in
the court record.

in those reasons, i found that the cs’s
information was credible and compelling and that the warrants disclosed reasonable
and probable grounds to believe that mr. scott was in current possession of a
firearm, either on his person or at one of the locations listed in the
warrants. this was despite the fact that the police had not been able to
corroborate much of what the cs had told them, other than information about mr.
scott’s satchel.

after receiving my judgment dismissing his
garofoli
application, mr. scott decided to change his plea to guilty and has since been
sentenced.

at trial, mr. cassells-watson brought an
application to have the firearm excluded because of alleged violations of his
s. 8, 9 and 10(b)
charter
rights. the trial proceeded in blended
fashion. mr. cassells-watson did not testify on the application or the trial
proper.

mr. cassells-watson’s application is dismissed
for the following reasons, which should be read in conjunction with my reasons
dismissing mr. scott’s
garofoli
application.

ii.
the issues

on behalf of mr. cassells-watson, mr.
fitzmaurice takes issue with the credibility of some of the officers’ testimony
but argues that even if i take them at their word, mr. cassells-watson’s s. 8
and 9 rights were violated, and the evidence ought to be excluded. he argues
that the police violated mr. cassells-watson’s right to be free from arbitrary
detention and unreasonable search by
1.
detaining him without reasonable grounds to
suspect that he was involved in criminality;
2.
using an excessive amount of force amounting to
a
de facto
arrest in the context of an investigative detention or, put
another way, effectively arresting mr. cassells-watson for an offence without
reasonable and probable grounds; and
3.
conducting a pat-down or safety search of his
person without reasonable grounds to believe that that there was an imminent
risk to their safety or the public’s.

with respect to s. 10(b), mr. fitzmaurice argues that the officers
did not implement mr. cassells-watson’s right to counsel in a timely fashion
and that the crown has failed to justify the delays.

on behalf of the crown, ms. josic argues that the detention of mr.
cassells-watson was based on reasonable suspicion and carried out with
reasonable force. the pat-down search was permitted in the circumstances. while
the implementation of mr. cassells-watson’s right to counsel was delayed, the
delay was reasonable and accounted for. what is more, he indicated no desire to
speak to counsel during the delay.
iii.
applicable legal principles
section 8 – reasonable and probable grounds to believe

as the supreme court of canada explained in
r. v. storrey,
1990 canlii 125 (scc), 1 scr 241 at pp. 250-1,
the
criminal code
requires
that an arresting officer must subjectively have reasonable and probable
grounds on which to base the arrest. those grounds must, in addition, be
justifiable from an objective point of view. that is to say, a reasonable
person placed in the position of the officer must be able to conclude that
there were indeed reasonable and probable grounds for the arrest. on the other
hand, the police need not demonstrate anything more than reasonable and
probable grounds. specifically, they are not required to establish a
prima
facie
case for conviction before making the arrest.

the
law does not demand the same of a police officer in an arrest situation as that
which is expected of a justice considering a search warrant. the police officer
must make his or her decision in a volatile environment with incomplete
information: see
r. v. bush
2010 onca 554,
at para.
43.
section 9 –
investigative detention

section 9 protects against arbitrary arrest or detention. in
r.
v. mann
2004 scc 22, at para.
34, the supreme court of canada explained
that investigative detentions must be premised on reasonable grounds to
suspect. unlike the reasonable and probable grounds standard, which is about
probability,
reasonable suspicion is about
possibility: see
r. v. chehil
2013
scc 49, at para.
27. however, like reasonable and probable grounds, this
standard has subjective and objective components. the court explained as
follows:
the detention must be viewed as
reasonably necessary on an objective view of the circumstances, informing the
officer’s suspicion that there is a clear nexus between the individual to be
detained and a recent or on-going criminal offence. reasonable grounds figures
at the front-end of such an assessment, underlying the officer’s reasonable
suspicion that the particular individual is
implicated
in the criminal activity under investigation. the overall reasonableness
of the decision to detain, however, must further be assessed against al of the
circumstance, most notably the extent to which the interference with individual
liberty is necessary to perform the officer’s duty, the liberty interfered
with, and the nature and extent of the interference….

at para. 52, the court added that an officer may place an individual
under investigative detention “if there are reasonable grounds to suspect in
all the circumstances that the individual is connected to a particular crime
and that such detention is necessary.” such detentions are expected to be
brief: at para. 45.
section 9 –
search incident to investigative detention

in
mann,
supra, at para.
40, the court wrote that
during an investigative detention a search power does not exist as a matter of
course. rather, “the officer must believe on reasonable grounds that his or her
safety, or the safety of others, is at risk.” this question is to be viewed “in
light of the totality of circumstances. it cannot be justified on the basis of
a vague or non-existent concern for safety, nor can the search be premised upon
hunches or intuition.”

importantly, unlike searches incident to arrest, investigative
detentions do not authorize police officers to search a person or their
property for evidence.
while the police have common law duty to investigate
crime, they are not empowered to undertake any and all action in the exercise
of that duty. individual liberty interests are fundamental to the canadian
constitutional order. consequently, any intrusion upon them must not be taken lightly
and, as a result, police officers do not have carte blanche to detain. the
power to detain cannot be exercised on the basis of a hunch, nor can it become
a
de facto
arrest:
ibid, at para. 35.

at
para. 43, the court wrote that a frisk search is a “relatively non-intrusive
procedure,” that lasts “only a few seconds.” as such, “[w]here an officer has
reasonable grounds to believe that his or her safety is at risk, the officer
may engage in a protective pat-down search of the detained individual.” however,
the search “must be grounded in objectively discernible facts to prevent
‘fishing expeditions’ on the basis of irrelevant or discriminatory factors.”

mann
led to some confusion about the scope of police search powers and the court
sought to address it in
r. v. macdonald
2014 scc 3. at
para. 40 the majority held that
the duty of police officers to
protect life and safety may justify the power to conduct a safety search in
certain circumstances. at the very least, where a search is reasonably
necessary to eliminate an imminent threat to the safety of the public or the
police, the police should have the power to conduct the search.

however, the court cautioned that
the power to carry one out is not
unbridled …. the principles laid down in
mann
and reaffirmed in
clayton
require the existence of circumstances establishing the necessity of safety
searches, reasonably and objectively considered, to address an imminent threat
to the safety of the public or the police. given the high privacy interests at
stake in such searches, the search will be authorized by law only if the police
officer believes on reasonable grounds that his or her safety is at stake and
that, as a result, it is necessary to conduct a search…. the legality of the
search therefore turns on its reasonable, objectively verifiable necessity in
the circumstances of the matter…. as the court stated in
mann, a search
cannot be justified on the basis of a vague concern for safety. rather, for a
safety search to be lawful, the officer must act on "reasonable and
specific inferences drawn from the known facts of the situation….”:
ibid,
at para. 41 (internal citations omitted).

to conduct this analysis,
…the actions of the police in
conducting the search must be scrutinized to determine whether the search was
carried out reasonably…. if the extent of the infringement is greater than what
is required to search for weapons, the search will not be authorized by law. at
this point, however, the overall reasonableness of the search must be assessed
in light of the totality of the circumstances…. it is necessary to consider not
only the extent of the interference, but how it was carried out. this inquiry
turns on whether the search was minimally intrusive on the privacy interest at
stake. in other words, the manner in which the search was carried out must have
been reasonably necessary to eliminate any threat:
ibid, at para. 42
(internal citations omitted).

while concurring in the result, justices moldaver and wagner (as he
then was) registered a strongly worded disagreement with the majority’s
approach to safety searches associated with investigative detention. at para.
91, they summarized the effect of the majority’s decision:
as of today, officers are empowered
to detain individuals they suspect are armed and dangerous for investigatory
purposes, but they have no power to conduct pat-down searches to ensure their
safety or the safety of the public as they conduct these investigations.
they described this result as anomalous, redundant and defying
common sense: at paras. 79-81. in their view, “a police officer in the field,
faced with a realistic risk of imminent harm, should be able to act immediately
and take reasonable steps, in the form of a minimally intrusive safety search,
to alleviate the risk”: at para. 91.

as it turns out, the
macdonald
decision has led to confusion
regarding the basis on which safety searches are permitted in the context of
investigative detention, and their scope. in
r. v. buakaska
2023 onca
383
at paras.
31-45, the ontario court of appeal recently discussed the
existence of an “ongoing debate.” did the concurring justices in
macdonald
interpret the majority’s ruling correctly? did
macdonald
recalibrate the
mann
standard? is there more than one standard? how pivotal is the
imminence
of the risk to safety? see also:
r. v. aim
2023 onsc 5305 at paras.
86-94.

in
r. v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 365
at para.
52, justice doherty
noted the possibility for confusion stemming from
macdonald, and found
that a “reasonable belief of an imminent threat could … be based on the
reasonable suspicion that the appellant had a handgun.” citing
mann, the
court made a similar ruling in
r. v. buffong
2024 onca 660
at paras.
7-9.
section 10(b) – implementational delays

section 10(b) of the
charter
guarantees
that upon arrest or detention every person shall have the right to retain and
instruct counsel without delay. the rationale for the right was
discussed by
the supreme court of canada in
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33, at para
42:
[t]he purpose of s. 10(b) is to
ensure that individuals know of their right to counsel and have access to it,
in situations where
they suffer a significant
deprivation of liberty due to state coercion which leaves them vulnerable to
the exercise of state power and in a position of legal jeopardy. specifically,
the right to counsel is meant to assist detainees regain their liberty, and
guard against the risk of involuntary self-incrimination.

as doherty j.a. observed in
r. v. rover
2018 onca 745, at
para.
45
the right to counsel is a lifeline
for detained persons. through that lifeline, detained persons obtain, not only
legal advice and guidance about the procedures to which they will be subjected,
but also the sense that they are not entirely at the mercy of the police while
detained. the psychological value of access to counsel without delay should not
be underestimated.

as the court of appeal recently explained in
r. v. samuels,
2024
onca 786, at para.
24, when access to counsel is delayed, the burden is on the
crown to show that a given delay was reasonable in the circumstances. in
r.
v. keshavarz,
2022 onca 312, at para.
71, fairburn a.c.j.o. explained:
[i]n specific circumstances the
implementational component of the right to counsel may be suspended. those
specific circumstances often involve concerns over police or public safety or
the preservation of evidence. [internal citations omitted.]

iv.
the facts

a summary of the facts will put my analysis into context. for the
most part, they are not controversial. where they are, i make findings
accordingly.
the officers

at trial, the crown called six officers whose combined experience
exceeds 100 years of policing. det. stolf has been a police officer for 29
years. he has been a member of the ggtf since 2012. he supervised the team of
officers who investigated mr. scott and mr. cassells-watson in this case and
called for the arrest of mr. scott and detention of mr. cassells-watson. sgt.
blake has been a police officer for 21 years. he has been with the ggtf for
three. he has conducted hundreds of firearm investigations, some of which
involved surveillance, and has received training relating to such cases. he
also grew up in 110 mornelle court. in this case, he was in a position to make direct
observations of mr. cassells-watson’s interactions with mr. scott in the
parking lot, which he relayed to the rest of the team on the radio. dc danson
has been a police officer for 16 years. he has been a member of the ggtf for
five years. in this case, he entered the kiosk first, and quickly arrested mr.
scott. dc da silva has been a police officer for over 17 years. prior to that,
he was an officer in scarborough for six years. he has made hundreds of firearm
and drug arrests. he entered the kiosk moments after dc danson and took
physical control of mr. cassells-watson. dc prodeus has been a police officer
for 15 years. he has been with the ggtf since 2022. he was at the gas station
when mr. scott and mr. cassells-watson arrived. he entered the kiosk and helped
dc da silva in detaining mr. cassells-watson. he conducted the pat-down search
that led to the discovery of the handgun in his waistband. he also informed mr.
cassells-watson of his right to counsel upon detention, arrest and a third time
before mr. cassells-watson was transported to the division. pc tanya cross has
been a police officer for 10 years. she attended the gas station with her
partner to transport mr. cassells-watson to the nearest police division.
the investigation

based on the ito, the officers had reasonable and probable grounds
to believe that mr. scott was in current possession of a firearm on his person
or at one of the locations to be searched. they also knew that he was on a
release for offences involving a firearm and drugs. that said, there was no
indication that he was a gun trafficker.

on september 20 at their briefing, they set the goals of locating
and arresting mr. scott when safe to do so, and then to execute the search
warrants. no one was assigned the task of performing the arrest, nor were they
directed as to how to do so. they are an experienced team and they make these
decisions as they arise.

shortly before 1pm, the team went to 110 mornelle court to look for mr.
scott. by all accounts, it is a high crime area that is plagued with drug
traffic, gun violence and, a in recent years, a number of homicides. they set
themselves up in various locations and communicated by radio. i heard a lot of
evidence about how those communications are expected to proceed. all of them
agreed that the purpose is to give the supervisor (det. stolf in this case) the
information required to make operational decisions, such as calling for an
arrest. they do this by giving concise and timely information about what they
are observing. it should be detailed but to the point. it should be brief, so
as to not tie up the line. it also involves police jargon. questions are not
common as they can lead to observations being missed. a “central note taker” is
assigned to keep notes of the communications so that the others can focus on
making and relaying their observations. later, at a debrief, they discuss and
ensure that the central notes are accurate and then, each can continue to make
his or her own notes.

for a period, mr. scott was seen interacting with a woman and child
in the parking lot of 110 mornelle court, near a gray honda. he was wearing a
t-shirt at the time. he then went to the building. at 1:43pm, mr.
cassells-watson arrived at the parking lot on foot and went directly to the
gray honda where mr. scott had been earlier. he was standing behind it, looking
down at his phone. mr. cassells-watson, who was a young man standing
approximately six feet tall, was unknown to the officers at this time. less
than a minute later, mr. scott exited the building and went directly to mr.
cassells-watson. this time, he was wearing a black sweater and satchel. the two
shook hands and had a conversation. at 1:46pm, mr. scott returned to the
building. at 1:48pm, sgt. blake saw mr. cassells-watson with his “head on a
swivel and watching every single motor vehicle that comes in and out.” having
one’s head on a swivel is a piece of police jargon that the team uses
regularly. to sgt. blake, it means someone who is constantly scanning the area.
it did not require definition over the radio. based on his experience, people
who are on the look out for police or opposing gang members can behave this way.
det. stolf had the same understanding of the term, and the same concerns about
the behaviour it describes. he has seen it done when one individual is waiting
for another to retrieve something for an illicit exchange.

at 1:50pm, mr. scott exited the building and returned directly to mr.
cassells-watson. they had more conversation, and mr. scott showed mr.
cassells-watson something on his phone for a couple minutes. at 1:52pm, mr.
scott handed something to mr. cassells-watson, which he took with his right
hand and immediately placed in his right hoody pocket. sgt. blake did not see
the item and could only say that it was small enough to fit in the palm of
one’s hand. to him, in the circumstances, the behaviour was like a drug
transaction. while he could not rule out a firearm, he believed that what had
been exchanged was drugs. he communicated over the radio that “something” had been
transferred and that it was small. he did not communicate his belief as to what
it was because he had not seen it. like sgt. blake, det. stolf believed that it
could be drugs, but he could not rule out a firearm. at 1:52pm, the two men
then walked over to the gas station and sgt. blake lost sight of them by 1:54pm.

at 1:56pm, det. prodeus saw them arriving. based on his experience
and knowledge, he came to believe that a firearm could have been transferred. he
did not notice a bulge or sway in mr. cassells-watson’s hoodie, and agreed that
whatever it was, mr. cassells-watson had placed it in his hoodie pocket at
1:52pm. however, he noted that there had been ample time for mr.
cassells-watson to move the object between 1:54pm and 1:56pm, when sgt. blake
had ceased reporting any observations of the men. also, he has discovered firearms
in the absence of a bulge or other tell-tale sign in the past.

based on his experience and what he heard and observed, dc da silva
also believed that the item could have been drugs, a firearm or something
benign.
det. stolf’s
stated grounds to detain mr. cassells-watson

det. stolf summarized his grounds to detain mr. cassells-watson as
follows:
-
they had reasonable grounds to believe mr. scott was in possession
of a firearm, either on his person or at one of the locations to be searched;
-
he was aware of the grounds to support the warrants related to mr.
scott;
-
mr. cassells-watson interacted with mr. scott very close to 110
mornelle, where they had reasonable grounds to believe that there would be a
firearm or other evidence;
-
after mr. cassells-watson and mr. scott first interacted, mr. scott
went into the building and returned to where he was, and handed him something –
this looked like a hand-to-hand drug transaction;
-
before mr. scott returned, mr. cassells-watson had his head on a
swivel and was looking at every car that came in or out; and
-
this was not a transitory encounter and they also left together.

on this basis, det. stolf believed that mr. cassells-watson was in
possession of contraband – probably drugs, but a firearm could not be ruled
out. he and other officers testified that drug dealers often possess weapons or
firearms. so do drug purchasers, some of whom are sub-dealers. in addition to
his grounds to suspect that mr. cassells-watson was engaged in criminality,
det. stolf listed a number of safety concerns that added to his decision to
detain mr. cassells-watson. first, if mr. cassells-watson had a weapon, he
could pose a danger during the arrest of mr. scott. second, there was a
potential risk to public safety, given the location and time of day. third, mr.
cassells-watson could interfere with the execution of the warrants by alerting
someone of police presence.

det. stolf felt that the kiosk was a safe and contained place and
gave his team the order to arrest mr. scott and detain mr. cassells-watson at
1:57pm.
the detention and
pat-down of
mr. cassells-watson

given the time of day, the gas station was busy. customers were
entering the kiosk to shop or pay. during the arrest and detention of the two
men, customers continued to enter and approach the counter to pay.

dc danson entered the kiosk first. mr. scott and mr. cassells-watson
were at the counter with their backs to him – mr. scott to the left and mr.
cassells-watson to the right. he quickly took physical control of mr. scott while
announcing that he was a police officer. he did so by bearhugging him around
his body and arms and pulling him to the ground. the goal was to eliminate the
possibility that he might have access to a firearm.

dc da silva entered a very short time after dc danson and decided
that he would detain mr. cassells-watson. he explained that his plan was to
bearhug him and pin him against the counter. the purpose of the bearhug was to
prevent him from accessing a firearm if he had one. however, because he had
entered a second or so after dc danson, he had lost the element of surprise. mr.
cassells-watson had looked over toward mr. scott, and then as dc da silva approached
him with his arms spread out, it appeared to him that mr. cassells-watson was
attempting to flee because he had taken a step back and was ducking or making
himself smaller. the attempted bearhug was unsuccessful. had mr.
cassells-watson remained upright, at six feet tall, it would have been easy for
dc da silva to hug him around his torso. instead, his right arm ended up around
the back of mr. cassells-watson’s neck and his left arm around his right
shoulder. he ended up grabbing hold of mr. cassells-watson’s hoodie and pulling
him to the ground with dc prodeus’s help, in order to maintain control of him.
as he was trying to get his handcuffs, mr. cassells-watson was showing his
hands and saying, “ok ok ok.” he had gone from being non-compliant to being
compliant.

then, dc da silva heard dc danson telling mr. scott to show him his
hands. he looked over and saw that mr. scott was trying to raise his upper
body. so, he jumped over to help dc danson place him in handcuffs. then, he
found a handgun in his satchel.

meanwhile, dc prodeus did a pat-down search of mr. cassells-watson’s
waist and noticed that he had a firearm. when asked why he conducted the
pat-down search, he testified that he believed that mr. scott had a firearm and
wholeheartedly believed that mr. cassells-watson was connected to that crime. his
understanding is that a detainee’s connection to a crime, which authorizes an
investigative detention, also vests him with the authority to conduct a
pat-down search for weapons or means of escape (but not for evidence, which is
limited to arrests). none of the officers involved in this case testified that
they require reasonable and probable grounds to conduct a pat-down search of a
suspect who is being detained for investigative purposes. those who testified
about this, including det. stolf, appeared to understand that they were simply entitled
to search such a detainee for weapons.

less than 10 seconds elapsed between the moment dc da silva entered
the kiosk and the moment that mr. cassells-watson showed him his hands and said,
“ok ok ok.” the process of taking physical control of mr. cassells-watson and
bringing him to the ground took dc da silva three-to-four seconds. the firearm
was located and removed from his waistband within one minute.

in cross-examination, mr. fitzmaurice took dc da silva through the
take down process frame-by-frame, in what is believed to have been tenths of a
second,

using the security video from the gas station and a booklet of stills he had
prepared. his purpose was to try to establish that mr. cassells-watson had not
tried to flee and that it had been dc da silva’s plan to ground him from the
get-go. he relied on det. stolf’s testimony that the take down happened as he
had expected that it would and dc prodeus’s testimony that he would have taken mr.
cassells-watson to the ground, given the nature of the investigation, his size
and age, and the concerns he had about a firearm. dc da silva stood firm. he
indicated that the whole event took place very quickly and that he had had to adapt
and make snap decisions. he added that the video confirmed his testimony. i
agree. it looks to me like mr. cassells-watson did in fact move and hunch over.
dc prodeus gave a similar description of mr. cassells-watson’s position when he
arrived. i bear in mind that the camera angle is from behind and above the
counter, facing downward, which is not ideal. but based on my careful review of
the footage, i find that dc da silva’s interpretation – which had to be made in
a split-second – was reasonable. what happened after looked like someone
slipping a tackle as dc da silva’s right arm deflected off his shoulder or back,
and upward toward the back of his neck. i accept dc da silva’s testimony that
his initial intention was to bearhug mr. cassells-watson and pin him against
the counter. if he had been compliant, that would have sufficed. he explained
that when he has approached suspects from behind and bearhugged them as
intended, they experience a “moment of defeat” and give up. also, it is worth
noting that det. stolf and dc da silva testified that every situation is
different.

mr. fitzmaurice also cross-examined dcs da silva and prodeus about
their stated belief that mr. cassells-watson might be armed. he put to them,
and later argued, that at no time did they believe mr. cassells-watson might be
armed; rather, they made this up after the fact to justify an excessive use of
force and an illegal search. for this, he relied a great deal on the fact that
they had left mr. cassells-watson’s hands free for a spell and that dc da silva
went to help dc danson before mr. cassells-watson was handcuffed. dc da silva
explained that once mr. cassells-watson was on the ground, he became compliant
by showing his hands and saying, “ok ok ok.” what is more, he and dc prodeus
had control of him and could have responded if mr. cassells-watson had made any
moves with his hands. he also pointed out that the whole thing had taken place
very quickly and then he had to go help dc danson.

dc prodeus agreed that mr. cassells-watson’s hands were free for a
couple of seconds as they were taking control of him, however, he disagreed
with the suggestion that he did not believe that mr. cassells-watson was armed.
rather, he explained that with his palms up, mr. cassells-watson was indicating
that he was not a threat. once dc da silva went to help dc danson, dc prodeus
took control of mr. cassells-watson’s hands. his explanation was reasonable and
consistent with the security footage.

mr. fitzmaurice also put to dc prodeus that it did not make sense
that he went straight to mr. cassells-watson’s waist and patted it down, when,
given what sgt. blake had put over the radio, the most obvious place to search
for a firearm was his hoody pocket. dc prodeus repeated his testimony
concerning the two-minute gap between sgt. blake’s last observations and when
he saw the two men arrive at the gas station. his testimony was reasonable.

i accept both officers’ explanations for why they did not grab mr.
cassells-watson’s hands once he was on the ground. as the security footage
confirms, he was showing them his hands and indicating that he was compliant. mr.
scott’s factum refers to this gesture as conveying submission at para. 45. in
addition, for the seconds that followed, together, they had control of him. i
also accept that both officers believed that mr. cassells-watson might have a
gun. i further accept dc prodeus’s explanation for why he patted down mr.
cassells-watson at the waist.
the delay in
transporting mr. cassells-watson to the division to speak to counsel

dc prodeus informed mr. cassells-watson of his right to counsel
immediately upon detention and again upon arrest. he did so in summary fashion,
without reading it formally from the back of a police notebook. his
understanding is that police have a duty to implement the right to counsel
as
soon as practicable; to him, that
means as soon as
privacy can be afforded, absent any safety risks. while he was satisfied
that mr. cassells-watson understood what he was told, mr. cassells-watson did
not respond verbally. they took mr. cassells-watson out of the kiosk at
approximately 2:05pm. dc prodeus asked him to identify himself and also asked
him if he had a lawyer. he asked him this more than once. mr. cassells-watson
did not respond to either question. after five to 10 minutes, mr.
cassells-watson identified himself and gave the name of a lawyer. the parties
have agreed that in doing so, mr. cassells-watson asserted his right to
counsel. at some point, mr. scott was allowed to call counsel using his own
mobile phone, which an officer held for him. after the call, while handcuffed
to the rear, he tried to snatch the phone from the officer and almost
succeeded. as a result, an officer removed the sim card from his phone and mr.
cassells-watson’s.

the officers all indicated that a call for transport had been made
quickly and that it was on its way; however, none of them knew who had placed
the call or when. dc prodeus expected transport to arrive quickly, within 10-35
minutes, since the division was nearby. at 2:27pm, he told mr. cassells-watson
that transport was on its way and that he would be able to contact counsel at
the station, where his privacy could be ensured. at 2:43pm, transport arrived
to take mr. scott to the division. at 2:56pm officers stolf, oliver, da silva
and blake left to go execute the warrants, leaving dcs prodeus and danson at
the gas station. pc cross and her partner arrived at 3:28pm. at 3:31pm, mr.
cassells-watson was placed in their vehicle and dc prodeus read him his right
to counsel from a police notebook on camera. at that time, mr. cassells-watson’s
girlfriend had arrived. dc prodeus allowed mr. cassells-watson to let her know
that he was ok. a few minutes later, dc prodeus returned to 110 mornelle court
to help with the search.

from approximately 2:10pm, when mr. cassells-watson invoked his
right to counsel, to 3:28pm, when the transport officers arrived, none of the
officers contacted the station to inquire about the delay in transport or to
see if anything could be done to expedite it. they had not received an
explanation as to the delay. dc prodeus felt that the delay was longer than
expected, but “not incredibly unusual”; he has waited hours before. det. stolf
explained that typically, they are told if there is going to be a delay. these
days, it is difficult to get a uniform car even for the ggtf. as he put it,
“cars have to come from somewhere.”

pc cross began her shift at 3:00pm. it is at that time that her
sergeant told her partner and her to go pick up mr. cassells-watson at 110
mornelle court. they arrived at 3:28pm. the drive took less than 10 minutes.
the rest of the time was spent checking the car, preparing the in-car camera
and dealing with their firearms. the direction to go to 110 mornelle court was
an error. when they arrived, they were immediately told by one of the officers
(det. stolf) to go to the gas station. the gas station is visible from the
parking lot and the deviation added less than a minute.

she had not yet been told when mr. cassells-watson had been
arrested. usually, she asks when she arrives. in this case, she did not make a
note of it. by 3:35pm, mr. cassells-watson had been transferred to her custody
and given his rights comprehensively. they left the gas station at 3:43pm
because she decided to type in the information that the booking sergeant would
require before leaving. this is because it is difficult to type properly when
the car is in motion.

they arrived at the sally port at 3:50pm and called in, as usual.
they were next in line. the door did not open until 4:30pm. pc cross did not
make any inquiries about the delay. there must have been someone ahead of them
that was taking time and there was nothing she could do about it. she would
wait maybe 1.5 hours before calling in to inquire about such a delay.

the booking was complete at 4:36pm and calls to mr. cassells-watson’s
counsel were made at 4:46 and 4:48pm.

counsel called back and spoke to mr. cassells-watson at 4:50pm.

at no time, at the gas station or while waiting at the sally port,
did mr. cassells-watson ask any officer to let him speak to counsel.
v.
analysis
sections 8
and 9 – grounds for detention and use of force

in cross-examination, det. stolf and others agreed that in a high
crime area like mornelle court, an innocent young man could very well have his
head on a swivel out of concern for his safety, and that what was transferred
in a one-way exchange like the one that took place between mr. cassells-watson
and mr. scott could have been something benign, like a pack of cigarettes. all
of this is true, but it ignores the totality of the circumstances known to det.
stolf and the relatively low standard required for reasonable suspicion. i have
no trouble finding that, based on the totality of the circumstances, det. stolf
had a reasonable suspicion that mr. cassells-watson was implicated in or
connected to a criminal activity that was under investigation. mr. fitzmaurice
is understandably concerned that someone who is seen having a brief interaction
with a legitimate police target will be suspected by association and deprived
of their liberty. but that is not what happened in this case. mr. scott was on
a release on firearm and drug charges and reasonably believed to be in
possession of a firearm on his person. when he left mr. cassells-watson to
return to the building, mr. cassells-watson engaged in excessively vigilant
behaviour that was consistent with counter-surveillance. then, mr.
cassells-watson returned and transferred something to him, which he immediately
pocketed. those factors go well beyond suspicion by association. seen in
context, the exchange looked like an illicit hand-to-hand transaction. what is
more, it was pivotal. as det. stolf explained, without it, he may not have
called for mr. cassells-watson’s detention at all. i accept that he saw things
that way, and in my view, his decision was entirely reasonable.

as i indicated above, i accepted dc da silva’s testimony that his
initial intention had been to bearhug and pin mr. cassells-watson against the
counter. mr. cassells-watson’s reaction, which dc da silva reasonably believed
was the beginning of an attempt to evade him, led to an increase in the use of
force to the point that mr. cassells-watson was taken to the ground. mr.
fitzmaurice argued that even had dc da silva’s original intention been carried
out, it amounted to an excessive use of force akin to an arrest and was, therefore,
a violation of mr. cassells-watson’s s. 8 and 9 rights.

it is not at all clear that the detention that dc da silva envisaged
would have amounted to a
de facto
arrest. on the facts of this case, the
detention lasted one minute. at that time, mr. cassells-watson was not yet in
handcuffs.

be that as it may, the real question here is whether the use of
force that dc da silva intended to use was reasonable. the parties’ approached
this question, and the issue of the pat-down, as though both were premised only
on det. stolf’s stated grounds. mr. fitzmaurice focused on the fact that det.
stolf testified that although he could not rule out a firearm, he felt that
what had been transferred was “probably drugs.” moreover, no officer testified
that a pat-down search required reasonable and probable grounds.

articulating
reasonable and probable grounds can be difficult and officers, who are not
lawyers, are not required to pronounce
magic words
when they do so: see
r.
v. clarke,
 o.j. no. 804 at para. 13 (s.c.j.). trial judges can infer
that an officer had the requisite subjective grounds to arrest based on a fair
reading of their evidence:
ibid; see also
r. v. hall
(1995),
1995 canlii 647 (on ca), 22
o.r. (3d) 289, at para.
36
(c.a.). what is more, in relation to the requisite
objective grounds, the reviewing court is not limited to what the officer
articulated in court; what must be considered is the totality of the
circumstances: see
r. v. censoni,
 o.j. no. 5189
at paras. 55-56 (scj). this includes all facts and circumstances reasonably
known to the officer at the time they formed their grounds: see
r. v. yi,
 o.j. no. 1315 at para. 20;
r. v. singh,
 o.j. no. 5133 at
para. 43 (s.c.j.)
and
r. v. fyfe
2023 onca 715
at paras.
54-63.

in
a dynamic investigation like this one, involving several officers, it is
expected that each of them may be forming their own grounds as the
circumstances evolve. as the court of appeal recently wrote in
fyfe,
supra,
at para.
53:
… the evidence of subjective grounds for an arrest
does not necessarily come from a single officer. an arrest may involve multiple
officers, and occur in a dynamic situation as new information rapidly comes to
light. the evidence of various officers may, as in this case, be contradictory
in certain respects. as such, evidence about the subjective grounds for arrest
may come from one or more officers and other sources, including the surrounding
circumstances. [internal citations omitted.]
in my
view, the same must be true where the question is the existence of a reasonable
suspicion.

on
a fair reading of the evidence, one could easily come to the conclusion that
det. stolf and dcs da silva and prodeus subjectively suspected that mr.
cassells-watson was in possession of a firearm, some of which can fit in the
palm of one’s hand. the real question is whether, based on all the
circumstances, such a suspicion was reasonably founded. on this record, a judge
may very well find that it was.

however,
given how the parties approached the issue, i will limit my analysis to det.
stolf’s stated basis for ordering mr. cassells-watson’s detention. this requires consideration of all the circumstances. those must
include the intended arrest of mr. scott on the reasonable belief that he was
in possession of a firearm when, minutes earlier, he had transferred something
to mr. cassells-watson in what looked like an illicit hand-to-hand transaction
after returning from a place in which the police had reasonable and probable
grounds to believe there was a firearm. det. stolf suspected that that “something”
was “probably drugs.” based on his experience, he knew that both sides of a
drug transaction can be armed. the circumstances also must also include the
fact that the arrest of mr. scott took place a few feet from mr.
cassells-watson, in a gas station kiosk with customers milling about. lastly,
the circumstances include 50 years of combined and extensive on-the-job
experience of det. stolf and sgt. blake.

viewed in context, mr. cassells-watson’s intended detention would
have been executed with a reasonably necessary amount of force. the additional
force that was in fact applied was reasonably necessary because of the concern
that he was going to flee. as such, the detention did not violate his s. 9
charter
rights.
dc prodeus’s
pat-down search of mr. cassells-watson

mr.
fitzmaurice submitted that
macdonald
cleared up the law and embedded
into the criminal law a requirement that a search incident to investigative
detention can only be performed based on reasonable and probable grounds to
believe in the existence of an imminent risk to officer or public safety. he added
that this has been “indisputably the law for 10 years.” for her part, ms. josic
simply submitted that a pat-down search incident to investigative detention is
permitted.

with
respect, there is nothing indisputable about what the
macdonald
majority
said in this regard.
mcguffie,
buakaska,
aim
and
buffong,
supra, are evidence of an ongoing debate about that very issue. at the
same time, this much is clear: an investigative detention does not import a
right to conduct a safety search in each and every case.

if
one steps back for a moment and looks at the big picture, the situation in that
gas station kiosk was clearly fraught with danger at the time of mr. scott’s
arrest. danger to the officers, to the customers and to messrs. scott and cassells-watson.
based on the state of the law, it would be open to find that the pat-down
search, which was conducted quickly and no more invasively than required, was
warranted in the circumstances.

basing
my analysis of dc prodeus’s pat-down search on det. stolf’s stated grounds is
proving to be more artificial as dc prodeus was clear that he suspected that mr.
cassells-watson was in possession of a firearm and that the situation was rife
with safety concerns. what is more, det. stolf could not have known that dc da
silva felt that mr. cassells-watson had tried to evade him. this could only
have reasonably added to dc da silva’s concerns.

however,
if i confine my analysis to det. stolf’s stated grounds, his testimony that a
legitimate investigative detention
entails
permission to search for
weapons, his suspicion that the object that had been transferred was “probably
drugs,” and assume that his inability to “rule out” a firearm does not rise to
the level of a reasonable suspicion, then i must come to the conclusion that
the pat-down was not based on the appropriate subjective legal standard,
whether it is the one attributed to the ruling in
mann
or to the
majority’s in
macdonald. it would therefore constitute a violation of mr.
cassells-watson’s s. 8 rights to be free from unreasonable search and seizure.
section 10(b) – delayed
implementation

mr. fitzmaurice does not argue that the officers should have let mr.
cassells-watson speak to counsel from the scene or that they should have
transported him in their unmarked van,

and there is no plausible argument that they should have had a uniform car
accompany them all day in the event of an arrest. his position is that, knowing
that they could not transport mr. cassells-watson themselves and that this
would inevitably lead to some delay, the officers were all under an obligation
to ensure that it was done as quickly as possible. here, the delay was both
lengthy and unaccounted for.

ms. josic argues that the officers at the gas station acted
reasonably by quickly calling for transport. their inaction during the delay
was reasonable given that they expected that transport would arrive relatively
quickly. as for the sally port, there was nothing that pc cross could have done
but wait. as a result, the total delay was accounted for and reasonable.

no one was able to say who called for transport or exactly when.
what is known is that it must have been by 2:35pm, because transport arrived for
mr. scott at 2:43pm. if the officers waited until 2:35pm, the 30 minutes or so
that they waited is not accounted for and is unreasonable. on the other hand,
if they called earlier (as i am inclined to believe), then the delay between
that time and 3:00pm, when the station sergeant told pc cross to go pick up mr.
cassells-watson, is not accounted for. if someone at the station had been
dispatched closer to 2:10pm, then it is reasonable to expect that they would
have arrived at the scene between 2:45 and 3:00pm. that delay would have been
reasonable and accounted for. the additional period until 3:28pm has not been
accounted for and cannot be said to have been reasonably necessary.

while the arrival of mr. scott’s transport certainly indicated that
the wheels were in motion, neither dc prodeus nor dc danson took it upon himself
to inquire about the delay, which exceeded an hour. based on the evidence of
the officers, it is a fair conclusion that they had become resigned to such
delays. this resignation, in turn, led dcs danson and prodeus to adopt a
lackadaisical attitude in which they would not act unless the delay became much
lengthier.

while the same could be said about pc cross’s attitude, i reach a
different conclusion about the delay at the sally port. the gta is a very busy
jurisdiction. i am satisfied that i can infer that the booking hall or the
sally port were occupied and that, as a result, mr. cassells-watson had to wait
his turn. what is more, there are good reasons for prisoners to be admitted and
booked into police stations in this way; these include safety: see
r. v. lee
2023 onsc 1332, at para.
19, citing
r. v. desilva,
2022 onca 879, at
paras.
77 and 79. this part of the delay was accounted for and was reasonable.

i make little of the eight minutes that pc cross spent on the front
end entering the information into the computer before leaving the gas station.
it was required for the booking process one way or the other.

as a result, i find that the crown has failed to account for 30-45 minutes
of the time it took to implement mr. cassells-watson’s right to counsel. this
constituted a breach of mr. cassells-watson’s s. 10(b) rights.
section 24(2)
– whether the evidence should be admitted

it is clear that the firearm was discovered “in a manner” that
breached mr. cassells-watson’s s. 8 rights. it is less clear that it was
discovered in a manner that breached his s. 10(b) rights. this aspect of the
case was not argued by the parties. however, for the sake of this analysis, i
will assume that it was.

section 24(2) of the
charter
allows a court to exclude
evidence where admitting it would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. in
r. v. grant
2009 scc 32, at paras.
68-70, the supreme
court explained this concept.
the phrase “bring the administration
of justice into disrepute” must be understood in the long-term sense of
maintaining the integrity of, and public confidence in, the justice system.
exclusion of evidence resulting in an acquittal may provoke immediate
criticism. but s. 24(2) does not focus on immediate reaction to the individual
case. rather, it looks to whether the overall repute of the justice system,
viewed in the long term, will be adversely affected by admission of the
evidence. the inquiry is objective. it asks whether a reasonable person,
informed of all relevant circumstances and the values underlying the
charter,
would conclude that the admission of the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.
section 24(2)’s focus is not only
long-term, but prospective. the fact of the
charter
breach means damage
has already been done to the administration of justice. section 24(2) starts
from that proposition and seeks to ensure that evidence obtained through that
breach does not do further damage to the repute of the justice system.
finally, s. 24(2)'s focus is
societal. section 24(2) is not aimed at punishing the police or providing
compensation to the accused, but rather at systemic concerns. the s. 24(2)
focus is on the broad impact of admission of the evidence on the long-term
repute of the justice system.

i must consider three factors: (1) the seriousness of the
violations; (2) the impact of the violations on the accused's
charter
-protected
interests; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its
merits:
ibid, at para. 71. the focus must be on the long-term and
prospective effect of a remedy or lack of remedy. the supreme court of canada’s
decision in
r. v. le
2019 scc 34
also provides important guidance. at
para. 141, the majority provided the following explanation of the interplay
between the
grant
factors:
while the first two lines of inquiry
typically work in tandem in the sense that both pull towards exclusion of the
evidence, they need not pull with identical degrees of force in order to compel
exclusion. more particularly, it is not necessary that both of these first two
lines of inquiry support exclusion in order for a court to determine that
admission would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. of course,
the more serious the infringing conduct and the greater the impact on the
charter
-
protected interests, the stronger the case for exclusion (
r. v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 36, at para.
62
). but it is also possible that serious
charter
-infringing
conduct, even when coupled with a weak impact on the
charter
-protected
interest, will on its own support a finding that admission of tainted evidence
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. it is the sum, and
not the average, of those first two lines of inquiry that determines the pull
towards exclusion.
seriousness
of the charter-infringing conduct

this stage is focused on whether the court must dissociate itself
from the police conduct in order to “preserve public confidence in the rule of
law and its processes”:
grant,
supra, at para.
73. to determine
this, i must locate the police conduct on a spectrum of seriousness. in doing
so, i must not compartmentalize the breaches. rather, i must consider them
together to ensure that the view i take of their seriousness is not distorted:
see
r. v. james
2015
onca 213, at paras.
36-40. in that case, the ontario
court of appeal explained that, while the judges of the supreme court of canada
in
r. v. zacharias
2023 scc 30
were divided on the impact of
consequential breaches on the first
grant
factor, the majority agreed
that a pattern of
charter
breaches can increase the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
conduct.

the officers were wrong in their apparent belief that investigative
detentions entail safety searches. this is concerning, given their level of
experience. however, i do not see this as rising to a systemic concern. also, in
the context of this case, the pat-down was either objectively justified based
on the totality of the circumstances or, if it was not, the circumstances came
extremely close to justifying one. what is more, it cannot be said that the law
is settled when one tries to apply it to the circumstances of this case. the
pat-down was momentary and went no further than what would have been necessary
to satisfy safety concerns. if the pat-down pulls in favour of exclusion, it
does so with minimal force.

i do not see a problem in dc prodeus’s testimony that the right to
counsel must be implemented “as soon as practicable” instead of “immediately”;
he explained that it means as soon as privacy can be afforded, absent any
safety risks. his language and understanding are consistent with the
authorities: see
keshavarz,
supra, and
r. v. samuels
2024
onca 786, at para.
37. however, dcs danson and prodeus’s lackadaisical approach
to the delayed arrival of the uniform car is a real concern. their initial
expectation that things would go quickly may have been reasonable for a period,
particularly when transport arrived for mr. scott within a reasonable time. but
at some point, officers are under an obligation to confront the reality of the
situation and they failed to do so. when seen in combination with the 30-minute
delay, this conduct is moderately serious and would pull towards exclusion with
commensurate force.

in considering the seriousness of the breaches in the aggregate, no
pattern can plausibly be said to emerge. the cumulative effect of the
charter
-infringing
conduct favours exclusion to a moderate degree at most.
impact
of the breach on
mr. cassells-watson
’s charter-protected
interests

in
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12, at para.
90, the supreme court of
canada wrote that this line of inquiry considers the impact of the breach(es)
on the accused's
charter
-protected interests and asks whether the breach
“actually undermined the interests protected by the right infringed.” i must
identify “the interests protected by the relevant
charter
rights” and
evaluate “how seriously the breaches affected those interests.” as with the
first line of inquiry, i must then “situate the impact on the accused’s
charter
-protected
interests on a spectrum, ranging from impacts that are fleeting, technical,
transient, or trivial, to those that are profoundly intrusive or that seriously
compromise the interests underlying the rights infringed.” as the court
explained,
[t]he greater the impact on
charter
-protected
interests, the greater the risk that admission of the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute. this is because “admission of the
evidence may signal to the public that
charter
rights, however high-sounding,
are of little actual avail to the citizen, breeding public cynicism and
bringing the administration of justice into disrepute.”

the interests protected by s. 8 in this case were mr.
cassells-watson’s privacy and to some degree, physical integrity. the interests
protected by s. 10(b) were his interests in being able to consult counsel in
private as soon as reasonably practicable, in ensuring that he had a lifeline
to the outside world and in knowing that he was not entirely at the mercy of
police while detained.

pat-down searches are relatively non-invasive procedures. in this
case, it was conducted very quickly and went no further than necessary. on its
own, its impact on mr. cassells-watson’s
charter
-protected interests was
on the low end of the spectrum. of course, it led to the discovery of a firearm
and his subsequent arrest. this increases the seriousness of the impact on his
charter
-protected
interests.

the same cannot be said about the s. 10(b) breach. at no time did mr.
cassells-watson so much as ask to speak to counsel during his detention. his
rights were explained to him three times, and he was told that he would have
access to counsel once he was brought to the station where he could speak privately.
he knew that his girlfriend understood that he was in police custody. the
officers did not try to obtain evidence from him during the delay, and he did
not inadvertently self-incriminate. the impact on mr. cassells-watson’s s.
10(b) rights occasioned by delayed implementation was minimal.

in sum, i would describe the impact on mr. cassells-watson’s
charter
-protected
interests as falling somewhere between moderate to serious. as such, this
factor pulls toward exclusion of the evidence with a degree of force that is
somewhere between moderate and strong.
society’s
interest in adjudication on the merits

this line of inquiry is concerned with the reliability of the
evidence and its importance to the crown’s case. the question is “whether the
truth-seeking function of the criminal process would be better served by
admission of the evidence, or by its exclusion”: see
grant,
supra,
at para.
79. reliable and critical evidence generally pulls toward inclusion.
that said, this factor cuts both ways and ought not be permitted to overwhelm
the analysis: see
r. v. harrison,
2009 scc 34 (canlii), 2 s.c.r. 494, at para.
34;
grant,
supra, at para.
84; and
r. v. paterson, 1 mr. s.c.r. 202 at para.
55. as the court stated in
grant, “while the public has a heightened interest
in seeing a determination on the merits where the offence charged is serious …
it also has a vital interest in having a justice system that is above reproach,
particularly where the penal stakes for the accused are high”:
ibid.

here, the firearm is reliable evidence. without it, the crown’s entire
case against mr. cassells-watson would be gutted. firearms offences are among
the most serious, and they are a plague in the gta. the public has an extremely
strong interest in the prosecution of such cases on their merits. all the more
so when they involve persons who are carrying concealed and loaded handguns in
public. such persons “pose a real and immediate danger to the public”: see
r.
v. morris
2021 onca 680, at para.
68.

this factor clearly and strongly favours admission of the evidence.
balancing

the balancing exercise does not lend itself to mathematical
precision. the question is whether, having regard to all the circumstances, the
admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute in the long term. i find that the admission of the evidence in this
case would not have a significant or lasting impact on the repute of, and the
public’s confidence in, the administration of justice.

with respect to the
charter
-infringing conduct, the s. 8
issue was a very close call. the s. 10(b) breach was more serious, but it was
not deliberate, and no evidence was sought or obtained in relation to it.
together, the breaches did not disclose a pattern or systemic concerns. i do
not believe that the conduct, seen as a whole, calls upon the court to dissociate
itself from it to maintain the public’s confidence in the rule of law.

as i have explained, the second line of inquiry pulls more strongly
in favour of exclusion. however, i find that, on balance, the sum of the first
and second factors is outweighed by society's interest in the truth-seeking
function of a trial on the merits.
vi.
conclusion

for these reasons, the application is dismissed, and the evidence is
admissible against mr. cassells-watson.
released: april 22, 2025
justice p.f. band

particularly paras. 15-18 of the
garofoli
reasons.

see also
rover,
supra, at paras.
26-28.

this was not entirely clear based on the software he had used and the way it
was presented.

the voicemail box of the first number was full and a second number was found on
the internet.

such vans are not equipped with cameras or dividers and are unsuitable for
transporting detainees.