source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj488/2025oncj488.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. hindy,
2025 oncj 488
date: 
2025 09 24
court
file no.: hamilton 24-47104543 and 24-47100274
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
james hindy
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on february 11, 12, 13, 18, march 24, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 24, 2025
matthew moser.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
robin mccourt.................................................... 
counsel for the accused james hindy
fiorucci j.:
overview

on august 14, 2024, a hamilton police officer was
following a minivan, when the automated licence plate reader in the police
cruiser alerted the officer that the minivan was stolen. the officer followed
the minivan into the parking lot of a tim hortons. after using the drive-thru,
the accused, james hindy, who was the driver and lone occupant of the minivan, parked
in the parking lot. the police boxed the minivan in and arrested the accused. the
police searched the minivan and found a 12-gauge sawed-off shotgun and
ammunition.

the accused was charged with possession of the stolen
vehicle and five offences relating to the sawed-off shotgun and ammunition. the
crown proceeded by indictment. the accused elected to be tried in the
ontario court of justice. he entered not guilty pleas.


the owner of the minivan testified at trial, as did the police officers
who arrested the accused and searched the vehicle, and two police officers who
test fired the shotgun. the sawed-off shotgun was test fired with both police
issued ammunition and ammunition that was found in the minivan.

the accused testified that the registered owner of the minivan permitted
him to use the vehicle and that he intended to return it. the accused admitted knowledge
and control of the seized shotgun and ammunition but submitted that he should
be acquitted of the firearms charges because the crown had not proven that the
shotgun was a “firearm”.

the issues to be decided at the conclusion of the trial were:
(1)
has the crown proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that the minivan was stolen and that, therefore, the accused was in possession
of stolen property?
(2)
has the crown proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that the sawed-off shotgun is a “firearm” as defined in
s. 2
of the
criminal
code
? the accused raised two questions:
(a) was the
shotgun operable, or if inoperable, could it be adapted for use as a firearm?
(b) the
crown led no evidence about the velocity of the shells that were test fired
from the sawed-off shotgun. when an accused is charged with firearms possession
offences, is the crown required in all cases to lead evidence that the “pig’s
eye test” or other velocity testing was conducted to establish that the discharged
shot, bullet or other projectile is capable of causing serious bodily injury or
death to a person?

on july 24, 2025, i found the accused not guilty of possession
of stolen property but guilty of the firearms offences. i advised the parties
that i would provide written reasons for my decision. these are my written
reasons.
the possession under $5,000 offence
was not proven beyond a reasonable doubt

the accused and the registered owner of the minivan, jeffrey estee, were
known to each other. at trial, mr. estee acknowledged that he had on prior
occasions permitted the accused to drive the minivan. however, he maintained
that, on this occasion, he had no idea that the accused and the accused’s
girlfriend had taken the minivan without his permission.

the accused claimed that he asked mr. estee for permission to use the
minivan to move out of the apartment that he and his girlfriend shared with mr.
estee. according to the accused, mr. estee gave him permission to use the
minivan for this purpose. the accused testified that he intended to return the
vehicle to mr. estee.

a finding of guilt for the possession of stolen property offence required
the crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused knew the minivan
was stolen.

the crown relied on the evidence of mr. estee. although i found mr. estee to be
a credible witness, his evidence lacked the reliability required to establish
that his vehicle was stolen. his testimony contained numerous inconsistencies.
he also acknowledged that he thought the accused and his girlfriend would
eventually bring the minivan back.

when
i considered the accused’s claim that mr. estee gave him permission to use the
minivan, in the context of the totality of the evidence, including the
frailties in mr. estee’s evidence, i was left in a state of reasonable doubt
that the accused knew he was in possession of stolen property. an accused must
be acquitted if the explanation offered for possession could be true, even if
the court is not convinced that it is true.

i found that the accused’s explanation for how he came to be in possession of
the minivan by lawful means, that is with the consent of mr. estee, could be
true.

mr.
estee testified that he knew the accused and his girlfriend, patricia, for
about three or four years. mr. estee lived with his brother, greg, at 54 west 1
st
street in hamilton. the accused and patricia lived in the basement of the home.
after greg passed away in 2023, mr. estee, the accused, and patricia continued
living in the home on west 1
st
street for eight or nine months.

in examination-in-chief, mr. estee said that the only house he resided
in with the accused was on west 1
st. however, during
cross-examination, mr. estee gave inconsistent testimony on this point. he
acknowledged that, at some point, he moved out of the house on west 1
st
with the accused and patricia and that they all began living together in an
apartment at 192 hughson street in hamilton. the hughson street apartment was
in an apartment building that had underground parking. in cross-examination, mr.
estee agreed that there was no underground parking at the west 1
st
address.

mr.
estee testified that he was the person who used the toyota sienna minivan the most but acknowledged that the accused and
patricia also used it. when crown counsel asked how it came about that the
accused and patricia used it, mr. estee replied, “i’d be coming home, and i’d
leave the keys by the kitchen cupboards, and i guess they just took them and
helped their selves”. in examination-in-chief, mr. estee denied that he ever
had a conversation with the accused and patricia about the use of the minivan
and said that he “didn’t know that they would take it”.

however,
during cross-examination, mr. estee gave inconsistent testimony on this point. mr.
estee agreed with defence counsel’s suggestion that, due to a couple of minor
fender-benders he had been involved in, he was a little nervous to drive in
some places. therefore, he would let the accused drive the minivan sometimes
when he was in it. he acknowledged that this was a relief to him, and helped
him out, because he was a nervous driver. during cross-examination, mr. estee
acknowledged that he had no reason to think of the accused as anything but a
friend because the accused was doing things to help him out.

mr.
estee also agreed with defence counsel’s suggestion that he would sometimes let
the accused drive the minivan when he was not in it. the following exchange occurred
between defence counsel and mr. estee:
q. okay. so, when you said you let him drive the van
without you…
a. yes.
q. …that would – would you have required him to ask
permission each and every time?
a. yes.
q. okay. and he would do that, right?
a. yes.
q. okay. so, as long as he said something like,
‘hey, i’m going to take the van to run some errands, is that okay with you?’
you were pretty much all right with that, right?
a. not – yes.

therefore, in-chief, mr. estee said that there were no discussions
with the accused and patricia about them using his vehicle, whereas in
cross-examination he admitted that discussions did occur and that he did allow
them to use his minivan when they would ask permission.

mr. estee agreed with defence counsel that the accused and patricia
wanted to move out of the apartment on hughson street because of issues with
bedbugs and other pests. mr. estee did not agree that it was possible the
accused and patricia asked him to use the minivan to move out, but he did agree
that it would not have been out of the ordinary for them to ask to use the
minivan for something like that.

mr.
estee gave inconsistent testimony about the last time he had used the vehicle before
he noticed it to be missing. when crown counsel asked mr. estee why he went to
the police about the minivan, he said he had not used the vehicle for “weeks on
end” and noticed that it was gone. however, at a different point in his
evidence, when crown counsel asked mr. estee what made him suspect that the
accused and patricia took the minivan without his permission, he replied,
“because i never used it for, like, three, four days and then i went to look,
and it was gone”.

mr. estee also gave inconsistent testimony about where he, the
accused and patricia were living in august 2024. in
examination-in-chief, he said they were still living in the home on west 1
st
street. however, at another point in his evidence, he said that he would
usually park the minivan in the underground parking. he was obviously mistaken
about them living on west 1
st
street in august 2024 because he
agreed with defence counsel that the west 1
st
address did not have
underground parking. furthermore, the stolen auto report, exhibit 3 on the
trial, shows that mr. estee reported that the vehicle was stolen from his
residence located at 192 hughson street in hamilton, not 54 west 1
st
street.

at
certain times in his evidence, mr. estee maintained that he did not give the
accused and patricia permission to use the minivan to move out and that he had
no idea that they had taken it without his permission. however, in the following
exchange with defence counsel, mr. estee acknowledges that he let the accused
use the vehicle to move out:
q. right. so, you knew that they had the keys,
right?
a. yes.
q. okay.
a. from the kitchen there.
q. okay. so, i’m going to suggest to you that you
knew they had the keys and that you had let him take the vehicle to help
himself move out of the apartment because of the whole bedbug situation, you
agree with that?
a. yes.

in
cross-examination, mr. estee admitted that it was his sister, karen, who told
him to report the vehicle stolen in august of 2024 and that he would not have
done that otherwise. the following exchange between defence
counsel and mr. estee casts significant doubt on whether the minivan was stolen.
mr. estee acknowledged that it was his sister who was angry that the accused
had the minivan and that he reported it stolen to calm her down, even though he
thought the accused and his girlfriend would eventually bring the minivan back:
q.... so, is it possible, then, that you had let
him – you knew he had the keys…
a. yes.
q. …you’d let him take it…
a. yes.
q. …and you had just forgotten how long that he had
brought it back?
a. no, that’s not right.
q. no? you don’t think maybe you spoke to karen and
karen was asking where your van was and then karen got upset that mr. hindy had
it?
a. no. my sister told me to report it stolen.
q. okay. i’m going to suggest to you that your
sister was unhappy that mr. hindy had the van, is that – would you agree with
that?
a. that sounds right.
q. that sounds right?
a. yes.
q. okay. and, so, your sister karen was upset that
mr. hindy had the van, she wanted you to report it stolen, right?
a. yes, that’s right.
q. right. you weren’t upset that mr. hindy had the
van, were you?
a. not really.
q. no.
a. i didn’t know that they took it.
q. okay, but you weren’t upset that they did?
a. no.
q. you knew he would bring it back, right?
a. i thought they would bring it back eventually.
q. right, right. and at that point karen was more
upset about it than you were, right?
a. yes, that’s right.
q. okay. so, you, to calm your sister down, went and
reported it stolen, is that fair?
a. yes, that’s right, she told me to report it
stolen.
q. okay. and that’s why, you wanted to make your
sister happy and calm her down, right?
a. yes.

mr. estee’s inconsistent testimony about his brother’s guns also
caused me to approach all of his evidence with caution, including his denial
that he gave the accused permission to use the minivan to move out. mr. estee
testified that his brother had a shotgun and two rifles in the home at 54 west
1
st. according to mr. estee, after his brother died, his sister came
to his new address on hughson street and took the guns. at first, he told crown
counsel that his sister took all three guns but then said she took the two rifles
but not the shotgun.

in examination-in-chief, mr. estee said that the last time he saw
the shotgun was “probably 2007”. he also said that he never personally handled
the shotgun, nor did he ever see it used by anyone. however, during
cross-examination, he gave inconsistent testimony. he agreed with defence
counsel that the firearms, including the shotgun, were still in the home at
west 1
st
street when his brother passed away in 2023. mr. estee
also acknowledged that an incident occurred at west 1
st
street, when
he was handling the shotgun, and it went off inside the home. patricia was in
the room when the shotgun went off. mr. estee admitted that, after this
incident, the accused told mr. estee to get rid of the shotgun because it was
dangerous.

therefore, mr. estee’s testimony contained numerous inconsistencies
which raised concerns about the reliability of his evidence, including his claim
that he did not give the accused and patricia permission to use the minivan to
move out of the apartment on hughson street.

the crown called mr. estee’s cousin, glenn ryan, to testify about
his relationship with mr. estee. mr. ryan said that he took on the role of a
caregiver for his cousin. he also gave evidence about mr. estee’s intellectual
capacity. prior to calling mr. ryan to testify, crown counsel said that his
evidence was expected to provide context for mr. estee’s evidence. mr. ryan was
not qualified to give expert opinion evidence. in essence, mr. ryan gave his
lay opinion, based on his dealings with his cousin, and his extensive
experience working with disabled individuals, that mr. estee’s “intellectual
capacity would be around the nine to 12-year-old level”. in cross-examination, mr.
ryan acknowledged that although he was involved in mr. estee’s life growing up,
he did not have a close relationship with mr. estee until august 2024 when he
took him to the police station to report the minivan stolen.

mr. estee’s testimonial competence was not challenged at trial
pursuant to s. 16 of the
canada evidence act. he testified under oath
and was able to communicate his evidence in court by understanding and
responding to questions. even if i were to accept mr. ryan’s lay opinion about
mr. estee’s intellectual deficits, as the trier of fact, my focus was on mr.
estee’s “
veracity and [his] actual
capacities as demonstrated by [his] ability to perceive, recall and recount the
events in issue, in light of the totality of the evidence”.


mr. ryan had never met the accused. he had no first-hand
knowledge of who was living with mr. estee and helping care for him prior to
august 2024 when he assisted mr. estee in filing the police report about the
minivan. mr. ryan’s evidence did not assist me in assessing mr. estee’s
credibility or the reliability of his evidence.

the accused testified that, on august 8, he talked to mr. estee about
moving out and asked him if they could use the minivan for a couple of days so
they could set up a tent and get some food. according to the accused, when he
spoke with mr. estee on august 8, mr. estee told him that he needed the van
returned by saturday, august 10.

on august 15, 2024, the accused gave a statement to dc colin bouwers,
which the crown introduced as part of its case. in his police statement, the
accused said that when mr. estee gave them permission to use the minivan he
said, “i need my vehicle saturday”, to which the accused responded, “yeah, i’ll
bring it to you”.

the accused testified that he called mr. estee and left several
messages for him trying to return the minivan, including on august 10, 12 and
13. in his police statement, the accused told the officer that he tried to
bring the minivan back on august 10,,
but the unit looked like it was
cleared out. in cross-examination, crown counsel suggested to the accused that,
at any time, he could have returned the vehicle to the dedicated spot in the
underground parking lot because he still had the key fob. the accused agreed
with crown counsel but said that he did not do so because the parking permit had
expired for the month, and he did not want the vehicle to be towed, which would
be costly for mr. estee.

the accused’s testimony about his use of the minivan on prior
occasions was not without flaws. he gave vague and somewhat confusing evidence
about mr. estee having written them a note, or perhaps two notes, confirming
that he gave them permission to use the minivan because mr. estee’s family was
“terrorizing us”. when asked to explain the connection between mr. estee’s family
members and the minivan, the accused said “nothing….they were just very
vindictive….they didn’t like the fact that we were kind of..looking out for
[mr. estee]…”. the accused did not produce the notes at trial and mr. estee
was not confronted in cross-examination with the suggestion that he had
provided written permission to the accused and patricia to use the minivan.

i did not accept the accused’s evidence that, on prior occasions, mr.
estee had given him and patricia written permission to use the vehicle. however,
i found that the accused’s evidence that he asked for and received permission from
mr. estee to use the minivan to move out of 192 hughson street in august 2024,
and that he planned to return the vehicle to mr. estee, could be true. mr.
estee acknowledged that the accused had asked for permission to use the minivan
in the past and that he had granted the accused permission to use it. mr. estee
also stated that he thought that the accused would eventually return the vehicle,
but he reported it stolen to calm his sister down. on the totality of the
evidence, i was left in a state of reasonable doubt that the minivan was stolen,
and that the accused knew he was in possession of stolen property.
the firearms charges

pc william armstrong testified about the search of the minivan. the
police observed garbage bags which contained lots of clothing, and backpacks. in
the rear backseat area, the police located a red toolbox that contained
ammunition as well as the sawed-off shotgun that was inside a blue folding
chair bag. the shotgun the police seized is a j.c. higgins, model 20, 12-gauge
single-barrel pump-action shotgun. the shotgun was not loaded. pc armstrong
estimated that the toolbox contained a couple of hundred rounds of unspent
ammunition. included amongst the ammunition were numerous 12-gauge shotgun
shells. most of the ammunition was found within the toolbox.


the accused was charged with the following
criminal code
offences: (i) unauthorized possession of a firearm without
being the holder of a licence or registration certificate for it: s. 91(1);
(ii) possession of a firearm knowing that he was not the holder of a licence or
registration certificate for it: s. 92(1); (iii) careless storage of a firearm:
s. 86(1); (iv) being an occupant of a motor vehicle in which he knew that there
was a firearm: s. 94(2); and (v) possession of a prohibited or restricted
firearm with readily accessible ammunition that is capable of being discharged
in the firearm without being the holder of an authorization or a licence to
possess it in that place and the registration certificate for the firearm: s.
95(1)(b).

in
addition to admitting that he had knowledge and control of the seized sawed-off
shotgun and ammunition, the accused admitted that he did not have an
authorization, licence, or registration certificate for the shotgun, that it
was stored in a careless manner in the minivan, and that, if the shotgun was found
to be a “firearm”, within the meaning of
s. 2
of the
criminal code, it
was a prohibited firearm because of its barrel length. no issue was taken with
the continuity of the seized shotgun and ammunition.
the sawed-off shotgun is a “firearm”
as defined in
s. 2
of the
criminal code
(a)
operability and adaptability

dc kevin mccomb was the firearm analyst who first took possession of
the shotgun from pc armstrong to process and forensically examine it. at the
time, dc mccomb was relatively new to the role, having examined under five
firearms. in addition to receiving the shotgun, dc mccomb received shotgun
rounds that pc armstrong located in the minivan, which included 12-gauge
shotgun rounds that could be used in the seized shotgun.


dc mccomb testified that the overall condition of the shotgun was
good, although the wooden forearm which would rack the pump-action shotgun was
detached from the metal rod to which it would customarily be attached. the
officer referred to photographs in exhibit 5 which showed the detached forearm.
on photographs 14 and 16 of exhibit 5, he circled the metal rod from which the
forearm had become detached. dc mccomb explained that when the forearm is
attached to the metal rod and the user pumps the forearm, it will cycle the
action which means that it will load a round into the chamber of the shotgun.

dc mccomb testified that the shotgun was still operable despite the
forearm being detached from the metal rod. the process he used to determine its
operability began with dry firing it in the lab without ammunition. dc mccomb explained
dry firing in the following exchange with crown counsel:
q. okay. and what if any impact that you could
discern did this break here that we’re looking at at 16 have in terms of your
ability to do so?
a. the firearm is still operable without it being
attached to the firearm. i was able to determine that in the lab, actually. 
in the lab we dry fire the firearm.
q. what do you mean when you say ‘dry fire?’
a. without any ammo in it. you’re cycling the action
as if you were to be putting a round in it and you’re pulling the trigger to
ensure when you take it to the range it’s a safe firearm to be loading real
ammunition into it and to be firing from it.
q. so practically speaking, how did it work when you
did this dry fire exercise? what happened?
a. yeah, it worked, it cycled normally, it dry fired
as it should, as functioned, but without the forearm because the forearm’s not
attached. so, if you pump the forearm without it being attached to the metal
rod, it’s not going to do anything. but the metal rod you can manipulate with
your hand and push in and pull out. the same function that the forearm would
do but you’re doing it with your hand.
q. okay.
a. pushing and pulling out to dry fire or to load a
round if you’re actually loading rounds.

in cross-examination, dc mccomb expanded on what it means to dry
fire or cycle the action:
so, the dry fire for the shotgun was with it on a
table, action release button down, manipulating that bar so i can see the
chamber opening and closing…to know that that component of the firearm appears
to be working.

defence counsel cross-examined dc mccomb about a note in his
notebook that said, “not fireable condition”. dc mccomb explained that when he
looked at the firearm, his initial impression of it with the broken forearm was
“that you wouldn’t be able to cycle the action”. he went on to say, “[b]ut
then when i realized that you could manipulate the metal rod and cycle the
action, i changed my opinion on whether it would be fireable or not”. i accept
dc mccomb’s explanation that this note in his notebook represented his initial
impression of the shotgun when he visibly inspected it, before he manually
examined it, and eventually test fired it.

defence counsel confronted dc mccomb with the fact that his
handwritten notes and will say made no mention of dry firing the shotgun in the
lab. i find as a fact that dc mccomb dry fired the shotgun as he described,
which changed his initial opinion that it was not fireable and caused him to
proceed further by taking the shotgun to the range to test fire it. the fact
that this was not noted in his notebook or will say does not affect the
officer’s credibility or the reliability of his testimony on this point. he
gave evidence that dry cycling is part of the normal process when
examining firearms. sgt. cole testified that he too dry fired the shotgun in the
lab before taking it to the range to conduct his test fires.

dc mccomb said that he was able to dry fire the shotgun in the lab
numerous times by pulling the metal rod out and pushing it back in. this
replicated what the forearm would do if it was attached. he then said that
after dry cycling the shotgun this way about ten times, the metal rod started
to seize so he applied gun oil to that area and tapped it with a hammer. he
clarified that he could probably have continued to manipulate the metal rod
with his hand without the gun oil, but it got to the point where it was
difficult to do so because he started to get some resistance:
it’s a small piece of metal to grab with your hand and
it’s just awkward to manipulate back and forth. so, when it started to get
some resistance to it, rather than fighting with it, it was easier to put some
gun oil to have it moving easier.

in cross-examination, dc mccomb agreed with defence counsel that, in
his will say, he wrote that he was able to manually manipulate the metal bar to
cycle the action until it got stuck in position. in cross-examination, he also
agreed that it was only after applying the gun oil and tapping the metal bar
with the hammer that he was able to get it cycling again. however, he went on
to say, “stuck in position is kind of a relative term, it was stuck in a
position that it was making it more difficult to use my hand to move the – to
manipulate that metal bar”.

dc mccomb described how he used the hammer to tap the edge of the
metal rod lightly:
it wasn’t deep, and again it wouldn’t have been
required, i could still manipulate it with my hand. hitting it with the hammer
just forced the metal rod to go all the way in, get the gun oil all the way
through, and then get it sliding easier.

dc mccomb used gun oil that was supplied by the police service, but
he thought that gun oil would be available at any gun shop or canadian tire
store. he said that other than applying “a very average to small amount of gun
oil” and tapping the metal rod lightly with a hammer to make it slide easier,
he did nothing else in the lab to manipulate the shotgun. there were no blocks
or occlusions in the chamber that precluded someone from loading a round of ammunition
in it.

after examining the shotgun in the lab, dc mccomb took it to the
police central range to test fire it. because of the detached forearm, dc
mccomb decided to use a safe firing device to test fire the shotgun. he
described the device as a metal box with clamps that the shotgun was placed into,
and a string was used to pull the trigger. dc mccomb successfully test fired
the shotgun once in the safe firing device. he said:
yes, so the first shot was successful, the firearm
operated as it was supposed to, it test fired one round, the round was
retrieved, and then i attempted a second test fire.

dc mccomb used an imperial special long-range 12-gauge two-and-three
quarters inch round to test fire the shotgun. it was a round that was available
at the range. dc mccomb explained what he meant when he said that the shotgun
test fired successfully:
so, there was no issue loading the round into the
firearm, it discharged the firearm as it should, the firearm operated in every
way that it should, and then i retained that round.

when dc mccomb attempted a second test fire with the shotgun, it
wouldn’t fire again. he left the shotgun for a senior officer who had more
experience with firearms, sgt. michael cole. dc mccomb measured the shotgun and
took photographs of it.

he testified that the shotgun was a prohibited firearm because its barrel was
sawed-off and was less than 457 millimetres in length.

sgt. cole testified about his examination and test firing of the shotgun.
he had extensive experience with firearms. before his 17-year career with the
hamilton police service, sgt. cole was an officer with the royal constabulary in
northern ireland for 19 years, where he became a nationally recognized firearms
instructor. sgt. cole’s career included a secondment to kosovo through the
united nations where he trained kosovo police in firearms and a four-year term
in iraq where he trained the police in firearms and firearms tactics. sgt. cole
was a sergeant in forensic services in the hamilton police service and one of
his specific roles was to oversee firearms examinations within the unit. he
also performed the role of firearms examiner for two-and-a-half to three years.

sgt. cole testified that he received an e-mail from dc mccomb asking
him to look at the shotgun because he had test fired it once and could not get
it to fire again. sgt. cole removed the shotgun from the transfer locker it had
been left in and examined it in the lab. he confirmed that part of the reason
he did so was to look for potential defects and identify any risks associated
with it.

the following exchange occurred between crown counsel and sgt. cole:
q. so did you notice any defects or
observe or record any defects with respect to the item that you examined in
this case?
a. i did. i noticed -- you can call it
like a guide drill or like a transfer bar that attaches the -- like the front
foregrip or the handle for the pump had been disconnected or broken. and that
for the -- you can tell a lot from a firearm just by dry cycling it, if that
makes sense. whenever you -- and again, you have to listen to the noise and
the feel of the firearm itself, but i was able to tell that whenever you rack
the firearm back, the rod went back with the system. but whenever you pushed
it forward again into which would effectively load another round in, round into
it that the bar didn't go forward. so it had basically disengaged it, but i
think in my notes, i have maybe put it, that was more of an inconvenience to
the function of the firearm than anything else. it was a very simple defect. 
it could be remedied.
q. and so in terms of you said it's
simple to remedy. just in terms of your ability, did you require any tools or
did you use any tools in order to manipulate.
a. none whatsoever.
q. and so in terms of the integrity of
the actual system, and when i say “the system,” it's the word you used, but i
understand to mean essentially filling in -- essentially loading a round,
ability to manipulate the round in terms of the firearm.
a. yeah.
q. was there any impediment to that in
your observation of the a in your handling?
a. no, i was able to fire the gun total
of seven times.
q. okay.
a. and part of that would be to get it
to recycle. so yeah, it was -- there was no issue for that.

sgt. cole testified that he had no difficulty firing the shotgun. like
dc mccomb, sgt. cole gave evidence about being able to manually manipulate the
rod:...really from where the pump handle of
it is, this rod is attached to that. so once you know it was going forward,
part of the way, you just had to push it forward, like the final inch say and
then that allowed the internal working parts of the firearm to engage.

when asked by crown counsel to opine on why dc mccomb had difficulty
firing the shotgun a second time, sgt. cole said that he had a different level
of confidence with firearms than his colleagues and would not have used the
safe firing device. he reiterated, “i fired this by hand and it operated fine
for me”.

for six of the test fires, sgt. cole used federal premium law
enforcement ammunition, 12-gauge caliber, two-and three-quarter inch long
buckshot with nine pellets, called “double 0 buck” (00 buckshot). sgt. cole used
one of the seized rounds of ammunition to successfully test fire the shotgun a
seventh time. the following exchange occurred between crown counsel and sgt.
cole:
q. and so then just as a -- i suppose a
final question for you officer. so, you obviously -- i understand you said you
essentially fired the item seized by hand, the shotgun.
a. that's correct.
q. so was there anything in your firing
of that shotgun that gave you any concern that it was just otherwise not
operable or couldn’t be operated?
a. no, nothing.

on consent, dc mccomb’s certificate of analyst was admitted in
evidence as exhibit 2, pursuant to
s. 117.13
of the
criminal code. the
certificate contains information dc mccomb learned from examining and test
firing the shotgun himself and information he learned from sgt. cole. the
certificate concludes that the shotgun fired as designed and is a barreled
weapon that can discharge projectiles that are capable of causing serious
bodily injury or death to a person. dc mccomb testified that there were no
impediments to the shotgun’s ability to discharge a projectile “other than the
fact that you’re using your hand to manipulate that metal rod instead of the
forearm”.

dc mccomb used the make, model, manufacturer and gauge of the
shotgun to search the rcmp firearms reference table (frt), a database that
assists police in classifying firearms. dc mccomb learned that the shotgun was
listed on the frt as a non-restricted firearm.


the definition of firearm is found in
s. 2
of the
criminal code:
firearm
means a barrelled weapon from which any
shot, bullet or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of
causing serious bodily injury or death to a person, and includes any frame or
receiver of such a barrelled weapon and anything that can be adapted for use as
a firearm.

the accused was charged with firearms possession, not use, offences.
the accused submitted that the shotgun did not meet the definition of a
“firearm” in s. 2. his challenge to the operability of the shotgun focused on
the fact that the forearm was detached, and that the shotgun was rusted and in
poor condition. with respect to whether the shotgun could be adapted for use as
a firearm, defence counsel argued that the crux of the issue was whether the
accused would have known to manipulate the metal bar or use gun oil and a hammer
as dc mccomb did to make it operable.

the testimony of dc mccomb and sgt. cole provides ample evidence that
the sawed-off shotgun was operable. both dc mccomb and sgt. cole testified that
they dry cycled the shotgun in the lab by simple manual manipulation of the
metal rod which replicated what the forearm would do if it was attached. sgt.
cole, who had extensive experience with firearms, said that the disengaged
forearm was “more of an inconvenience to the function of
the firearm than anything else” and called it “a very simple defect” that “could
be remedied”.

both dc mccomb and sgt. cole test fired the shotgun successfully,
meaning that shotgun shells were loaded into it and fired as projectiles down range.
dc mccomb said that during his test fire the shotgun discharged and “operated
in every way that it should”. he was able “to load a round into the chamber…the
fire pin struck the round, propelled it down the barrel”. defence counsel’s cross-examination
of dc mccomb about making no notes regarding the condition of the inside of the
barrel, or the chamber, such as rust inside the chamber, did not undermine the officer’s credibility and the reliability of his
evidence that the shotgun was operable, and test fired a shell.

defence counsel cross-examined sgt. cole but left unchallenged his evidence
that he test fired the shotgun successfully seven times, without the use of the
safe firing device, and that there was nothing in his
firing of the shotgun that gave him any concern that it was not operable.

the evidence of dc mccomb and sgt. cole was sufficient to establish the
operability of the shotgun. however, the testimony of mr. estee and the accused
about the accidental discharge of the shotgun provides additional evidence that
it was operable and that the accused knew it was operable.

mr. estee testified that the barrel was already sawed off when the accidental
discharge occurred at the west 1
st
street home. he admitted that he
was the one who sawed it off. defence counsel tried to get mr. estee to admit
that he was under the impression that the shotgun was broken. he initially
agreed but then when asked why he was under that impression he said, “[t]he
barrel was sawed off, i didn’t know it was broken...i didn’t think it was
broken”. mr. estee testified that, after the shotgun went off, a casing came out
of it. mr. estee denied ever telling the accused that the gun was broken.

the accused testified that he believed the accidental discharge of
the firearm happened sometime in may, which was approximately three months
before he was arrested. when asked in examination-in-chief what his
understanding of the condition of the shotgun was, he answered, “bad,
broken…poor condition”.

the accused testified as to what he did after the shotgun
discharged:
well, when i grabbed it from jeff, it was rusty, i
heard it but i grabbed it from him and tried getting the round or the shell out
of the – what the man said, the cycling area, pull on that because the elbow or
the pump arm didn’t – wasn’t functioning.

according to the accused, the shell was stuck in the gun. although
he “wrestled with it”, he did not spend a lot of time with it because he was
more concerned about patricia having almost been shot. the accused claimed that
when he gave the shotgun back to mr. estee, mr. estee said, “it was broken, i’m
sorry…i thought it was broken”.

the accused’s testimony in-chief suggests that at the time of the
accidental discharge, the forearm was already broken, or as the accused said, “the
elbow or the pump arm didn’t -wasn’t functioning”. yet, the shotgun discharged
and put a hole in the wall and the accused agreed that this was a traumatic
experience, as he almost lost someone dear to him. he agreed with crown counsel
that, based on this accidental discharge, and the fact that the barrel had been
sawn off, he knew the shotgun was dangerous. it was dangerous because it was
operable as a firearm notwithstanding that the forearm was detached from the
metal rod.

even if i am in error in finding that the shotgun was operable, it
was adapted for use as a firearm by dc mccomb’s simple acts of manipulating the
metal rod to replicate the function of the forearm and applying gun oil to the
metal bar and tapping it with a hammer to ensure the gun oil went all the way
in. counsel provided various authorities on this issue. i found the ontario
court of appeal’s decision in
r. v. morris
to be most instructive on the
issue of whether an inoperable gun “can be adapted for use” to bring it within
the definition of a “firearm” in
s. 2
of the
criminal code.


in
morris, the offender was convicted of possession of a
firearm contrary to
s. 95
of the
criminal code
and breach of a firearms
prohibition order, contrary to
s. 117
of the
criminal code. he appealed
his convictions on the basis that the handgun he had was not operable and could
not be “adapted” under the definition of firearm.

a police detective, who was an expert in the examination,
identification and classification of firearms, examined and tested morris’s gun
and found that it did not fire. the detective took steps to identify the
problem which turned out to be a broken firing pin. he fixed the weapon by obtaining
and installing a replacement for the broken part.

the sole issue on the conviction appeal was whether the trial judge
erred in law by finding that the handgun, which was inoperable and required a
new firing pin, fell within the definition of firearm in s. 2. the ontario
court of appeal succinctly summarized the law on this issue by referring to three
decisions:
11 first, in
r. v.
covin,
1983 canlii 151 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 725, the supreme court explained that where an
inoperable gun is used in the commission of an offence, such as robbery, it
must be able to be adapted for use in the commission of that offence to come
within the definition of “firearm”. subsequent decisions have held that where
the offence is possession of the gun itself, the adaptation period is extended
because the gun does not have to be usable on the spot. the evil that is
targeted by the section is possession that is dangerous to the public.
12
 the trial judge referred to the following
paragraph from
r. v. ferguson
(1985),
1985 canlii 3534 (on ca), 20 c.c.c. (3d) 256 (ont.
c.a.), at p. 262:
because of the nature of the
continuing offence of possession of a prohibited weapon under s. 88(1) [now s.
91(1)], and having regard to the purpose of the subsection, we are all
satisfied that the acceptable amount of adaptation and the timespan required to
render the gun operable is longer than that required for a s. 83 offence [now
s. 85], where the adaptation has to be made on the scene in order to support
the charge of using a firearm during the commission or attempted commission of
an indictable offence or during the flight thereafter.
13
 the trial judge also quoted from the ontario
superior court decision in
r. v. grant
2006 canlii 6209, where the court
conducted a review of the caselaw and summarized the results as follows at
para. 24:
the cases reviewed above
suggest that where the evidence establishes that a gun can be made operational
through the straight forward installation of readily available parts in a
relatively short period of time, the courts are disposed to find it to be a
firearm for the purposes of the offence of possession. by contrast, where the
effort to make the gun operational requires special expertise, considerable
time, or parts that are not readily available, the courts are less disposed to
find it to be a firearm for purposes of that offence.


the trial judge in
morris
found that the steps the detective
took could be taken by any ordinary member of the public, including the common
practice of using internet searches and youtube instruction videos. the trial
judge rejected morris’s submission that the steps the officer took required
particular expertise or involved considerable time, noting that disassembly and
reassembly together took less than 45 minutes, with some additional time
required to conduct internet searches and watch youtube videos. the trial judge
also observed that the firing pin cost less than $30.00 and was received within
a few weeks with no need for government paperwork or verifications.

in
morris, the court dismissed the conviction appeal, finding
that the trial judge correctly concluded that the handgun could be adapted for
use as a firearm, within a reasonable time. the steps and time involved in making
the gun operational in
morris
involved much more than what was
required in the accused’s case.

defence
counsel submitted that this issue requires a consideration of whether the
accused would have known to manipulate the metal rod the way the officers did to
make the shotgun fire, whether he would have known “what repairs” were needed,
and whether he had access to the tools required to make the “repairs”.

first, the shotgun did not require “repairs” to make it operable. dc
mccomb used gun oil and a hammer simply to make the metal rod slide easier but
did not say that they were tools that were necessary to make the shotgun fire. since
the accused was charged with possession offences, even if gun oil and a hammer
were necessary for the shotgun to be made operable, the crown was not required
to prove that those items were available at the time and place of the accused’s
arrest:
covin
and
morris.

if
i am in error that the shotgun was operable, i find that adapting it for use as
a firearm did not require special expertise, considerable time, or parts that were
not readily available. furthermore, the accused was, at one time, a serviceman
in the united states and was also interested in gunsmithing. the accused agreed
with crown counsel that, by virtue of his background, he was very familiar with
firearms and how they work, including shotguns. i am satisfied that the accused
had sufficient knowledge on how to operate the shotgun, or in the alternative,
on how to make it operational.
(b)
capability to cause serious bodily injury or death

neither dc mccomb nor sgt. cole measured the velocity of the projectiles
they test fired from the shotgun nor did they conduct a “pig’s eye test”. defence
counsel submitted that the crown had not proven that the shotgun could discharge
a shot, bullet or other projectile capable of causing serious bodily injury or
death to a person because no evidence was led about the
velocity of the test fires. in submissions, defence counsel argued that,
without evidence that the “pig’s eye” test was conducted with the shotgun,
there could be no finding that the shotgun could cause serious bodily injury or
death. as i will explain, the law does not support the defence argument.

dc mccomb testified that it was not part of his training to measure
the velocity of the projectile. he testified that the shotgun was on the frt
and for it to be on the table it would have to fire above a certain velocity. dc
mccomb confirmed that he was able to load a round into the chamber and
that the fire pin struck the round which propelled it down the barrel. when defence
counsel questioned dc mccomb about not conducting a “pig’s eye test”, he said,
“[t]he pig’s eye test kicks in when we’re examining a bb gun, which i’ve never
done”.

when
crown counsel asked sgt. cole whether he conducted a “pig’s eye” test with the
shotgun, he said, “we don’t do the pig’s eye test for anything other than bb
guns or pellet guns”. he explained that a pellet or bb gun is not the same as a
bullet or a shotgun cartridge because “it has to be fired using
some sort of compression system, whether it's a spring compressed air,
compressed gas or whatever”. on the other hand, shotgun cartridges all come
with their charge in behind them.

sgt. cole went on to say that it is the gunpowder or propellant in the
shell itself that determines the velocity of a shotgun shell. he said that some
will fire a higher velocity than others and that “[i]t could be anywhere from a
thousand feet to 1,300 feet per second”. in re-examination, sgt. cole said, “i
haven't seen a shotgun cartridge that fires at less than a thousand feet per
second. they’re all pretty high”.

defence counsel pointed to no authority that supports the
proposition that the pig’s eye test is required for a conventional gun. the ontario
superior court of justice cases of
r. v. bell
and
r. v. goard,
each involved devices that were not conventional guns, a flare pen launcher and
a bb gun respectively.

both of the cases discuss the use of velocity and projectile penetration tests
as a means of determining whether a device, that is not a conventional firearm,
is capable of firing projectiles at a velocity that can cause serious bodily
injury or death.


in
bell, the police seized 22-calibre ammunition and four
flare pen launchers. justice nakatsuru considered the evidence given by one
crown expert and one defence expert. the crown expert test fired all four
seized devices with 22-calibre ammunition but did not conduct velocity testing.
even without velocity testing, the crown expert opined that the devices were
capable of causing serious bodily injury or death and certified them to be
firearms. the defence expert could not classify the adapted flare pen launchers
as a firearm and said that velocity and projectile tests should have been
performed.

justice nakatsuru accepted the evidence of the defence expert over
the testimony of the crown expert. in doing so, he did not hold that velocity
and projectile penetration tests are required whenever the crown seeks to prove
that a device is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death
to a person.

in
bell,
justice nakatsuru held:
it cannot reasonably be debated that a 22-calibre
projectile fired from a conventional gun can cause serious bodily injury or
death. even without expert evidence, this is a compelling inference. to
illustrate, in
r. v. t.n.a.k.,
 o.j. no. 644 (c.a.), at para. 7,
the ontario court of appeal held that although no direct evidence as to the
capability of a rifle, such as test firing, was led at trial, circumstantial
evidence could properly lead the jury to conclude that the rifle was a firearm
as defined in the
criminal code. see also
r. v. osiowy
(1992),
1997 abca 50 (canlii), 113 c.c.c. (3d) 117 (c.a.), at para.
20;
r. v. charbonneau,
2004 canlii
9527
(ont. c.a.), at para.
3.


in finding that the crown had not proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that the flare pen launcher was capable of causing serious bodily injury or
death, justice nakatsuru said that “[t]
he
absence of evidence regarding the velocity of the bullets test fired by [the
crown expert] is but one factor to be considered, albeit a significant one”.

he went on to say this:
[the defence expert] does not simply point to the lack
of velocity testing as buttressing his opinion. rather there are case-specific
physical indicators that arose from the test firing and his own examination of
the devices that supported his opinion and casts doubt on the crown’s proof.


justice nakatsuru then went on to list the factors the defence
expert relied on to conclude that he could not classify the adapted flare pen launchers
as a firearm.

these included an incomplete chamber and physical evidence that energy escaped
laterally from the rupturing of the cartridge casings because of the incomplete
chamber. the defence expert also relied on the fact that the barrel of the adapted
flare pen launcher was significantly wider than the round once it was fitted in
the partial chamber. he also noted that each test fired bullet did not sustain
impact damage that he would have expected when firing a bullet into a water
recovery tank.

after reviewing the defence expert’s evidence, justice nakatsuru said:
it must be emphasized that these adapted flare pen
launchers were essentially new devices. they had not been encountered before by
the experts. they were never designed to be weapons, let alone firearms. the
adaption itself was minor and rudimentary. little, if any, thought or effort
went into turning them into devices that could discharge a bullet. it is not as
if a device had been skilfully forged into an efficient gun. taken altogether,
the circumstances called out for velocity or penetration tests to establish the
criterion of the capacity to cause serious bodily injury or death.


therefore, in
bell, even when dealing with flare pen
launchers, justice nakatsuru did not find that the crown had failed to prove
the devices could cause serious bodily injury or death simply because velocity
or projectile penetration tests had not been done. in fact, justice nakatsuru
reviewed the authorities provided by the crown and said that the cases were
distinguishable “
based on the fact that
velocity tests were conducted or other significant circumstantial evidence
existed to base the finding that the object in question met the definition of a
firearm”.

justice nakatsuru said this about one of the cases:
in
r. v. spreeman,
2004 abpc 209, at para.
18,
the police had not test fired the handguns, nor was any expert testimony
presented at trial. however, given that the accused had admitted to the police
he had purchased two conventional brand-named pistols in the united states and
was bringing them over the border, along with the receipts of their purchase
and ammunition, it is not surprising that even without that evidence, the trial
judge found them to be firearms.


in
goard, justice trotter also did not hold that velocity
and projectile penetration tests are required to prove that a device is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death. he dealt with a
bb gun in this case and said:
when dealing with guns that are not “conventional”
firearms, such as bb guns, it is necessary to determine whether the device is
capable of firing projectiles at a velocity that can cause serious bodily
injury or death. i accept the evidence of p.c. dwayne scott and detective
richard rossel that it was established that the device was capable causing this
type of harm through the use of the pig’s eye test, a recognized laboratory
procedure used by law enforcement agencies: see
r. v. dunn
(2013), 117
o.r. (3d) 171
(ont. c.a.), at para.
40.


in
morris, although the issue to be determined was whether
the inoperable handgun could be adapted for use as a firearm, ultimately, the
officer testified that, once the new firing pin was inserted and the gun was reassembled,
he test-fired it successfully with seized ammunition and concluded that all was
in working order. in
morris,
no mention is made of any velocity testing
or projectile penetration test such as the “pig’s eye” test, yet the handgun was
found to meet the definition of a firearm.

it cannot reasonably be debated that a 12-gauge projectile
fired from a conventional shotgun, listed on the frt, can cause serious bodily
injury or death to a person. the accused acknowledged this himself
in his evidence. he admitted that the shotgun that accidentally discharged in
the home on west 1
st
was the same shotgun that the officers test
fired.

the accused had the following exchange with crown counsel:
q. right. and you knew that it could have hurt
somebody, right?
a. well, i wasn’t thinking of it but with it in my
possession, i guess, no, nobody would have been hurt.
q. all right, but we agree, though, that a shotgun is
designed to hurt people, right, that’s its purpose, what a gun does?
a. no, it’s designed to hunt animals.
q. sure. you could shoot somebody with it and they’d
be seriously injured in the usual course, right?
a. you could.
q. and in fact, your wife, or your partner, was
actually almost seriously injured by it, right?
a. very traumatic, sir, yes.
q. very traumatic.
a. yes, sir.
q. i’m going to suggest to you you ought to have been
concerned and, in fact, you were.
a. i was.
q. and because you understood the risk this shotgun
posed to you and others around you, right?
a. sure.

the following exchange also occurred between crown counsel and the
accused:
q. and that’s because it had successfully discharged
the projectile it seemed to you, right?
a. yes, sir.
q. right. and, so, you’d agree with me your wife
almost just got shot in that incident, that’s what i understand happened,
you’re in a state of panic when you’re examining this shotgun the last time,
right?
a. yeah, heart was racing.
q. you just almost lost somebody who’s extremely dear
to you, right?
a. yes, sir.

the totality of the evidence established beyond a reasonable doubt that
the sawed-off shotgun which was in the accused’s possession was capable
of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person and met the definition of
firearm in
s. 2
of the
criminal code.
conclusion

for the reasons set out above, i found the accused not guilty of
unlawful possession of stolen property valued at under $5,000 (
s. 354(1)
of the
criminal code
) but guilty of the following
criminal code
offences: (i) unauthorized possession of a firearm without
being the holder of a licence or registration certificate for it: s. 91(1);
(ii) possession of a firearm knowing that he was not the holder of a licence or
registration certificate for it: s. 92(1); (iii) careless storage of a firearm:
s. 86(1); (iv) being an occupant of a motor vehicle in which he knew that there
was a firearm: s. 94(2); and (v) possession of a prohibited or restricted
firearm with readily accessible ammunition that is capable of being discharged
in the firearm without being the holder of an authorization or a licence to
possess it in that place and the registration certificate for the firearm: s.
95(1)(b).
released: september 24, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci

the accused also entered a not guilty plea to the charge of driving while his
driver’s licence was suspended, contrary to
s. 53(1)
of the
highway traffic
act
of ontario, but conceded his guilt for this offence at the conclusion
of the trial.

section 354(1)
(a) of the
criminal code,
r.s.c. 1985 c. c-46. the accused
was charged with unlawful possession of the minivan knowing that all or part of
the property was obtained by or derived directly or indirectly from the
commission in canada of an offence punishable by indictment. the crown’s theory
was that jeffrey estee’s minivan was stolen and that it was the accused and/or
his girlfriend that had taken it without mr. estee’s consent. see
r. v.
l’heureux,
1985 canlii 49 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 159, 47 c.r. (3d) 221, 21 c.c.c. (3d) 574.

r. v. l’heureux, supra.

r. v. slatter,
2020 scc 36, at para.
2.

pc armstrong also located an unspent rifle round in a ziploc
bag in the glove box of the vehicle.

the photographs on pages 33-37 of the firearms-photo book (exhibit 5) depict
12-gauge shotgun shells that the police seized from the minivan.

the photographs of the shotgun are in the firearms-photo book (exhibit 5).

although the shotgun is listed as a non-restricted firearm on
the frt, it was classified as prohibited due to the barrel length.

r. v. morris,
2023 onca 816.

ibid,
at paras. 11-13.

r. v. bell,
2024 onsc 3906;
r. v. goard,
2014 onsc 2215.

in both
bell
and
goard, reference is made to measuring the
velocity of a projectile fired from a device using a chronograph. at footnote 5
of
bell, justice nakatsuru identifies the “pig’s eye” test as a
penetration test but says, “though these days actual pig’s eyes are no longer
used and rather gelatin is used in a penetration test”.

r. v. bell, supra,
at para.
7.

ibid,
at para. 23.

ibid,
at para. 26.

ibid, at paras. 27- 30.

ibid,
at para. 31.

ibid,
at para. 39.

ibid,
at para. 39.

r. v. goard, supra, at para.
121.