source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj490/2025oncj490.html

citation:
r. v. thongdara, 2025 oncj 490
date: 2025·09·24
court
file no.: 4814 998 22 4000 2363
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
thaviphanh thongdara
before
 justice david porter
sentencing
 submissions heard on september 2, 2025
reasons
 for sentence released on september 24, 2025
d. desantis……….……………………………………………………………………..…for
 the crown
s. pennypacker……………………………………………………..…………………
 for the defendant
porter j:
overview

in a previous decision on july 21, 2025, i found mr.
thongdara to be a long-term offender. the matter was adjourned to hear
submissions on sentence, in light of that decision. these are my reasons on
sentence. the details of mr. thongdara’s background, the details of his
criminal record, and the results of the forensic psychiatric assessment of dr
alina iosif in her report dated july12, 2024, and her evidence in the dangerous
offender proceeding, are summarized in my decision of july 21, 2025, and form
part of the evidence considered on this sentencing and will not be repeated in
these reasons.

mr. thongdara had 1,047 days of actual pre-sentence custody
to september 2, 2025, so that as of today’s date of september 24, 2025, he has
1,047 + 22 days of actual pre-sentence custody totalling 1,069 days of actual
pre-sentence custody, resulting in an enhanced credit of 1069 x 1.5 = 1,604
days of enhanced credit or 4.4 years of enhanced credit, or 4 years and 145
days of enhanced credit, which is approximately 4 years, 4 months and 25 days
of enhanced credit.

ms. pennypacker provided records from the toronto south
detention centre proving that between may 4,2022 and march 6, 2023. mr.
thongdara was subject to 52 days of lockdowns. in addition, records from the
toronto east detention centre showed that between march 7, 2023 and august 26, 2025,
mr. thongdara was housed with 2 other inmates for 461 nights of his 1,069 days
of actual custody, and had 126 days of lockdowns. during his pre-sentence
incarceration, mr. thongdara therefore was in lockdowns on a total of 178 days,
or almost 6 months, and was triple bunked for 461 days.

pursuant to
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344, at paras.
50-52,
these harsh circumstances of pre-sentence incarceration are relevant as a
further mitigating circumstance in sentencing. i agree with molloy j. in
r.
v. shaikh and tanoli,
2024 onsc 774, at para.
23
that assigning a specific
additional credit to the
summers
credit otherwise applicable, is a
proper and transparent manner to give effect to the mitigation in sentencing
resulting from very harsh pre-sentence custody, so long as it does not result
in an unfit sentence.

to give effect to this principle, i will grant further credit
to bring the total enhanced pre-sentence credit from 4 years 4 months and 25
days to a total enhanced pre-sentence custody credit of 4 years and 9 months
(1,735 days).

mr. thongdara entered a plea of guilty to the index offence
of robbery which is the main mitigating circumstance in this case. in
addition, he has pursued available workshops at the toronto east detention
centre (“tedc”) completing workshops on self-accountability, substance abuse, and
anti-criminal thinking and responsible living choices.

the crown position on sentencing is that a 7-year sentence, less
pre-sentence custody, and a 10 year long-term supervision order, is the fit
sentence for the index offence given mr. thongdara’s designation as a long-term
offender.

on behalf of mr. thongdara, ms. pennypacker submits that he
is in a time served position, and that a 10-year long-term supervision order is
the proper sentence, without any additional incarceration. she submits that, even
when the sentence is imposed after a designation as a long-term offender, the
fit sentence proportionate to the gravity of the index offence, and the degree
of responsibility of mr. thongdara, is a time served sentence, with a 10 year
ltso, having regard to the significant pre-sentence custody already
served.
sentencing law

the general principles of sentencing are established in the
following provisions of the
criminal code.
section 718
states:
“the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful
conduct and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by
unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the offender,
and other persons, from committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders
from society, where necessary;
(d) to assist in
rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide reparations for harm done to victims, or to the
community; and
(f) to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and
acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or to the community”

section 718.2 states:
“a court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the
following principles:
(
a
) a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender, ….
(
b
) a sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar
offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances;
(
c
) where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined
sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
(
d
) an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less
restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances; and
(
e
) all available sanctions other than imprisonment that are
reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for all offenders, with
particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders.”

the fundamental principle of sentencing is the principle of
proportionality.
section 718.1
of the
criminal code
states that a
sentence, “must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender”.

in
r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, in which the court
considered the principles applicable to sentencing under the long-term
sentencing regime, lebel j. summarized the principle of proportionality as
follows at para. 37:
“the fundamental principle
of sentencing (i.e., proportionality) is intimately tied to the fundamental
purpose of sentencing — the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society
through the imposition of just sanctions. whatever weight a judge may wish to
accord to the various objectives and other principles listed in the
code,
the resulting sentence must respect the fundamental principle of
proportionality. proportionality is the
sine qua non
of a just
sanction. first, the principle ensures that a sentence reflects the gravity of
the offence. this is closely tied to the objective of denunciation. it
promotes justice for victims and ensures public confidence in the justice
system. as wilson j. expressed in her concurring judgment in
re b.c. motor
vehicle act,
1985 canlii 81 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 486, at p. 533:
it is basic to any theory
of punishment that the sentence imposed bear some relationship to the offence;
it must be a “fit” sentence proportionate to the seriousness of the offence. 
only if this is so can the public be satisfied that the offender “deserved” the
punishment he received and feel a confidence in the fairness and rationality of
the system.
second, the principle of
proportionality ensures that a sentence does not exceed what is appropriate,
given the moral blameworthiness of the offender. in this sense, the principle
serves a limiting or restraining function and ensures justice for the
offender. in the canadian criminal justice system, a just sanction is one that
reflects both perspectives on proportionality and does not elevate one at the
expense of the other.”

while it is clear that denunciation and general and specific
deterrence are the par-amount considerations in sentencing an accused in
relation to robbery, the rehabilitation of the accused must always be
considered as one of the principles of sentencing. indeed, as noted by the
supreme court of canada in
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at para.
4:
“one of the main objectives
of canadian criminal law is the rehabilitation of offenders. rehabilitation is
one of the fundamental moral values that distinguish canadian society from the
societies of many other nations in the world, and it helps the courts impose
sentences that are just and appropriate.”

in
r. v. boutilier,
2017 scc 64,
the court
confirmed the application of the general principles of sentencing in ss. 718 to
718.2 to long term offenders. the court stated at paras. 53 and 54:
“this court has
consistently affirmed that dangerous offender proceedings are sentencing proceedings:
r.
v.
steele,
2014 scc 61, 3 s.c.r. 138, at
para.
40;
jones, at pp. 279-80
and 294-95;
lyons, at p. 350. accordingly, a sentencing judge in a
dangerous offender proceeding must apply the sentencing principles and
mandatory guidelines outlined in ss. 718 to 718.2:
r.
v.
johnson,
2003 scc 46, 2 s.c.r. 357, at
para.
23; neuberger, at p. 3-4. these
sections of the
criminal code
set out the
purpose and objectives of sentencing (
s. 718
), the fundamental principle of
proportionality (
s. 718.1
) — “the
sine qua non
of
a just sanction” (
r. v. ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, 1 s.c.r. 433, at
para.
37
) — and the other
sentencing principles that a court “shall” consider before imposing any
sentence on an offender (s. 718.2). an error in the application of these
principles is reviewable by an appellate court:
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, 3 s.c.r. 1089.
….
these sentencing principles
apply to every sentencing decision, whether made under the regular sentencing
regime, the dangerous offender regime or the long-term offender regime.”

at paragraph 56 of
boutilier, the court affirms that,
while the sentencing principles in
sections 718
-
718.2
of the
criminal code
apply to sentences for long-term offenders or dangerous offenders, under part
xxiv of the
criminal code,
“parliament is entitled to
decide that protection of the public is an enhanced sentencing objective for
individuals who have been designated as dangerous…. emphasis on the public
safety component is consistent with the fact that public protection is the
general purpose of part xxiv of the code:
steele, at para.
27
”.

in the subsequent decision in
r. v. spilman,
2018 onca
551, the court of appeal confirms that, in imposing a determinate sentence for
a dangerous offender or long-term offender under part xxiv, the judge is not
restricted to imposing the sentence for the predicate offence that would have
been appropriate in the absence of the designation of the offender as a
dangerous offender or long-term offender. as watt j.a. notes at paras. 32-33:
“as i will explain, i am
satisfied that in determining the length of the fixed - term custodial
component of a composite sentence under section 753(4)(b), the hearing judge is
not restricted to imposing a term of imprisonment that would be appropriate on
conviction of the predicate offence but in the absence of a dangerous offender
designation. the hearing judge must take into account the statutory limits of
the offence for which sentence is being imposed, the paramount purpose of
public protection under part xxiv, and other applicable sentencing principles
under sections 718-718.2. this analysis may justify fixed term sentences
lengthier than those appropriate outside the dangerous offender context….
emphasis on the public
safety component is consistent with the fact that public protection is the
general purpose of part xxiv of the
criminal code:
boutilier,
at para.
56;
r. v. steele,
2014 scc 61, 3 s.c.r. 138, at para.
27. this
enhanced objective of public safety distinguishes proceedings under part xxiv
from those under part xxiii and is of sufficient cogency to warrant sentencing
dispositions beyond those ordinarily available for the predicate offence: see
ss 753(4)(a) and (b).”
this assessment can consider the length of treatment
required in custody for the paramount principle of public protection to be
achieved. watt j.a stated in
r. v.
spilman, supra, at para.
51:
“…i am satisfied that when
imposing a sentence under ss. 753(4)(b) or (c) a hearing judge may impose a
fixed - term sentence that exceeds the appropriate range in the non-dangerous
offender context, to ensure the offender has access to treatment programs in a
penitentiary.”

he notes however, that the sentence must nevertheless be a
fit and proportionate sentence having regard to the sentencing principles in
ss.
718
-
718.2
of the
criminal code. he states at para 53:
“while factors such as the
degree of responsibility of the offender and the gravity of the offence play a
lesser role in determining a sentence under part xxiv, these considerations
cannot be entirely ignored. even where their significance is attenuated, they
prevent the imposition of lengthy fixed- term sentences that are entirely
disconnected from the circumstances of the offence giving rise to the
sentencing proceedings.”

in its recent decision in
r. v. j.w.,
2025 scc 16, at
para.1 the supreme court of canada has confirmed that, as a general principle
applicable to all sentencing decisions,
“when there is a sufficient
evidentiary basis on the availability and accessibility of institutional
programming, it is not an error in principle to consider an offender’s
anticipated time to complete it as a factor in the individualized sentencing
process, provided that the sentence arrived at is proportionate to the gravity
of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. in assessing
the fitness of sentences, we should bear in mind that proportionality often
gives rise to a range of sentences rather than a single “correct” result…”

the court notes, however, that for sentencing in relation to
a dangerous offender or long-term offender, under part xxiv of the
criminal
code, the protection of the public is an enhanced sentencing objective
entitled to particular emphasis. while stating that a judge, in general,
cannot overemphasize the purpose of protection of the public to the exclusion
of other relevant and applicable considerations when crafting a fit sentence,
the court states at paragraph 61:
“there are limited
exceptions to the foregoing, notably the dangerous offender and long-term
offender scheme in part xxiv of the code “to protect the public when the past
conduct of the criminal demonstrates a propensity for crimes of violence
against the person, and there is a real and present danger to life or limb”….
for this narrowly defined group of offenders, parliament has decided that
protection of the public is an “enhanced sentencing objective” (
r. v.
boutilier,
2017 scc 64, at para.56.)”

finally, an overriding principle in the sentencing of
dangerous offenders or long-term offenders is that the offender is entitled to
the least intrusive sentence required to achieve the primary purpose of the
statutory scheme in part xxiv of the
code:
r. v. boutilier, supra,
at para.
60;
r. v. walters,
2018 onca 391, at para.
13.

in my opinion, the same principles apply to the sentencing of
a long-term offender under part xxiv of the
criminal code.

in my opinion, the record in this case establishes that his
polysubstance use disorder and gambling addiction became most problematic for
mr. thongdara after the completion of his lengthy sentence for attempted murder
in 2018.

i accept dr. iosif’s conclusions that the psychological
treatment for anti-social personality disorder, and treatment for his gambling
addiction, and his addiction to many substances including fentanyl and alcohol
needs to be lengthy and substantial, and is only available within a federal penitentiary
after an appropriate assessment at the beginning of a penitentiary sentence.

even in the absence of a long term offender designation, sentencing
jurisprudence has established that sentencing for robberies of convenience
stores must apply principles of denunciation and general deterrence to reflect
the vulnerable position of convenience store clerks who often work alone late
into the night.

in
r. v. lewis,
2009 onca 792
the court stated at
para. 3:
“this court has repeatedly
said that robberies of convenience stores will attract heavy sentences.”

in
r. v. dodman,
2021 onca
543, the court stated at para.15:
“the
jurisprudence of this court makes clear that robberies of convenience stores
will attract substantial sentences and that general deterrence and denunciation
play an essential role in fashioning a fit sentence:
r. v. clarke,
2014 onca 296, at
para.
18;
r. v.
superales,
2019 onca 792, at
para.
1; and
r.
v. lewis,
2009 onca 792, at
para.
3.”

the maximum sentence for robbery is
imprisonment for life:
criminal code,
s.344(1)(b).

mr. thongdara has
4 prior robbery convictions: two in 1995 for convenience stores, and two in
1999 in conjunction with his conviction for attempted murder. he received a
sentence of 4 years concurrent on the two robbery convictions in 1999,
concurrent to his 14-year sentence for attempted murder.

while bound by a
release order in relation to the index offence of robbery in this case,
committed, on april 19, 2022, mr. thongdara assaulted elderly strangers at the
woodbine casino on july 9, 2022 when he was high on drugs, and acknowledged in
his interview with dr. iosif that he had lost money at the casino that night
and the assault was an attempt to take the victims’ money to go home.

while this offence
is not a prior offence in relation to the index offence for which he is being
sentenced in this case, it does demonstrate the risk to the public posed by mr.
thongdara until he is successfully treated for his polysubstance addiction, his
gambling addiction, and his personality disorder with strong antisocial
personality traits.

in
r. v. wilson,
2020 onca 3
at para.
66, paciocco
j.a. held that offences committed after the index offence may be relevant in
sentencing under part xxiv of the
criminal code
as they are relevant to
the risk the offender poses to the public. he stated at para.66:
“whereas subsequent
convictions are not relevant in ordinary sentencing in determining the
proportional fitness of the sentence for an offence, subsequent convictions are
of utmost relevance in dangerous offender sentencing in establishing patterns
of behaviour and evaluating future risks to public safety.”

the circumstances of the index offence of robbery, in light
of mr. thongdara’s substantial criminal record, including an 18 year sentence
for offences including attempted murder, 4 prior robbery convictions including
2 prior convenience store robberies, the vulnerability of the convenience store
clerk to this offence, and the gratuitous violence inflicted upon the clerk
during the commission of the offence make the principles of denunciation, and
specific and general deterrence, important considerations in determining the
fit sentence in this case.

the denunciation, specific and general deterrence objectives
of the proportionate sentence for this robbery would call for a significant
penitentiary sentence even in the absence of a long-term offender designation.

at p. 38 of her report, dr. iosif makes the following
recommendation concerning mr. thongdara’s risk management:
“given mr. thongdara’s high
risk of violent offending, he needs a high level of intervention and
significant resources to decrease that risk. his needs should be directed
toward assisting with abstinence from substances, and therapies that focus on
antisocial traits. he should also have a high level of consistent support and
external supervision, and assistance in engagement in meaningful activities
including employment. it is recommended that mr. thongdara complete the
indicated programming in a federal institution prior to being released in the
community.”

the testimony of joseph dixon, a parole officer supervisor,
with correctional services canada establishes that, as a person who has
committed three violent offences, upon being sentenced to a period of
incarceration of over two years, mr. thongdara would likely be referred for a
psychological assessment upon his entry into the federal penitentiary.

he would also receive an intake assessment at the joyceville
facility to determine what level of program intensity was appropriate for him. if
he was assessed as needing a high intensity program it consists of 86 sessions
in the institution of 2 and half hours per session. the current programming in
federal institutions that would be applicable to an offender like mr. thongdara
is a global relapse prevention program that is a multi-target program called
the integrated correctional program model.

according to mr. dixon, if an offender is subject to a
long-term supervision order, the order may involve a residential condition
requiring the offender to live in a community correctional centre or a
community residential facility in the same way in which this can be ordered by
the parole board as a condition of parole.

on the totality of the evidence, i accept dr. iosif’s evidence
and recommendations that mr. thongdara requires intensive in - custody
rehabilitative treatment, and a subsequent controlled environment including
substantial supervision, to reduce the risk of re-offence by mr. thongdara to
an acceptable level such that it is effectively controlled. i accept dr.
iosif’s opinion that, the intensive treatment available in a federal
penitentiary is necessary in this case to protect the public. this is only
possible if, after credit for pre-sentence custody is deducted, mr. thongdara
receives a sentence of at least 2 years.

in my opinion, the clarity of dr. iosif’s opinion on the need
for the treatment available in a custodial setting distinguishes this case from
the decision of the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. gilmore,
2025 onca
517
on which ms. pennypacker relies. in that case, the expert evidence of dr. pearce,
relied upon by the court of appeal, was that ms. gilmore’s prognosis for
treatment in the community pursuant to a ltso was fair, with some reason for
optimism, and that the targeted treatments she required were available in a
ltso through correctional services canada:
r. v. gilmore, supra, at
para.16.

in contrast, in the case at bar, dr. iosif’s opinion, which
i have accepted, is that the risk of re-offence presented by mr. thongdara
requires intensive treatment available in a federal penitentiary, prior to the
ongoing treatment and supervision available in a 10 year long term supervision
order.

on the totality of the evidence, including mr. dixon’s evidence
on the nature of the assessment available for an offender sentenced to more
than two years in the federal penitentiary, i have concluded that the proper
application of sentencing principles for mr. thongdara, pursuant to s.753.1(3),
as a long-term offender, being sentenced for his fifth robbery conviction,
requires that the total sentence to be imposed must ensure that receives a
sentence involving custody in a penitentiary, to ensure that he has available
the necessary treatment within a federal penitentiary before being released on
a 10 year long term supervision order.

this requires a sentence in this case of 6 years and 10
months (2,495 days), which after a deduction of four years and nine months
(1,735 days) of enhanced credit for presentence custody, leaves a remaining
sentence of 2 years and 1 month, (760 days) which will be served in a federal
penitentiary.

i note that the court of appeal has instructed in
r. v.
spilman, supra, at paras
32-38 and 43 - 44, that,under part xxiv of the
criminal
code, a sentence for a dangerous offender or a long-term offender beyond
the sentence which otherwise would be imposed for the index offence, may be a
fit sentence if it is required to ensure the offender has access to treatment
required to ensure that the offender’s risk of further offences is
appropriately controlled.

i also note that any sentence for the index offence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and degree of responsibility of the
offender when sentencing any offender, including a long-term offender:
s.718.1
criminal
code,
r. v boutilier, supra, at para.
55.

in my opinion, the proportionate sentence for the index
offence of robbery, to achieve the goal of protection of the public, mandated
by part xxiv of the
criminal code, and
s.753.1(3)
governing the
sentencing of long term offenders, and to achieve the objectives of general and
specific deterrence, denunciation, and the rehabilitation of mr. thongdara, requires
that mr. thongdara be sentenced to a period of incarceration of 6 years and 10 months
(2,495 days) in the federal penitentiary, less pre-sentence custody to which an
enhanced credit is applied totalling 4 years and 9 months (1,735 days).

this leaves a sentence of 2 years and 1 month ( 760 days) to
serve. in my opinion this is the least intrusive sentence required to achieve
the primary purpose of sentencing under part xxiv of the
criminal code, the
protection of the public:
r. v. boutililer, supra, at para.60.

while this sentence may be higher than would be imposed for the
predicate offence under part xxiii of the
criminal code, as the court of
appeal noted in
r. v. stilman, supra, at para. 22 and 33, the primary
objective of sentencing under part xxiv of protection of the public may warrant
sentencing dispositions beyond those ordinarily appropriate for the predicate
offence. see also
r. v. ariyanayagam,
2019 oncj 329,
per
silverstein,
j. at para.51;
r. v. maclean,
2021 onsc 6052,
per
o’marra, j. at
para. 34;
r. v. r.m.p.,
2020 onsc 6337,
at paras.176-179, per
ryan
bell j.

in my opinion, this is the minimum additional incarceration
that will ensure that mr. thongdara serves a period of time in a federal
penitentiary, and thus is able to receive an initial intake assessment, and the
substantial treatment available in the federal penitentiary to address his polysubstance
abuse, history of trauma and his gambling addiction, which dr. iosif concluded
is essential to protect the public from further offences, and will assist mr.
thongdara in his rehabilitation.

in my view, the sentence of this length is required to make
available to mr. thongdara the extensive substance abuse counselling and
treatment, gambling addiction treatment, and psychological treatment to address
antisocial personality disorder required for there to be a reasonable assurance
that mr. thongdara will not commit a further serious personal injury offence at
the conclusion of his sentence. this is a proper consideration in sentencing a
dangerous offender or a long-term offender:
r. v. spilman,
supra,
at para.
43-44, and 51-54;
r. v. c.g.,
2019 onsc 2406, at para.119;
r.
v. maclean,
2021 onsc 6052, at para.
34.

in my opinion, it is also the proportionate sentence
pursuant to
s.753.1(3)
of the
criminal code, applying the sentencing
principles in
ss.718,
718.1
and
718.2, reflecting the serious nature of the
offence, mr. thongdara’s substantial moral culpability, his prior serious
criminal record, and the statutory objective of protection of the public
parliament has chosen as the paramount objective of sentencing under the
dangerous offender and long-term offender regimes.

thereafter a lengthy period of long-term supervision,
analogous to the heavily controlled environment in which he did well at the
conclusion of his 18-year prison sentence, is required and provides a
reasonable possibility that the public will be adequately protected against the
commission by mr. thongdara of further offences. in my opinion a long-term
supervision order of 10 years is required to provide the public with this
reasonable expectation.

in addition, pursuant to
section 760
of the
criminal code,
i order that a copy of all reports and testimony given by dr. iosif, including
her expert forensic psychiatric assessment report dated july 12, 2024, marked
as exhibit 4 in the sentencing, a transcript of dr. iosif’s testimony, and my
reasons for my ruling that mr. thongdara is a long-term offender dated july 21,
2025, and these sentencing reasons, along with a transcript of the evidence on
the dangerous offender application, all be forwarded to the correctional
service of canada for their information.

i also order that mr. thongdara provide a sample of his dna
pursuant to s. 487.051 as robbery is a primary designated offence pursuant to
s. 487.04.

i also order that a s.109 order be issued prohibiting mr.
thongdara from possessing a firearm and the other specified weapons and
materials in s.109 for life.

there will also be an order pursuant to section 743.21
prohibiting any communication between mr. thongdara and the victim of the
robbery moon lee while mr. thongdara is serving the custodial portion of his
sentence.
dated: september 24, 2025 ________________________________
justice
david porter