source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj187/2025oncj187.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. christie, 2025 oncj 187
date: april
2, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 998 23 31111268
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
roy christie
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 01 april 2025
reasons
for judgment released on 02 april 2025
j. mahal...................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
r. mccartney........................................................ counsel
for the defendant roy christie
reasons for judgment on the
charter
application
renwick j.:
introduction

the defendant is charged with the two standard drink-driving offences
and resisting arrest.

in advance of the trial, the defendant brought a
charter
application for alleged violations of his ss. 8, 9, and 10(a)
charter
rights.
the prosecutor responded to this application in writing at the start of the
trial, yesterday. no issue was taken with respect to the late response.

the parties agreed to proceed with the trial and the
charter
application concurrently in a “blended” forensic environment. the parties seek
a ruling on this application in advance of the continuation of the trial (closing
submissions), later today.

the prosecution called three witnesses: mr. peter hull (a concerned
motorist), police constable anwar chaar (an arresting officer), and police
constable joshua champagnie (the qualified technician).

the issues for determination in this judgment are
whether the defendant’s
charter
rights were violated, and if so, whether
the evidential breath sampling results should be excluded from the defendant’s
trial.
applicable
legal principles

though the defendant generally has the onus to
establish violations of the
charter
on a balance of probabilities,

where there is a warrantless
search, as in this case, the prosecutor must establish that the search was
conducted reasonably and pursuant to some lawful authority.

thus, both parties have an
onus: the defendant must prosecute his
charter
claims that the police
had failed to advise him of the reason for his detention and that he had been
arbitrarily detained and/or his arrest was arbitrary; while the prosecutor has
to establish that the seizure of the evidential breath samples followed a
lawful arrest and breath demand, and otherwise complied with the statutory
regime.

obtaining reasonable grounds to believe that an
offence has been committed does not demand perfection or even perfect accuracy.
police officers embarking on an investigation are entitled to be wrong. as long
as their grounds are objectively reasonable, rather than based on vague
suspicions, intuitions, hunches, or worse, improper motives, they need not be
found to be correct.

the standard of reasonable grounds to believe is
credibly-based probability.

alternative explanations for observed signs of possible alcohol-related
impairment do not undermine reasonable grounds, unless the officer unreasonably
discounted information of which she was aware. reasonable grounds to believe
an offence has been committed must be articulable, subjectively held by the
officer, and objectively reasonable.

an officer is entitled to rely on hearsay, unless there is reason to doubt the
information’s truth.

reasonable grounds are not proof on a balance of
probabilities, but they involve being satisfied of the probability of a state
of affairs. the officer can be mistaken in the belief, as long as her belief is
reasonable and there was no reason for her to doubt the information she
believed.

the
ontario court of appeal affirmed these principles in
r. v.
notaro:
the reasonable and probable
grounds test is not about the quality of the investigation or the range of the
questions the officer asks herself. it turns on whether an arresting officer's
honest, subjective belief that an offence has been committed is supported by
the objective facts that the officer was aware of:
r. v.
bush,
2010 onca 554,
101 o.r. (3d) 641,
at paras.
71-72. as durno j.
(sitting
ad hoc
)
noted in
bush,
at para.
70, "the issue is not whether the officer could have conducted a
more thorough investigation. the issue is whether, when the officer made the
breath demand, he subjectively and objectively had reasonable and probable
grounds to do so."
this is
not to say that the quality of the investigation will have no practical bearing
on whether the arresting officer has reasonable and probable grounds. after
all, the nature and quality of the investigation will affect the information
that the officer has, and can therefore indirectly influence the sufficiency of
the officer's grounds. the point is that the material focus in a reasonable and
probable grounds analysis is not on the extent of the investigation that an
officer goes through in forming her belief. the material focus is on what the
information known to the officer would mean to a reasonable person.


relatedly, our court of appeal considered the
standard for a warrantless arrest in
r.
v. carelse-brown,

o.j. no. 6564. at paragraph 28 of
carelse-brown, the court quoted from
its decision in
r.
v. golub:
in
determining whether the reasonableness standard is met, the nature of the power
exercised and the context within which it is exercised must be considered. the
dynamics at play in an arrest situation are very different than those which
operate on an application for a search warrant. often, the officer's decision
to arrest must be made quickly in volatile and rapidly changing situations.
judicial reflection is not a luxury the officer can afford. the officer must
make his or her decision based on available information which is often less
than exact or complete. the law does not expect the same kind of inquiry of a
police officer deciding whether to make an arrest that it demands of a justice
faced with an application for a search warrant.


the law respecting the obligation of the police
to inform individuals of the reason for their detention is well settled.
ordinarily, the start of an investigative detention engages an individual’s s.
10(a)
charter
right to know the reason for the state’s interference with
one’s autonomy or liberty. information about the reason for one’s detention permits
detainees the opportunity to choose whether or not to submit to a detention or
arrest.


breaches of s. 10(a)
can be "temporal" or "informational". a temporal breach
occurs if a detained person is not
promptly
informed of the reason for
their detention. an "informational" breach arises if the reason for
detention is not adequately communicated.


by way of a roadmap, it will be helpful to
outline the
charter
arguments at play, the evidence and my findings, how
the law intersects with the facts, and my conclusions on the
charter
applications.
positions
of the parties on the charter applications

the defendant alleged that several
charter
violations occurred during the investigation of the defendant leading to his
arrest and a demand for evidential breath sampling. the
charter
arguments were framed in the
grounds
section of the application as follows:
1.
that the seizure of breath in accordance with
the
criminal code
is by way of a warrantless search. as such, the
respondent is obliged to demonstrate that the warrantless seizure was
reasonable in the context of
s. 8
of the
canadian charter of rights and
freedoms;
2.
since the arresting officer lacked the necessary
and reasonable probably [sic] grounds to believe an offence had been committed
under
s. 320.14(1)
a) of the
criminal code, he also lacked the necessary
reasonable and probably [sic] grounds to arrest the applicant without a warrant
in accordance with the statutory requirements provided for in
s. 495
of the
criminal
code. as such, the applicant was arbitrarily detained in violation of his
s. 9 rights under the
charter;
3.
that the entry of the police officers into the
applicant’s garage without specific invitation consulted [sic] an unreasonable
search and seizure within the meaning of
s. 8
of the
charter;
4.
that s. 10(a) requires that upon detention the
reasons be provided. the officer did not inform the applicant of the reasons
for detention immediately, thus breaching his s. 10(a) rights under the
canadian
charter of rights and freedoms;
5.
that in the circumstances, the applicant’s
rights pursuant to
ss. 8
and 9 were breached and could impact negatively on the
fairness of the applicant’s trial and bring the administration of justice into
disrepute;
6.
that the facts warrant exclusion of the
evidence, including the breath samples, pursuant to s. 24(2); and
7.
such further and other grounds as counsel may
advise and this honourable court may permit.

orally, the defendant submitted two other points
that expanded upon the grounds for the application: the defendant revoked the
implied invitation for the police to enter upon his property
before
his
arrest; and there was no evidence in respect of the subjective grounds held by
the arresting officer.

the prosecutor responded that there would have
been no doubt in the defendant’s mind why the police were present once they advised
him of a driving complaint and the presence of beer in his car, within minutes
of their interactions with the defendant.

as well, the police were lawfully present to
investigate a recent driving complaint where they made their own observations
consistent with the poor driving alleged: there was open alcohol (beer) visible
beside the driver; the defendant’s pupils were dilated; there was the smell of
alcohol coming from the vehicle; and the defendant had slurred speech. in the
circumstances of the 9-1-1 call, the police were either entitled to enter onto
private property to investigate a possibly-impaired driver, or, the officers
had an implied invitation to attend onto the private property to communicate
with the resident about the concerns with the recent driving of the resident’s
vehicle.

the parties disagree that there were
charter
violations, and the import of any
charter
breaches on the admissibility
of the breath testing results in this trial.
the
evidence and findings
the testimony of peter
hull

this witness testified briefly about a vehicle
he was following on highway 410 north one evening in the fall of 2023. mr. hull
was uncertain, but he thought that the vehicle was a honda. the vehicle was
stopping and failed to move although traffic was clear ahead of it. mr. hull
would honk his horn and flash his headlights, but the other motorist would take
some time before moving the vehicle again. this happened several times over a
few minutes. eventually, mr. hull called the police and then he observed the
vehicle to exit the highway onto another road, but he could not say where. he
never saw any occupants and could not describe the driver.

understandably, mr. hull was not cross-examined.
it was unclear if the vehicle he described was the one investigated by the
police before the defendant’s arrest.
the testimony
of constable anwar chaar

constable chaar was a police officer for
approximately one year on the date of the alleged offences. despite his lack of
experience, he testified credibly and his recollection was good. some of his
body-worn camera (“bwc”) footage became an exhibit (approximately seven minutes
and 10 seconds, until 20:30:00).

the bwc video reinforced much of the officer’s
testimony and supports my finding that his recollection was not perfect, but he
was mostly reliable as a witness. where the bwc video contradicted the
officer’s testimony, i do not find that the witness was trying to mislead the
court. rather, like any historian speaking from his recollection, his testimony
suffered from the passage of time and the frailties of memory.

constable chaar testified that he had received a
radio call involving a 9-1-1 call to the ontario provincial police (“o.p.p.”)
about a vehicle that had been north bound on highway 410 that exited in an
unknown direction onto bovaird drive. the vehicle had a license plate byde733,
which was registered to an owner who resided at 127 dumfries avenue, brampton. within
10 minutes, p.c. chaar arrived at that address and saw the defendant belted in
the driver’s seat of the subject vehicle, which was reversed and parked in the
open garage attached to the house, with the headlights illuminated.

the officer arrived at this location after
another officer, chet phillips, who had parked his police vehicle directly in
front of the defendant’s honda. the defendant was in the driver’s seat, hunched
over, wearing his seatbelt. he appeared to be unconscious. upon approaching the
passenger’s front window, p.c. chaar observed an open can of beer, with a straw
in it, in the centre console cup holder.

constable chaar testified that the driver’s eyes
were closed when he first approached and “he was not alerted to me until i
knocked on the window.” the bwc footage actually shows the driver lift his head
at 20:23:34, which is about five seconds before the officer knocked on the
front passenger window (20:23:39). this discrepancy is a small one. given that
there was no evidence that the young officer had seen the bwc video before he
testified, i am not troubled by this slight inaccuracy in his testimony. in many
other respects, his testimony closely aligned with the video footage.

the bwc footage supported the officer’s
recollection that the defendant was wholly uncooperative with the police. when
p.c. chaar asked the defendant to roll down his window, it took him about one
minute to do so and even then, he only rolled it down about 1-2 inches. both
constables asked the defendant numerous times to leave his vehicle. he would
not. at 20:25:01, p.c. chaar made it clear why the police were present:
sir, we got a
complaint that you were driving all over the place and you have a beer in the
middle console.
this statement was made approximately 87
seconds into the interaction with the defendant.

of significance, p.c. chaar testified that he
could see that the driver’s eyes were dilated when they spoke. he could smell
alcohol coming from the car. he could see open liquor. the officer testified
that the defendant was not complying with the police requests to unlock the car
and to exit. both constables warned the defendant that they would break the
window to get him out of the vehicle.

on the police video, p.c. phillips is heard
several times threatening to arrest the defendant for obstructing the police. the
defendant was unmoved. he even told the police “arrest me then” at 20:27:13.

constable chaar even asked the defendant his
name and at 20:28:08 he replied, “i don’t have to tell you nothing.” at 20:28:52,
p.c. phillips advised the defendant that he was “under arrest for impaired
operation.” this was followed by p.c. chaar who echoed, “we’re telling you
you’re under arrest” at 20:29:15. again, following several more warnings, p.c.
phillips eventually broke the driver’s window at 20:29:33 and he opened the car
door and took the defendant into custody.
the
testimony of the qualified technician, joshua champagnie

this witness testified briefly about his
interactions with the defendant and the breath sampling procedure he undertook
using an approved instrument.

except for the breath testing results, which are
the subject of the request to exclude evidence, this testimony is entirely
unrelated to the
charter
application and need not be reviewed here.
analysis
there
was no breach of s. 10(a) of the
charter

section 10(a)
of the
charter
requires the
state to “promptly” notify individuals when they are arrested or detained and
the reason(s) for same. this permits an individual to make an informed decision
whether or not to submit to the arrest or detention. it is also important
information in the context of exercising the concomitant right to counsel.

obviously, the pre-condition for provision of the
informational component of the s. 10(a) right is a detention or arrest.

in
r. v.
suberu, the supreme court
discussed the threshold issue (was there a detention):
in
grant,
we adopted a purposive approach to the definition of "detention" and
held that a "detention" for the purposes of the
charter
refers to a suspension of an individual's
liberty interest by virtue of a significant physical or psychological restraint
at the hands of the state. the recognition that detention can manifest in both
physical and psychological form is consistent with our acceptance that police
actions short of holding an individual behind bars or in handcuffs can be
coercive enough to engage the rights protected by
ss. 9
and
10
of the
charter.
while a detention is clearly
indicated by the existence of physical restraint or a legal obligation to
comply with a police demand, a detention can also be grounded when police
conduct would cause a reasonable person to conclude that he or she no longer
had the freedom to choose whether or not to cooperate with the police. as
discussed more fully in
grant,
this is
an objective determination, made in light of the circumstances of an encounter
as a whole.


the court in
suberu
also relied upon a
portion of its earlier decision in
r.
v. mann:
"detention" has been held to cover, in canada, a
broad range of encounters between police officers and members of the public.
even so,
the police cannot be said to "detain", within the
meaning of
ss. 9
and
10
of the
charter, every
suspect they stop for purposes of identification, or even interview.
the person who is stopped will in all cases be "detained" in the
sense of "delayed", or "kept waiting". but the
constitutional rights recognized by ss. 9 and 10 of the
charter
are
not engaged by delays that involve no significant physical or psychological
restraint. [original emphasis]


the defendant submits that there was a detention
when the police blocked his vehicle and approached him in his garage. the
prosecutor conceded that the defendant was detained at this point.

respectfully, it is arguable that the defendant
was detained when the police initially approached. while it was obvious that
the police were investigating a possibly impaired driver, p.c. chaar also
testified, and i accept, that as he approached, he saw the defendant slumped
over the steering wheel (suspended by the seat belt), with his head down. this
is clearly evident in the bwc video. constable chaar testified in chief that this
was also a “well-being check.” he was concerned about the possibility of a
“medical episode.”

i find that until p.c. chaar approached the
passenger side and the defendant awoke, there was no detention.

the delay from the initial detention (20:23:34)
until the defendant was told why the police were present (20:25:01) is
approximately 87 seconds. during this time, p.c. chaar made the following
demands or comments: “can you roll your window down; turn the car off; turn the
car off; get out of the car; sir, turn the car off and get out of the car; his
car’s not on, no; the lights are just on, the car’s off; roll your window down,
sir; get out of the car; it’s locked.”

the defendant did not actually crack open his driver’s
window until 20:24:45. within 16 seconds, p.c. chaar explained the reason for
the defendant’s detention.

i find that the defendant’s refusal to roll down
his window was the sole reason for the delay in advising the defendant why the
police were present. the police can be heard raising their voices in order to
be heard through the closed car windows. their frustration was likely growing,
which is understandable. the police were standing beside a vehicle occupied by an
uncooperative driver who may be impaired by alcohol, while they were in a
confined space. the officers did not know the driver or what his motivations
were. if the driver had decided to re-engage his car and attempt to depart,
despite the police vehicle in his way, the officers would certainly have been
in danger had the defendant’s car moved, even slightly.

in these circumstances, i am not satisfied that
there was any delay in advising the defendant why he was being investigated. i
am also satisfied that it was reasonable for the police to continue to demand
the driver to leave his car in light of his refusal to open his window to
permit the police to fully communicate with him. the defendant’s actions and
his lack of cooperation completely derailed what could have been a short
conversation about the reason for police concern.
there was no breach of s. 8 of the
charter

the defendant submitted that the police were
essentially trespassing when they attended inside his garage and attempted to
gather evidence unlawfully. moreover, if there was an implied license given to
the police to enter the garage to communicate with the defendant, it was
revoked when he refused to cooperate and told the police, “fuck you,” at
20:25:35.

the prosecution’s reliance on
r. v.
mccolman
may be misplaced. that decision considered the authority of the police to
effect a stop of a motorist on private property to ascertain sobriety under
provincial legislation, where the intention to stop the motorist crystalized
before the motorist left the highway. the supreme court agreed with the lower
appeal courts that provincial legislation permissive of random sobriety checks
did not authorize random traffic stops on private property. i do not find that
the judgment assists to determine the legality of a traffic stop for a
drink-driving investigation despite the fact that the “judgment does not
constitute a blanket ban on police stops of drivers on private property.”


there are at least two sources of police
authority to detain motorists for criminal investigations on private property:
the common law and
s. 320.27
of the
criminal code.

in
r.
v. lotozky,

the court of appeal
considered the lawfulness of criminal investigations conducted by the police
while on private property. in that case, in response to a complaint of a
possibly impaired driver, police drove to the registered address for the
vehicle. police waited and eventually observed the defendant drive onto his property
and park before they approached him to investigate.

speaking for the majority, rosenberg j.a.
considered whether four elements of the police conduct constituted a search:
the attendance upon the driveway, tapping on the window to get the driver’s attention,
questions about a driver’s license, ownership, and insurance, and a
breathalyzer demand. the latter was clearly a search or seizure authorized by
law. however, if the police had trespassed, the search would not have been
carried out reasonably. of the remaining steps the court held:
at the other end of the
spectrum, despite the breadth of the notion of search and seizure, merely
walking on to a driveway, even with an intent to conduct an investigation
involving the owner, does not, in my view, constitute a sufficient intrusion to
be considered a search. there must be something more, as in the perimeter
search cases, peering in windows of the home and trying to detect odours from
within. put another way, not every trespass onto private property by police can
constitute a search. i would not place a possible trespass onto a driveway open
to public view in the category of a search or seizure.
as regards the other two
aspects of the police conduct, i tend to think that merely tapping on the
window, like peering into a window with a flashlight, does not involve a
search. asking routine questions of a motorist about licence, ownership and
insurance similarly would not seem to be the type of questioning that would
lead to a finding of a sufficient intrusion into a reasonable expectation of
privacy. see
r.
v.
grant,
2006 canlii 18347 (on ca), o.j. 2179 (c.a.) at para.
36.
finally, cases concerning questioning of motorists in drinking and driving
situations have turned on issues such as right to counsel and detention; not
search and seizure. see most recently:
r. v.
elias
(2005),
2005 scc 37 (canlii), 196
c.c.c. (3d) 481 (s.c.c.). obviously, the fact that the courts have not dealt
with this element of the drinking and driving paradigm as a search issue is not
determinative, but it does suggest to me that in most cases the search and
seizure threshold is not crossed until the breathalyser demand is made.
elias
at para.
41, is also helpful in clarifying that checking sobriety of
drivers is lawful at common law. if the police conduct was unlawful in this case
it was only because it took place on the driveway as opposed to a public
highway. since, as i explain below, i have concluded that the police were not
unlawfully on the driveway, the fact that they questioned the respondent on his
driveway to check his sobriety did not render that particular investigative
technique unlawful.
accordingly, i am of the view
that the violation of the respondent's s. 8 rights must relate to the fact that
the police made the demand while they were on private property. if, contrary to
the findings of the trial judge and the appeal judge, the police were lawfully
on the property when they made the demand, the search was reasonable having
been authorized by a reasonable law and carried out in a reasonable manner.


the higher appeal court held that the doctrine
of implied license permitted the police attendance onto the private driveway.
relying on one of its earlier decisions, the court of appeal affirmed the
principle that property owners permit members of the public, including the
police, to attend the door of a residence to communicate with the residents. to
be sure, the implied license to attend onto private property also imports a
resident’s right to withdraw the implied license by asserting the right to
privacy and the right to be left alone.

the court in
lotozky
held that the
context of the police visit was important:
a driveway is
not a dwelling house; it is a place where people drive and park their vehicles.
it is an open area that is visible to the public. the scope of the implied
invitation must be analyzed in that context.
…
the fact that the police officer intends to pursue an investigation
on the driveway, at least if the investigation relates to a motor vehicle, does
not in my view exceed the bounds of the implied invitation, provided that the
officer has a legitimate basis for entering on the driveway. interpreting the
common law in this way is, in my view, consistent with the broader principle
identified by sharpe j.a. that licences may arise by implication from the
nature of the use to which the owner puts the property. as i have said, the use
to which this property is put is to park motor vehicles and it is an area of
the property that is open to public view.
the officers in this case had a legitimate basis for entering on the
driveway. they had received a report that the driver of the car associated with
the address was apparently impaired.


to summarize, the police were obligated to
investigate a possibly impaired driver. that led them to the defendant’s
residence. from the street, it was obvious that the same vehicle observed by a witness
several minutes earlier was now parked, in the defendant’s open garage. the
vehicle appeared to have been recently driven (the headlights were still on and
the driver was still buckled in). the police walked a short distance onto the
driveway and into the garage to check on the driver, who initially appeared to
be unconscious. the interaction with the driver was immediately stymied, which
did little to allay the police concerns.

constable chaar was clear and consistent during
his testimony in chief and under cross-examination that there was a dual
purpose to his entry onto private property: investigation of a possibly-impaired
driver, and a well-being check.

the defendant submitted that there is a
difference between entering onto a driveway and into a garage. if there is a
difference, i do not find that it is material in the circumstances of this
case:
i.
the garage door was completely open;
ii.
the vehicle was clearly visible from the street;
iii.
the vehicle appeared to have been recently
driven – it’s headlights were on and the driver was still present and wearing a
seatbelt; and
iv.
the driver appeared to be unconscious.

in the circumstances, the implied license
doctrine permitting police (and other members of the public) to attend to a
front door and knock, to attempt to communicate with a home’s resident(s),
would be entirely frustrated if the police could not check on the well-being of
a motorist, plainly visible from the driveway leading to the front door, possibly
having a “medical episode.”

there are at least two other reasons to be
unconcerned about the police entrance into the defendant’s garage. i note that
the garage protrudes in front of the residence. the police covered less
distance by walking up the driveway and into the garage, than they would have walked
had they passed the open garage to approach the front door. also, the garage
does not have an entrance into the home. although there is a door on the right
side of the garage as one enters, it obviously leads to the yard at the side of
the house. being inside the open garage was no more intrusive of the privacy
interests of the occupants (if any) of the house than standing on the front
lawn.

after a careful review of the bwc video, i
cannot find any revocation of the implied license to approach the defendant on
his private property in either his words or conduct. he never told the police
to leave his property despite his apparent comfort in the unfortunate belief
that the police had no authority over him. his use of an expletive was general
in nature and unhelpful to signal that the police were no longer welcome on his
property. moreover, there is nothing in the defendant’s comments or behaviour
which indirectly supports a finding that he had revoked the implied invitation
of the police to enter his garage. the message that he would not cooperate with
the police was loudly received while the message that the police had to leave
was never sent.

the
criminal code
provides a secondary
source of police authority for approaching the defendant on private property. i
find that the statutory provisions governing drink-driving investigations
include breath screening demands made well after a motorist has ceased to
operate a motor vehicle. although the statute is silent about where a screening
demand may be made, i conclude that the police were authorized to make a breath
screening demand of the defendant when he was first found in the care and
control of his car in his garage. that said, this authority was not argued as a
justification for the police interactions with the defendant.
there was no breach of s. 9 of the
charter

constable chaar was initially concerned about
the possibility that the defendant was the driver referred to by a witness who
had called police about poor driving only minutes before the police arrived at
the defendant’s home.


given the vehicle’s proximity, its make, and the
license plate, the defendant’s car was apparently the same as the one observed
by the witness. when first seen, the car appeared to have been recently driven
(its headlights were still on). the defendant was apparently passed out in the
driver’s seat. a “medical episode” soon became the least likely explanation for
the poor driving and the defendant’s state.

before long, it was obvious to the police that
the defendant was the suspect driver who had driven from the 410 highway given his
position in the car, his fastened seat belt, the report of driving consistent
with alcohol consumption, the defendant’s initial apparent unconsciousness, the
presence of open alcohol beside him, and the defendant’s immediate
unwillingness to lower his window or to exit his vehicle. as their interaction
continued, the defendant’s lack of cooperation, his dilated pupils, the smell
of alcohol, his slurred speech (which is apparent in several parts on the video
footage), and his demeanor and use of foul language, all told of a single
probable explanation – the driver was likely impaired by the consumption of
alcohol.

the entire interaction between the defendant and
p.c. phillips was less than six minutes (20:23:34 to 20:28:52) when that
officer told the defendant, “you’re under arrest for impaired operation.” within
16 seconds, p.c. chaar similarly concluded, “we’re telling you you’re under
arrest.”

in his written submissions, the defendant states
that the “arresting officer lacked the necessary and reasonable probably [sic]
grounds to believe an offence had been committed…” in his oral submissions, the
defendant focussed on the lack of direct evidence in respect of p.c. phillips’
subjective grounds for an arrest. this officer never testified. leaving aside
whether there is indirect evidence of that officer’s beliefs (he actually told
the defendant that he was under arrest, so, presumably he believed he had the
grounds to do so), i am satisfied that p.c. chaar’s evidence establishes that
there was a lawful arrest.

during his evidence in chief, constable chaar
testified that he arrested the defendant. he told the court his grounds and his
belief that he had advised the defendant of his arrest for impaired driving
before p.c. phillips. after the bwc video was played, during cross-examination,
it was suggested to p.c. chaar that although he had testified that he had told
the defendant that he was under arrest, it was actually p.c. phillips who arrested
the defendant. constable chaar agreed with this suggestion. he was mistaken to
do so.

as indicated above, p.c. chaar re-iterated that
the defendant was under arrest at 20:29:15 when he said, “
we’re
telling
you you’re under arrest.” i find that this statement aligned well with p.c.
chaar’s testimony that he had formed the view that the defendant was impaired
by alcohol and he could be arrested for that offence based on all of the evidence
p.c. chaar was aware of up until that point:
i.
a complaint of poor driving;
ii.
open alcohol;
iii.
the smell of alcohol;
iv.
dilated pupils;
v.
slurred speech;
vi.
an unwillingness to open the driver’s window despite
multiple requests and threats of an arrest;
vii.
an unwillingness to fully open his window when
he finally complied; and
viii.
the defendant’s attempt to cover his open can of
beer with a bag.

i further find that it was objectively
reasonable to come to this conclusion given the appearance and conduct of the
defendant captured on the bwc footage:
i.
the defendant appeared confused;
ii.
the defendant did not seem to be able to find
the button to open his window (he indicated “one minute” with his index finger
before finally finding the right button);
iii.
the defendant swore at the police;
iv.
the defendant refused to give his name;
v.
the defendant repeated himself about his
presence in his garage; and
vi.
when told why the police were arresting the
defendant he repeatedly asked, “for what” and “what did i do.”

there was neither an arbitrary detention when
police first began to investigate the defendant, nor was there an arbitrary
arrest when p.c. chaar arrested the defendant while apparently in the care and
control of a motor vehicle while impaired in his ability to do so by the prior consumption
of alcohol.

given my firm conclusions on the application and
the short turnaround of these reasons, i do not see fit to engage in a
theoretical discussion in respect of the effect of
charter
violations that
have not been proven.
conclusion

the defendant has failed to establish any
charter
violations on a balance of probabilities. accordingly, the application is
dismissed.

all exhibits will become numbered exhibits on
the trial.
released: 02 april 2025
justice
g. paul renwick

r. v.
collins,
1987 canlii 84 (scc), s.c.j. no. 15 at para.
21.

collins, supra, at para.
23.

canada (combines investigation acts, director of
investigation and research)
v.
southam
inc.,
1984 canlii 33 (scc),
 s.c.j. no. 36.

r.
v. storrey,
1990 canlii 125 (scc), s.c.j. no. 12 at para.
17.

r.
v. notaro,
 o.j. no. 2537 (c.a.) at paras.
34-35.

1997 canlii 6316 (on ca), o.j. no. 3097, at para.
18.

r.
v. kumarasamy,
2011 onsc 1385
at para.
42.

r.
v. roberts,
2018 onca 411 (canlii), o.j. no. 2279 (c.a.) at para.
63.

r.
v suberu,
2009 scc 33 (canlii), scj no 33 at paras.
21-22.

suberu, supra, at para.
23.

r. v.
mccolman,
2023 scc 8, at
para.
49.

2006 canlii 21041 (on ca), o.j. no. 2516 (c.a.).

lotozky, supra, at paras.
18-20.

lotozky, supra, at paras.
32 and 35-36.

i accept p.c. chaar’s testimony that he was made aware of the
driving complaint at 8:16 p.m., which was only seven minutes before he arrived on
scene.