source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj36/2025oncj36.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. j.p.,
2025 oncj 36
date: 
2025 01 20
court
file no.: pembroke 23-37100837
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
jp
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on june 18; july 16; august 19, 28, 30, 2024
oral
decision rendered december 9, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on, january 20, 2025
goher irfan........................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
adrian cleaver................................................................................. counsel
for the accused
richardson j.:
introduction

the accused is charged with:
a)
sexually assaulting kj on july 18, 2023;
b)
sexually interfering with kj on july 18, 2023;
c)
administering a noxious substance, xanax, to kj on july 18, 2023.

the crown elected to proceed by indictment.

the parties advised at the outset that the
following issues were admitted:
a)
date;
b)
time;
c)
jurisdiction;
d)
identity;
e)
the fact that jp and kj had sexual intercourse on july 18, 2023;
f)
the fact that kj was 14 years of age on july 18,
2023;
g)
the fact that jp was 31 years of age on july 18, 2023.

the issues in this case are:
a)
whether the sexual intercourse was consensual;
b)
if the sexual intercourse was not consensual, whether jp had an
honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent;
c)
if the sexual intercourse was consensual, whether kj’s consent was
vitiated by her intoxication;
d)
if the sexual intercourse was consensual, or if i have a reasonable
doubt that kj did not consent, whether jp took all reasonable steps to
ascertain kj’s age before proceeding to have sexual intercourse with her;
e)
whether xanax is a noxious substance;
f)
if xanax is a noxious substance, whether jp
administered it to kj.

these issues require an assessment of the
reliability and credibility of the witnesses.

on december 9, 2024, i orally advised the
parties that, for reasons to be delivered later, i was finding jp guilty of
sexual assault and sexual interference, and finding him not guilty of
administering a noxious substance.

these are those reasons.

in this judgment,
a)
kj is the complainant.
b)
jp is the accused.
c)
cc is the mother of the complainant.
d)
sw is the mother of the accused.
e)
lp is a friend of the complainant who was at a party that the
complainant and the accused were at, and later at the pembroke marina where
both the complainant and the accused ended up after the party broke up.
f)
nl is a friend of the complainant who was at the
party that the complainant and the accused were at.
evidence of kj
in-chief

kj was 15 years old when she testified. she turned 16 in september
2024.

at
the time of the incident, kj was living with her mother cc and her older
brother tj on c street in pembroke. she also had a dog and two cats.

with
respect to her relationship with her mother, she stated that they argued a lot
but “it was all right”.

on
july 17, 2024, she had an argument with her mom and then she left to go to a
party. she estimated that she left at 8:30 pm and arrived at the party at
about 9:00 pm. she walked to the party. she went by herself. the party was at
the home of a person whose name she could not remember on eganville road in
pembroke. she did not have any other plan but to go to the party.

kj
recalled that her argument with her mother was about her brother’s girlfriend. 
kj did not like the girlfriend because she had “cheated” on her brother.

once
at the party, kj consumed some “hard liquor” and “twisted tea”. she stated
that she consumed a quarter or more of a 26er of hard liquor and two or three
twisted teas. after consuming this much alcohol she was drunk. she was stumbling
and slurring her words.

she
did not know jp. she met him in the kitchen of the house where the party was
taking place. she recalled that he told her that he came to the party because
he followed two other kids. they invited him to come.

kj
stated that the people at the party were 14 to 18 years old.

when
she first met jp, she was taking a shot. she did not remember if anyone else
was there other than her and jp.

she
asked him how old he was because he looked older. he told her that he was 21
years old. she told him that she was 14 and she had to go. in response to
this, he said, “don’t worry i’m not weird”.

she
was by the counter and he was sitting on a chair. she did not think he was
drinking. they spoke for a couple of minutes and then someone yelled, “cops!”

she
left the house. lp, whose evidence i have discussed below, was with her. when
she saw the police she just started running. she did not know if jp was with
her as she was running or if he just caught up to her. she ended up at the
marina. she did not remember what route she took to get there. lp told her
that she was really drunk and she needed to calm down.

kj
recalled being with a group of people. she recalled being near a wooden boat that
is near the transcanada trail right-of-way.

kj
stated that “people” saw her with jp and told her not to go with him. one of
those people was lp. kj told lp that, “he’s not weird. he’s fine. he’s just
trying to help me.”

kj
stated that from the marina, they were supposed to walk to her house. jp
offered her a place to stay at his place and she said ok. she recalled walking
to a hotel, which she later identified as the hillside inn. they passed “the
college” (which i infer is the pembroke campus of algonquin college) and they
“went on the main drag” (which i infer is a reference to pembroke street).

kj
could not recall how long she walked. she did recall seeing the police on the
way and she recalled that jp held her up because she was struggling to walk.

as
they walked, they talked about “random things”. jp told her that he had been
in the military. he also told her that he had xanax back at his place. she
told him that she was humiliated at the party. people called her a “slut”.

kj
did not recall what time they arrived at the hotel. she could not recall what
room jp was renting, but she remembered it was near an outdoor barbeque.

once
they got to the room, they sat at the table and jp grabbed a prescription pill
bottle. he poured two white, oval shaped pills into her hand and told her it
was xanax. kj took them. she did not believe that jp consumed any pills.

jp
got in the bed and asked her to come lay down with him. kj obliged and got
into bed with him. she closed her eyes. she recalled that jp asked if he
could kiss her. she agreed that he could.

the
bed was a “two-person bed”. she was on the side by the window.

after
he kissed her, jp started to remove her clothes. kj told him “no, i’m on my
period and i don’t want to.” she recalled that he said “it’s fine” and kept
going. she recalled that she “went limp” because she wanted to go to bed. “i
let him do it because i didn’t know what else to do”.

kj
was wearing a black dress, black shorts, black underwear and a black bra.

jp
removed the straps of her bra and started to unzip her dress. he took off her
dress and pulled down her shorts and underwear.

kj
recalled feeling like her arms and legs were heavy. she was “really tired” and
“didn’t feel good”.

after
he undressed her, jp inserted his penis into her vagina. kj “just laid
there.” she could not recall how long she laid there for. she stated, “he was
fucking me”.

the
crown asked, “how did that end?”. kj stated that she told jp she needed water
because she was going to be sick. she drank some water. he kept going. he
then asked her, “are you finished?”. he removed his penis and laid next to
her.

she
continued to lay there. she could not remember how long she laid there for. after
a little bit he went and cooked himself a steak on the outdoor grill and
returned to eat it. she photographed him with her phone.

kj
photographed him because she knew what happened “wasn’t quite right. i didn’t
want him to do what he did. i needed proof that i was with him.”

kj
left the next morning at around 8 am. jp’s mom, sw (whose evidence is
described below) came and drove her home. kj recalled that sw was mad that jp
had texted her at 1:00 that morning. kj did not know what else they talked
about or how long the drive was. sw dropped her off near a tim horton’s that
was not far from where she lived. kj recalled that sw’s car had lots of clothes
and stuff in it.

during
the car ride, jp gave kj “a snap” (referring to a snap chat message) and his
phone number. she recalled that as they drove, jp and sw were speaking and jp
told sw that kj was 20 years old.

kj
did not say anything to correct him because jp told her not to tell anyone that
she was 14 so she didn’t say anything. she could not, however, specifically
recall when they had that conversation. she also recalled that jp told her
that he had a 13-year-old son. she recalled that “when we were fucking” he
told her that she would like his son better. that made her feel weird.

once
she arrived at her home, kj went to bed until 3 or 4 pm. she woke up but stayed
away from her mother, cc. she then went back to bed and slept until about 4 or
5 am. she then sent cc a message and told her what happened.

kj
stated that she sent a message because she was scared that she would get
pregnant or jp would give her something. she knew what happened wasn’t right.

she
recalled that in the message she told cc that “he” raped her and fucked her. 
she told cc that she was scared that she was pregnant. she did not remember
the message.

kj
identified exhibit 1 as her message which stated:
when i went out i lied i went
to that party cuz i asked again they said yes cops came at 12 so i ran i ended
up with a 28 year old he was supposed to walk me home but then he said let’s go
hangout at his hotel and he gave me xanax we talked and jus watched tv for a
while i was already drunk then i was passing out then he woke me up to ask to
kiss n i said k then we had sex then he told me he has a 13 year old son and
when i went with him he said he was 21 but i put the pieces together yesterday that
that’s not possible and he stole my weed don’t be mad at me don’t make me get
rid of my cat i’m sorry ik i made a mistake i won’t do it again i’m sorry idk
if he wore a condome either cuz my eyes were closed the hole time was so tired
i’m sorry.
i’m sorry i know i’m gross
i got his number and when i
msged about it he’s clean std wise and when i asked if he stole my weed ik he
did but he blocked me.

she
recalled feeling scared. she did not know how cc would react.

with
respect to how she knew that jp was 28, kj explained that one of her friends
told her that.

after
she sent the message, cc came downstairs and asked her the man’s name. cc then
called the police who told her to take kj to the hospital and wait for them. the
police ultimately took a statement from her.

kj
is autistic. she denied being on any medication for it when she testified. in
july 2023, she was on medication for something else but she could not remember
what it was. cc was in charge of her meds. kj was pretty sure she took her
morning medications before she went to the party.

kj
identified two photos of jp that she took on her phone as exhibits 2a and 2b. these
are the same photos that appear in her text messages which are included in
exhibit 1.

kj
believed that jp stole about half an ounce of weed from her. a few days later,
she found out that he took her air pods.

kj
recalled that she asked jp if he used a condom and he said he did. she stated,
however, that she did not think he did. she could not recall where he was when
he wiped himself off but she recalled seeing a paper towel on the bedside table
and she assumed that he used it.
cross-examination

kj
told defence counsel that she and cc also argued about whether she would go to
the party. cc did not want her to go. she asked cc to buy her alcohol. cc
had bought her vodka and sour puss in the past.

kj
denied that when she first left her house she was dressed in a sweatshirt and
jeans but changed into her dress at a friend’s house on the way to the party.

when
asked if she was wearing any make-up, kj stated that she had her lashes done. 
she agreed that she was carrying a backpack which contained her weed and her
air pods. she denied that she had condoms with her.

kj
reiterated that when she met jp she was drinking hard liquor and twisted tea. 
she recalled that he saw her take one shot of liquor.

defence
counsel asked kj about the following discussion at page 8 of her statement to
the police:
police: …..so, you
were drinking at the party? (inaudible) um, was…did he witness you drink at
all, does he see you drinking?
kj: by the
time i, whenever he saw me, maybe, but by the time i met him, i had nothing to
drink.

kj
agreed that this was completely different from her evidence in court. she
explained that it had been over a year and it was hard to remember things.

defence
counsel then suggested to kj that jp told her that he was 31, not 21. she
disagreed.

she
also disagreed that in the kitchen at the party, jp told her that he had a
13-year-old son.

defence
counsel suggested to kj that she told jp that she was 20. she disagreed and
said that she does not lie about her age. she then admitted that she had lied in
the past quite a few times to get alcohol. she denied that she lied about her
age to get a bank loan.

defence
counsel then asked kj about her evidence that jp told her not to tell anyone
that he had sex with a 14-year-old. defence counsel suggested to kj that she
never told the police about this in her statement. she agreed. she explained this
omission by stating that she was still coming off the drugs that jp gave her
and it was very hard to give that statement.

defence
counsel suggested to kj that when she left the party, she left with jp and they
walked together to the marina. kj stated that she did not remember.

kj
disagreed that jp was insistent on walking her home. defence counsel suggested
that she told jp that she did not want to go home because she was having a
fight with her mother. kj agreed that she told jp that she had a fight with cc,
but she did not tell him that she did not want to go home.

defence
counsel asked kj about her evidence that a police car passed them as they were
walking down pembroke street east toward the hotel. defence counsel suggested
that she did not mention this to the police in her statement. kj stated that
she did not remember telling the police about it. when invited to look at her
statement, she stated that it would take “way too long” to look at it. defence
counsel then invited her to accept that there was no discussion of a police car
in her statement. kj stated, “i don’t know”.

kj
agreed that when they were chilling at the table, they smoked weed. she stated
that she took the weed out and jp rolled the weed into joints. she stated that
he had the papers. she recalled consuming one or two joints.

kj
agreed that the photo in exhibit 2a was taken at 1:32 am. she could not recall
if that was before or after the sex.

kj
stated that jp grilled a steak outside both before and after sex. she denied
that he asked her if she wanted any steak.

kj
agreed that she asked to be dropped off at the tim horton’s. she stated that
she did not want jp and sw to know where she lived.

kj
denied that on the drive to tim horton’s sw looked at jp suspiciously and that
kj stated, “what?! i am 20.”

kj
agreed that jp did nothing to hide his identity from her and gave her all kinds
of information to help her figure out who he was. kj stated, “he’s not very
smart”.

with
respect to the sex, kj disagreed that the only thing that jp did was unzip the
back of her dress. she disagreed that she took off everything else.

she
again reiterated that she didn’t want to have sex because she was on her
period. when defence counsel asked her if she told the police this detail when
she gave her statement, she stated, “i don’t think so”.

kj
agreed that she also did not think that she told the police that jp told her
that she would like his 13-year-old son during sex. she explained this
omission again by stating that she was coming off drugs and she barely knew
what to say.

kj
agreed that she was very concerned about how cc would react. defence counsel
suggested that her main concern was that cc would get rid of her cat. kj
stated, “my main concern was also getting him charged for what he did to me.”

kj
could not recall how many people were at the party. she stated that she did
not know everyone who was there. she disagreed that some of the people at the
party were older than 18. she also disagreed that anyone could walk into the
party. she stated that one had to knock and be let in. she agreed, however,
that she did not control who came to the party.

defence
counsel suggested that by the time they got back to the hotel, she would not
have had anything to drink for between one and two hours. kj stated that she
did not know.

kj
stated that she was 5’3” to 5’4” tall. she had black hair and was wearing
lashes. she went to a beautician to get extensions, and this cost about $55
every two weeks. when asked why she did this, she stated, “i don’t get pretty
without them”. defence counsel suggested that this made her look older. kj
stated, “i don’t know”.

kj
agreed that when sw arrived the next morning, she was still in bed. she denied
having any conversations with sw. she stated that sw asked jp some questions. 
kj could not remember what jp told sw. defence counsel suggested that jp told sw
that kj was 20. kj disagreed and stated that he told sw that in the car.
re-examination

kj
stated that she gave her statement to the police at the police station. she
could not remember if she talked to the police before she gave her statement. 
she stated that she gave her statement to “someone named christine”. she could
not remember if she had spoken to christine before. she stated that she gave
her statement to the police a couple of days after the incident.

crown
counsel asked kj if she remembered telling the police about her period in her
statement. kj stated, “i think so.” crown counsel then took kj to page 16 and
17 of her statement, where the following exchange took place:
police: you
mentioned to my yesterday about in your period. does that (inaudible) at all? 
or….
kj: yeah.
police: what is
that?
kj: i was on
my period.
police: you were on
your period? okay. how far into your period were you?
kj: i think it
was day three.
police: day three? 
okay. does that factor into anything there that night at all, or …?
kj: no, i
didn’t understand why he still did it while i was on my period. cuz, i was
grossed out and stuff. nah.
evidence of cc
in-chief

cc
is kj’s mother. she is 47 years of age. she has two children. her son tj is
17 and her daughter kj is 15 (kj has since turned 16). in july of 2023, kj was
14 years old. the family lived on c street.

on
july 17 or 18, at about 5:48 am, cc received a text message from kj (exhibit 1)
apologizing for attending a party and not being home with her kitten.

cc
had forbidden kj from attending. she stated that kj was “triggered” at home
and was very angry. kj packed her bags and left. cc messaged kj to remind her
that she had a kitten at home. in one of the messages that she later received,
kj told her “please don’t get rid of my kitten”.

cc
reckoned that kj came home between 8 am and 9 am. kj went straight into the
house, up to her bedroom and to bed. cc stayed outside.

as
the day progressed, cc checked on her. cc recalled smelling the remnants of
alcohol. she knew that something was wrong because when she went into kj’s
bedroom, kj did not move. that was unusual. at about 4:00, cc woke kj up, but
kj did not come out of her room that night. cc went to bed.

cc
stated that she woke up the next morning at about 4:30. cc had difficulty
trying to get to sleep and she tossed and turned because she was worried about
kj. at 5:30 am, cc looked at her phone and noticed the text from kj.

she
got out of bed immediately and ran downstairs. kj was sitting in the kitchen. 
kj apologized. cc told kj that she was not “gross”. cc messaged her mother
(kj’s grandmother), who told her to call police. the police dispatcher told
her to wait at home until the officer came.

at
about 7:00, the officer took them to the hospital where kj was examined. they
arrived at hospital at about 8:00.

with
respect to kj’s demeanour, cc stated that she was very “sluggish”.

kj
has been diagnosed with autism, adhd, bi-polar disorder and she is “borderline schizophrenic”. 
at the time of the incident, she was on 75 mg of trazodone, 15 mg of ritazopine
(ph) and 2 mg of abilify. cc controls kj’s prescriptions.
cross-examination

cc
explained that she believed that kj was not invited to the party because the
other kids did not like the fact that she tracked kj’s location.

cc
agreed that it was possible that there were kids older than kj at the party. 
she also agreed that kj sometimes wanted to hang out with older kids.

defence
counsel asked cc about kj being “triggered”. cc explained that she “put some
boundaries down”, which included her son’s girlfriend only being permitted to
sleep over on the weekend. she recalled that her son and his girlfriend had a
mishap and asked if she could sleep over. she stated that her family is like a
tree. they hold each other up or they watch one fall. she decided to bend and
let the girlfriend stay over. kj did not agree with that decision.

cc
stated that kj is not easily triggered. something has to harm her to trigger
her. she agreed that asking her to do something that she did not want to do
would trigger her.

cc
recalled that kj left the house sometime after 7:30. she did not take her trazodone
with her. cc explained that she keeps it “locked up” and kj only gets it at
bedtime, which is usually at 9:30. cc agreed that when she returned the next
day, kj asked for it and she gave it to her. kj fell asleep. cc explained
that trazodone is a sleeping medication.

cc
stated that when kj left the house she was very angry because cc “bent” for her
son. cc agreed that kj packed her backpack but she was not sure what was in
it.

defence
counsel asked cc if she gave kj condoms. cc stated that she gave them to her
son, but she did not give any to kj because kj indicated she was not interested
in having any kind of intercourse.

defence
counsel asked cc if she bought kj alcohol. cc admitted that she had but she
denied buying it for her that day. she stated that she bought kj alcohol about
once a month. she usually buys 200 ml bottles of vodka. to cc’s knowledge, kj
had not consumed any alcohol that day.

cc
recalled that kj left the house wearing a pair of jeans and hoodie. she agreed
that kj owns a black dress. she wears it with biker shorts. cc stated that
kj was not wearing that when she left the house.

cc did not initially
know where the party was. she found out a couple of days later. she agreed
that the party was a fair distance from where she lived. she estimated it
would take about half an hour to walk there. cc stated that she refused to
take kj anywhere in the car.

cc stated that
she later received a text from kj that she was at n’s house and she was safe. 
she did not initially know who n was. she met n the first time the morning she
testified while she was waiting for court. at the time, she assumed that n was
a friend of kj. i infer that n is nl, the evidence of whom i discuss below.

defence counsel
asked cc about a portion of her statement where she told the officer that kj
had always been honest but around the time that the incident took place she had
started to lie. she agreed that this was the case, but noted that it is
somewhat misleading. kj did lie about where she was, and she wanted to hang
out with older kids.

cc agreed that
kj misrepresented her age to someone on-line. cc discovered this when she went
into kj’s phone and looked at her email. she saw an e-transfer. she stated
that she asked kj about it and kj told her that she was claiming to be 18.

cc stated that
the morning she came home, kj came in through the back gate. cc was in the
backyard. she did not see how kj arrived home. she recalled that they
had a brief conversation and then kj went to bed. cc agreed that essentially a
full day went by and then she got the text in exhibit 1.

cc agreed that
kj told her that jp was 28, but then she told him that she was 21. cc stated
that kj told her that she told jp that she “better get out of here because i am
only 14.”
evidence of nl
in-chief

nl is 15 years
old. she is a friend of kj. she recalled that she met kj through mutual
friends in 2022 and they started to hang out. they did not get close, however,
until the july 2023 party.

the party was at
a house about 15 minutes from where she lived. she was one of the first people
to arrive and she got there at about 9:00 pm.

nl noticed kj at
the party between 10 and 11. kj kept to herself and seemed shy and nervous. 
nl tried to make conversation with her and “break the ice”.

everyone “scattered”
at the end of the party because the person in charge of the house said, “let’s
quit”. she saw kj walking down christie street and heading toward the lakefront. 
kj was with a guy.

kj was wearing a
very short dress that was “really revealing”. otherwise, there was nothing
remarkable or noticeable about her appearance. nl could not remember what
colour the dress was.

nl admitted that
she was drinking at the party, but she could not remember how much she had to
drink.

nl was drinking
with kj and kj consumed about as much as she did. she recalled that kj was “not
straight”. her speech was slurred and she “was clearly intoxicated”. nl could
smell alcohol on her.

nl did not speak
to the man that kj was with. she had never seen him before the party. she
recalled seeing him in the kitchen taking shots. another girl, l, (lp, the
evidence of whom is discussed below) was also there. nl stated that they were
all drinking.

nl was 14 when
she went to the party. most of the kids in her grade were there. some would
have been “slightly older”. she opined that the oldest would have been in
about grade 11.

nl did not see
kj consume anything other than alcohol.

nl last saw kj
going down christie street. kj split from the group and went another
direction.

nl later heard
from kj at 2:00 am. nl stated that the original plan was that kj would come
and hang out at her house. she texted kj to ask her to come over to her
house. nl admitted, however, that she was intoxicated and not really paying
attention. nl received a text message from kj who indicated that she was at a
motel “with a random guy” and she did not feel safe. she got the message
through
snapchat.
nl stated that she could see kj’s location through
snapchat
at a motel.
cross-examination

nl admitted that
she consumed between a quarter and a third of a bottle of alcohol and was
feeling “quite drunk”.

she identified the
person who announced that the party was over as bj, who was a student in grade
11. she disagreed that there were 18- or 19-year-old people at the party and
stated that she knew most of the people who were there.

nl did not see
kj or jp pour drinks. nl poured her own drinks. she allowed that it was “free
for all”.

with respect to
her memory of the evening, she stated that everything was “scrambled
together.” she had no recollection of the police coming to break up the
party.

nl saw lp on the
algonquin trail near the marina after everyone scattered.

nl received a
text from kj between 12 and 1 to say that she was “going to a motel with j”. 
nl asked kj if she was safe. she explained that she was not able to give those
messages to the police because the messages could not be saved. she stated
that she was using
snapchat
which does not save anything in the chat
function.

nl received two
messages from kj at 2:00 in the morning indicating that she had been “raped”. not
all of the messages made sense. nl knew that kj was intoxicated by the way she
was texting.

nl agreed that
other partygoers were teasing kj and being rude toward her. she stated that
she recalled this happening when everyone was in the kitchen. lp’s younger
brother and his friends were the primary culprits.

nl is still
friends with kj and has spoken to her about what happened, but not in any
detail. she did not know that the matter was proceeding to court until she
received her subpoena.

nl recalled that
kj was wearing a black dress. she did not recall whether kj was wearing
shorts.
evidence of lp
in-chief

when she
testified, lp was 17 years of age and in grade 11.

she did not know
kj well before meeting her at a party that occurred on july 17, 2023. although
she did not know her and had not really talked to her, lp stated that kj was
her “friend” on social media, including
snapchat.

lp recalled that
the party was just down the street from bishop smith high school. the party ended
because the police attended.

the partygoers
ranged in age between 14 and 17 years.

lp acknowledged
drinking two coolers that night. she was “slightly tipsy”.

lp saw kj just
before the police attended. kj was at the entrance to the house. kj said
something about needing her medication.

lp also saw kj
after the police broke the party up. about 20 of the partygoers went down to
the marina and she recalled seeing kj there.

kj was
“stumbling around on her own” when she saw her. she added, “i think i saw her
fall once or twice. she was very clearly intoxicated.”

lp did not go up
and speak to kj at the marina until she saw jp going up to her. lp had seen jp
at the party earlier. she did not speak to him, however, until they met at the
marina.

lp recalled
telling jp, “you shouldn’t be offering to walk [kj] home. she needs someone
her age to walk her home.” lp recalled that as she approached kj and jp, she
overheard kj stating that she needed her meds and she needed to go home. jp said,
“i can take you home.”

lp stated, “it
didn’t seem right. it was obvious that he was trying to say that he would be
the one to walk her home. i could tell that she was young and he was much
older.”

lp stated that
she had earlier asked jp how old he was and he told her he was 22. she
recalled that this conversation took place just after they left the party. jp
asked where the party was going to be continuing. she remembered the
conversation because she was with four friends looking for a backpack that one
of her friends had lost. lp thought that jp was a friend of the owner of the
house where the party took place. she remembered that he was “just lounging
around”.

when she first
saw jp at the party, lp didn’t think it was “that weird.” she added that “once
all the teenagers were moving to a separate place it seemed wrong for him to
want to follow. everyone was much younger than him.”

lp told kj that
kj should not go with jp. when asked what her exact words were, she stated, “i
remember telling him that she was way too young and it wouldn’t be right.”

in response, jp
tried to “blow it off”. “it was like it didn’t matter”, lp recalled. she
stated that he said he was a “safe guy” who was “trustworthy” and it was “no
problem” walking her home.

lp did not see jp
drinking anything. she saw kj drinking from a large bottle of vodka.

lp heard from kj
the day after the party. kj told her that she was “drugged and raped by the
guy that offered to walk her home.” kj also told her that she would be getting
a call from the police and would probably be a witness.

lp recalled that
jp and kj left heading westbound in the direction of the “old age home.”

it is known to
this court that there is a long term care facility called miramichi lodge which
is west of algonquin college and the pembroke marina. this is however, in the
opposite direction of the hillside inn where kj and jp ended up.
cross-examination

lp recalled
giving a statement to the police on video. she reviewed her statement before
testifying.

she testified
that when she heard from kj the next day, kj communicated with her through
snapchat.
she agreed that she did not mention this detail when she gave her statement
to the police.

she also agreed
with defence counsel’s suggestion that her evidence that jp “brushed off” her
concerns about him taking kj home was something that she did not tell the
police when she gave her statement.

she did not
recall who jp came to the party with.

lp did not see
other 18- or 19-year-olds at the party.

with respect to
her evidence that she thought that jp was a friend of the owner of the house
where the party took place, lp testified that she did not know who the owner
was.

lp stated that
others at the marina offered to walk kj home. with respect to her condition,
kj was “in no state to walk”.
evidence of sw
in-chief

sw is jp’s
mother. she was 60 years of age when she testified.

she recalled
that on july 18, 2023, she was staying with her sister in an apartment on a
street. jp was staying at the hillside motel.

sw testified
that on july 18, she went to pick jp up at the motel. this was their normal
morning routine. she recalled that she had been staying with him at the motel
for some time, but she left the night before to go live with her sister.

when sw
went to pick jp up, kj was there. she asked jp who kj was. he told her that
they had been to a party, and he walked kj back. jp said that he wanted to
take kj home first, but she was in a fight with her mother.

the crown asked sw
if she expressed any concerns to jp about kj. she replied, “i thought she
looked young. like 18 i am thinking”. she added that jp told her that kj was
20.

later in her
evidence, she told the crown that jp told her that kj was 20, even though she
did not ask him how old she was. sw recalled that when jp got up and came
across the room, she (sw) “just looked at him” and he said, "what? she's
20".

sw denied being
upset with jp that morning. she also denied giving him any particular look
which would cause him to tell her kj’s age.

jp asked her if
they could give kj a ride home. she did not think that there was anything
unusual about this because she gave jp’s friends a ride home all the time.

once they were
in the car, kj told her that she was 20. kj raised her age when she was
looking at kj in the rear-view mirror. her exact words were “what? i’m 20.” sw
was quite taken aback that kj would talk to her like that.

there was no
other conversation. the car ride was “quite silent”.

they dropped kj
off at a tim horton’s. kj was wearing a little top and tight black pants. she
had black hair which was down.

all this
happened between 8 and 9 am.

the crown asked sw
what made her think that kj was 18. sw replied, “by the way she was dressed”. 
when asked, “did you think she could have been younger?”, sw stated, “i don’t
think so. definitely 18.”

sw remembered
that jp was supposed to also come to live at her sister’s that day. the car
was loaded with their effects from moving.
cross-examination

sw indicated
that she had lived at the motel with jp. she moved out to go live with her
sister. she stated that both she and jp moved back to canada from connecticut
on may 12, 2023.

jp did not move
to her sister’s place with her because her sister was “wacked” and kicked them
out and invited them back several times.

before she moved
to her sister’s, sw shared the same room at the motel with jp. there was only
one bed in the room, a queen.

with respect to
how she came to pick jp and kj up that morning, sw could not remember whether
he texted or whether she just went there. it was not unusual for her to just
pick him up.

when sw first
went in the room, she saw “a girl in bed and [jp] standing by a table”. she
was a little bit surprised. he was shirtless but wearing a pair of pants. the
girl was wearing a purple top and black pants. sw thought the girl was asleep.

sw estimated
that she was in the room for about ten minutes.

sw denied being
curious as to who the girl was.

when this
happened, jp was 31 years old. he has one child, a boy, who is 14. that child
still lives in connecticut.

the girl did not
seem upset. she was not crying. she did not complain of being sexually
assaulted. she was willing to get in the car.

defence counsel
also asked sw about the kind of look she gave kj to make her say she was 20. 
she did not know what kind of look she gave kj.

kj gave her
directions to the tim horton’s.

sw did not smell
any alcohol or notice any alcohol in the room. she could not remember whether
she smelled marihuana. kj was not carrying anything.

sw found out
that kj was 14 when jp brought the paperwork from the charges home.

kj was not
wearing the type of outfit that a 14-year-old would wear. she thought that the
outfit was “too grown up”. kj’s manner of dress was an indicator that kj
was 18 or older.

with respect to
kj’s attitude, sw stated that, “kj seemed put out by me.”
evidence of jp
in-chief

jp
testified in his own defence.

he was 33 years
old when he testified. he was born in ottawa. he lived in the state of
connecticut for 24 years before moving back to canada in 2023. he returned to
canada with sw in mid-may 2023 because sw and his step-father separated.

they came to
pembroke because his aunt offered them a place to stay. they came by car. the
items that kj described in the car were “everything we owned”.

when they first
arrived in pembroke, they stayed with his aunt but they moved out of there
because his aunt and sw “don’t see eye-to-eye.” he stated that his aunt took
advantage of sw and him. he also admitted that he was using drugs and his aunt
did not like that.

jp admitted to
having a criminal record in the united states with “a few misdemeanors” for
“drug paraphernalia and maybe a theft.”

he agreed that
he told kj that he had been in the us army. he was so employed for three years
before he was honourably discharged. his final rank was that of private third
class.

when he
testified in august 2024, he was not working and was living in a tent. he
stayed with a friend from time to time.

he agreed that at
the time of the incident, he had a room at a motel which he acquired through
the homeless prevention program of ontario works. the room was assigned to
him. sw stayed with him before she left to go stay at her sister’s.

although jp had
been to pembroke before, he did not remember it because he was very young. he
denied having a good knowledge of the city, its layout and its roads.

on the date in
question, jp stated that he was “just walking around and listening to music”. 
he met “two kids” in front of the dairy queen, which is known to this court to
be located on pembroke street east. he noticed that one of them was carrying
liquor and the other was carrying a case of beer. he asked them what they were
doing and they told him that they were going to a party. he asked them if he
could join and how old they were. one said that he was 18 years old and the
other said he was 19. they said “sure” in response to his question as to
whether he could join them.

they led him to
the location of the party. otherwise, he did not know where the party was
located. when defence counsel told him that the party was on eganville road,
which is in the city’s west end from where he saw the “two kids”, jp stated
that he “had no idea how to get there.”

as they walked
to the party, he had “random conversation” with them. he told them when he
moved to pembroke. he asked them what their names were.

they did not
state that they were in school. he believed, given their age, that they were
not in school.

when they got to
the party it was dark, probably about 10:00. the party was located in a very
small house. he estimated that there were between 15 and 20 people at the
party. the number of attendees dropped later because the police came.

when he arrived
at the house, he went in with the “two kids” he met near the dairy queen. he
recalled going into a living room. off to the left was a kitchen with a
counter in an “l” shape. kj was there. he sat on the counter. kj was
“diagonal and to the right” of him. he got to the kitchen about 10:00 or
10:20.

he drank two
shots of vodka from a shot glass.

with respect to
drugs, he had taken his prescription for xanax. his prescription was from his
doctor in the united states. he took it for anxiety. he renewed it here a
couple of times. he has since been “weaned off it” and prescribed something
else.

jp, kj, and
maybe two or three other people, were in the kitchen. he did not remember how
he got into a conversation with kj.

they ultimately discussed
their ages. kj told him that she was 20. he told her that he was 31 and that
he had a 13-year-old son. he could not remember if at that point in the
conversation, he told kj that he was in the army or whether that came later,
once they were back at the hotel.

he denied ever
telling kj that he was 21.

he denied that
kj ever told him that she was 14.

he stated that
he did not have sex with 14-year-olds. “it’s not right. it’s disgusting. i
don’t know how to put it into words, to be honest.”, he stated.

kj was drinking
and she drank a couple of shots from the bottle.

the police came
and “everyone went in different directions”. kj stayed with him. they left
the house and went to the marina. then they went to his hotel.

when they first
left the house kj “appeared intoxicated” but during the walk to the marina and
the hotel, she “started to sober up”.

once she was at
the hotel, he stated that she was “completely sober”. she did not slur her
words or have any difficulty walking.

he went to the
marina because he merely followed the group. kj walked next to him. he
recalled her stumbling “quite a bit” when they first left the house. jp could
not recall the exact route that they took to the marina.

kj was dressed
in a short black dress with straps going over her shoulders. she was wearing
spandex shorts under her dress. he stated that the dress was “so short you
could see the spandex coming out of the dress”.

jp did not
believe that she was younger than 20. he stated, “the kids that i met were 18
or 19. it didn’t seem like a reach for her to be a year older than them.” he
was also aware that the legal age for consuming alcohol was 19.

he recalled that
kj later produced an ounce of marihuana. to his knowledge, the legal age for
possessing marihuana is also 19.

he estimated
that they stayed at the marina for about an hour or less.

he insisted that
he walk her home. kj told him that she could not go home because she and her
mother were “in a huge fight” and it was too late. he thought she told him
that the fight was about a cat, but he could not be sure.

while they were
at the marina, others were around from time to time. he knew who lp was but he
did not recall having a conversation with her. he denied ever telling lp that
he was 22 and stated, “i barely had a conversation with her.”

he did not
recall whether lp told him not to take kj home with him. he again stated that
he “had little conversation with her or anyone else other than [kj]”.

jp did not know
where kj’s home was. he recalled that she told him that she lived “in the
west”. at the time, that did not mean anything to him. she did want to go
home and no one else offered her help to get home.

when asked
whether she needed help because she was intoxicated or impaired, he stated, “a
little at that point”. no one offered her help. he told her, “come back to my
hotel and stay and you could go home in the morning.”

he added, “i
even suggested that she leave the motel later that night and she didn’t want to
go – at 2:00 in the morning.”

he denied hoping
to have sex with her.

he described how
they walked from the marina back to the hotel. his description is consistent
with walking from the marina down alexander street and then walking eastbound
on pembroke street. his description of the side of the street that they walked
on is consistent with the south side of pembroke street. the walk took
approximately 45 minutes because “she was still having a little trouble. she
had her arm around me.” he denied that she ever slumped to the ground and
needed help getting up.

he recalled that
a man walked by and asked kj if she needed help. he asked the man, “why?”. 
the man told him, “she doesn’t look good.” he recalled telling the man, “she’s
fine. i got her.” throughout this exchange, kj said nothing.

jp
estimated that they arrived at the hillside motel at about 1:00.

once they
entered his room, they talked. he cooked a steak and some fries, and he had
some macaroni salad and potato salad. he offered her some of the food, but she
declined. he cooked the steak outside on a barbeque that was near his room. 
kj was outside with him while he cooked the steak.

kj never told
him that she wanted to leave.

before and after
eating the steak they had a couple of joints from the marihuana that kj
produced from her backpack.

jp stated, “one
thing leads to another. i asked if i can touch her. she said yes. from
there, everything i did, i asked her. she asked me to unzip the back of her
dress”.

he only removed
her dress. kj removed “everything else, including her spandex shorts, bra and
panties. she then got into bed and they had sex.

kj produced
condoms from her backpack. he recalled that it was the trustex brand, which he
recognized as the same brand that he got at a clinic. the condom was blue with
white swirls on it. he denied having any condoms of his own in the room.

jp denied that
he would have had sex with kj without a condom. he stated that he thought it
was too risky due to the possibility of disease or pregnancy.

after sex, they
both got dressed. they talked and smoked more marihuana. he estimated that
they had one or two joints. he could not recall if he had more food.

he laid down and
ultimately fell asleep. as he was falling asleep, he observed kj “wandering”
the room. he estimated that he fell asleep at about 3:00.

defence counsel
showed jp exhibit 2a. he identified himself in the photo and stated that he
was eating a steak.

jp texted sw. 
he could not recall when that was, but it was late because he recalled that sw
was mad about the time of day that he texted her. he agreed that it was sw’s
routine to come there every morning.

he
recalled that when sw arrived, he opened the door for her. sw said “hi” and kj
was “pretty rude”. he stated that “they kinda glared at each other.” sw also
looked at him.

they then
went to sw’s car to give kj a ride home. during the drive, he and sw were
talking. sw was looking in the rear mirror. he saw kj glare back at her. kj
then said, “what, i’m 20”. “you coulda cut the tension with a knife”, he
said.

he denied that his
mother ever expressed her displeasure with him.

kj asked them to
drop her off at a tim horton’s. he stated that she did not tell him why she
wanted to be dropped off there as opposed to her house.

he denied ever
telling kj that she should not tell anybody what happened because kj was only
14.

jp agreed that
he did not try to conceal his identity from kj. on the contrary, kj knew
everything about him. he gave her his real name, his telephone number, and how
to find him on facebook and
snapchat.

he denied
knowing that she was 14.

he did not think
that she was 14. when asked why, he stated that older people were at the party
and he had “no reason to suspect otherwise”. he stated that she was drinking
when he saw her and she later produced marihuana and a condom. he did not
think that she was wearing false eyelashes.

he did not
believe that she was impaired by alcohol or drugs when he had sex with her at
the motel. she was not slurring her words anymore. her balance had returned,
and she was able to walk on her own. there was “no tipsy type of stuff”. she “seemed
very there”. he described her condition as a “complete turn-around from the party
and the marina to the motel room.”

when asked how
he found her answers when he asked her if she wanted to kiss and participate in
sex, he stated, “genuine”.

jp said that kj
never mentioned that she was on her period, but he found out before they
started having sex.

he denied ever
seeing any blood when he wiped himself or when he removed the condom after
sex.

jp denied giving
kj two xanax pills. he stated that he would not have given her any because at
the time, he was only getting one-week prescriptions and he needed them for
himself. he agreed that the bottle was in the room and on his nightstand.

he was aware
that the side-effects of that drug included drowsiness, particularly if a
person did not regularly take them. he added that if one took too much xanax
and drank alcohol, it was possible to “black out.”

when asked if he
gave her an orange soda when he was in the room, he stated “probably.” he
denied that he gave her this in order to “wash the pills down”. he gave it to
her because he asked her if she wanted something to drink and she said yes.

kj physically
appeared to him to be 20 years old. he added, “the way that she talked; the
way that she handled herself made me think that she was 20 or over.” he described
the dress she was wearing as “very provocative.”

jp could not
recall exactly where kj was when the police arrived to break up the party. he
recalled, however, that when they started to leave the house, she was right
beside him. he said, “i think i spoke to an officer. that was it. we
dispersed.” he agreed that she did not speak with or attempt to speak with the
police.

defence counsel
asked jp if now, in hindsight, he would have gone to that party again. he
replied, “no. this has taught me to stick with people that i know for a fact
are my age. it's crazy. i don't go out much. this is the one night i went
out and this is what happened.”

when asked
point blank if he sexually assaulted kj, he stated, “no, it was consensual.”
cross-examination

crown counsel
asked jp about his drug addiction. he stated that it started while he was in
the united states, but at the time of the offence he was “clean from drugs”
except for those that he had a prescription for. he acknowledged, however, that
he has at other times used drugs while in canada. he stated that he had gone to
treatment for it. he described himself as “currently sober”.

he agreed that
he was taking his prescription medication twice a day.

he could not
remember if there was other medication in the room while kj was there. he
stated, that if there was, it would have been his duloxetine and olanzapine. 
he stated that those were also prescription drugs.

jp agreed that
he has a 14-year-old son in the united states.

crown counsel
asked him what time he ran into the two individuals near the dairy queen. he
estimated that it was about 9:00 or 10:00.

crown counsel
then asked jp, why, when he was in-chief, he referred to those two individuals
as “kids”. he stated that he did not remember saying that, but they were 18 or
19. crown counsel continued to press him as to why he called them “kids” and
asked him why he would refer to two individuals that are a decade younger than
him as kids when they are “young adults.” ultimately, he agreed that they
were “teenagers.” he also agreed that sometimes 18- or 19-year-olds are in
high school.

later in the
cross-examination, he stated that he did not remember whether he asked the
“kids” their ages. he said, “i don't remember how it happened. that was a
year ago. i don't remember if they asked my age and then i asked their age. i
was talking to them a good half hour.”

crown counsel
suggested to jp that the party seemed like a high school party. he stated, “i
don’t know to be honest with you. the kids that i went with, i would assume
that they graduated high school. i just thought it was a house party.” he
agreed, however, that teenagers were at the party, and it was “possible” that
kids who were in high school were at the party.

jp agreed that
he did not interact with anyone else other than the “two kids” and kj. he may
have had a couple of words with lp, but he did not remember what those words
were. lp was standing in the doorway. he was sitting on the counter.

he disagreed
that he was the only person at the party with facial hair. he allowed,
however, that his beard was the fullest.

the crown asked
him if there were younger people at the party including 14- and 15-year-olds. 
he stated, “i couldn’t tell you”. the crown followed up by asking whether the
others could also be described as “kids”. he stated, “they were of age, so i
didn’t put more thought into it. everybody was drinking either straight out of
the bottle, out of the shot glass or they had a beer.” the crown continued to
press, asking, “but there were others at the party you would describe as
“kids”.” jp stated, “i wouldn’t describe them as kids. teenagers. young
adults.”

he disagreed
that kj told him that she was 14.

jp talked with kj
in the kitchen for between 20 and 45 minutes before the police came to break up
the party. he stated that they talked about her fight with her mother, and everyone
putting her down. people at the party were calling her a “slut”. she was “kind
of down”. he denied that she told him anything about being in school. she
also did not share with him that she could not go home. she said that later,
at the marina.

with respect to
the arrival of the police, he stated that kj went in another direction. he did
not recall speaking to the police, other than an officer told him to leave. he
stated that by the time he got to the marina, she was with him. he agreed that
he followed the others to the marina, because he had no idea where he was. he
also agreed that he could have just gone home. he agreed that by the time he
got to the marina, kj had nowhere to go. he estimated that they were at the
marina for about an hour, but stated, “i couldn’t tell you 100%”.

he agreed that
while they were at the marina, he did not interact with anyone other than kj. no
one came up to kj and offered to take her home. he did not ask the others to
take kj home because they were not his friends.

with respect to
any conversation he had with lp, he agreed that lp was there but she did not
say anything in his presence. rather she pulled kj aside and spoke to her. he
did not hear what she said. he disagreed that he told lp that he was 22 years
old.

the crown
suggested to jp that while he was at the party, he was trying to act the same
age as the kids who were there. he stated, “i was just being myself. i’m a
shy person. i didn’t talk to hardly anybody there.”

he estimated
that there were about 15 people at the marina. they were there for as long as
they were because kj was talking to him and he was listening. he essentially
agreed that the only thing he remembered kj telling him about was the fight
with her mother.

he remembered
offering to walk kj home and kj told him that it was too late and her mom would
“freak out”. the crown suggested, “you didn’t think those were teenage
words?” jp replied, “not really. i still get into fights with my mother. i
got in fights with my mother when i was 22 or 23.”

he agreed that
he was not responding to her as she was talking. he stated, “i didn’t know
what to say to that. i offered to bring her back. she said she couldn’t go
back so i offered her a place to stay because nobody else did.”

he disagreed
that as they were walking from the marina to the hillside motel a police car
drove by. he agreed that a man walked by and asked if everything was all
right. the man explained his concern by referencing the way that kj looked. 
kj told the man that “everything is fine.” jp stated that she was “walking
good”. she had her arm around him.

he disagreed
that this raised a “red flag” in his mind. he did not know “who the guy was
and had never seen him before.”

he also agreed
when the crown suggested that prior to that night he did not know who kj was
and had not met anyone else at the party either.

once they got to
the hillside, they hung out for “about an hour” before they got in the bed. 
during this time, they smoked a couple of joints, talked and made the food. 
the conversation revolved around kj’s home life. he told her a little about
himself, including the fact that he had a son and was in the military. he
estimated that they fell asleep at around 3:00 am.

he again denied
that he offered kj some of his xanax. he stated, however, that the bottle was
clearly visible on his night table. he denied that she asked for some.

he agreed that
kj could have been lying in the bed before him. he denied offering to sleep on
the floor or suggesting that she sleep on the floor. the crown suggested to him
that he always assumed that he was going to sleep with her. “i didn’t assume
anything,” he replied. “she had free range of the room. she could have slept
where she liked”.

they had a
conversation while they were lying in bed and the tv was on. she continued to
talk to him about her home life. she told him how crazy her mom was and how
her mother was going to get rid of her cat.

he disagreed
that they discussed how she was doing in school, or her friends. the only
discussion about her peers revolved around the fact that people at the party
were putting her down.

he was not aware
that she took the photos of him that became exhibits 2a and 2b.

he could not
remember whether kj was lying down or sitting up when he asked her if he could
kiss her.

the crown then
asked, “you then asked if you could have sex with her?” jp replied, “i don’t
think so”. the crown followed up: “how did you initiate further”. he
replied, “i don’t know. it just happened after we started kissing and then she
asked me to unzip the back of her dress.”

he disagreed
with the crown’s suggestion that kj did not ask him to unzip her dress and he
simply undressed her. he also disagreed that kj told him that she was on her
period and did not want to have sex.

he did agree
that he had sexual intercourse with her.

jp maintained
that he was the first one to fall asleep and he recalled being woken up by kj
because sw arrived. he disagreed that he was up as late as 5:00 or 4:45 am.

the crown showed
him exhibit 2b which is timestamped at 4:43. he then corrected his answer and
said, “i guess it’s possible. he agreed that the photo showed him in the
process of rolling a joint. he agreed that after rolling the joint, he would
have probably consumed it and would not have been able to sleep for between 15
minutes and half an hour. he agreed that by the time the photo was taken, he
had already had sexual intercourse with kj.

the crown asked
him about sw’s evidence that once she arrived, he told her, “she’s 20”. he
disagreed with this and stated that he did not think that he told sw kj’s age
until he saw sw looking at kj in the rearview mirror and kj “snapped”. he did
agree, however, that sw looked at him as if to say, “who’s the girl in the
room”. although sw did not say those words, he could tell that was what she
was thinking by the look that she gave him.

the crown asked jp,
“how old did she look to you?” jp replied, “at least 18. enough that i
thought she was 20.”. the crown followed up, “could she have been 16?”. he
answered, “she could have been i guess but i didn’t think she was 16.” he
disagreed with the crown’s suggestion that he told kj not to tell anyone that
she was 14.

crown counsel
returned to questions about kj’s sobriety. jp disagreed that he did not see kj
fall over at the marina, stating, “she was pretty much fine when we got to the
marina. it was at the house that she was more intoxicated.” when asked
whether kj was stumbling, he stated, “not real bad. maybe a slur of words a
bit. you could tell that she was intoxicated but by the time we got to the
marina she was able to talk without slurring her words. she was walking.”

the crown asked
him about his own consumption at the party. jp agreed that the party was the
first time he had anything to drink in seven or eight years. he agreed that he
“just made the decision” to drink.

jp agreed that
he has seen a 16-year-old under the influence of alcohol. he stated that he
has never seen a 14- or 15-year-old under the influence and he personally did
not have any experience with alcohol at that age.
re-examination

jp agreed that
it took him at least half an hour to walk from the dairy queen to the party. 
when asked what he talked about with the two “kids” he met, he stated, “just
random stuff”. he recalled telling them that he had moved from the united
states.

defence counsel asked
jp at what point during the 20 to 45 minute conversation with kj, she told him
that she was 20. jp replied that exchange took place about a quarter of the
way through. by the time she told him that, he had already shared his age.

he did not
ask kj about high school. when defence counsel asked, “why not?”, he replied
rhetorically, “why would i? she would have been out of high school.”

defence counsel
asked him about his evidence that kj did not want to go home because “her mom
would freak out”. he stated that those were kj’s words. she also told him
that the door to the home would be locked, and her mother would not let her
in.

defence counsel
asked him about the time on exhibit 2b. he did not know if the time was
accurate. by that time (4:43), they would have been in the room for “hours”. 
kj could have walked out the door at any time.
defence submissions

defence counsel
argued that the crux of the case was the conversation between jp and kj at the
party. one of the parties misrepresented their age. the issue is which one.

he noted that
once the party was broken up by the police, jp did not know the way back to his
motel on his own. they walked from the party to the marina together. once at
the marina, they had a conversation, the gist of which was that kj did not want
to go home. at this point, jp offered to walk her home. she told him that she
would be in trouble with her mother for being out so late, and being at a party
that she was not supposed to be at. she also told him that she was afraid that
her mother would take her cat.

defence counsel
noted that kj did not recall any of this conversation.

with respect to
the evidence of lp, defence counsel argued that although lp told jp that kj was
too young for him, lp did not tell jp how old kj actually was. additionally,
lp was not privy to the conversation where, on jp’s version, he told kj that he
was 31 and kj told him that she was 20.

he also argued
that lp’s evidence that jp told her that he was 22 cannot be true because on jp’s
evidence that he told kj that he was 31 (his actual age), or in the
alternative, kj’s evidence that he told her that he was 21. it does not make
sense, defence counsel argued, for jp to give three versions of his age the
same night.

defence
counsel noted that on his client’s version of events, the sex was consensual,
that she removed her own clothing (she asked him to unzip her dress), and that
she produced a condom. in contrast, in the text messaging, which was filed as
exhibit 1, kj told her mother “idk” (text-ese for “i don’t know”) about the use
of a condom.

he noted that kj
did not make any effort to leave the motel, although the evidence is clear that
at any time in the period between 1:00 am and 8:00 am, she could have simply
left. he noted that jp’s evidence is that she “roamed” around the room.

defence counsel
also noted that the following evidence pointed to a finding of credibility in
favour of his client with respect to his evidence that kj told him that she was
20:
a)
he accompanied
her to the marina and offered to let her come to his place;
b)
he gave her his
real name, his social media handle and his cell number.
c)
he asked sw to
drive her home;
d)
he told her that
he was 31 and his son was 13. it makes no sense for him to give her that information
if she had told him that she was 14;
e)
his evidence was
straight-forward and honest. he was honest about his drug problem and his
criminal record.

with respect to
kj’s evidence, defence counsel pointed out the following problems:
a)
in the text messaging,
kj told cc that she was sexually assaulted by a man who was 28 years old, who
told her that he was 21;
b)
in her statement
to the police, which was 35 pages long, not once did kj say that jp told her
that she should not tell anyone that she was 14 and they had sex. this is
inconsistent with her evidence in court. defence counsel argued that this was an
important piece of information, and it is highly unlikely that she would not
have disclosed it. her explanation for the inconsistency that she was
“stressed out” when she gave her statement to the police, therefore, does not hold
up. as part of this argument, defence counsel also noted that kj gave other
very detailed information, such as the fact that he gave her an orange soda and
he has a 13-year-old son;
c)
kj texted cc that
she did not come home because she did not want to get in trouble and she did
not want cc to give her cat away. defence counsel argued, that this statement
was premised on kj’s concern about the consequences for going to the party
contrary to cc’s wishes. in this vein, he suggested that kj could not admit to
cc that she had consensual sex with a 31-year-old man and she therefore came up
with the story that she was sexually assaulted;
d)
there is no
medical evidence that kj actually ingested the xanax. jp’s evidence was that
she was fully awake and he fell asleep before she did;
e)
kj has previously
misrepresented her age in order to get a loan or a line of credit.
crown submissions

crown counsel
began by making submissions on the law as it pertains to this case, which i
will summarize more thoroughly below.

the crown cited
the following problems with jp’s account of what took place:
a)
he went to the
party with “a couple of kids”;
b)
the whole of the
evidence, including kj, lp and nl, was to the effect that the party was a party
of high schoolers between the ages of 14 and 18;
c)
while he was not
the only one there with facial hair, he had the fullest beard;
d)
sw thought that
kj “looked young” and “looked 18”;
e)
jp’s evidence is
consistent that kj was preoccupied by issues with cc and concern for her cat. 
this should have raised “a red flag” that kj was under 16.

with respect to
kj’s evidence, crown counsel argued that her account was credible and reliable for
the following reasons:
a)
she was not
inconsistent in the evidence she gave in court;
b)
the
inconsistencies between her evidence in court and her statement were minor or
peripheral matters;
c)
the evidence of nl
and lp supports kj’s evidence that she was quite intoxicated. jp himself
stated that she was slurring her words;
d)
she trusted jp. 
she told ll and lp that she was okay to go home with him. jp testified that there
was not anyone else at the marina who offered to take her home;
e)
lp testified
that she told jp that he was too young for kj. crown counsel argued that
should have been another “red flag” for him.

with
respect to the issue of consent, kj recalled that he asked her if he could kiss
her. she was terribly sleepy because of the xanax. with respect to the
intercourse, she protested because she was on her period, but in the end, to
use kj’s words, she just “let him fuck her.” that, submitted the crown, is not
sufficient to make out the legal requirements for consent.

with respect to
the issue of the condom, the crown argued that kj presumed that he used a
condom but she was not really sure.

with respect to
the fact that kj seemingly made no effort to leave the room, crown counsel
argued that argument was based on myth and stereotype. additionally, it makes
sense that she did not leave because where was she to go, having regard to the
following facts:
a)
she is young –
just 14 years of age;
b)
she is
indigenous;
c)
she is autistic.

crown counsel
argued that the product of these characteristics made kj an extremely
vulnerable person. they explain her reticence, not only to leave the hotel
room, but also to complain to police (when they were breaking up the party or
later when they may have driven by jp and kj when they were walking to the
motel), to complain to the passerby, or to reach out to cc.
defence reply

defence counsel
argued that lp’s evidence that she told jp that kj was too young for him was
immaterial if kj told him that she was 20.

defence counsel
argued i should be cautious in relying on nl for the following reasons:
a)
she was
intoxicated;
b)
she stated a
number of things that either contradicted or were contradicted by everyone
else, including:
i)
what time the party began;
ii)
the fact that the party ended peaceably (as opposed to being broken up
by police);
iii)
her evidence that she did not see jp and kj at the marina (they turned
down christie street which was before the marina).

with respect to
the crown’s arguments about the “red flags” that should have made jp think more
carefully about kj’s age, he noted that:
a)
one does not
have to be young in order to:
i)
still be living with their parents;
ii)
be in difficult arguments with their parents;
iii)
have a pet cat and be concerned about their cat.
b)
kj was dressed
provocatively.
analysis
the presumption of innocence
and the burden of proof

many, who are ill-informed about how our criminal justice system
works, believe that it is the responsibility of a judge to listen to the
evidence and decide who they believe. in their world, if a judge believes the
accused, the accused is not guilty. if, however, the judge believes the
complainant, the accused is guilty.

that is not how it works.

because the liberty of the accused is always at stake, woven through
every stage of the analysis that judges like me conduct every day are
safeguards to prevent wrongful conviction.

one of those safeguards is the time-honoured principle that an
accused person is always presumed innocent until the state proves his guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.

a second safeguard is the principle that only when the crown proves
that the accused committed the elements of the offence charged beyond a
reasonable doubt, is the presumption of innocence overcome.

a reasonable
doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched or frivolous doubt. it is not a doubt
based on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone. it is a doubt that is based
on reason and common sense. it is a doubt that logically arises from the
evidence or the absence of evidence.

to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, i have to be sure with
respect to the accused’s guilt. if i am not sure, i must find the accused not
guilty.

if i don’t know who to believe, i must find the accused not guilty. 
even if i believe that the accused probably committed the offence, that is not
a sufficient basis on which to find the accused guilty. probable guilt is not
proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

the appellate authorities, particularly
r.
v. w.(d.),
1991
canlii 93 (scc), set out the path i must follow in considering whether the
crown has established guilt beyond a reasonable doubt:
a)
first, where the accused testifies and i believe him, i must find
him not guilty.
b)
second, where the accused testifies and even though i do not believe
him, i am left with a reasonable doubt by his evidence, i must find him not
guilty.
c)
third, even if i do not believe the accused or am not left in doubt
by his evidence, if i am left with a reasonable doubt on the basis of the
other evidence i do accept, i must also find the accused not guilty.
only if, at
the end of this exercise, i am satisfied as to the guilt of the accused beyond
a reasonable doubt, must i find him guilty.

i cannot compare the accounts and decide guilt on the basis of which
account i like better.

in following this path, i rely on my experience, reason and common
sense. i must not, however, engage in stereotypical or mythological reasoning
which masquerades as “common sense”.
the assessment of the
reliability and credibility of witnesses

evidence must be both credible and reliable.

a witness who is credible, is not necessarily reliable. a witness
may be sincere and credible, but their evidence may also demonstrate that their
recollections are not reliable.

one way of determining whether a witness is credible and reliable is
to gauge their evidence in court against what they said on previous occasions,
such as when they gave a statement to the police.

not every inconsistency, however, gives rise to the conclusion that
a witness is unreliable. some inconsistencies are important; others less so. 
where an inconsistency involves something material about which an honest
witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the inconsistency may demonstrate a
carelessness with the truth which is a cause for concern.

the same issue can arise where a witness “fills in the blanks” with
respect to what took place. a witness may honestly and sincerely believe that
a certain aspect of their evidence is true; analysis on the basis of logic,
reason and common sense might suggest however, that what the witness says – as
honest, sincere and credible as the witness may seem – is not reliable.

memories fade. they can also be faulty and frail. sincere, honest
and credible witnesses can simply be wrong or make assumptions about things
because of the passage of time.
the assessment of evidence
of persons who are not adults

three of the
witnesses in this case, kj, nl and lp were under 18 when the incident took
place and when they testified. additionally, kj is autistic.. in
r. v. w.r.
(1992),
1992 canlii 56 (scc), 74 ccc (3d)
134 at page 144, justice mclachlin (as she then was) stated:
it is
neither desirable nor possible to state hard and fast rules as to when a
witness's evidence should be assessed by reference to "adult" or
"child" standards -- to do so would be to create anew stereotypes
potentially as rigid and unjust as those which the recent developments in the
law's approach to children's evidence have been designed to dispel. every
person giving testimony in court, of whatever age, is an individual, whose
credibility and evidence must be assessed by reference to criteria appropriate
to her mental development, understanding and ability to communicate.
but i
would add this. in general, where an adult is testifying as to events which
occurred when she was a child, her credibility should be assessed according to
criteria applicable to her as an adult witness. yet with regard to her evidence
pertaining to events which occurred in childhood, the presence of
inconsistencies, particularly as to peripheral matters such as time and
location, should be considered in the context of the age of the witness at the
time of the events to which she is testifying.
[emphasis mine]

this principle
has been part of our law for over thirty years. i have considered it in
assessing the evidence of kj, nl and lp.
the law with respect to the
admissibility of prior consistent statements

the crown led
the following prior consistent statements:
a)
the text message
between kj and cc the day after the incident (exhibit 1
);
b)
oral evidence
from nl with respect to the substance of text messages she received from kj on
the night of the incident;
c)
oral evidence
from lp with respect to the substance of text messages she received from kj on
the night of the incident.

prior consistent
statements are generally not admissible.

one exception to
this rule arises where the defence is alleging recent fabrication:
r. v. ellard
2009 scc 27.

“recent fabrication” arises when there is an allegation that a
witness has, between the date of the incident complained of and the date that
she testifies in trial, lied about the allegations:
r. v. stirling
2008
scc 10
at paragraph
5.

the word “recent” in the concept is something of a misnomer. the
fabrication need not be particularly “recent”:
r. v. stirling, supra,
citing
with approval
r. v. o’connor
1995 canlii 255
(ont. c.a.).

in order to rebut an allegation of recent fabrication, the crown is entitled
to present evidence of the prior consistent statements of the witness. this is
an exception to the general exclusionary rule with respect to prior consistent
statements. the messages are not, however, admissible for the truth of their
contents.

a second exception to the rule against the admissibility of prior
consistent statements relates to narrative.

a prior consistent statement can assist a trial judge in
understanding how and when the allegations came to be disclosed and reported. 
more generally, it can also assist in assessing the credibility and reliability
of the complainant or a witness:
r. v. c.(g.)
2006 canlii 18984 (on ca), 2006 oj 2245 (c.a.);
r.
v. dinardo
2008 scc 24;
r. v. j.a.t.
2012 onca 177;
r. v. khan
2017
onca 114;
r. v. n.w.
2018 onsc 774;
r. v. camara
2021 onca 79;
r.
v. ellis
2022 onca 535.

as with the rule respecting recent fabrication, it cannot be
admitted for the truth of its contents.

given that the defence has raised recent fabrication, and given the
attack on her credibility, subject to my comments below about the weight that they
can be given, the prior consistent statements of kj are admissible.
the law of sexual assault
generally

in order to find
jp guilty of sexual assault, i must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that:
a)
jp intentionally
applied force to kj.
b)
kj did not
consent to the force that jp applied.
c)
jp knew that kj
did not consent to the force that he applied.
d)
the force that jp
applied took place in circumstances of a sexual nature.

appellate courts
have given trial judges the following instructions in assessing the presence or
absence of consent:
a)
if the sexual
assault case involves a different interpretation of essentially the same
events, trial judges should consider whether the complainant, in her mind,
wanted the sexual touching to occur. once she has asserted that she did
not consent, the question is one of credibility. if the trial judge is
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that she did not consent, the inquiry
shifts to the accused’s state of mind:
r. v. ewanchuk
1999 canlii 711
at para.
61
(scc).
b)
the accused may
then establish that on the basis of her words and conduct, the complainant was
consenting:
ewanchuk, supra,
at para.
63.
c)
the accused’s
belief that the complainant was consenting cannot be reckless or willfully
blind:
ewanchuk, supra,
at para.
65.
d)
silence,
passivity or ambiguous conduct is not consent:
ewanchuk, supra,
at
para.
51.
e)
while it is open
for a complainant to change her mind, the accused must make certain that she
has truly changed her mind before proceeding with further intimacies. the
accused cannot rely on the mere lapse of time or the complainant’s silence or
equivocal conduct to indicate that there is a change of heart, nor can he
engage in further sexual touching to “test the waters”. continuing sexual
contact after someone has said “no” is, at a minimum, reckless conduct which is
not excusable:
ewanchuk, supra,
at para.
52.
f)
the
complainant must agree to the specific sex act. agreement to one form of
penetration is not agreement to all forms of penetration. agreement to
sexual touching on one part of the body is not agreement to all sexual touching:
r. v. hutchinson
2014 scc 19
at para.
54. consent must be
specifically renewed and communicated for each sexual act. it is not
possible to give “broad advance consent”:
r. v. barton
2019 scc 33
at
paragraph
118.
g)
section 273.1
of
the
criminal code
requires that the accused must take reasonable steps,
in circumstances known to him at the time, to ascertain that the complainant
was consenting. the reasonable steps requirement rejects the outmoded
idea that women can be taken to be consenting unless they say “no”. there
is no catalogue of steps that constitute “reasonable steps”. silence,
passivity or ambiguous conduct is not a reasonable step. the more
invasive the sexual activity and/or the greater the risk posed to the health
and safety of those involved, the greater care is necessary in ascertaining
consent. greater care is also necessary where the parties are unfamiliar
with one another and there is the risk of miscommunication, misunderstanding
and mistake:
barton, supra,
at paras.
105 to 108.
h)
not only does no
mean no, but only yes means yes. nothing less than positive affirmation
is required to establish consent:
r. v. goldfinch,
2019 scc 38
at para.
44.

the supreme
court of canada’s decision in
r. v. hutchinson
2014 scc 19
makes it
clear that where a trial judge finds that the complainant consented, or has a
reasonable doubt about the lack of voluntary agreement to the sexual activity,
the next step is to determine whether, pursuant to section 265(3) and
273.1,
the consent has been vitiated.

section 273.1
of
the
criminal code
states:
(1) consent must be
present at the time that the sexual activity in question takes place.
(2) for the purposes of
subsection (1) no consent is obtained if
(a) the complainant is
unconscious;
(b) the complainant is
incapable of consenting to the activity for any reason other than the one
referred to in paragraph (a.1);
(c) the accused induces
the complainant to engage in the activity by abusing a position of trust, power
or authority;
(d) the complainant
expresses, by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to engage in the activity;
or
(e) the complainant,
having consented to engage in sexual activity, expresses, by words or conduct,
lack of agreement to continue to engage in the activity.
disregarding myths and
stereotypes

for almost 25
years, trial judges like me have been instructed by the supreme court that “there
is no inviolable rule on how people who are victims of trauma like sexual
assault will behave”:
r. v. d.d.
2000 scc 43
at para.
65.

a complainant’s “failure”
to dress modestly is not indicative of consent to sex:
r. v. kruk
2024
scc 7
at para.
41.

a complainant’s
failure to leave immediately is not indicative of consent to sex:
r. v.
lacombe
2019 onca 938
at paras.
43 to 45.

a complainant’s
failure to resist or fight back is not indicative of consent to sex:
r. v.
kruk, supra.

on the other
hand, predicting the sexual behaviour of women based on the fact that at the
time of the incident they were menstruating is also “perilous business”. to do
so is “
too fraught with the risk
of prejudicial judgment and too uncertain to yield appropriate inferences”:
r.
v. e.d.j.
2024 onca 48
at paragraph
27.
the law with respect to the
capacity to consent

kj voluntarily
consumed alcohol and drugs (as i will discuss below, i find that she
voluntarily consumed jp’s xanax and they both consumed marihuana) before the
sexual intercourse took place. while he disagrees with the extent to which kj
was intoxicated, jp was aware of the extent to which she had consumed both
alcohol and drugs.

kj acknowledged
consenting to jp kissing her. she stated that she did not consent to sexual
intercourse. during the sexual intercourse, she described feeling extremely
drowsy and her arms and legs were heavy. she testified that she essentially
let it happen.

this raises the
spectre of whether kj was so intoxicated that any consent to have sex with jp
was vitiated by incapacity due to intoxication.

a person who is
drunk still has the capacity to consent:
r. v. jensen
1996 canlii 1237
(ont. c.a.);
r. v. r.(j.)
2006 canlii 22658
(ont. s.c.j.). alcohol or
drug-induced intoxication which results in poor decision-making or loss of
inhibition is also still valid consent:
r. v. merritt
 o.j. 1295
(s.c.j.). while it may be helpful to have expert evidence on this issue, it is
not required:
r. v. hernandez
 a.j. no. 955 (c.a.);
r. v.
cedeno
2005 oncj 91.

in
r. v.
al-rawi
2018 nsca 10, at paras.
66 to 74, justice beverage of the nova
scotia court of appeal helpfully set out how a trial judge should go about
assessing the issue of whether the complainant’s intoxication vitiated her
consent:
therefore, a
complainant lacks the requisite capacity to consent if the crown establishes
beyond a reasonable doubt that, for whatever reason, the complainant did not
have an operating mind capable of:
1. 
 appreciating
the nature and quality of the sexual activity; or
2. 
 knowing the
identity of the person or persons wishing to engage in the sexual activity; or
3. 
 understanding
she could agree or decline to engage in, or to continue, the sexual activity.
in cases where
consent and capacity to consent are live issues, the trial judge must determine
if it has been established beyond a reasonable doubt that the complainant did
not consent, or lacked the capacity to consent. as detailed above, these
inquiries are entirely subjective.
in
r.
v. hutchinson,
supra, the majority reasons penned by mclachlin
c.j. and cromwell j. helpfully suggest a two step approach. first,
determine if the complainant consented, or at least, is there a reasonable
doubt that she did not. if there is doubt that she did not consent,
determine if her consent was vitiated:
the
criminal code
sets out a two-step process for analyzing consent to sexual
activity. the first step is to determine whether the evidence establishes that
there was no “voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual
activity in question” under
s. 273.1(1). if the complainant consented, or her
conduct raises a reasonable doubt about the lack of consent, the second step is
to consider whether there are any circumstances that may vitiate her apparent
consent. section 265(3) defines a series of conditions under which the law
deems an absence of consent, notwithstanding the complainant’s ostensible
consent or participation:
ewanchuk, at para.
36. section
273.1(2) also lists conditions under which no consent is obtained. for example,
no consent is obtained in circumstances of coercion (s. 265(3)(a) and (b)),
fraud (s. 265(3)(c)), or abuse of trust or authority (ss. 265(3)(d) and
273.1(2)(c)).
difficulties
present where the complainant, due to the ingestion of drugs or alcohol, truly
has little or even no memory of the event. absent direct evidence from a
complainant that subjectively she did not consent, the judge or jury frequently
must rely on circumstantial evidence to determine the absence of consent (see
for example: r. v. j.w.m.,
 o.j. no. 1295;
r.
v. tariq,
2016 oncj 614;
r. v. cedeno,
2005 oncj 91;
r. v. thurairajah, 2006 carswellont 9699,
2008 onca 91;
r. v. anderson,
2010 yksc 32;
r. v. b.s.b.,
2008 bcsc 917, aff’d
2009 bcca 520;
r. v. c.p.,
2017 oncj 277;
r. v. j.m.,
 o.j. no. 3493;
r. v.
j.r.,
2006 canlii 22658 (on
sc), o.j. no. 2698, aff’d,
2008 onca 200, leave to appeal denied, s.c.c.a. 189/231;
r. v.
kontzamanis,
2011 bcca 184;
r. v. meikle,
2011 onsc 650;
r. v. olotu,
2016 skca 84, aff’d
2017 scc 11
).
where a
complainant testifies that she has no memory of the sexual activity in
question, the crown routinely asks: “would you have consented?” despite
the potential to discount the typically negative response as speculation, the
answer is usually received into evidence, and depending on the reasons, may or
may not have a bearing on the determination if consent or capacity to consent
were absent (see for example:
r. v. j.r.,
supra;
r.
v. b.s.b.,
supra;
r. v. olutu,
supra;
r.
v. meikle,
supra
at para.
45;
r. v. tariq,
supra
at para.
70;
r. v. esau,
supra
at paras.
4 and 91; r. v. kontzamanis,
supra
at para.
31
). for unknown reasons, this question was not put to the
complainant.
in any event,
a trial judge is required to consider all of the evidence adduced at trial and
direct his or her mind to making the necessary findings of fact or mixed law
and fact presented by the issues to be decided. in doing so, the judge
must not start with any presumptions that certain types of witnesses are
inherently credible or reliable, nor must the judge employ stereotypical myths
or flawed assumptions.
there is, of
course, the legal presumption that any accused is innocent of the accusation
that he or she faces. this legal presumption can only be displaced by
reliable and credible evidence that establishes beyond a reasonable doubt all
of the essential elements of the offence or offences charged.
a trier of
fact is not to assess each piece of evidence individually on a standard of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt (
r. v. morin,
1988 canlii 8 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 345). rather, the trier of fact must take into
consideration all of the circumstantial evidence relevant to any particular
element.
when the
evidence is entirely circumstantial, the judge must again consider all of the
evidence. if after considering that evidence, existence of the elements
is the only reasonable or rational inference, the trier of fact should draw the
inference that the elements, and hence guilt, have been established beyond a
reasonable doubt (see
r. v. villaroman,
supra
at
para. 41). if there are other reasonable or rational explanations
inconsistent with guilt, the inference must not be drawn and the accused
acquitted.
the law with respect to
sexual interference

it is common
ground that the
actus reus
of the offence of sexual interference as set
out in
section 151
of the
criminal code
is made out in this case on the
basis that jp had sexual intercourse with kj, a person who was under the age of
16.
the law with respect to
mistake of age

section 150.1(4)
of the
criminal code
may have application to this case in the event that
i rule that the sexual intercourse between jp and kj was consensual. it
states:
it is not a defence to a charge
under
section 151
or 152, subsection 160(3) or 173(2) or section 271, 272 or
273 that the accused believed that the complainant was 16 years of age or more
at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed unless the accused
took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant.

mercifully, in
r.
v. hason
2024 onca 369
at paragraphs
33 to 51, the court of appeal has
recently set out firm guidance on how to interpret this section, by enunciating
the following principles paraphrased below:
a) there are two elements to the
mistake of age defence provided for in
section 150.1(4):
i)
the
accused honestly believed that the complainant was at least 16 years old;
ii)
the accused took
all reasonable steps to ascertain the complainant’s age.
b) if the accused shows
an air of reality to both elements, then the crown must negate the air of
reality by proving beyond a reasonable doubt that either element is lacking.
c) in order to disprove
the first element, the crown must prove that the accused did not subjectively
accept that the complainant was at least 16 years of age:
i)
subjective
acceptance as truth requires a higher degree of certainty than suspicion or
supposition.
ii)
for greater
certainty, suspecting, guessing or hoping that the complainant is at least 16
years of age does not rise the standard of subjective acceptance of truth. 
this is because inherent in suspecting, guessing or hoping is the fact that
there is a risk, even a low one, that the complainant is under 16. if the
accused proceeds with sexual activity in the face of that risk, they are
reckless, which is a blameworthy mental state.
d) if the crown
disproves the first element, the entire mistake of age defence is eliminated. whether
the accused took “all reasonable steps” is irrelevant because he did not
subjectively believe that she was at least 16.
e) if the crown has not
disproved the first element, subjective acceptance of truth that the
complainant is at least 16, then the court must consider whether the accused
took all reasonable steps. this is a contextual and fact-specific exercise.
i)
establishing
all reasonable steps is a high bar. the use of the word “all” favours requesting
adults to take more, not fewer, steps. this robust analysis protects young
people as much as possible.
ii)
to establish
that the accused took all reasonable steps, the accused must take all steps
that a reasonable person would take in circumstances known to him to ascertain
the complainant’s age.
iii)
those steps would
expect a reasonable person to accept as true that the complainant was at least
16.
iv)
a reasonable person
would demand compelling information that establishes the complainant’s age to a
high degree of certainty before accepting as true that the complainant was at
least 16 years of age.
v)
even a low risk
that the complainant is under 16 is recklessness and precludes belief that the
complainant is of legal age. this is because reasonable persons would want to
be sure that they are not running the risk of causing the life-altering and
devastating consequences that adult/youth sexual activity inflicts on underage
young people, including heightened risk of physical injury, suicide, substance
use, unwanted pregnancy.
vi)
the information
establishing the complainant’s age to a high degree of certainty must be
compelling. if it is not, the accused must take additional steps. the accused
cannot take an approach to ascertaining the complainant’s age where they check
a few boxes or that is focused on plausible deniability rather than reasonable
belief. common scenarios where the accused must take additional steps to
ascertain the complainant’s age are:
1)
if the
complainant tells the accused they are underage.
2)
if the
complainant does not respond to the accused inquiries of her age or gives an
ambiguous response.
3)
if the accused
obtains information that merely suggest that the complainant is at least 16,
but does not establish this to a high degree of certainty.
4)
if the accused
initially obtains compelling information that the complainant is 16 or older
but subsequently learns other information that suggests she is underage.
5)
stereotypical
and illogical reasoning is not compelling. for example,
(a)
an offer to exchange money for
sex.
(b)
a reasonable person appreciates
that someone may look 16 but not actually be 16. a reasonable person would be
wary of relying on appearance or jumping to conclusions about age based on, for
example, height, weight and presence of some breast development. visual
observations may be sufficient in some circumstances, but this is rare because
it is not a reliable indicator.
(c)
a reasonable person would be wary
of relying on the mere fact that the complainant is drinking, smoking,
purchasing or using drugs or sexually active. reasonable persons recognize
that underage people engage in these activities. thus, they will not generally
be sufficient to ground a reasonable belief.
(d)
more reliable indicators include attendance
at adult-only social events, graduation from high school, employment or the
ability to drive.
(e)
if the accused cannot obtain
compelling information right away (such as a situation where the complainant
declines identification or cannot provide it promptly), the accused must hold
off until they can obtain information that would cause a reasonable person to
believe that the complainant is at least 16.
f) negating mistake of
age is necessary but it is not sufficient. the crown must also prove that the
accused actually believed that the complainant was under age, was willfully
blind as to that fact or was reckless.
i)
belief
means that the accused accepted as true that the complainant was under age and
proceeded anyway.
ii)
wilful blindness
means that the accused suspected that the complainant was under 18 but
suppressed that suspicion and failed to make further inquiries;
iii)
recklessness means
that the accused appreciated the risk, even if the risk is a low one, that the complainant
was under the age of 16 but bailed to make further inquiries. in essence, the
accused appreciated a risk, even a low one, and decided to take the risk. this
can include situations where the accused simply does not turn his mind to the complainant’s
age.
g) in some rare
circumstances, complete inattention to the complainant’s age is not reckless
and the accused can be acquitted because the crown has not proved
recklessness.
the law with respect to
administer noxious substance

section 245
(b)
of the
criminal code
makes it an offence to administer a noxious
substance. the section states:
every person who administers or
causes to be administered to any other person or causes any other person to
take poison or any other destructive or noxious thing is guilty
b) of an indictable
offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years or of
an offence punishable on summary conviction, if they did so with intent to
aggrieve or annoy that person.

the crown is
required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the following elements:
a)
jp administered,
caused to be administered or caused kj to take a substance;
b)
the substance is
“poison or any other destructive or noxious thing”;
c)
jp had intent to
aggrieve or annoy kj.

in this case, as
i will discuss below, jp essentially says that his xanax prescription was on
the nightstand in his motel room. he did not see kj take any, but she could
have taken it when he was not looking.

on the other
hand, kj stated that they sat on the bed and he poured two pills from the
prescription bottle into her hand and she took it.

there is a
distinction in the law between administering a substance to the complainant,
causing the substance to be administered to the complainant or causing the
complainant to take the substance and the complainant taking the substance
voluntarily. a conviction does not follow where the complainant ingests the
substance voluntarily. there must be the element of subterfuge, deceit, fear,
coercion or in the case of a young or intellectually challenged complainant,
complete ignorance as to the nature of the substance.

pouring motor
oil over the face of the complainant while holding her head back is sufficient
to meet the definition of administering:
r. v. clark
2008 abca 271.

surreptitiously
applying a chemical which causes rashes, burns or blisters to the complainant’s
desk is sufficient to meet the definition of administering:
r. v. carr
2010
onca 290.

ordering the
complainant to drink bleach is sufficient where the complainant is afraid of
the accused:
r. v. getachew
2013 oj 1674.

an uncle who
coaxes an 11-year old niece to smoke cocaine but putting the cocaine in a tube,
holding it with her and lighting a lighter to allow her to smoke it is
sufficient to meet the definition of “administering”, even where the
complainant did not feel “forced” to take it:
r. v. dy
2018 onsc 6764.

surreptitiously
placing urine and semen into drinks left by the complainant on a nightstand is
sufficient:
r. v. langdon
2024 oncj 183.

is xanax a
“noxious substance”? the only evidence before me on the character of xanax
comes from the accused himself. he testified that xanax can cause drowsiness. 
it is particularly potent if mixed with alcohol, particularly in the
uninitiated. in that case it can cause one to black out.

in
r. v.
burkholder
1977 altascad 8
the alberta court of appeal found that a
substance is noxious if it is capable of resulting in the consequences
described elsewhere in
section 245, i.e. the aggrieving or annoying of the
person to whom it is administered. the court noted with approval the
dictionary definition of “noxious”, which included “injurious, hurtful,
harmful, unwholesome” (“unwholesome” meaning “not beneficial to mortals”.).

in
r. v.
ho-on
2023 onsc 1010, schreck, j. acquitted the accused of the charge of
administering a noxious substance on the basis that the complainant’s evidence
was not sufficiently reliable. the judgment discusses the effects that the
xanax had on the complainant, including severe drowsiness. schreck, j. also
found that her ingestion of xanax is likely to blame for the problems with her
memory that resulted in difficulties with her reliability. the judgment
implies that xanax is a noxious substance.

i am satisfied
that a drug that can cause drowsiness to the point of black out when mixed with
alcohol is “noxious”.

i will return to
the issue of whether the accused “administered” the xanax below.
assessment
do i believe the accused on
the issue of consensual sexual intercourse with kj?

no. i do not
believe the accused for the following reasons:
a)
he admitted to
encountering “two kids” who invited him to the party. when crown counsel
cross-examined him about this, he retreated from describing them as “kids” and described
them as teenagers or young adults. his use of the word “kids” is most telling.
b)
he could not
give any detail with respect to the “random conversation” he had with the “two
kids” during the “good half hour” walk between the dairy queen and the location
of the party other than:
i)
they told him that they were 18 and 19. in this regard, he stated he
could not remember whether he asked them their ages or whether this was
information that they volunteered in the course of the conversation.
ii)
they told him their names.
c)
he could not
give any detail with respect to the conversations that he had with kj at the
party, which lasted between 20 and 45 minutes other than:
i)
about a quarter of the way through the conversation, she told him that
she was 20.
ii)
he told her that he was 31 and had a 13 year-old son.
iii)
she’d had a fight with her mother.
iv)
everyone at the party was putting her down. some people called her a
slut.
d)
he could not
give any detail with respect to the conversation with kj at the marina, which
he estimated lasted about an hour other than:
i) kj
could not go home because she had a huge fight with her mother.
ii) he
thought the fight was about her cat.
iii) kj
told him that she lived in pembroke’s west end.
iv) she
did most of the talking and he was mostly listening.
v)
he offered
to walk her home. she was afraid her mother would “freak out”.
vi)
she believed if she went home the door would be locked and her mother
would not let her in.
vii)
he offered that she
could stay with him at his motel.
e)
he could not
give any detail with respect to his conversation with lp either at the party or
at the marina.
f)
he could
not give any detail about his conversation with kj on the walk from the marina
to the motel which lasted approximately half an hour other than kj told the man
that stopped them that “everything is fine”.
g)
he could not give
any detail about his conversation with kj at the motel which lasted about an
hour, during which they had food and smoked a couple of joints, other than:
i) he was in the
military and he had a son.
ii) kj talked about her
home life.
iii) kj expressed worry
about her cat.
iv)
kj opined that her mother was crazy.
h)
he did not go
into great detail with respect to his conversations with kj about initiating
sex with her, or the change from kissing to sexual intercourse other than:
i) “one thing led to
another” and he “asked if he could touch her”.
ii) before he did
“anything else” from there, he asked her permission.
iii)
she asked him to unzip her dress.
iv)
in cross examination he said that he did not know how he initiated sex
from kissing, other than “it just happened” and she asked him to unzip her
dress.
i)
he
testified that kj produced condoms. there was not, however, any detail about
how that came about. in fairness to him, jp did generally testify that he
thought sex without a condom was too risky. he also described in detail what
the condom looked like and what brand they were. it was odd that he could
describe that in detail but he could not describe much else about the incident
in detail.
j)
he
testified that they got in bed and had sex. other than the general
conversation i alluded to above, he did not offer any detail with respect to
how that came about, what happened during the sex, and how it ended, including,
i)
what, if anything, he said or kj said during sex.
ii)
what observations he made of kj during sex, including how they were
positioned on the bed.
iii)
whether he or kj or both orgasmed.
iv)
how long the sex lasted.
k)
he did not offer
any detail about what they talked about after they had sex while they had more
food.
l)
he gave
specific, detailed information about where his xanax was located (on his
nightstand) but he could not say where in the room his other two prescriptions
were.
m)
when defence counsel jogged
his memory about the orange soda, he gave an internally inconsistent answer. 
he said he “probably” gave her orange soda. he then went on to give a more
detailed answer that he gave it to her because she asked for something to
drink. i thought it was curious that he was not sure whether he gave it to her
in the first place but then was sure that he gave it to her because she asked
him for it.
n)
although he
relied on the fact that kj was drinking as partial justification with respect
to her age, he minimized the effect of her alcohol consumption at the marina,
on the walk from the marina to the motel and at the motel.

in the final
analysis, i found the accused’s evidence in general to be vague and at times,
completely self-serving. in particular, the lack of a robust discussion of the
various steps that he took to ensure that kj was consenting to sexual
intercourse with him was completely missing.
notwithstanding that i do
not believe him, am i left in doubt by the accused’s evidence on the issue of
consensual sexual intercourse?

no. above, i
have set out the myriad of reasons why i found the accused’s evidence vague and
at times self-serving. in stepping back and assessing his evidence from the
standpoint of whether even though i do not believe him, his evidence leaves me
in doubt, for the same reasons i cannot so conclude. there are simply too many
vague assertions and omissions, particularly on the issue of consent, to allow
me to have a doubt on his evidence.
on the basis of the evidence
i do accept, am i satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused did not
have consensual sexual intercourse with the complainant?

i begin by
stating that i categorically reject the following submissions:
a)
that kj could
have told the police that she was uncomfortable either at the party or when she
saw them drive by on the way to the motel;
b)
that kj could
have left the motel room at any time;
c)
that kj was
dressed provocatively.

these
submissions are based on mythological and stereotypical assumptions of how
victims can be expected to behave.

similarly, i
also reject any argument that kj did not consent to sex with jp because she was
on her period. as i set out above, this has also been found to be mythological
and stereotypical assumption.
1.
assessment of the evidence of kj

kj’s evidence
suffers from many of the same issues that i have with the evidence of jp. she
was very vague about the nature of her conversations with jp at the party, on
the walk to the marina, at the marina, on the walk to the motel and at the
motel.

i find that her
memory was impaired by alcohol, by the xanax or both. she is also under the
age of 18 and has autism.

kj’s evidence
suffers from the following problems with credibility and reliability:
a)
she told the
police that by the time she met jp she was not drinking at all. this was
contrary to her evidence in court. it was also contrary to the evidence of
jp. even allowing for her age and her autism, this is not a minor or peripheral
issue about which she would be confused. she chalked it up to the passage of
time making it difficult for her to remember things.
b)
kj has admitted
to lying about her age in the past in order to get alcohol. she denied lying
to get credit. cc stated that she discovered that kj lied about her age in
order to get a bank loan. this causes real concerns with the credibility and
reliability of kj in relation to anything she says about telling jp her actual
age.
c)
kj testified in
court that jp told her not to tell anyone that he had sex with a 14-year-old. 
she did not, however, tell police about this. she explained this omission by suggesting
that she was still coming off the xanax when she gave her statement. as with
the issue about the consumption of alcohol, despite allowing for her age and
her autism, this is not a minor or peripheral issue about which she would be
confused.
d)
kj testified in
court that jp told her in the course of sexual intercourse that she would like
his 13-year-old son better. kj did not tell the police about this in her
statement, again trying to explain the omission by stating that she was coming
off the xanax. allowing for her age and autism, this is also not a minor or
peripheral issue about which she would be confused or readily forget. i note
that it is essentially the only thing she remembers jp saying to her during
sexual intercourse.

for these reasons,
i simply cannot rely on kj’s uncorroborated evidence about the following
points:
a)
she told jp that
she was 14.
b)
she is an
unreliable historian as to her consumption of alcohol on the evening in
question. i accept, however, based on her evidence, jp’s evidence and the
evidence of lp, that she consumed enough alcohol at the party to be drunk by
the time the party broke up, during the walk from the party to the marina and
while at the marina.
c)
jp told her not to
tell anyone that he was having sex with a 14-year-old.
d)
although at some
point during the evening kj learned that jp had a 13-year-old son, i do not
accept her evidence that this disclosure came during the act of sexual
intercourse.

there is one
neutral factor with respect to assessing her reliability and credibility: kj
asked to be dropped off at a tim horton’s near her residence, rather than at
her residence. she testified that she did so because, given the incident, she
did not want jp to know where she lived. this is consistent with her evidence
that she knew something was not right and she wanted to be safe from jp. i am
inclined to believe her. arguably, however, it is also consistent with not
wanting to be confronted by cc about who she was with upon her arrival home.

one aspect of kj’s
evidence works to strengthen her credibility and reliability that she knew
right away that something was not right and she felt she needed to somehow
document her association with jp that evening. she took two photos of jp when
they were in the hotel room, some three hours apart. she testified that she
did so because something did not seem right and she knew that she had to prove
that he was with her. i accept this evidence.
2. assessment of the
evidence of cc

cc is kj’s
mother. she is supportive of her daughter and has an obvious interest in the
outcome of the proceedings.


cc impressed me
as an honest woman who is trying her best to parent two challenging children.

while i question
her judgment in supplying kj with alcohol (and marihuana), i have no difficulty
accepting the evidence of cc on the following points:
a)
kj is
essentially a volatile, challenging 15-year-old. kj has serious mental health
problems, including autism, adhd, bi-polar disorder, and perhaps schizophrenia. 
at the time of the incident, kj was on medications for these problems.
b)
kj takes one of
those medications, trazodone, which is a sleeping medication, at night.
c)
kj came home the
morning of the incident in question and essentially slept until 5 am the next
morning. the only words that cc had with kj before then was when kj asked for
her trazodone, which cc gave her.
d)
cc received the
text in exhibit 1 from kj at 5:00 am the next morning.
e)
cc did not
supply kj with condoms.
f)
cc has
supplied kj with alcohol in the past.
g)
kj was not
wearing a black dress when she left the house. she was wearing a pair of jeans
and hoodie. i therefore, accept that at some point, somewhere before the
party, kj changed her clothes.
h)
before she came
home, kj sent cc a text message that she was at nl’s house. i accept that this
was a lie because both nl and kj testified that she never went to nl’s house.
i)
kj wants
to hang out with older kids.
j)
kj has
lied about her age in order to obtain credit.
k)
kj uses alcohol
and marihuana.
3. assessment of the
evidence of nl

nl was trying
her best to give an honest account of her recollections. she is a friend of
kj. i accept that she was being truthful when she said that other than telling
her that she would be a witness, kj has not spoken with her about these
allegations.

unfortunately, i
have some difficulties relying on her uncorroborated evidence for the following
reasons:
a)
she was heavily
intoxicated on the evening in question to the point that her memory of what
took place was “scrambled together”.
b)
she had no
recollection of the police coming to break up the party. she testified that it
essentially ended peaceably. this cannot be true. kj, jp and lp all testified
that the party ended because the police came and broke it up.
c)
she saw kj and jp
split from the group before arriving at the marina and go down christie
street. this cannot be true. kj, jp and lp all testified that kj (and jp)
ended up at the marina after the police broke up the party.
d)
she received a
number of text messages from kj that evening through
snapchat.
because
that software does not save text messages, these messages were not put into
evidence and i only have nl’s evidence with respect to the content of them. i
note that kj did not testify about sending messages to nl. although i find that
her evidence about the
snapchat
messages is admissible, it is unsafe to
give it any weight given that its content is not available for review and given
the other problems i have outlined with nl’s memory and intoxication.

i accept nl’s
evidence with respect to the amount of alcohol that kj consumed and kj’s state
of sobriety.

i also accept
her evidence that some of the party-goers were being unkind to kj, putting her
down and calling her names.
4. assessment
of the evidence of lp

unlike nl, lp
admitted to consuming two coolers and she was only “slightly tipsy”.

like nl,
although lp and kj are friends, i accept her evidence that apart from kj
advising her that she would ultimately be a witness, they have not discussed their
evidence.

i accept her
evidence except for her evidence about the
snapchat
texts. as with
similar evidence offered through nl, although this evidence is admissible, i
cannot give this evidence much weight because it is not available for review.

i accept that lp
was concerned about jp because of his age. i find that she confronted him
about it at the marina. i note that jp testified that he did speak with lp at
that marina, but he could not remember the gist of the conversation. although
lp omitted to tell the police about being “brushed off” by jp when she
confronted him at the marina, i find that this is, in fact, what took place.

i accept that
she also confronted kj about it and kj “blew her off”.
5. assessment of the
evidence of sw

sw is jp’s
mother. she has an obvious interest in the outcome of the proceedings.


i accept her
evidence on the following points:
a)
kj “looked
young” to her. in cross-examination, she described her as “a girl” in bed.
b)
when she arrived
at the motel and saw kj, she gave jp “a look”. in response, jp said, “what?!
she’s 20.”
c)
that kj seemed
put out by her. as i will relate below, i believe that kj was starting to realise
what had happened to her. it is not surprising that she would seem “put out”
by the mother of the man who she was starting to realise had taken advantage of
her. i also believe that sw was put out by kj. in the final analysis, i
believe that sw suspected that kj was a lot younger than what kj or jp told
her. as i will now discuss, i also believe that sw suspected that kj was a lot
younger than 18.

i do not accept
her evidence on the following points:
a)
that kj looked
18. while i accept that to a 60-year-old person, 18 is “young”, the only basis
she had for concluding so was the way that kj was dressed. there were no other
details.
b)
that kj looked
“definitely 18”. i do not accept this evidence. this is a very precise
number. people who estimate the age of someone usually estimate a range of
ages. for sw, there was no range. kj looked 18. not 17. not 19. 18. 
having never met kj before this incident, it is impossible for her to be so
precise and i do not believe it.
c)
that she denied
being curious as to who “the girl” was. if she was not curious, she would not
have given jp the look that resulted in his immediate exclamation that kj was
20.
d)
that kj glared
at her and said, “what?! i’m 20,” in the car on the way back to tim horton’s. 
i find by the time that this car ride took place, kj was starting to process
what happened to her and starting to come to the conclusion that something was
not right. she asked to be dropped off at the tim horton’s because she did not
want jp to know where she lived. earlier that morning, she had taken pictures
of jp in the motel room – pictures that he was unaware she had taken – because
she wanted proof that they were together. i do not believe sw when she says
that kj told her that she was 20.
6. findings of fact
based on the balance of the evidence

i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt as to the following facts:
a)
jp met “two
kids” at the dairy queen in pembroke. they had alcohol. they invited him to
join them at the party. he walked with them from the dairy queen to the location
of the party on eganville road.
b)
kj knew about a
party on eganville road. her mother did not want her to go. this upset kj. 
she was also upset because her mother allowed her brother’s girlfriend to stay
overnight at the house. she decided to leave and go to the party anyway.
c)
kj changed into
a black dress and black spandex shorts somewhere after she left her home but
before she arrived at the party.
d)
kj met jp at the
party.
e)
everyone at the
party other than jp was between 14 and 18 years of age.
f)
some of
the people at the party were rude toward kj, called her names or put her down.
g)
kj, lp and jp
left the party because the police attended and shut it down.
h)
kj was very
intoxicated at the party, on the way to the marina and at the marina. she was
stumbling and slurring her words. she fell.
i)
kj
testified that someone saw her with jp and told her not to go with him. i
accept lp’s evidence that she was that person. i accept kj’s evidence that she
rebuffed that suggestion. i accept lp’s suggestion that she told jp that he
should not be walking kj home and that someone who was “her own age” should
walk kj home. i note that jp testified that he remembered having a
conversation with lp but he did not remember what it was about. lp also
testified that jp said, “i can take you home.”
j)
kj was
still very intoxicated as she walked from the marina to the motel. lp testified
that at the marina kj was in no state to walk. kj testified that she was
struggling to walk. jp admitted that he had his arm around her. he also
testified that a random person passed by, asked about kj’s state and said that
she does not look so good.
k)
kj consumed some
xanax while she was at the motel. she testified to this effect. jp testified
that he was on prescription xanax at the time. i will discuss below whether i
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that jp administered the xanax to her.
l)
kj
consented to joining jp in bed.
m)
kj consented to jp kissing
her. she testified to this effect. jp testified that she consented to him
touching her.
n)
the bed that
they were in was a two-person bed. it was the only bed in the motel room.
o)
kj was wearing a
black dress, black shorts, black underwear and a black bra. jp unzipped her
dress.
p)
kj’s arms and
legs started to feel heavy and she did not feel good. i accept that this was
likely a result of the alcohol, the marihuana, the xanax or all three.
q)
jp proceeded to
have sexual intercourse with kj.
r)
at some
point in the evening, jp cooked a steak on the barbeque outside the room and
ate it. kj did not have anything to eat.
s)
at some point in
the evening, while at the motel, they consumed marihuana. kj had a half an
ounce of marihuana in her backpack.
t)
kj took
the photos of jp. jp did not realise she was taking his photos.
u)
at some point in
the evening, he told her that he had been in the military and had a 13-year-old
son. he also gave her his name and contact information, including social media.
v)
at some point in
the evening, kj told jp that she was having a fight with her mother, that she
was afraid to go home and that she was afraid her mother would get rid of her
cat.
w)
kj took photos of jp
sitting at a table in the motel room.
x)
sw came by the
next morning and was suspicious as to kj’s age. she gave jp a funny look and
he told her that kj was 20. kj and sw were put out by each other.
y)
sw and jp drove
kj home the next morning. they dropped her off at a tim horton’s near her home.
z)
once she arrived
home, kj went to bed.
aa)
she got up at one point and asked
cc for one of her sleeping pills which cc gave to her.
bb)
she essentially slept around the
clock until approximately 5:00 the next morning when she sent cc an email about
what happened. she figured out that she was taken advantage of. she was
scared and she did not know how cc would react.
findings with respect to consent

i find beyond a
reasonable doubt that kj did not consent to sexual intercourse with jp. i base
this conclusion largely on the following:
a)
kj admitted to
consenting to jp touching her.
b)
kj admitted to
going to bed with jp.
c)
kj stated that
she did not consent to sexual intercourse. although there are some serious
issues with her credibility and reliability, i believe her on this point for
the following reasons:
i) kj
took photos of jp after the incident because she wanted some evidence as to who
he was and the fact that they were together so he could not deny it.
ii) kj
texted her mother. i have the benefit of a complete record of the text
message. the message indicated that she consented to kissing and “then we had
sex”. while not entirely contemporaneous to what took place, it buttresses her
credibility on this point.
v)
kj’s evidence that there was really no discussion between her and jp
about what happened is remarkably similar to what jp said. there was a
discussion about touching, which she consented to, and then they proceeded with
intercourse. jp explained this by stating that one thing “led to another” and
they ended up having sex. that is not consensual because kj did not consent by
words or actions.
findings with respect to whether consent could have
been vitiated by intoxication

having concluded
that kj did not consent to sexual intercourse, it technically is not necessary
for me to consider the balance of the arguments in this case. in the event
that these reasons are reviewed on appeal, however, i will proceed to analyse
these issues.

there is ample
evidence in this case that kj was grossly impaired by alcohol before she
arrived at jp’s motel room. having been with her for most of the evening, jp
was very aware of how impaired she was.

once there, she
consumed xanax and she may have consumed marihuana. jp was aware that she had
consumed these drugs.

kj testified
that she started to feel very drowsy and her arms were very heavy.

despite this
however, she remembered consenting to jp kissing her. she testified to this
effect in court and she texted her mother to that effect later. she also
remembered the sexual intercourse.

having regard to
the legal principles outlined above, i therefore find that she was not so
intoxicated that she was incapable of consenting to sexual intercourse. 
notwithstanding how intoxicated she was, she was capable of consenting. she
did in fact consent to some sexual activity with jp.
findings with respect to honest belief in
communicated consent

i have concluded
beyond a reasonable doubt that kj did not consent to sexual intercourse with
jp.

i do not believe
jp’s evidence that kj consented, nor am i left in doubt by his evidence on this
issue for the reasons i set out above when i analysed his credibility.

while i accept
that kj consented to kissing jp, i do not believe that jp took reasonable steps
to ensure that kj was consenting to sexual intercourse with him for the reasons
i expressed above.

i find that jp
took kj’s consent to kissing as consent to have intercourse. as he said when
he testified, “one thing leads to another.” unfortunately for him, legally, one
thing does not lead to another. it was incumbent upon him to specifically
ensure that kj was consenting to sexual intercourse with him. i find that he
did not do so.

i find that she
did not consent to sexual intercourse verbally. nor did she consent by
conduct. these two people met that night. they had no familiarity with one
another. it was his responsibility to make sure that he had her consent,
either through words or conduct, every step of the way. he did not do so.
findings with respect to mistake of age

following the
hason
rubric, i make the following findings:
step 1 – did jp honestly believe that kj was 16 or older?

jp said that kj
told him at the party that she was 20. kj denies this and says that she told
him her true age. i have found that i do not believe kj’s evidence with
respect to this. she has lied about her age before in order to obtain credit. 
she wants to hang out with older people. she wants to drink and use marihuana
which is an adult activity. later on, she admitted to consenting to kissing jp
who, on her evidence (whether i believe it or not) she thought was 21 years of
age.

i therefore find
that the crown has failed to disprove that jp subjectively believed that kj was
16 or older.
step 2 – did jp take all
reasonable steps to ensure that kj was 16 or older?

hason
instructs
me that this element is contextual and fact-specific. the use of the word
“all” imposes a high bar that is robust and protects young people. jp had to
demand compelling information which established kj’s age with a high degree of
certainty. even if jp knew that there was a low risk that kj was underage, he is
reckless and has not taken “all reasonable steps”. “plausible deniability” is
not sufficient.

in this case,
although the accused may have obtained compelling information from kj that she
was 20, he was in possession of other information which should have led him to
realise otherwise including,
a)
he followed “two
kids” to the party. his use of the word “kids” is most telling. it suggests
that there was reason to believe that the “kids” were not the age they told jp,
assuming that they told him their ages which i do not believe happened.
b)
most of the
people at the party were underage. this should have been clearly evident to
him. it was evident to everyone else i heard from who was present at the
party. as the crown later submitted, this was a party of high-schoolers.
c)
he cannot rely
on the fact that other people of the party were drinking or using drugs. this
is stereotypical and illogical reasoning which is impermissible because many
underage people engage in this kind of activity.
d)
he cannot rely
on kj’s mode of dress. this, too, is stereotypical and illogical reasoning. it
is natural for underage people to try to dress to look older than they are.
e)
he did not have
any information that kj graduated from high school.
f)
he did not
testify with respect to receiving any information with respect to whether kj
was employed.
g)
he did not
testify with respect to receiving any information with respect to whether kj
was licensed to drive.
h)
he received
information from lp that someone her own age should be walking kj home and that
he was too old for her. he disregarded this evidence.
i)
he
received information from kj that she was in a fight with her mother and was
concerned about her pet cat. as defence counsel pointed out, in this day and
age, young persons are remaining under the parental roof longer and it is not
uncommon for someone in their 20s to still be living at home, be concerned
about fights with their mother or be concerned about their cats. that’s all
true. but it is, to borrow a phrase used by the crown, a “red flag” that was
deserving of further inquiries – further inquiries which jp did not make.

as to the three
categories of blameworthy mental states, i find that jp was reckless as to
whether kj was 16 or older. he was in possession of other information that
should have made him question her more thoroughly. he chose to ignore the need
for those inquiries and take the risk.

i therefore find
that, if i am wrong and kj consented to the sexual activity with jp, jp did not
take all reasonable steps to ensure that kj was of age.
conclusion re sexual assault and sexual interference

i therefore find
the accused guilty on both counts. the parties may address me on the effect of
r. v. kienapple
1974 canlii 14 (scc), 1 scr 729.
findings with respect to administer noxious substance

i went back and
listened to the record with respect to kj’s evidence on this point which
revealed:
crown: …and when
you went into the room, what did [jp] do?
kj: we
sat down at the table and he grabbed a pill bottle off the bedside table and he
poured two in my hand and said it was two mg of xanax so i took them.
crown: can you
describe the pill – the pills for the court?
kj: it was
like a circle, oval shape. it was white.
crown: was there any
marking on it….
kj: (indiscernible)
crown: sorry, no
marking on it….
kj: i don’t
remember.
crown: and what kind
of a bottle did it come out of?
kj: a
prescription bottle.
crown: and you took
two of those pills, did [jp] consume any drugs or alcohol when you were in the
room?
kj: not that i
know of.
crown: and after you
took the pills, what did you do?
kj: uh, sat at
the table for a bit. he got into bed and i got tired and he offered me to
come and lie down with him. so i got into bed with him….

although jp gave
her the xanax pills, there is no evidence that kj’s ingestion of them was
anything but voluntary. she was old enough and experienced enough to know that
one should not take someone else’s prescription medication. she did anyway.

kj was not
threatened or coerced into taking them.

i also find that
kj was not ignorant with respect to xanax. in exhibit 1, her text to cc which
is rife with spelling errors and text-ese, “xanax” is spelled correctly. she
knew what it was and took it anyway. there was no subterfuge, deceit, fear,
coercion or complete ignorance.

the accused is
therefore acquitted on this count.
released: january
20, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson

as a wise judge once said to me when i was counsel, “everyone has a
mother, mr. richardson”.

see footnote 1.