source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj42/2025oncj42.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. t.o.,
2025 oncj 42
date: 
2025 01 22
court
file no.: sudbury 23-40100608; 22-40102667-00; 23-40103358
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
t.o.
before
justice g. jenner
heard
on december 13, 2024
reasons
for judgment released on january 22, 2025
alayna
jay............................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
jacqueline
boutros........................................................... counsel for
the defendant t.o.
jenner j.:
reasons for sentence
i.
introduction

the offender, to, pleaded guilty on december 13, 2024,
to four counts of voyeurism contrary to
s. 162(1)
of the
criminal code,
and one count of theft contrary to
s. 334
(b)(i) of the
criminal code.

to surreptitiously, and for a sexual purpose, photographed
children and adults in a manner which focused on areas including their buttocks
and anal region, breasts, and genitalia. his victims included members of both
sexes. in some of the photographs, the victims are nude. he took the images
using his mobile phone. to acknowledged stealing the underwear of two of his
victims, which he later photographed himself ejaculating into. to was
responsible for over 1,000 images either of a voyeuristic nature or involving sex
acts he was performing using children’s underwear as a prop. some of the
victims have been identified. others have not.

the parties agree to should receive a custodial
sentence for these offences. they disagree about the nature of the custody that
ought to be imposed, as well as about certain ancillary orders. the crown seeks
a period of custody up to an including two-years-less-a-day, to be followed by three
years’ probation. the crown further seeks an order to comply with the
sex
offender information registration act
or (
soira
order). to asks me to
impose a conditional sentence of imprisonment (cso), which would allow him to
serve his sentence in the community, under strict terms including house arrest.
he does not dispute the need for probation but does contest the appropriateness
of a
soira
order.

i am called on to determine the appropriate sentence.
ii.
circumstances of the offence

the facts were presented in an agreed statement of
facts (asf).

in september 2022, to was at science north, a science
and education centre in sudbury. he used his mobile phone to photograph seven-year-old
cv1, whom he did not know. the photographs focused on her buttocks. her father
noticed, confronted to, and involved police.

police subsequently executed a search warrant at to’s
residence and seized several electronic devices. the investigation revealed specific
further instances where to victimized members of his now-ex-spouse’s family:
•
in the summer of 2022, while to’s sister-in-law,
av2, was visiting him, he surreptitiously recorded her while she was wearing a
bathing suit. the photographs focused on her breasts and buttocks.
•
in the summer of 2021, at his own home, to
surreptitiously photographed 11-year-old cv3 while the child’s genitals were
exposed. his genital area was the focus of the image.
•
in the summer of 2021, at his own home, to
surreptitiously photographed 10-year-old cv4. the images depict her in a
bathing suit, and focus on her anal region.
•
to stole the underwear of cv4 and that of her
mother, av5. he photographed himself masturbating while holding the stolen
underwear, and then ejaculating on the underwear.

in addition to these specific instances involving known
victims, to’s mobile phone was found to have a total of 1,158 relevant images
on it, taken between january 2018 and december 2022. most of the images were
photographs of children’s underwear, some of which appeared soiled. some of the
images incorporated to’s penis and ejaculation. there were also many
voyeuristic images, some of which were close-up or cropped pictures of genital
areas, buttocks or breasts of the subjects. the images were taken
surreptitiously without the subjects’ knowledge and were made for a sexual
purpose. a small number of the images were attached to gps data which indicated
they were taken at (i) a public park near peterborough, (ii) a splash pad in
sudbury, and (iii) inside a large store in sudbury.
iii.
circumstances of the offender

the court had the benefit of a pre-sentence report and
a psychotherapy report.

to is 44 years old. before the offences came to light, he was
married to jo. they are now separated and have not spoken since to’s arrest.
they have two young children, who now reside with their mother and who have no
contact with their father.

to was born in british columbia. his parents separated soon after
his birth. he remained with his mother in british columbia while his father
moved to quebec. to and his mother moved to ontario when he was quite young. when
he was old enough, he would spend summers in quebec with his father. though to
did not initially graduate high school, he has completed his ged and attended
college. he has worked a variety of manual jobs. he is currently employed at an
electrical parts distribution centre.

following his arrest, to moved back in with his mother. his father
passed away in 2020 and she is to’s only family in canada. she expresses she
does not understand why he would do the things he has done, but she intends to
support him in his rehabilitation.

to has taken certain steps to address his offending conduct since
his arrest. he has been attending a virtual group for sex addicts anonymous,
which he reports has helped him identify his problematic relationship with
sexuality and pornography. he indicates he has learned to completely refrain
from using pornography or masturbating. he reports celibacy is the only method
he is comfortable with to limit his sexual urges.

more recently, in october 2024, to sought the services of psychotherapist
dr. liam marshall. as of december 12, 2024, to had attended and actively
participated in six one-hour sessions. dr. marshall opines that to would
benefit from continued participation in sex addicts anonymous and sexual
offender-specific treatment. if to is incarcerated, dr. marshall believes to’s
treatment needs could be met at either ontario correctional institute or the
st. lawrence valley secure treatment unit. mr. marshall places to in the
overall low-moderate category of risk, and notes that participation in therapy
with an expert on sexual offender issues is essential to reduce the risk of
recidivism.

addressing the court, to expressed deep regret and shame for his actions
and emphasized his remorse for the great deal of suffering he caused. this was
consistent with what he told the presentence report author. to acknowledged
that his sexual fantasies involved deviant interests in children. he also
expressed accountability for his actions, and recognized that he has caused his
victims, their families, and his own family much distress and conflict. to expressed
a desire to engage in rehabilitative programmes. the author of the presentence
report identifies to as a suitable candidate for community supervision.

at the time of his arrest, to did not have a criminal record. he
was, however, convicted of failing to comply with a release order on may 6,
2024, and received a $1,000 fine. that release order pertained to the present offences.

while these charges have been pending, to has spent 36 days in
presentence custody before securing his release.
iv.
victim impact

i had the benefit of hearing victim impact statements from jo, to’s
ex-spouse, as well as his sister-in-law (av2), and mv1, the mother of cv1. the
victim impact statements reinforce the obvious immediate consequences of to’s
actions, but also the long-term effects they will have on his victims and
family members. these impacts have physical, emotional, financial, and
interpersonal manifestations. in addition to the most obvious direct impacts, innocent
family members have become isolated from friends and extended family. victims
have seen their capacity to trust others, and their comfort in public spaces
shaken. they have seen their physical health decline and have sought counseling
to address the impact on their mental health.

the victim impact statement of jo also highlights the devastating
impact to’s actions have had on their family, and in particular their young
sons, who have had to grapple with their father’s abrupt exit from their lives.

i am grateful to the victims for their participation in this process
and commend them for the strength and resilience they demonstrated. i recognize
as well that other victims of to have not been identified, and likely remain
ignorant of to’s crimes. i cannot lose sight of the impact these offences
nonetheless have on their dignity and bodily and sexual integrity.
v.
applicable law
5.1 the
purpose and principles of sentencing

pursuant to
s. 718
of the
criminal code, the fundamental
purpose of sentencing is to protect society and contribute to the respect for
the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe community by imposing
just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to denounce unlawful conduct and the harm done
to victims or the community;
(b)
to deter the offender and others from committing
offences;
(c)
to separate offenders from society where
necessary;
(d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to provide reparation for harm done to victims
or to the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledge the harm done to victims or the community.

several other general principles apply:
•
proportionality:
a
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender: s. 718.1.
•
aggravating and mitigating factors:
a sentence should be increased or decreased to account for relevant
aggravating or mitigating circumstances, including but not limited to those
statutory factors set out in s. 718.2(a).
•
parity:
a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances: s. 718.2(b).
•
restraint:
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate: s. 718.2(d). all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders: s. 718.2(e).
5.2 specific
statutory considerations for these offences

when the crown proceeds by indictment, as it has here, the maximum
sentence for voyeurism is five years’ imprisonment. theft under $5,000 is punishable
by up to two years’ imprisonment. neither offence carries a minimum penalty.

these offences involved the abuse of persons under the age of 18
years, who are also vulnerable due to their personal circumstances, and so i am
required by
ss. 718.01
and
718.04
of the
criminal code
to give primary
consideration to denunciation and deterrence.

the young age of many of the victims is also a statutorily
aggravating factor: s. 718.2(a)(ii.1). as is the fact that the offender abused a
position of trust in relation to some of the victims: s. 718.2(a)(iii).
specifically, to abused the trust placed in him when he hosted children from
his ex-spouse’s family at his backyard pool. i must also consider whether the
offence had a significant impact on the victims, considering their age and
other personal circumstances, including their health and financial situation:
s. 718.2(a)(iii.1).

section 718.3(7)(b) stipulates that when a court sentences an
accused at the same time for more than one sexual offence committed against a
child, the court shall direct that any custodial sentence it imposes for such
an offence (excluding child pornography), be served consecutively to any
sentence it imposes for such an offence against another child (excluding child
pornography).
5.3 the
availability of conditional sentences

section
742.1
of the
criminal code
permits me to order an offender to serve a
sentence of less than two years’ imprisonment in the community under the
conditions of a cso in certain circumstances. neither voyeurism nor theft are
specifically excluded offences under
ss. 742.1
(b)-(d), so the operative
question is whether i can be satisfied that permitting to to serve a sentence
in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
vi.
analysis
6.1 voyeurism
offences and sexual offences against children

it is difficult to fix on a range of sentence for voyeurism
offences. as the cases provided by both the defence and crown illustrate,
offenders have received sentences ranging from suspended sentences to csos to
upper-reformatory traditional custodial sentences: see, for example,
r. v.
cairns,
 o.j. no. 4748 (c.j.),
r. v. wong,
2022 oncj 546,
r.
v. jarvis,
2019 onsc 4938;
r. v. b.h.,
 o.j. no. 3021;
r.
v. boucetta,
2024 onsc 1046. each case features a unique array of
circumstances. sentencing is a highly individualized exercise and variation is
to be expected.

despite the variation, it appears that sentencing for voyeurism has
been in a state of flux as courts consider (i) the ubiquity of handheld image-
and video-recording technology, (ii) renewed focus on ensuring that sentencing
accounts for the gravity of sexual exploitation of children, and (iii) the full
impact of the offence on victims’ sexual integrity.

in
r. v. jarvis,
2019 onsc 4938, justice goodman observed, at
para. 81, that “[t]echnology is everywhere,” that “cameras, cell phones and
other recording devices can be placed surreptitiously in any location, or on
any person,” and that “this increases the need for sending a message to the
general public that taking pictures of individuals in compromising positions…
is inappropriate.”

in
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9, at para.
51, the supreme court
stressed that sexual violence against children, which includes the production
of sexual images of children, “invades children’s personal autonomy, violates
their bodily and sexual integrity, and gravely wounds their dignity.” courts
must focus their attention on the pervasive and often permanent emotional and
psychological harm visited on inherently vulnerable child victims, as well as
on their families and communities: para. 58, 63. sentences must reflect these
harms and the “life-altering consequences” that flow from sexual violence:
para. 74.

in
r. v. downes,
2023 scc 6, at paras.
46-47, the supreme
court of canada stressed the centrality of sexual integrity to voyeurism
offences specifically:
as noted in this court’s decisions in
friesen
and
jarvis,
society’s conception of sexual offences has evolved from a focus on the
wrongful interference with sexual propriety to a concern with protecting sexual
integrity (
friesen, at para.
55, and
jarvis, at
para.
127, per rowe j., both citing e. craig,
troubling sex:
towards a legal theory of sexual integrity
(2012), at p. 68). in the
passage cited approvingly in
friesen
and the concurring
reasons in
jarvis, professor elaine craig explained that “[t]his
shift from focusing on sexual propriety to sexual integrity enables greater
emphasis on violations of trust, humiliation, objectification, exploitation,
shame, and loss of self-esteem rather than simply, or only, on deprivations of
honour, chastity, or bodily integrity (as was more the case when the law’s
concern had a greater focus on sexual propriety)” (p. 68). under a sexual
integrity analysis, the focus is “not simply [on] the sexual motives, arousal,
or body parts of the accused, or the community’s standard of sexual propriety,
but also [on] the perception, experience, and impact on the complainant” (p.
75). in addition, a sexual integrity analysis focuses not just on physical harm
to the complainant, but also on emotional and psychological harm, which is
often more lasting than physical harm, especially for children (
friesen,
at paras.
56-59
).
surreptitious observation or recording of a person where
there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, and which occurs in a “safe
place” under
s. 162(1)
(a), violates or poses a risk of violating sexual
integrity, even if nudity is not reasonably expected at the specific time of
the observation or recording. an observation or recording in such a
quintessentially private and “safe place” violates trust and can result in the
person’s humiliation, objectification, exploitation, shame, or loss of self‑esteem
(craig, at p. 68). it can also cause emotional and psychological harm, even if
the person is not observed or recorded when nude. as the intervener, the
samuelson‑glushko canadian internet policy and public interest clinic,
observes: “such violations of trust objectify those targeted by reducing them
to body parts, creating images that in a digital environment can be easily replicated,
cropped and manipulated in ways and for uses that disregard their right to
control their own bodies. these violating images hinder subjects from
developing their sexuality as they see fit, while also potentially exposing
them to the shame and humiliation that often results from instantaneous and
widespread dissemination” (i.f., at para. 24).
6.2 aggravating and
mitigating factors

i
have already discussed the application of several statutory aggravating factors
in this case, including the young age of some of the victims, the abuse of
trust in some of the offending conduct, and the significant impact on victims
and their families.

i
identify the following further aggravating factors:
•
to’s retention of the images: this was not point-in-time
observation but the maintenance of a collection of images, a portion of which
meet the definition of child pornography, over a lengthy period.
•
the number of photographs and victims: though the asf does not
stipulate the total number of victims, i can infer from the 1,158 voyeuristic
or related images captured over a five-year period that there were a
significant number of different victims, both child and adult.
•
the duration of the offending conduct over that five-year period:
to’s offences were not impulsive lapses in judgment but a prolonged campaign of
violation.
•
the exacerbation of the violation of many of his victims’ sexual
integrity by to’s photographing himself ejaculating into children’s underwear,
and in particular pairs he stole from cv4 and av5.
•
the nature of the images: while not all the images depicted nudity,
some did. again, it bears emphasizing that part of the collection is child
pornography.
•
while some of the images were taken while victims were clothed
and in public places where the expectation of privacy is on the lower end of
the spectrum, other images were taken in circumstances with a higher degree of
privacy, such as while wearing and changing out of bathing suits at a trusted
family member’s backyard.

there
are mitigating features to be considered as well:
•
at the time of the offences, to had no criminal record. he has a
criminal record for breaching a release order, but that offence post-dates
those before me, and he is to be sentenced as a first-time offender on these
offences.
•
to entered pleas of guilt to these offences. in
doing so, he preserved prosecutorial and court resources, and avoided the need
for his victims and family members to testify about highly traumatic experiences.
in giving up his right to a trial, he relieved the crown from its need to prove
the case beyond a reasonable doubt.
•
to is remorseful, demonstrates some insight into the issues that
brought him before the court, and has of his own accord taken the first steps
towards addressing those issues. his path of rehabilitation is far from
complete, but it is mitigating that he has retained a psychotherapist and
actively commenced treatment.
6.3 the
impact on to’s family

a factor which does not fit neatly into the aggravating
or mitigating categories, but nonetheless bears recognizing, is the devastating
impact that to’s conduct has had on his family. his ex-
spouse finds herself struggling to financially support herself and
their two young children, who themselves struggle with the loss of any
relationship with their father, without—given their age—the maturity and
ability to fully process the reason why. these are not challenges that this
sentencing process can hope to resolve, but they are realities which
demonstrate another avenue of harm perpetrated by to’s actions, and collateral
consequences that to himself will need to live with.
6.4 determining
the appropriate sentence

when i consider the unique array of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances and the appellate guidance with respect to voyeurism and sexual
offences against children, i conclude that a sentence to be served in the
community as a cso would not be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing.

the more significantly denunciatory effect of a carceral jail
sentence is needed to convey the serious gravity of the offence, and to deter other
potential offenders. as in
downes, the broad harms caused by to’s
gross violations are illustrated by the victim statements in this matter. there
is a high degree of moral culpability associated with this conduct. i am particularly concerned that a cso would fail to balance the
significant aggravating factors present in this case, including the breach of
trust, the inclusion of child sexual exploitation, the high number of images
and victims, and the long duration of the offences.

a custodial sentence cumulatively in the upper-reformatory range is
appropriate. while denunciation and deterrence must be given primary
consideration, i must have regard to the mitigating features of the case, and
to the principle of restraint.

the custodial sentences shall be as follows:
•
the lead count will be the voyeurism count which
groups together the unidentified child and adult victims. on that count, to
will receive credit for his presentence custody of 36 days, and credited on a
1.5:1 basis as 54 days. on this count he will be sentenced to an additional eight
months’ custody.
•
on the voyeurism count relating to 11-year-old
cv3, the sentence will be four months’ custody consecutive.
•
on the voyeurism count relating to 10-year-old
cv4, the sentence will be a further four months’ custody, consecutive to both
other sentences.
•
on the voyeurism count relating to av2, the
sentence will be three months’ custody concurrent.
•
on the theft count, the sentence shall also be
three months’ concurrent. while it is unusual for a first-time offender to
receive a custodial sentence for a theft, to’s sexual incorporation of the stolen
garments is a significant aggravating factor.

these sentences are crafted to account for
s. 718.3(7)
(b) of the
criminal
code
and the principle of totality.

taking into account the presentence custody, this amounts to an
effective cumulative sentence of almost 18 months. going forward from today, it
means a further 16 months’ custody. i recommend that to serve this period of
custody at either ontario correctional institute or the st. lawrence valley
secure treatment unit.
vii.
ancillary orders
7.1 should
a
soira
order be imposed?

voyeurism is a secondary offence under
s. 490.011
of the
criminal
code. i can only make a
soira
order if crown has established, beyond
a reasonable doubt, that to committed the offence of voyeurism with the intent
to commit a primary offence:
criminal code
s. 490.012(5). the primary
offences that the crown submits are engaged here are making, possession, and
accessing child pornography, as set out in
s. 163.1
of the
criminal code.

one of the voyeurism counts identifies the offence in relation to
av2, who is not a child. on the balance of the voyeurism counts, the crown has
met their onus. many of the images to captured and retained depict persons
under the age of 18 and have as their dominant characteristic the depiction of
the subject’s sexual organ or anal region. that the depictions are for a sexual
purpose is abundantly clear on the agreed facts.

this is not a case where, considering the factors and exceptions set
out in
s. 490.012(3)
and
(4)
of the
criminal code, to can demonstrate
there would be no connection between making a
soira
order and the
purpose of helping police prevent or investigate sexual crimes. nor is it a
case where to can establish that the impact of a
soira
order on his
privacy or liberty interests would be grossly disproportionate to the public
interest in protecting society. in light of the aggravating factors which i
have previously identified in considering the appropriate sentence, the
assistive investigatory function of a
soira
order in this case is
obvious. given the high number of victims and the variety of public and private
spaces in which to offended, the impact of an order on to’s privacy and liberty
would be entirely proportionate. a
soira
order will issue, effective
today, for the duration of ten years.
7.2 further orders

during his period of incarceration, to will be prohibited pursuant
to
s. 743.21
of the
criminal code
from communicating, directly or
indirectly with his named victims, his ex-spouse, jo, as well as any person
under the age of 16, except,
•
with respect to his own children, pursuant to a
valid family court order made after today’s date, and this decision having been
made available to that court for consideration, and
•
with respect to his spouse, through legal
counsel.

when released from custody to will be placed on probation for a
period of three years. in addition to the statutory terms, the following
conditions will apply:
•
he is to report to his probation officer within
48 hours and thereafter as directed.
•
he is to attend, participate and complete any
counseling that is directed by his probation officer, including but not limited
to sexual boundaries, and is to sign any consents or releases to allow his
probation officer to monitor any such counseling.
•
he is not to have any contact or communication,
directly or indirectly with his named victims, his ex-spouse or any person
under the age of 16 except,
o
with respect to his own children, pursuant to a valid family court
order made after today’s date, and this decision having been made available to
that court for consideration; and
o
with respect to his ex-spouse, jo, through legal counsel, or with
her written revocable consent filed with the probation officer.
•
he is not to be within 100 metres of his named
victims, their residence, place of employment, or place of education.
•
he is not to attend any public park, swimming
area, daycare centre, schoolground, playground, community centre, or education
centre, including science north, where persons under the age of 16 are present
or can reasonably be expected to be present.
•
he is not to seek, obtain, or continue any
employment or volunteering that involves being in a position of trust or
authority towards persons under the age of 16.

in crafting exceptions for potential communication between to and
his children, i am not endorsing such communication. i am, rather, recognizing
the complexity of the circumstances and the need for a court of competent
jurisdiction to be positioned to respond appropriately over the lifespan of
these orders.

the electronic devices on which the photographs were captured or
stored shall be forfeit to the crown as offence-related property.

to is ordered to provide a sample of his dna to the gsps on the
voyeurism counts, which are secondary designated offences pursuant to
s. 487.04
of the
criminal code.

as to will be unable to earn income while incarcerated, and is
likely to have continuing family support obligations, i will waive the victim
fine surcharge in relation to these offences.
released: january 22, 2025
signed:
justice g. jenner