source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj62/2025oncj62.html

ontario
court of justice
citation:
r. v. hinds, 2025 oncj 62
date: 
2025 01 14
court
file no.: 22 50004400, 22 50004337 and 24 23106498
10
armoury st., ocj-toronto
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
travis hinds
before
justice joseph callaghan
guilty
pleas entered on april 9, 2024, and september 26, 2024
sentencing
submissions heard on december 3, 2024
reasons
for sentence released on january 14, 2025
e. evans / i. islow......................................................................... counsel
for the crown
k. vakili................................................................................................ counsel
for t. hinds
j. callaghan
j.:

on april 9, 2024, after hearing several days of
evidence during the scheduled preliminary inquiry in this matter, travis hinds pleaded
guilty to five counts of armed robbery and one count of possessing a loaded restricted
firearm.

sentencing was adjourned multiple times for mr.
hinds to waive in additional charges from london, ontario for resolution. in
addition, mr. vakili, counsel for mr. hinds, expressed his intention to seek an
enhanced pre-sentence report, otherwise known as a
morris
report.

on september 26, 2024, mr. hinds pleaded guilty
to the london charges: one additional count of armed robbery, one count of aggravated
assault and one count of discharge firearm with intent to endanger life. subsequently,
this additional armed robbery count was amended to attempt armed robbery. sentencing
was adjourned for the preparation of an enhanced pre-sentence report. ultimately,
mr. vakili advised that, given the lengthy delay for the preparation of such a
report, he chose not to seek a
morris
report and relied on the psr filed
as exhibit 2.

on december 3, 2024, i heard submissions on
sentence and the following exhibits were filed:
1.
usb containing video clips of the robberies, including
the london attempt robbery
2.
pre-sentence report (psr) prepared by radika
koneswaran dated september 26, 2024
3.
statistics canada fact sheet dated january 30, 2024
4.
letter from employer zhi li dated september 25,
2024
5.
article: “does imprisonment deter: a review of
the evidence”
6.
article: “effect of imprisonment on criminal
behaviour”
7.
letter from chrisann hinds (sister of mr. hinds)
dated december 2, 2024
facts and circumstances of the
offences

i will go through the facts and circumstances of
mr. hinds’ offences in a chronological order.
toronto region: armed robbery of
yat lee jewellery (kwok chow)

on july 12, 2022, at approximately 5:53 pm, mr. hinds
participated in the planned armed robbery of the yat lee
jewellery store, located in the busy agincourt mall.

mr. hinds and two others, while wearing gloves and masks, with
their heads covered, arrived with the necessary tools to commit an armed
robbery. they entered the jewellery store wielding hammers with which to smash
the glass display cabinets and bags with which to take the stolen watches and
jewelry. no firearm was used in this robbery.

two employees were working in the store at the time of the
robbery and one customer was present.

mr. hinds and his two accomplices smashed numerous glass cases
and managed to grab a quantity of jewelry and watches and then ran back through
the mall and parking lot to a parked stolen infiniti g35 and drove away.
toronto region: armed robbery of daniel
watches & jewellery co. ltd. (choi-sun lam)

one day later (july 13, 2022), at approximately 5:33 pm, mr.
hinds and two other men participated in the planned armed robbery of daniel watches & jewellery company, located in the community
hub of the albion mall.

mr. hinds and his accomplices, while wearing gloves and masks,
with their heads covered, arrived with the necessary tools to commit an armed
robbery. they entered the jewellery store wielding hammers with which to smash
the glass display cabinets and bags with which to take the stolen goods.

during this robbery, mr. hinds brandished a handgun. two
employees were working in the store at the time of the robbery and one customer
was present.

mr. hinds and his two accomplices smashed numerous glass cases
and managed to grab a quantity of jewelry and cash and then ran back through
the mall and parking lot to a parked stolen infiniti g35 and drove away.

members of the public can be seen on
surveillance video running and hiding for safety.
toronto region: armed robbery of
bellagio jewellers (rajesh chugh)

one week later, on july 20, 2022, at approximately 8:10 pm, mr.
hinds and three other men participated in the planned armed robbery of bellagio jewellers, located in the busy oshawa centre.

mr. hinds and his accomplices, while wearing gloves and masks,
with their heads covered, arrived with the necessary tools to commit an armed
robbery. they entered the jewellery store wielding hammers with which to smash
the glass display cabinets and bags with which to take the stolen goods.

three employees were working in the store at the time of the
robbery. a customer was also present. mr. hinds brandished a handgun and
pointed it one of the victims with whom he proceeded to the back area of the
store.

mr. hinds and his two accomplices smashed numerous glass cases
and managed to grab a quantity of jewelry and mr. chugh’s wallet containing
$2,000 in cash and then ran back through the mall and parking lot to a parked
stolen infiniti g35 and drove away.

members of the public can be seen on
surveillance video running for safety.
london: attempt armed robbery of riham kamel,
aggravated assault and discharge firearm with intent

one week later, on july 27, 2022, mr. hinds and
his accomplices were in an acura vehicle that had been stolen in pickering the
night before. from their position in the parking lot, they observed the victim
riham kamel exit his store, rk forever jewellers and get into his red porsche
vehicle in the parking lot.

as he did so, the four males exited the acura and approached mr.
kamel in his porsche. one of the males, mr. hinds, had a loaded handgun in his
right hand. mr. hinds grabbed the door handle with his left hand and pointed
the handgun at mr. kamel and demanded that he open the door. while this
occurred, the other three males surrounded the porsche and the driver of the get-away
vehicle pulled in front of the porsche, in an attempt to block mr. kamel from
driving.

mr. kamel put the porsche in gear and pulled forward, and as he
did so, mr. hinds intentionally fired the handgun. the bullet struck mr. kamel
below his left arm and ended up behind one of his lungs, missing his heart by a
narrow margin. mr. kamel was able to drive around the acura and mr. hinds and
his accomplices, who then re-entered the acura and fled the area.

mr. kamel had to undergo surgery to have the bullet removed.
toronto region: armed robbery of white
carat jewellery store (sachin gehlot)

two weeks later, on august 10, 2022, at approximately 4:48 pm,
mr. hinds and two other men participated in the planned armed robbery of white carat jewellery store, located in the busy erin mills
town centre.

mr. hinds and his accomplices, while wearing gloves and masks,
with their heads covered, arrived with the necessary tools to commit an armed
robbery. they entered the jewellery store wielding hammers with which to smash
the glass display cabinets and bags with which to take the stolen goods.

four employees were working in the store at the time of the
robbery. mr. hinds brandished a handgun and pointed it at the victims, making
orders of them. he pushed nishan sahib singh, the uniform security guard, and
forced him at gunpoint to kneel on the ground.

mr. hinds and his accomplices smashed numerous glass cases and
managed to grab a quantity of jewelry and cash, then ran back through the mall
and parking lot to a parked honda civic and drove away.

members of the public can be seen on
surveillance video running for safety.
toronto region: armed robbery of
kdm jewellery (debra burkus)

on september 14, 2022, at approximately 4:48 pm, mr. hinds and three
other men participated in the planned armed robbery of kdm
jewellery store, located in the busy sherway gardens shopping mall.

mr. hinds and his accomplices, while wearing gloves and masks,
with their heads covered, arrived with the necessary tools to commit an armed
robbery. they entered the jewellery store wielding hammers with which to smash
the glass display cabinets and bags with which to take the stolen goods.

ms. burkus was working alone at the time of the robbery. mr.
hinds made demands of ms. burkus while brandishing a handgun. one of his
accomplices pointed a second handgun at her, holding it close to her body and
head.

mr. hinds and his two accomplices smashed numerous glass cases
and managed to grab a quantity of jewelry and then ran back through the mall
and parking lot to a parked stolen acura suv and drove away.

members of the public can be seen on
surveillance video running for safety.
toronto region: possession of loaded
restricted firearm

on monday, october 3, 2022, mr. hinds and two male accomplices
attended at the shops on yonge street in markham. they wore masks, gloves and wore
their hoods pulled tight over their heads.

mr. hinds and his accomplices came prepared to commit another
robbery. they brought with them the necessary tools with which to conduct
another robbery, including hammers with which to smash the glass cases and bags
to carry the stolen jewellery.

the victim, mr. ghasamboland was working
inside the bolandian jewellery store when he saw mr. hinds and his accomplices
arrive inside the mall wearing their disguises. he was aware that a robbery had
occurred at another jewellery store in the same mall just two weeks prior, so
he was on high alert.

as mr. hinds and his accomplices approached his store, mr.
ghasamboland began yelling “call the cops, call the cops”. as this occurred,
mr. hinds and his accomplices quickly turned around and exited the mall and
entered a lexus suv that was waiting for them at the mall entrance.

at about 4 pm on the same date, mr. hinds and his accomplices were
arrested by the toronto police in a high-risk take down. at this time, mr. hinds
was seated in the rear middle seat and had in his possession, beneath his feet
and easily accessible to him, a ruger 57 calibre semi-automatic handgun which
was loaded with 16 rounds of ammunition.
impact on the victims

the harmful consequences of
using a restricted or prohibited firearm in a robbery are readily understood.
there is the risk of death or life-altering physical injury for victims and
bystanders if the weapon is discharged. this risk became reality when mr.
hinds shot mr. kamel when attempting to rob him.
riham kamel

given the terrifying circumstances of the attack
on him, i appreciate why mr. kamel has chosen not to provide a victim impact
statement (vis).

despite mr. kamel not providing a vis, i can
easily conclude that being robbed at gunpoint while trapped in the driver’s
seat of his car would have been extremely traumatic.

then, while attempting to flee for his life,
having that gun fired at him, just missing his heart, would have been
emotionally and psychologically devastating. this is in addition to the severe
physical consequences of being shot by mr. hinds.

the bullet ended up behind one of his lungs, missing his heart by
a narrow margin. mr. kamel had to have surgery to remove the bullet.

unfortunately, i have not been provided with an update to mr.
kamel’s health.
jewellery store salespeople

having the store invaded by masked men wielding
hammers would have been a terrifying event. for five of the robberies, the
victims faced the added danger of being confronted by at least one gun-wielding
invader. while none of the victims have chosen to file a victim impact
statement, it is expected that the brazen, daylight armed robberies in which
mr. hinds participated would have had a significant emotional and psychological
impact on the employees who were working and on the customers who were present
at the time of the robberies.
even if the
weapon was not fired – as was the case with five of the robbery offences -
exposure to this threat carries the risk of profound psychological harm. [
see
r. v. hilbach,
2023 scc 3
at para.
54]

all of these robberies took place in busy malls,
at times when many people were present. as the surveillance videos demonstrate,
numerous other mall patrons, who can be seen running and hiding, were impacted
by the actions of mr. hinds and his accomplices.
positions of the parties

ms. islow, on behalf of the crown is seeking a 6-year
global jail sentence for the five toronto robberies and the s. 95 offence. in
addition, she seeks an 8-year concurrent jail sentence for the london offences,
which resulted in mr. kamel being shot by mr. hinds. the crown also seeks a dna
order, a s. 109 order for life and a forfeiture order in relation to the seized
handgun and ammunition.

while fairly recognizing the mitigating factors
in this case, ms. islow argued that given the number of serious offences
committed by mr. hinds, with highly aggravating facts, a global sentence of
less than eight years would fail to adequately reflect the primary sentencing
objectives of denunciation and deterrence.

mr. vikili, on behalf of mr. hinds, has argued
that a global sentence of 6 years is appropriate. he takes no issue with the
ancillary orders sought by the crown.

while reasonably acknowledging the highly
aggravating facts of mr. hinds’ offences, mr. vikili highlighted the mitigating
factors including mr. hinds’ guilty pleas and the fact that he is a very young
man without a prior criminal record.
background of travis hinds

travis hinds is a 24-year-old young man with no prior
criminal record.

he was born in jamaica and was adopted on
the day of his birth by his mother karen adelson and her then partner. when mr.
hinds was 2 years old, ms. adelson and mr. hinds’ adoptive father separated.

ms. adelson works as an assistant manager at a hotel in quebec,
where she lives. mr. hinds’ adoptive father lives in the united states where he
owns a trucking company.

the family moved to quebec from jamaica in 2018. mr. hinds lived
with his mother and sister until he was 18, when he moved in with his
grandmother. at age 21, mr. hinds moved out to live on his own in toronto. it
was after this move when mr. hinds’ criminal behaviour began.

mr. hinds became engaged with a crowd who committed crimes to
support a lifestyle he could not afford. this desire for quick financial gain led
mr. hinds to commit the offences to which he has pleaded guilty.

mr. hinds did not complete his high school education due to the
language barrier when he arrived in quebec from jamaica and the challenges of
online schooling during the covid pandemic. in addition, mr. hinds’ adhd diagnosis
was insufficiently supported.

in high school, mr. hinds was stabbed in the leg when he
confronted someone who had taken his wallet.

mr. hinds’ first paid employment began at age 14 working for a
mechanic, and then for two years, he worked with horses and as an animal
caretaker. mr. hinds is currently employed at the same hotel that employs his
mother. he works as a cleaner and his employer described him as “a reliable,
hard worker” who gets along with his co-workers.

mr. hinds has expressed a desire to complete his high school
education.

in
speaking with the author of the pre-sentence report, mr. hinds was described as
cooperative, respectful, and engaged.

mr. hinds maintains a good and supportive relationship with his
mother and sister as well as his intimate partner, ms. baskaraca. indeed, they
are all present in court today, along with other supporters of mr. hinds.

mr.
hinds was described as empathetic by his mother, who pointed to his work with
animals in jamaica. unfortunately, this empathy was completely missing when he
committed the offences before me.

while
the psr suggests that mr. hinds has started to develop some insight into his
offending behaviour, it is clear to me he has a long way to go before he
understands the seriousness of his criminal behaviour and the real the harm he
has caused. i have serious concerns about his mr. hind’s decision-making, which
led to him to possess and ultimately use a firearm.

when asked by ms. koneswaran why he had a firearm, he responded,
“it’s a good question. i don’t know, maybe to feel more secure.” of course, one
obvious explanation for obtaining and possessing a firearm was for mr. hinds to
have a tool of intimidation that he used when committing the robberies.

i also wish to make it
clear to mr. hinds that his decision to illegally arm himself, even if it was partly
for his own protection, is not mitigating. indeed, condoning in any way the
illegal possession of handguns for one’s protection would invite the creation
of the wild west, where members of the public would feel justified in arming
themselves and seeking their own version of justice, refusing to engage with
law enforcement, and resulting in the break down of the rule of law. such an
approach would undermine public safety and exacerbate the existing problem with
the possession and use of illegal firearms in this city.
principles of sentencing

the fundamental purpose of any criminal sentence is to protect
society, contribute to respect for the law and help maintain a just, peaceful,
and safe society. [see s.
718
of the
criminal
code
]

sentencing judges attempt to achieve this goal by imposing just
sanctions that address one or more of the sentencing objectives enumerated in
s.
718(a) – (f)
of the
criminal
code, including denunciation, general and specific deterrence,
rehabilitation and promoting a sense of responsibility in offenders and an
acknowledgment of the harm they have caused.
denunciation and deterrence

denunciation and deterrence are the paramount objectives in this
case. the gravity of firearm offences will almost always require a severe
sentence even for youthful offenders coming before the court without a prior
record. [see
r. v. mansingh,
2017 onca 68
at para.
24]

in
r. v. thavakularatnam,
2018 onsc 2380 (canlii), o.j. no. 2038, at para.
21, justice akhtar described gun crime as a cancer:
gun crime has become a cancer
in toronto. despite several years of case law condemning the offence, the
possession of firearms remains a blight on the city and its residents. guns are
made and used to maim, threaten, and kill. …courts have sought to send an
unambiguous message to those involved in gun crime that convictions will
inevitably bear severe consequences.

the
rate of police-reported violent crime involving a firearm increased in 2022 by
8.9%. the
2022
rate of firearm-related violent crime is
at its
highest level since comparable data was first compiled in
2009. [see exhibit 2]

the
increase
in
firearm-related
violent
crime
in
ontario
was
largely
driven
by
an
increase
in
the
number
of
these
crimes
in
toronto.
although
almost
all
census
metropolitan
areas
(cmas)
in
ontario
saw
an
increase
in firearm-related violent crime, the increase in the number of these
crimes was especially high in toronto. after three consecutive
yearly
declines,
police
services
covering
the
toronto
cma
reported
2,576
firearm-related
violent
crimes,
725
more
than
in
2021.
[see exhibit 2]

while the fact that a particular offence occurs frequently
in a particular community is not in itself an aggravating factor, a sentencing
judge may consider the prevalence of the offence at issue in balancing the
various sentencing objectives, including the need to denounce the unlawful
conduct in question in that
city and at the same time to deter anyone
else from doing the same thing. [see
r. v. lacasse,
2015
scc 64
at paras.
90 and 102]

given
the need to deter and denounce the offence of robbery, parliament has set the
maximum sentence for robbery as life imprisonment.

the
court of
appeal confirmed that the range for serious gun crimes of this nature – specifically
the attempt robbery and shooting of mr. kamel - is between seven and eleven
years. [
see
r. v. bellisimo,
2009 onca 49
at para.
3]
a similar range of
sentence is commonly handed down in robberies involving the use of firearms,
even when no physical injuries are inflicted. [
see
r.
v. asif,
2020 onsc 1403
(stribopoulos j.) at paras.
42-45]

while
sentencing ranges can assist judges in their application of all relevant
principles and objectives, it is important to note that such ranges are
guidelines and not fixed rules. as the supreme court explained in
lacasse,
at para.
51, there will be circumstances where a departure from the range, either
above or below, is entirely appropriate.

it is worth noting that none of the cases provided by counsel dealt
with an accused with a similar number of offences and a similar level of
overall seriousness to that of mr. hinds.
rehabilitation and restraint

the focus on denunciation and deterrence does not mean that
rehabilitation can be ignored, nor does it mean that proportionality in
sentencing is no longer an applicable principle. sentencing is a highly
individualized process and particular circumstances relating to
blameworthiness, prospects for rehabilitation and the like must always be taken
into account. [see
lacasse
at para
58]

the fundamental principle of sentencing is to impose a sanction
that is proportionate to the gravity of the offences committed, and the degree
of responsibility of the person who committed it. (see s.
718.1
of the
criminal
code
)

sections 718.2
(d) and (e) of the
criminal code
require me to consider
the principle of restraint when sentencing mr. hinds. this
is particularly true given that mr. hinds is a young, first-time offender.

while
the objectives of denunciation and deterrence must be given adequate weight,
they should rarely be the sole determinants of the length of a first
penitentiary sentence. [see
r. v. francis,
2022 onca 729
at para.
80
and
r. v. shaheen,
2022 onca 734
at para.
14]

mr. hinds is a 24-year-old bi-racial black male.
as he explained to the author of the psr, mr. hinds has encountered
discrimination in various settings, particularly during his time in school
where he has been discriminated for his bi-racial background. the court of appeal in
r. v. morris
2021 onca 680
interpreted
section 718.2
(e) through the context of black offenders and the systemic
discrimination that they face:
although we would not equate black offenders with indigenous
offenders, for the purposes of s. 718.2(e), the
gladue
/
ipeelee
jurisprudence
can inform the sentencing of black offenders in several respects: see borde, at
para. 30. just as with the discrimination suffered by indigenous offenders,
courts should take judicial notice of the existence of anti-black racism in
canada and its potential impact on individual offenders… similarly, in
considering the restraint principle, courts should bear in mind
well-established over-incarceration of black offenders, particularly young male
offenders. [
see
morris
at par.
123]
aggravating and mitigating factors

in determining an appropriate sentence, it is necessary to
consider any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances. [see s.
718.2(a)
of the
criminal
code
]
aggravating factors

the facts and circumstances of mr. hinds’
offences are particularly aggravating:
(1)
the impact on mr. kamel, who could have easily
been killed, and on the other robbery victims, is extremely aggravating. the
fear and trauma experienced by the many affected jewellery store clerks is very
apparent on the surveillance videos filed in exhibit 1.
(2)
the illegal possession of handguns is an
extremely grave offence. mr. hinds was armed with a handgun for 5 of the
6 robberies.
(3)
mr. hinds participated in six planned robberies.
mr. hinds and his accomplices organized to ensure they had the necessary tools
to commit the robberies, including hammers, bags, and get-away vehicles.
(4)
mr. hinds’ offences were group attacks.
(5)
mr. hinds and his accomplices disguised themselves.
(6)
mr. hind’s offences took place in busy, public
locations, putting at risk numerous people.
(7)
mr. hinds and his accomplices targeted jewellery
stores. members of society including both shoppers and retail employees should feel
safe in our malls and stores. it is aggravating that the victims of mr. hinds’
actions are employees of jewellery stores who face enhanced vulnerability
due to the high value of the goods they sell and the resulting higher risk of
being robbed. this is similar to the higher vulnerability bank tellers and convenience
store clerks experience. [see
r. v. hanna,
2024 onca 911
at para.
6
and
r.
v. lewis,
2009 onca 792
at para.
3]
(8)
it is highly aggravating that mr. hinds
continued to participate in violent armed robberies, and repeatedly possessed a
loaded handgun, even after the horrific result in the attempted robbery of mr.
kamel.
mitigating factors

there are several mitigating factors:
(1)
mr. hinds is a youthful first offender.
(2)
while his guilty pleas cannot be characterized as
early, with the pleas taking place after several days of evidence at the
preliminary inquiry, mr. hinds did plead guilty before any victim was required
to testify.
(3)
mr. hinds’ guilty pleas are a demonstration of the
remorse he has expressed to me and to some degree, the author of the
pre-sentence report.
(4)
i appreciate the challenges mr. hinds has faced
in his life, as outlined in the pre-sentence report, and as addressed earlier
in these reasons.
(5)
i take into account the family support mr. hinds
has in the community.
(6)
i am mindful of the good qualities he possesses,
including his willingness to work. it is clear that mr. hinds has done well
while on bail, which provides some hope for mr. hinds’ rehabilitation.
(7)
mr. hind’s guilty pleas have also saved the
court time that would have been required for the crown to prove the cases­ at
trial.
(8)
i consider the 10 actual days he has already
served. on a 1.5:1 basis, i give mr. hinds credit for 15 days of psc.
(9)
i also take into account the length of time mr.
hinds has spent on a strict bail.
appropriate sentence

handguns are an all too prevalent menace in the
greater toronto area. first and foremost, the sentences imposed for firearm
offences must further the sentencing goals of denunciation, deterrence, and
protection of the public. [see
r. v. brown,
2010 onca 745
at par.
14.]

while i appreciate the limits of deterrence, as
discussed in the articles provided by mr. vikili, the violent crimes committed
by mr. hinds call out for a lengthy denunciatory sentence. in my view, the
sentence must communicate to the community and to mr. hinds and others who
choose to commit similar violent, armed robberies, that they will face severe
consequences.

a
jail sentence of 6 years for the many violent offences committed by mr. hinds
in this case – even for a young, first offender – would not adequately reflect society’s
abhorrence of mr. hinds’ violent conduct. it would also fail to properly
reflect the proportionality principle.

but for the mitigating factors in this case – particularly
mr. hinds’ guilty pleas, youthfulness, and his lack of a criminal record – a
sentence approaching 10 years would be appropriate.

however, having considered the
submissions of counsel and the cases presented, and applying
the relevant sentencing principles, including restraint and totality, i find
that a global sentence of 8 years on top of mr. hinds’ pre-sentence custody is
necessary and appropriate.
sentence imposed

mr.
hinds, please stand.

after
noting the 10 days or the equivalent of 15 days of psc, i sentence you to an
additional 8 years in the penitentiary. the breakdown of the sentences is as
follows:
(1)
for the three london offences, i sentence you to 8 years on each count,
concurrent to each other;
(2)
for the five toronto region robberies, i sentence you to 6 years,
concurrent on each count and to the sentences for the london offences; and
(3)
for the s. 95 offence, i sentence you to 4 years concurrent to all other
sentences.
ancillary orders
in addition, i will make the following ancillary orders:
s. 109 weapons prohibition
order

pursuant
to s. 109 of the ccc,
i am prohibiting you from
possessing any firearm, crossbow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon,
prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and explosive substance
for life.
dna order

all
of the offences, other than the s. 95 offence, are primary designated offences
for which i must make the order. the section 95 offence is a secondary
designated offence.

both
parties are jointly recommending that i make a dna order. i am satisfied that
it is in the best interests of the administration of justice to allow the
application. i therefore order that you provide samples of bodily substances
reasonably required for the purpose of forensic dna analysis to be used in
accordance with the dna identification act.
forfeiture order

pursuant to
s. 491(1)
(a) of the
criminal code, the firearm
and ammunition, seized by the police, shall be forfeited to his majesty, and
shall be disposed of as the attorney general directs.
no contact order while in custody

pursuant
to s. 743.21 of the ccc, i am ordering that mr. hinds have no contact or
communication either directly or indirectly, by any physical, electronic, or
other means with the following people:
1.
riham kamel
2.
kwok chow
3.
choi-sun lam
4.
rajesh chugh
5.
nishan sahib singh
6.
sachin gehlot
7.
debra burkus
8.
taghi ghasamboland
victim fine surcharge

given
the sentence i am imposing, i am waiving the victim fine surcharge.

mr.
hinds, you are still a young man with a long life ahead of you beyond this
sentence. you have a partner and a family in the community to support you when
you are released. i hope you take advantage of the programs made available to
you while serving your sentence. i wish you well.
released: january 14, 2025
signed:
justice joseph callaghan