source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj151/2025oncj151.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v.
weston, 2025 oncj 151
date: 2025 03 18
court file no.: central
west – brampton 998 23-31102307
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
megan weston
before justice a. neil
singh
heard on october 21-22,
2024 & november 13, 2024
reasons for judgment
released on december 6, 2024
excerpt of ruling revised
and released march 18, 2025
rachael ward & nicholas cooper...................................................... counsel
for the ppsc
miranda brar & kim schofield........................... 
counsel for the accused megan weston
excerpt of ruling
re: the meaning of
“export” under the cannabis act
singh j.:
introduction

ms.
weston was charged with possession of cannabis for the purpose of exporting it
contrary to s.11(2) of the
cannabis act.
a large quantity of cannabis
was located in luggage that she had checked into a flight destined for heathrow
airport on january 20, 2023. the case against ms. weston was a circumstantial
one. on december 6, 2024, i found ms. weston not guilty. i found that a
reasonable inference inconsistent with her guilt was available on the
evidentiary record, namely as it surrounded her knowledge of the contraband
that was found in the checked luggage.

during
closing submissions, counsel made arguments in relation to the meaning of the
term “export” or “exporting” under the
cannabis act.
this excerpt of my
reasons for judgment addresses this issue. it explains my ruling on the meaning
of “export” or “exporting” in the
cannabis act.
position of the parties

counsel
on behalf of ms. weston submitted that the meaning of “exporting” under the
cannabis
act
required evidence that the contraband had some commercial value to it. given
there was no evidence before the court regarding the value of the cannabis at
the destination country, any possession of cannabis could not be said to be for
the purpose of exporting it under the
cannabis act.

the
prosecution service countered that the meaning of “export” under the
cannabis
act
only required an intention to take the cannabis outside of canada. the
value of the cannabis was extraneous to the analysis. if the court found that
ms. weston possessed the cannabis with the intention of transporting it outside
of canada’s border, she would be guilty of the offence as charged.
the
meaning of export under the cannabis act

the
term “export” is not defined in the
cannabis act. it is also not defined
in the
controlled drugs and substances act, an act with a similar
purpose regarding the criminalization of activities surrounding the possession
of controlled substances. the term is defined in the
customs act, albeit
somewhat confusingly to mean “export from canada.

”
the meaning of export under the
customs act
has been interpreted to mean
the act of sending or carrying goods from one country to another.

since
the term is not defined in the
cannabis act, the term should be read in
accordance with the principles of statutory interpretation. that is in their
ordinary and grammatical sense, and harmoniously within the scheme and purpose
of the legislation.
it is also a principle of statutory interpretation that where the liberty of an
accused is affected and there are two reasonable statutory interpretations
available, the interpretation favouring the accused should be adopted.


helpfully,
parliament included a section in the
cannabis act
that outlined the
purpose of the act. section 7 of the
cannabis act
states that the
purpose of the act is to protect public health and public safety, and in
particular to:
(a)
protect the health of
young persons by restricting their access to cannabis;
(b)
protect young persons and
others from inducements to use cannabis;
(c)
provide for the licit production
of cannabis to reduce illicit activities in relation to cannabis;
(d)
deter illicit activities
in relation to cannabis through appropriate sanctions and enforcement measures;
(e)
reduce the burden on the
criminal justice system in relation to cannabis;
(f)
provide access to a
quality-controlled supply of cannabis; and
(g)
enhance public awareness
of the health risks associated with cannabis use.

importantly, s.62(2) of the
cannabis act
places a limit
on the purpose for which cannabis may be imported or exported from canada. the
act holds that licences and permits authorizing the importation or exportation
of cannabis may be issued only in respect of cannabis for medical or scientific
purposes or in respect of industrial hemp.

in relation to industrial hemp, s.3(1) of the
industrial hemp
regulations
authorizes the holder of a licence to conduct any of the
following activities that are authorized by the licence: (a) to sell industrial
hemp; (b) t
o import or export seed or grain; (
c)
to cultivate industrial hemp;
(d)
in
the case of a plant breeder, to propagate industrial hemp;
(e)
to possess seed or grain for the purposes of cleaning it;
(f)
to possess grain for the purpose of processing it; or
(g)
to obtain seed by preparing it.

as it relates to cannabis, the regulations under the act provide
guidance with respect to the activities that are relevant regarding cannabis
exportation. the
cannabis regulations
under the
cannabis act
authorizes
a holder of an export permit to export cannabis for scientific or medical
purposes if they hold an export permit for each shipment of cannabis that is
exported. the regulations also permit other ancillary activities under s.213(2)
of the regulations. it authorizes the holder of an export permit to possess,
transfer, send, deliver, or sell the shipment of cannabis to the extent
necessary to export the cannabis.

black’s
law dictionary defines export as (1) to send or carry abroad; (2) to send, take
or carry (a good or commodity) out of the country; to transport (merchandise)
from one country to another in the course of trade; and (3) to carry out or
convey (goods) by sea.

beyond
that, black’s law dictionary defines the term “exportation” as the act of
sending goods and merchandise from one country to another.


further,
it is helpful to look to the meaning of the term “importing” in the context of
the
controlled drugs and substances act, an act that has a similar
purpose to the
cannabis act
as it relates to the deterring of illicit
activities in relation to the substances it relates to.
the supreme court of
canada in
r. v. bell

held that to import means to “simply bring into the country or to cause to
be brought into the country.” this is very helpful language to consider since “importing”
and “exporting” are antonyms.

it is
clear to me that when examining the ordinary meaning of the term, and
interpreting it harmoniously with the act, that to “export” within the meaning
of the
cannabis act
means to send cannabis (or industrial hemp) from
canada to another country. it does not require an additional commercial (or
other) purpose beyond that.

the act
establishes that exporting cannabis may only be done for medical or scientific
purposes or as it relates to industrial hemp. the licences permit the sale of
the cannabis (or hemp), but also permits a broader spectrum of activities
beyond that. as it relates to cannabis specifically, possessing, transferring,
sending, and delivering the cannabis to the extent necessary to export it is
permitted beyond selling the cannabis. the act and its regulations therefore
capture a much wider spectrum of activities than commercial ones. it stands to
reason that parliament did not ascribe any substantive importance to the value
of the cannabis being exported either in canada or the destination country.

for
the crown to prove that any possession is for the purpose of exporting under
s.11(2) of the
cannabis act, they must lead evidence that establishes
beyond a reasonable doubt that one of the intended purposes of the possession
is to cause the cannabis to leave canada. other purposes for which the cannabis
may be possessed are immaterial to the liability analysis. in other words, the
cannabis could also be possessed for any number of ancillary purposes such as
for personal use (licit or illicit), sale or distribution (licit or illicit),
medical or scientific reasons, or other purposes. they would all be criminal
within the meaning of the act.

the
construct of the act and its regulations do not leave open multiple
interpretations. it was clearly meant to be broad and covers a wide range of
activities. “exporting” within the confines of the
cannabis act
is meant
to cover any movement of cannabis (or industrial hemp) out of canada’s
jurisdiction.
revised
and released: march 18, 2025
signed: justice a. neil
singh

r.s.c., 1985, c. 1 (2nd supp.),
s.2(1)

r v. mainil v. canada (minister of national revenue – m.n.r.),
2006
fc 1062
at paras
26-27.

rizzo & rizzo shoes ltd. (re),
1998 canlii 837 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 27 at
para
21

r. v. mcintosh,
1995 canlii 124 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 686 at paragraph
29.

s.c. 2018, c. 16

ibid.

sor/2018-145

sor/2018-144

6th ed., st. paul, minn: west publishing co. 1990.

ibid.

1983 canlii 166 (scc), 2 scr 471 at pp. 478-479.