source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj365/2025oncj365.html

ontario
court
of
justice
citation:
r. v. mccormack-woolacoot,
2025 oncj 365
date:
2025
07
04
court
file
no.:
23-48114637;
23-48118605;
23-
48119247;
23-48125541;
24-48104346;
24-48108207;
24-48115184;
24-78700005;
21-75001820;
24-48125512;
24-48125514;
24-50000254
toronto
region
b
e
t
w
e
e
n:
his
majesty
the
king
—
and
—
dylan
victor
mccormack
-
woolacoot
before
justice h. pringle
heard
on
may
29
and
june
20,
2025
reasons
for
judgment
released
on
july
4,
2025
jean-pierre
d’angelo.........................................................................
counsel
for
the
crown
tony
paas......................................................................................
counsel
for
the
defendant
pringle j.:
overview
of case

mr. mccormack-woolacoot globally
pled guilty to ten separate charges on may 29, 2025. his decision to do so
resolved multiple informations, instead of setting twelve separate trials on
each information before the court.

the crimes he admitted committing
were, for the most part, low level offending: shoplifting and minor assaults.
but he committed these crimes, consistently, over an eighteen-month period and
while he was supposed to be obeying multiple court orders. additionally, two
offences he committed raise concern about mr. mccormack- woolacoot’s future
potential for inexplicable, unprovoked violence.

the parties’ positions reflect
agreement that a global sentence of between fifteen and sixteen months is fit
for all offences, properly expresses denunciation and deterrence, and reflects
all aggravating and mitigating factors. in submissions, the parties’ respective
positions differed by twenty-four days.

but the parties disagree about
presentence custody credit. the defence sought
summers
credit of 1.5:1
for each day served thus far. the crown opposed, relying on the trial
decision
of
r. v. jeyakanthan,
2024 onsc 1665.

globally, i concluded, a fit
sentence was 460 days. i imposed 1.5:1 credit for every day of pre-sentence
custody used towards that sentence.

mr. mccormack-woolacoot will be
released, placed on probation, will provide a dna sample and be subject to a
weapons prohibition order.
overview of the offences

in september 2022, the defendant
was placed on a fifteen-month conditional sentence order and twelve months of
probation. in august 2023, with four months left on his conditional sentence
order, he attended a shelter on strachan avenue. for reasons unknown, he threw
potatoes at a shelter worker and upended a cup of coffee onto a nearby car.

about one month later, the
defendant was shoplifting at shoppers drug mart. when confronted, he pushed a
shopping cart at a store manager to effect escape. three weeks later, he came
back to the same shoppers drug mart and stole three bottles of perfume.

ten days after that,

the defendant was released on
bail. more than two uneventful months passed, but then mr. mccormack-woolacoot
went back to that same shelter on strachan. he was on bail conditions to stay
away from the shelter and from that worker he assaulted. he breached both
conditions, confronting the worker, hurling misogynistic insults at her, and then
threatening her life.

mr. mccormack-woolacoot’s next
crime was a random attack on a stranger on march 2, 2024. the victim did
nothing to provoke or deserve it. he was walking his dog when the defendant
approached him, kneed him in the groin, and then punched him in the chest and
hip. this victim provided input which proved he still struggles with trauma
from this attack.

mr. mccormack-woolacoot was
globally released on a bp release six days later.

a little over three months later,
mr. mccormack-woolacoot was at a metro grocery store with an unknown female.
she got caught stealing. to prevent her arrest, the defendant stood in between
the loss prevention officer (lpo) and the female and assaulted the lpo, causing
soft tissue injury to the victim’s neck.

two months later, the defendant
went back to the exact same metro. his prior victim, the lpo, was there.
unprovoked, mr. mccormack-woolacoot threw a beer can at him. when the victim
tried to effect an arrest for this assault, mr. mccormack-woolacoot jabbed him
with a metal vape pen. he did this multiple times, causing blood to pool out of
the victim’s ear. the victim was hospitalized and may have suffered ear drum
damage.

all this offending took place
while mr. mccormack-woolacoot was supposed to be obeying his conditional
sentence order or the subsequent probation order, as well as bail orders.

on october 8, 2024, the defendant
was globally released on bail, which directed him to be amenable to working
with “sound times”. one month and one week after release

he was shoplifting at an lcbo
when, to prevent arrest, he hit an lpo on the side of the face and smashed a
bottle on the floor. following this arrest, the defendant was detained in
custody.

the man who mr.
mccormack-woolacoot randomly assaulted on the street submitted victim impact
evidence. the assault profoundly affected him. he is scared to leave his house
and feels insecure in his neighbourhood. his letter describes screaming for
help while mr. mccormack-woolacoot rained blows on him. he thinks about leaving
this community for good. he carries these thoughts every day, and explained
that:
…the
psychological and emotional injuries have been long- lasting. i live with the
persistent fear that something similar could happen again. i struggle with trust,
and i often relive the moment in ways that interfere with my concentration,
rest, and interactions with others. i have altered many of my routines to avoid
distress, but even those changes bring their own burdens and reminders of what
happened.

while no other victim submitted a
statement, i had no hesitation finding they also suffered profound impact,
particularly those victimized twice – especially the lpo who was stabbed. i
have no doubt the defendant’s actions haunt them both still.

the defendant has a criminal
record, with six prior convictions on cpic and one conviction on the
acknowledged 2022 conditional sentence order. his record began in 2014 and ends
in 2022. there was no gap between 2022 and the current convictions, since he
admitted offending in the community during most of this time. but the cpic
record has with a six-year gap in offending between 2014 and 2021.

two of his prior convictions are
concerning – a robbery from 2021 where 18 months jail was imposed, and a 2022
robbery conviction which attracted the 15-month conditional sentence order.
probation has been imposed twice.

mr. mccormack-woolacoot advised he
is indigenous but has little connection to that heritage. the disconnection
from his indigenous heritage is one well-recognized impact from colonization.
he described his mother as schizophrenic and his father as an alcoholic. mr.
mccormack-woolacoot was made a crown ward at age four and remained one until
age twenty-one. he lived in various foster homes during this time.

at some point, the defendant attended humber college.
he has worked in restaurants, summer camps, and with one of his brothers in a
painting business. but for two years prior to his november 2024 arrest, mr.
mccormack-woolacoot was largely living on the streets. he had developed an
addiction to crystal meth.

those two years reflected a spree
of unchecked criminal offending. during that time, the defendant showed little
to no respect for court orders, which is significantly aggravating. those court
orders were imposed to control his risk of offending. he ignored them.
community supports, made available to the defendant upon release, were unable
to stop his offending.

part of his offending behaviour
while not justified, is explicable. stealing feeds his addiction. what is
unclear and deeply troublesome is why, when mr. mccormack- woolacoot does not
get his way, he resorts to violence.

mr. d’angelo correctly noted that
the people mr. mccormack-woolacoot victimized fall into the category of
innocents, going about their day-to-day business. a shelter worker, a store
manager, a loss prevention officer, and a stranger on the street who still does
not know why he was attacked. except for the last victim, mr. mccormack-
woolacoot lashed out at people who opposed him in some way.

this is concerning. mr.
mccormack-woolacoot seems to lack proper coping or cognitive skills to react to
opposition with anything but anger and violence, and life is full of
opposition. thinking about mr. mccormack-woolacoot’s upbringing and life experience,
he has a lot to feel angry about. but unless something meaningful changes, i
fear mr. mccormack-woolacoot will seriously hurt someone and spend much of his
life in jail.

mr. mccormack-woolacoot
represented himself at his last bail hearing, where we met. he presented as
intelligent and articulate. he spoke compellingly about making safe use drug
kits for other marginalized people. the evidence in the bail hearing led me to
detain him. i could not help but observe a wealth of untapped potential in this
man.

i am hopeful that mr. mccormack-woolacoot’s probation
officer will assist him in finding, and completing, culturally appropriate
counseling which meaningfully addresses his substance use disorder, anger
management, and childhood trauma.
overview of presentence credit

the crown sought a global sentence
of 15.7 months, or 480 days, less pre- sentence custody. the defence submitted
the equivalent of 456 days, less time served, was appropriate. the parties were
apart on sentence quantum by approximately 24 days.

when sentencing was argued, mr.
mccormack-woolacoot had served 304 days. he has since served an additional 14
days, for a total of 318 days.

quantification of presentence
custody served was contested. the defence sought 1.5:1 credit for each day in
pre-sentence custody. the crown objected, submitting he receive 1:1 credit for
most presentence custody time.
as of today’s date, the crown’s position argues for an additional 118 days to
be served. the defence advanced a position of time served, meaning the
equivalent of 456 days.

applicable legal principles
legislative framework

this was not a case where
additional credit was sought for the notoriously inhumane conditions at toronto
south detention centre. the defendant only sought summers credit. section 719
statutorily caps credit at 1.5 to 1 for each day served:
719 (3)
in
determining the sentence to be imposed on a person convicted of an offence, a
court may take into account any time spent in custody by the person as a result
of the offence but the court shall limit any credit for that time to a maximum
of one day for each day spent in custody.
(3.1)
despite
subsection (3), if the circumstances justify it, the maximum is one and
one-half days for each day spent in custody.
rationale of summers credit

r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26
explained the historical, two-fold
rationale behind granting enhanced credit. only one, the quantitative
rationale, applies to this case. as per
summers, supra,
at paras.
23 and
25-27:
…the
quantitative
rationale for the practice of granting enhanced credit is to ensure that
the offender does not spend more time behind bars than if he had been released
on bail.
***
in practice,
the "vast majority of those serving reformatory sentences are released on
'remission'... at approximately the two-thirds point in their sentence",
and only two to three percent of federal prisoners are not released either by
way of parole or "statutory release": c. c. ruby, g. j. chan and n. r.
hasan, sentencing (8th ed. 2012), at ss.13.38 and 13.39.
because a
sentence begins when it is imposed (s. 719(1)) and the statutory rules for
parole eligibility and early release do not take into account time spent in
custody before sentencing, pre-sentence detention almost always needs to be
credited at a rate higher than 1: 1 in order to ensure that it does not
prejudice the offender.
a ratio of
1.5: 1 ensures that an offender who is released after serving two thirds of his
sentence serves the same amount of time in jail, whether or not he is subject
to presentence detention. a higher ratio than 1.5: 1 was therefore often used
to account for other circumstances, including the loss of parole eligibility
(i.e., the loss of the opportunity to be released after serving one third of
the sentence).

as schreck j. said at para. 92 of
r.
v. charley,
2025 onsc 2490:...it must be
borne in mind that a credit of one and one-half days per day, if applied, has
the effect of treating the offender as if he had been released after serving
two-thirds of his sentence…
denying summers credit in jeyakanthan

in the case at bar, the crown relied upon
r. v.
jeyakanthan,
2024 onsc 1665. there, 1.5:1 credit for presentence custody
was denied because the offender had committed offences, been released on bail,
and offended again. his original time in presentence custody, the court found,
should have presented a cautionary lesson against re-offending. further
offending proved it had not and as a result, the sentencing judge denied credit
beyond 1:1. as per paras. 115-117:
the supreme
court of canada held in
summers
that the 1.5:1 credit is not automatic,
and need not be applied in every case. the court held that a lower rate could
be appropriate if the detention was a result of the offender’s own bad conduct,
or if the offender is unlikely to obtain an early release or parole date (see
r.
v. hussain,
2015 onsc 7115
at paragraphs
78- 80 and 119
).
i agree
entirely with the reasoning of justice edwards in
hussain
and take the
same position here. janson was on a recognizance at the time he committed the
offences now before me. indeed, i have convicted him of two breaches of that
recognizance. he spent some considerable time in custody at the toronto south
following his arrest on these charges. he was fully aware of the harsh
conditions at the toronto south, both before and after covid, because he
experienced them first-hand. i have given him full
summers
credit and
also
duncan
credit for that period of time. he was then released on
bail. while on that bail he breached its terms in a pretty egregious way in my
view.
he did so
knowing what the likely result would be if he was caught and knowing what the
conditions of any inevitable incarceration would be. in those circumstances i
am not prepared to provide any enhanced
summers
credit, nor any credit
under
duncan. he’s entitled to time served, which is 332 days.

respectfully, i disagree with this
approach and this is why.
jeyakanthan was not persuasive

first, the trial level decision
relied upon
in
jeyakanthan
was overturned on appeal in 2018:
see
r. v.
hussain
2018 onca 147
at paras.
17-22. to be clear, the court of appeal did
not rule out bail breaches ever being used as “bad conduct” disentitling an
offender from
summers
credit. but the court found the sentencing judge
erred in doing so in that case: further, at para. 21 the court said:
in my view,
where an offender is simultaneously being sentenced for breach charges and the
charges that led to the recognizance or court order that was breached, it will
ordinarily be preferable for the sentencing judge to deal with the breach by
imposing a sentence commensurate with the seriousness of the breach. such a
sentence reflects the aggravating factor of committing an offence in breach of
a court order and serves the purposes of sentencing, including deterrence, more
directly and more appropriately than by denying enhanced credit for
pre-sentence custody. in this case, the appellant was sentenced for the breach
offences directly. he should not also be denied enhanced credit for the period
of incarceration between the revocation of his bail and the imposition of his
sentence due to the same breaches.

second and with all due respect, i
found
jeyakanthan
’s
logic behind denying 1.5:1 credit somewhat
untethered from
summers. summers
found that s. 719(3)(3.1)’s statutory
intent ensures offenders denied bail were not punished more harshly than those
with bail. in my view, the approach
jeyakanthan
invites would have that
unwanted effect.

i recognize that parliament explicitly excluded nothing
from legitimately basing the denial of 1.5:1 credit. indeed, the supreme court
recently said as much, in
r. v. j.w.,
2025 scc 16
at paras.
87-90:
in summers,
karakatsanis j. explained that, in certain situations, enhanced credit will
"often be inappropriate" (para. 48). notably, "when long periods
of pre-sentence detention are attributable to the wrongful conduct of the
offender" (para. 48) or "when detention was a result of the
offender's bad conduct" (para. 71), the offender will likely not be granted
enhanced credit.
this appeal
raises the following question: when an accused causes delay in their criminal
proceeding, in what circumstances does this amount to "wrongful
conduct"?..
******
lower courts have considered what
constitutes "wrongful conduct", though often in obiter. …
some cases
have considered conduct other than delay to be "wrongful conduct"
justifying the denial of enhanced credit. for example, some courts have
considered whether factors considered in sentencing, such as aggravating
factors, are relevant to the determination of enhanced credit (see, e.g., r. v.
mcbeath,
2014 bcca 305, 314 c.c.c. (3d) 531; r. v. boutilier,
2018 nsca 65, 30
m.v.r. (7th) 31). other cases query whether committing an offence while on bail
or probation disqualifies an offender from obtaining enhanced credit (see,
e.g., r. v. morris,
2013 onca 223, 305 o.a.c. 47; r. v. campbell,
2017 onsc 26,
at para.
62; r. v. bonneteau,
2016 mbca 72, 330 man. r. (2d) 139, at para.
22;
see also ruby, at s.13.98). i am of the view that consideration of such
circumstances is better left for another day, in cases where the relevant facts
arise.

then
the supreme court in
j.w., after declining
to explicitly interpret “wrongful conduct”, placed the onus of its proof on the
crown

and referenced the need to
interpret this term narrowly. the court underscored the importance of an
interpretation consistent with statutory intent and the principles of
sentencing, such as parity.

the following scenario runs
counter to that statutory intent and those sentencing objectives:
person a
offends, gets bail, re-offends, is detained. serves 30 real days in
pre-sentence custody as between the two arrests. fit sentence determined to be
30 days plus probation. but because they offended while on bail, ts is credited
at 1:1, meaning no credit for loss of early release. actual time served is thus
30 days.
person b
offends in the same way as person a, is immediately released on bail, again
re-offends in the same way as person a, is immediately released again. fit
sentence determined to be 30 days plus probation. person b, who also offended
in the same way while on bail, goes into custody and serves 20 days before
early release.


person b’s ability to secure bail twice meant they
served less actual time in jail than person a did. such a result does not
express equity:
r. v. kovich,
2016 mbca 19

at para. 106 and
r. v.
safarzadeh-markhali,
2016 scc 14
at paras.
66-67. additionally, and as the
supreme court
pointed in
summers
at paras.
65-67, the playing field for
obtaining bail is not always even:
…it is
difficult to see how sentences can reliably be "proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender"
(s. 718.1) when the length of incarceration is also a product of the offender's
ability to obtain bail, which is frequently dependent on totally different
criteria.
judicial
interim release requires the judge to be confident that, amongst other things,
the accused will neither flee nor reoffend while on bail. when an accused is
able to deposit money, or be released to family and friends acting as sureties
(who often pledge money themselves), this can help provide the court with such
assurance. unfortunately, those without either a support network of family and
friends or financial means cannot provide these assurances. consequently, as
the intervener the john howard society submitted, this means that vulnerable
and impoverished offenders are less able to access bail.
for example,
aboriginal people are more likely to be denied bail, and make up a
disproportionate share of the population in remand custody.6 a system that
results in consistently longer, harsher sentences for vulnerable members of
society, not based on the wrongfulness of their conduct but because of their
isolation and inability to pay, can hardly be said to be assigning sentences in
line with the principles of parity and proportionality. accounting for loss of
early release eligibility through enhanced credit responds to this concern.

denying 1:1 credit because of bail
breaches also poses a real risk of punishing one breach twice. see
r. v.
hussain, supra
at paras. 19-21 and
r. v. boutilier,
2018
…while the
fact that an offence was committed on bail may be taken into account in
determining the appropriate amount of pre-sentence credit, the extent to which
the breach has already been punished must also be considered: see
r. v.
colt,
2015 bcca 190, 324 c.c.c. (3d) 1, at paras.
24-27. to impose an
eighteen-month sentence for the breaches, and then further deny the appellant
the usual credit for pre- sentence custody on the basis of the same breaches
would, in effect, punish him twice for the same misconduct…
presentence custody credited

in the case at bar, there was no
evidence of institutional misconduct or to suggest mr. mccormack-woolacoot
would be ineligible for early release. the “wrongful conduct” relied upon was
his re-offending behaviour while on release orders.

in my view, the objectives of
parity, fairness, and transparency are best met by imposing either specific
sentence for breaches or using breaches to aggravate and increase another
sentence. i thus decline to impose 1:1 credit for the time spent by mr.
mccormack-woolacoot in presentence custody. i have credited of pre-sentence
custody used at 1.5:1.
sentence imposed

as stated above, there was but twenty-four days
between the crown and defence positions when sentencing was argued. i agree
that a sentence in this range is fit and would express the necessary sentencing
objectives.

i found aggravating factors to
include the breach of the defendant’s conditional sentence order and probation
order, the various breaches of mr. mccormack- woolacoot’s bail orders, the
victim impact evidence of trauma, impact on victims who did not submit
statements, the other offences disclosed by the facts, and his criminal record.

i found mitigating factors to
include mr. mccormack-woolacoot’s guilty plea and decision to spare the court
system multiple trials, his troubled background including disconnection from
his culture,
his addiction to a schedule i drug and its connection to some offending, and
the rehabilitative potential he so clearly has.

after weighing the aggravating and mitigating factors,
i concluded a global sentence of 460 days is fit. when pre-sentence custody of
307 days is calculated on a 1.5:1 basis, it is the equivalent of 460 days.

in other words, mr. mccormack-woolacoot
has already served the custodial part of his sentence. i will allocate specific
sentences for each specific offence,
but globally they total 460 days jail.

mr. mccormack-woolacoot will be
placed on two years of probation [
conditions omitted from written reasons
].
a dna order and a s. 109 order will issue. the victim fine surcharge is waived.
released:
july 4, 2025
signed: justice h. pringle

307
calendar
days
x
1.5
=
460
days.

september
29,
2023.

march
8
2024.

june
29
2024.

november 15, 2024.

cpic
shows
a
2014
fail
to
comply
with
probation
conviction,
which
suggested
the
imposition
of
a
preceding adult probation order but which was not reflected on cpic.

in submissions, the crown agreed 1.5:1 credit should
be imposed for 88 days, which on that calculus totaled
the
equivalent
of
132
days. the
remaining
216
days he
served
after
being released
and
eventually
detained was, on the crown position to be credited as 216 days.

this was as of the date of sentencing submissions,
when defence sought equivalent of 456 days and crown
sought
equivalent
of
480
days.
another
14
days
passed
after
judgment
reserved.
i
did
not
use
most of this additional time, on my
assessment of a fit sentence guided by restraint.

see
also
r.
v.
parker
2024
onca
591
at
para.
55.

i
am
ignoring
other
nuances
in
person
b’s
scenario,
such
as
the
brief
time
prior
to
arrest
counting
as
pre- sentence custody,
solely to keep the hypothetical math simple. even were that factored in, the
inequity between the two results remains the same.

in
the
context
of
a
constitutional
challenge
to
an
aspect
of
s.
719,
as
it
originally
read.

there
was
no
evidence
of the
defendant’s
indigenous background,
except his
disconnection from
it
and history in the crown ward system. no
gladue report was requested.

see informations.