source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj205/2025oncj205.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
—
(1)
every person who fails to comply with an order made
under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. s.t.,
2025 oncj 205
date: 
2025 04 15
court
files: oshawa 23-28108665-00
24-28104554-00
24-28108637-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
s.t.
before
justice joseph hanna
reasons
for judgment released april 15, 2025
t. jackson............................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
m. mistry
…..
………………………………………………………………..for the defendant
hanna j.:
introduction

i found s.t. guilty after a trial of sexually
assaulting his spouse. he subsequently pleaded guilty before me to violating two
court orders.

the crown seeks a sentence of 15 months jail on
the sexual assault charge and 60 days consecutive on the breach offences. the
crown also requests two years probation, a dna order, a s. 109 weapons
prohibition, and a soira order.

the defence requests a suspended sentence given s.t.’s
79 days time served. if imprisonment is required, the defence submits i should
allow s.t. to serve it in the community. the defence recommends a period of
probation between 12 and 18 months. s.t. does not oppose the requests for a dna
order and s. 109 order, but he contests the imposition of a soira order.

these are my reasons for sentence.
the
circumstances of the offences

at the time of the sexual assault, s.t. and the victim
were living together, though their relationship had been unravelling for a
while. i found that s.t. pushed the victim down on a bed, kissed her repeatedly
while pressing down on her arms, thrust his body into her while he had an
erection, and covered her face with his chest. while this was occurring, the victim
told s.t., “no” and “stop”.

between february and may 2024, s.t. texted the
victim multiple times contrary to his undertaking. on september 11, 2024, contrary
to his release order, he sent a friend to the victim’s residence who provided
the victim a clip board with notes written by s.t. s.t. also admits that in
november 2023 he sent messages to the victim while bound by an undertaking
prohibiting him from doing so. none of these communications by s.t. were
threatening or intimidating.
the circumstances of the offender

s.t. is 60 years old. he has no criminal record.

he grew up in the toronto area and had a stable
upbringing. he attended school until grade 11.

he has had steady employment working in the
field of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. he is an hvac and
electrical contractor.

he and the victim own five properties together.
he reported to the pre-sentence report author that he was financially stable,
though he has some debts in addition to the mortgages on his various
properties.

he reports that he developed some difficulties
with alcohol about 3 - 4 years ago. it appears he has resolved that issue. he
denied that alcohol played any role in the offence before the court.

s.t. told the pre-sentence report author that he
was overall in good health. he reported that he has taken adhd medication and
believes he may suffer from ptsd and anxiety.

i received letters of support for s.t. from his
friends and family. his sister, l.a., describes s.t. as a hardworking and kind
man who has always been committed to supporting his family. she indicates that s.t.
has struggled with his marital difficulties, financial instability, and mental
health challenges. she states that she and her family are committed to
supporting s.t. with his rehabilitation. his niece and nephew, j.a. and n.h., describe
him as fun and humorous. their letter indicates that s.t.’s struggles have
impacted his emotional and mental wellbeing, and that s.t. is motivated to make
amends and rebuild his life. s.t.’s brother-in-law, j.a., speaks to s.t.’s work
ethic and advises that s.t., while incarcerated, has expressed a desire to
reflect on his past decisions and work on becoming a better person.

s.t.’s friend, d.b., described s.t.to the
pre-sentence report author as a “stand up guy.”

s.t. has been in custody since january 28, 2025.
he reported to the pre-sentence report author that his anxiety has increased
while he has been in custody.

while in custody he has experienced numerous
lockdowns. as of april 2, 2025, the total lockdown time was calculated as 102
hours. he has also been triple bunked during most of his time spent in custody.
s.t. filed an affidavit at his sentencing hearing. in it, he describes the
impact the lockdowns and overcrowding have had on him. he refers to his
inability to use the phone, meet visitors, use the range, and enjoy
recreational activities. he also mentions that he has had restricted use of the
showers, and that he has been provided with insufficient clean clothing and
basic hygiene products. the affidavit also states that while incarcerated his
stress levels have raised and his debts have accumulated.

in the pre-sentence report, s.t. referred to his
business as being at a standstill. during submissions i asked mr. mistry
regarding the status of s.t.’s business. he replied that the business was still
running, and that s.t.’s friend had been managing it while s.t. has been
incarcerated.

s.t. maintained his innocence to the
pre-sentence report author regarding the sexual assault charge. he described
the victim as being obsessed with his inheritance and said that she would not
be happy until he was “broke, homeless, and in jail.”

s.t. chose to address me at the end of his
sentencing hearing. he said he wished to apologize for everything. he said this
was embarrassing and wasting everyone’s time. he mentioned that during the
incident with the victim he jumped off and that it was not the case that the
victim needed to kick him off. he told me he would be an idiot to try and
contact the victim now. he stated his life was a mess and that he needed
medical care. he apologized to the court, to the victim, and to his family for
anything that was done. he said he would never do it again.
victim input

the victim provided a victim impact statement.
it describes the profound emotional, physical, and psychological effects this
offence has had on her. she mentions feeling fearful in her own home and that
she is still struggling to deal with anxiety and other negative emotions
because of what happened. she also described feeling betrayed.
general principles

in determining the appropriate sentence, i am
required to weigh the mitigating and aggravating factors and balance the
sentencing objectives mentioned in s. 718(a) – (f) of the
criminal code.

various principles such as parity, totality, and restraint must
also be considered:
criminal code, ss. 718.2(b)-(e).

ultimately, it is necessary that the sentence i
impose be proportionate having regard to the seriousness of the offences and
the degree of responsibility of the offender:
criminal code, s.
718.2(a).
the aggravating
factors

there are multiple aggravating factors relating
to the sexual assault offence:
i)
while
s.t. and the complainant were no longer intimate partners at the time of this
offence, they were married. he, accordingly, violated a position of trust.
ii)
the
psychological impact on the victim has been significant.
iii)
the victim
experienced some bruising as a result of the offence and some physical
discomfort for a period following the incident.
iv)
while all sexual assaults are violent, there were some
particularly serious aspects to the conduct in this case. it involved holding
the victim down, repeated kissing, the offender’s chest being on the
complainant’s face, and the offender thrusting his body into the victim. the
victim testified that she was unable to breath while s.t. was on top of her. while
i do not find that s.t. intentionally attempted to interfere with the victim’s breathing,
his conduct reveals some indifference to the reasonably foreseeable
consequences of his actions.
v)
there was a level of persistence to the sexual assault. while it
was a short interaction, it did not end immediately when the complainant said “no”
and “stop.” it was interrupted, rather, by the dog jumping on s.t. and the
victim kicking him off.
vi)
the offence took place in the victim’s own bed, a place where she
was entitled to feel safe.

regarding the breach offences, it is an
aggravating fact that s.t. also communicated with the victim in november 2023
contrary to his undertaking. furthermore, the breach offence for the period between
february and may 2024 involved multiple incidents of contact.
the mitigating factors

the mitigating factors in this case are as
follows:
i)
s.t. has no criminal record.
ii)
regarding the breach offences, he has pleaded guilty and
expressed remorse for his conduct.
iii)
he has been gainfully employed for most of his life.
iv)
the harsh jail conditions he experienced while in pre-sentence
custody, including restricted access to showers and yard, numerous lockdowns,
and frequent triple bunking:
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344, at paras.
50
– 53.
v)
he still has employment opportunities.
vi)
he has support in the community, as is particularly evident from
the letters of support filed by the defence.

while
s.t. apologized to the victim for “anything he had done”, his comments in the
pre-sentence report leave me skeptical that he has any remorse regarding the
sexual assault offence. i cannot find that has gained any real insight
regarding the gravity of his offence and the impact it has had on the victim. any
lack of remorse or insight on his part is not an aggravating factor:
r. v.
reeve,
2020 onca 381, at para.
12;
r. v. fraser,
2016 onca 745, at
para.
13;
r. v. valentini, o.j. no. 251,
1999 canlii 1885 (onca),
at paras.
80 – 85.
collateral consequences

s.t.’s
incarceration has had and will have a financial impact on him. i note, however,
that it appears he at least has a friend assisting with the business while he
has been in jail. while he has debts, he co-owns multiple properties. it is
reasonable to infer he will have the ability to mitigate his financial
situation upon his eventual release. i appreciate that s.t.’s anxiety has
increased while in jail and that his incarceration will carry an emotional toll
on his family and friends. i have taken all these collateral consequences into
consideration while keeping in mind that sentence i impose must remain
consistent with the fundamental principle of proportionality:
r. v. suter,
2018 scc 34, at para.
56;
r. v. l.c.,
2022 onca 863, at para.
24.
sentencing precedents

sentencing
ranges cannot be treated as straightjackets because each offender is unique,
and each crime has its own unique circumstances. that said, parity plays an
important role in sentencing. comparison with sentences imposed in other cases assists
in respecting proportionality:
r. v. reeve,
2020 onca 381, at para.
31;
r.
v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at paras.
58, 60 – 61;
r. v. friesen,
2020
scc 9, at paras.
32, 33, 37, 108.

defence
counsel referred me to several case involving sexual assaults where discharges,
suspended sentences, and conditional sentences had been imposed. it is
significant to note that most of these decisions pre-date the supreme court of
canada’s decision in
friesen.

while
friesen
indicates that sentences for sexual offences involving children
should be higher than in cases involving adults, the general principles emphasized
in
friesen
regarding recognizing the harmfulness and wrongfulness of
sexual assault apply to cases involving adult victims as well:
r. v. r.s.,
2023 onca 608, at para.
28;
r. v. brown,
2020 onca 657, at para.
59;
r.
v. bunn,
2022 mbca 34, at paras.
69 – 80.

to
be sure, conditional sentences – and indeed less restrictive sentences – are
still legally available sentences for sexual assaults. that said,
“proportionality remains key to sentencing”:
r.s., at para.
4.

mr.
mistry also provided me with the recent decision
r. v. wong,
2024 onsc
7122, where justice goldstein imposed a conditional sentence in a case
involving non-consensual sexual intercourse. i observe that in that case justice
goldstein placed substantial weight on the fact that the offender pleaded guilty,
stating that “in the absence of mr. wong ‘manning up’ and taking responsibility
he would undoubtedly be going to jail”: see paragraphs 8, 37 – 38. justice
goldstein also noted that there was no evidence that mr. wong had ever been
non-compliant with his bail.

in
r. v.
einollahi,
2021 onsc 6048, the court allowed
a crown sentence appeal of a 60-day conditional sentence in a case involving an
uber driver who forcefully kissed the victim without her consent, then
persisted and forcibly touched the victim's breast over her clothes and told
her that she was "hot". after reviewing numerous decisions, the court
described a range of 6 – 9 months jail for sexual assaults of that nature. given
the mitigating factors present in that case the court imposed a 6-month jail
sentence.

in
r. v. kullab,
2024 oncj 548, justice monahan described a range of 6 – 18
months jail in cases involving uber or taxi drivers that did not involve
intercourse. mr. kullab had touched the victim’s breasts over her clothing, and
tried to touch her breasts under her clothing. he also touched her leg over her
clothing near her groin area, asked her if she wanted to have sex, and she said
"no" a number of times. the victim ultimately pushed him off her. the
interaction lasted a couple of minutes. mr. kullab had five children. he also
suffered from an apparent psychotic disorder which the sentencing judge found
would make his time spent in custody more difficult. justice monahan considered
the potential immigration consequences to be severe. he imposed a 6 month less
one day sentence, which he referred to as “generous.”

the
case before me of course does not involve a driver-passenger scenario. however,
offences involving strangers are not to be treated as more serious than those
committed in the domestic context.

in
r. v. a.j.k.,
2022 onca 487
(c.a.) that court stated at para. 76:
there is no justifiable reason
for why sexually assaulting an intimate or former intimate partner is any less
serious than sexually assaulting a stranger. the fact is that a pre-existing
relationship between the accused and complainant places them in a position of
trust that can only be seen as an aggravating factor on sentencing:
criminal
code, r.s.c. 1985, c. c-46, s. 718.2
(a)(ii). therefore, contrary to the
impression that may be left when contrasting the smith range with the non-smith
range, the sexual assault of an intimate or former intimate partner can
actually attract a greater sentence.

in
r. v. butt,
2012 onsc 4326, a decision decided prior to
friesen, justice
code held that six to twelve months jail was the appropriate range of sentence
for sexual assaults "in the mid-range of gravity". see also
r. v.
m.l.,
2018 onsc 7355, at para.
29.

the
crown referred me to the decision in
r. v. wicker,
2025 onsc 930
where
the offender was sentenced to 2 years. in that case the offence involved
digital penetration accompanied by a threat.

the
crown also relied on the decision in
r. v. b.w.s.,
2020 onsc 3916. in
that case the offender told the victim he was going to have sex with her
despite her telling him no. he groped the victim, pushed her, and made threats.
the offender had a terrible criminal record and showed no remorse. the court
imposed a sentence of 22 months jail.
the appropriate
sentences in this case

s.t. has no prior record, has employment available to him, has support
in the community, and has expressed a willingness to engage in counselling. he
committed a serious violent offence within a domestic context which has had a
significant impact on the victim. he also breached the conditions of his
release on multiple occasions. the objectives of rehabilitation, specific
deterrence, denunciation, and general deterrence all play a significant role in
this case. the principles of parity and restraint are also important.

in
my view, a time served disposition would clearly be an unfit sentence given the
aggravating factors present.

a
conditional sentence is a legally available sentence for the offence of sexual
assault. there is no presumption either in favour or against imposing a
conditional sentence. s.t. is not facing a sentence of more than 2 years. given
that s.t. breached his non-communication condition on multiple occasions i have
concerns that he would not comply with the terms of a conditional sentence. more
importantly, i do not find that a conditional sentence would be consistent with
the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.

i
recognize that a conditional sentence can accomplish both deterrence and
denunciation. in
r. v. r.s.
the court explained that sexual assault
covers a wide spectrum of conduct. the appropriateness of a conditional
sentence will necessarily be influenced by where the offence falls on that spectrum:
r.s., at para.
27. while all sexual assaults are serious, this case
involves significant aggravating features.

having
balanced the aggravating and mitigating factors, and considered the relevant sentencing
objectives and principles, i have determined that a conditional sentence would not
be a proportionate sentence. it would fail to adequately address the
seriousness of the offence and s.t.’s moral blameworthiness.

given
all the circumstances, i consider the range of sentence proposed by the crown for
the sexual assault offence to be higher than is necessary to address the
principles of sentencing. i have concluded that the appropriate sentence for
the sexual assault charge is 8 months jail. the crown’s position of 60 days
jail consecutive for the breaches is not unreasonable. keeping in mind the
principles of restraint and totality, i have decided to impose an additional total
of 15 days for these offences.

s.t.
has served 79 days of pre-sentence custody for which he is entitled to 119 days
credit. his sentence will be broken down as follows:
-
sexual assault: 240 days before credit for pre-sentence custody. s.t. will
receive 119 days of
summers

credit for 79 days time served, resulting in 121 days left to serve on this
count.
-
fail to comply with undertaking: 15 days consecutive.
-
fail to comply release order: 15 days concurrent.

the
total remaining time to serve is therefore 136 days.

following
his release from custody he will be on probation for a period of 18 months.

the
terms of the probation will be as follows:
-
in addition to the statutory terms, you will report to your probation
officer within 2 days of your release and thereafter as directed.
-
cooperate with your probation officer. you must sign any releases
necessary to permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance and you
must provide proof of compliance with any condition of this order to your
probation officer on request.
-
do not contact or communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, by any
physical, electronic or other means, with w.t. except:
o
with her prior
written consent filed in advance with the probation intake or the assigned
probation officer. this may be cancelled by w.t. in any manner at any time.
o
in the presence
of or through legal counsel.
o
for required court
appearances.
-
do not be within 100 metres of any place where you know w.t. to live,
work, go to school, frequent or any place you know her to be except:
o
with her prior
written consent filed in advance with the probation intake or the assigned
probation officer. this may be cancelled by w.t. in any manner at any time.
o
in the presence
of or through legal counsel.
o
for required
court appearances.
-
attend and actively participate in all assessment, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed by the probation officer and complete them
to the satisfaction of the probation officer for including, but not limited to:
o
anger
management;
o
sexual
offending;
o
substance abuse
issues;
o
psychological
issues.
-
sign any release of information forms as will enable your probation
officer to monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments,
counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
-
provide proof of your attendance and completion of any assessments,
counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
-
do not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code.

while
in custody, pursuant to s. 743.21 you will be prohibited from contacting w.t.
except through legal counsel.

there
will be a
s. 109
criminal code
weapons prohibition for 10 years.

a
dna order shall be issued on all offences, whether they are primary or
secondary designated offences.

the
defence opposes the imposition of a soira order.

pursuant
to s. 490.012 (3) of the
criminal code
i am required to impose the
order, unless:
(a) there would be no
connection between making the order and the purpose of helping police services
prevent or investigate crimes of a sexual nature by requiring the registration
of information relating to sex offenders under that act; or
(b) the impact of the order on
the person, including on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly
disproportionate to the public interest in protecting society through the
effective prevention or investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be
achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under
that act.

in
determining whether to make the order i am required to consider the following
factors listed in subsection (4):
(a) the nature and seriousness
of the designated offence;
(b) the victim’s age and other
personal characteristics;
(c) the nature and
circumstances of the relationship between the person and the victim;
(d) the personal
characteristics and circumstances of the person;
(e) the person’s criminal
history, including the age at which they previously committed any offence and
the length of time for which they have been at liberty without committing an
offence;
(f) the opinions of experts who
have examined the person; and
(g) any other factors that the
court considers relevant.

having
considered these factors, i do not find that the offender has met his onus
under either s. 490.012(3)(a) or (b). i find that i have insufficient evidence
to make an assessment regarding his risk to recidivate. i appreciate that s.t.
is 60 years old with no prior record. however, this was a serious offence which
substantially interfered with the victim’s sexual integrity. i do not have
evidence regarding insight into his behaviour. while not necessary, no expert
evidence was presented, nor do i have any evidence that s.t. has completed
counselling which might demonstrate a low risk to re-offend. ultimately, i find
there is a lack of evidence regarding s.t.’s likelihood of reoffending.

with
respect to the impact on s.t. of making an order, defence counsel suggested
that a soira order might impact potential business travel. i was not presented
anything concrete in that regard or with respect to any other impact on the
offender.

given
the record before me, i do not find that s.t. has met his burden to show that
the order should not be made.

i
accordingly also make a soira order for a period of 10 years.
released: april 15, 2025
signed:
justice joseph hanna

r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26.