source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj162/2025oncj162.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. battiston, 2025 oncj 162
date:
march 24, 2025
court
file numbers:
4860 999
24 24100008-00 1 fa
4860 999
24 24100008-00 2 fa
4860 999
23 23101035-00 1 fa
4860 999
23 23101035-00 2 fa
4860 999
23 23100878-00 1 fa
4860 999
23 23100878-00 2 fa
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
luciano battiston
before
justice of the peace r. shawyer
heard
on february 27, 2025.
reasons
for judgment released on march 24, 2025
mcpherson, j........................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
tomovski, r................................................................................. 
counsel for the defendant
justice of the peace shawyer:
introduction

on february 27, 2025, the court heard the defendant, luciano battiston’s
(hereinafter the “defendant”), charter application (hereinafter “application”).
the relief that the defendant sought in his application was a stay of proceedings.
the defendant argued that even though his matter was set for trial and scheduled
to be completed in under 18 months from the date the original information was
laid, nevertheless his 11b
charter
rights were violated.

the charges before the court stem from an accident that took place on october
30, 2023. on this date the defendant was making a left turn onto dufferin
street from ridelle avenue in the city of toronto. while making this left turn
the defendant struck two pedestrians (hereafter the “accident”). as a result of
the accident both pedestrians were injured and one of the pedestrian’s eventually
succumbed to their injuries while in hospital.
court being seized

during the proceedings there was some discussion about whether the court
would be seized with hearing a trial in this matter if the defendant’s prayer
of relief for a stay of proceedings was denied. the discussion came about
because the defendant appeared before this court on december 17, 2024, when the
matter was adjourned to february 6, 2025, for a second trial date, which this
court was coincidentally scheduled to hear even though it was made clear on the
record on december 17, 2024, that the court was not seizing itself of the
defendant’s matter.

the night before the second trial date it was brought to the court’s
attention that the defendant had filed and was going to argue a charter
application seeking a stay of proceedings. however, on february 6, 2025, when
the defendant was scheduled to proceed with their trial late disclosure of
prosecution evidence necessitated a further adjournment. therefore, the court
seized itself of the defendant’s charter application but did not seize itself
of the defendant’s trial.

the court seized itself of the
charter
motion but not the trial if it
were to proceed to ensure that the court was not the cause of any delay in
resolving the defendant’s matter. there were two reasons for this. the first
reason was to ensure that the defendant’s matter could be scheduled to start
and be completed within 18 months if the matter proceeded to trial. the second reason,
that was not articulated on the record on february 6, 2025, was so that in case
the defendant’s charter application had to be adjourned after the court heard
oral arguments to allow the court to consider its decision the court would not
be contributing to any delay: see
r. v. mengistu,
2024 onca 575
at paras.
24-37.

in criminal matters a judge who hears pretrial motions and applications
is seized with the defendant’s matter if it proceeds to trial: see
r. v. rahey,
1987 canlii 52 (scc),
 1 scr 588
at para.
16;
footnote 13 in ch. 4 of the
lesage
code
report of the review of complex criminal cases and
procedures, which led amendments to the
criminal code of canada,
rsc 1985, c c-46; and
r. v.
guindon,
 o.j. no. 927 (s.c.) at paras. 13 – 17, 21 – 22, and 28. however,
it appears that when charges are laid under the pao a justice who hears
pretrial motions or applications in a defendant’s matter is not necessarily
seized of the defendant’s matter if it proceeds to trial.

in
st. marys cement
corp. v. r.,
(1996),
1996 canlii 1344 (on ca),
106 ccc (3d) 21
(commonly referred to as
r v. eton construction ltd
)
(hereinafter “
eton construction
”) the ontario court of appeal
(hereinafter “onca”) stated the following at unnumbered paras. 2 – 5:
in these two cases, the appellants sought to prevent their trials
from taking place before justices of the peace and requested an order that they
be tried by a provincial court judge. in both instances their request was
denied. they brought applications pursuant to
s. 140
of the
provincial offences act, r.s.o. 1990, c.
p.33, s. 2, for relief
in the nature of certiorari and mandamus and for a remedy under
s. 24
of the
canadian charter of rights and freedoms
("
charter
"). on november
13, 1991, the honourable mr. justice borins of the ontario court of justice
(general division) dismissed their applications. they appeal to this court from
that decision. the reasons of borins j. are reported as eton construction co.
v. ontario
(1991),
1991 canlii 7102 (on sc),
6 o.r. (3d) 42,
68 c.c.c. (3d) 219.
although the crown took the position that the appellants'
applications were raised prematurely at the supervisory level by way of
application for prerogative relief, borins j. concluded that he could properly
exercise his discretion to hear the applications and consider granting the
relief sought. while he could not have anticipated the extent of the delay
which did ensue, i think, in hindsight, that it is unfortunate that borins j.
exercised his discretion in the manner that he did.
there have been numerous warnings
by the supreme court of canada and by this court to the effect that
charter
issues
should be raised at and determined by the court of first instance along with
the merits in order to avoid the risk of delay, the fragmentation of the trial
process and multiplicity of proceedings:
see r. v. desousa,
1992 canlii 80 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 944,
76 c.c.c. (3d) 124; r. v. duvivier
(1991),
1991 canlii 7174 (on
ca),
3 o.r. (3d) 49,
64 c.c.c. (3d) 20 (c.a.), and r. v. martin
(1991),
1991 canlii 7340 (on
ca),
2 o.r. (3d) 16,
63 c.c.c. (3d) 71 (c.a.), affirmed
1992 canlii 93 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 838,
71 c.c.c. (3d) 572. the present cases are a good
illustration of the dangers. nearly six years have elapsed since the charges
were laid and the trial has yet to commence.
there is another consequence to
this bifurcation of proceedings that is referred to specifically
in
duvivier,
supra, at p. 54 o.r., p. 24 c.c.c.: the need to decide an issue on an
inadequate record. on september 16, 1992, the appellants were permitted to file
a 52-page factum which dealt at length with the
charter
arguments
disposed of by borins j. on march 4, 1996, the appellants filed a 13-page
supplementary factum in which they raised a new ground of appeal which was not
stated in the notice of appeal, namely, the failure to exercise and the
improper delegation of authority of two regional senior judges in the selection
of justices of the peace rather than provincial court judges to act as trial
judges. leave to file a new factum, or raise a new ground of appeal, was not
sought in accordance with
rule 61.08
of
the
rules of civil
procedure. additionally, as a practical matter, we have
no record before us to determine factually if there is any basis for the
appellants' contention that the charges involve matters of unusual complexity.
for both these reasons, we declined to decide the issues raised by the new
ground of appeal.

the onca decision in
eton construction
amounts to a non-binding
practice direction to the lower courts. the onca’s admonition in
eton construction
was repeated a year later by the onca in
r. v. ddm plastics inc.,
1997 canlii 14541 (on ca)
(hereinafter “
ddm plastics inc
).

in addition to the onca decisions in
eton construction
and
ddm
plastics
justice m.t. devlin of the ontario court of justice (hereinafter
“ocj”) weighed in on whether a justice hearing
charter
application before the
start of a
poa
trial is seized of the trial if a trial follows:
a “best practices” approach
would entail having the defendant arraigned prior to hearing
the charter
application
because it is only after arraignment that the justice of the peace is formally
seized with the matter. arraignment includes having the charge read, asking the
defendant how he pleads, “guilty” or “not guilty”, and noting the plea on the
information. to do otherwise and commence a charter application prior to
arraignment or midway through the arraignment and prior to the plea being
entered, would allow a party who received an unfavourable decision on
the charter
to request
that the trial commence before a different justice of the peace since the first
one was not seized. if this were to happen, the parties would be able to
reargue
the charter
application
since the new justice of the peace would not be bound by the original
charter
decision. this
absurd legal outcome and case management headache would be properly prevented
by having the plea entered and noted on the information prior to addressing
the charter
application:
r v. byrnes,
2013 oncj 631
para.
8
(hereinafter “
byrnes
”)

the
obiter in
eton construction,
ddm plastics inc.,
and
byrnes
is logical, practical and are statements that this
court agrees with. however, it appears that these cases stand for the
proposition that in
poa
matters justices hearing pretrial matters are not
necessarily seized of the defendant’s matter if the matter proceeds to trial.
background

after the accident on october 30, 2023, the toronto police service
(“tps”) officers called to the scene and charged with investigating the
accident did not charge the defendant. as a result, the defendant was allowed
to leave the scene of the accident.

on november 2, 2023, an information (hereinafter the “original
information”) relating to the accident was sworn by a member of the tps. after
the information was sworn the defendant was contacted by a member of the tps.
he was asked to attend a tps station in relation to the accident. when the
defendant attended at the tps station as requested he was charged with two counts of careless driving causing bodily harm contrary to
s.
130(3)
of the
highway traffic
act, r.s.o. 1990, c. h.8 (hereinafter “
hta
”). at the same time the defendant was also
issued a summons to appear in court for the first time on january 4, 2024.

on december 19, 2023, a replacement information was sworn. this
information replaced the original information (hereinafter the “second information”).

on january 5, 2024, a third information (hereinafter the “third
information) was sworn. the difference between the original information(s) and
the third was that the original information(s) charged the defendant with
careless driving causing bodily harm (x2). whereas the third information charged
the defendant with one count each of careless driving causing death and
careless driving causing bodily harm pursuant to
s. 130(3)
of the
hta.
the third information was laid to reflect the fact that after the first two information’s
were laid one of the pedestrians that the defendant is alleged to have hit with
his vehicle on october 30, 2023, succumbed to their injuries.

on september 20, 2024, both the original two information’s and the third
information were before the court. after confirming which information’s were
before the court the prosecution advised that it would only be proceeding on
the third information and requested that the first two information’s be marked
withdrawn on consent.

on december 17, 2024, counsel for the defendant and the prosecution
appeared for what was anticipated to be the start of the defendant’s 2–day
trial. at the start of the hearing the prosecution advised the court that
further disclosure was provided to counsel for the defence the week prior to
the start of trial and that one item of disclosure, communication tapes, was
still outstanding. therefore, counsel for the defence and prosecution advised
the court an adjournment was being requested on consent, which the court granted,
and new trial dates were scheduled for february 6 and march 21, 2025.

on february 6, 2025, the trial was adjourned. the trial was adjourned
because the defence had filed an 11b charter application and had received 13
hours of audio tape evidence the night before.

on february 27, 2025, the defendant’s charter application was argued. after
the court heard the party’s arguments, the court advised the parties of the
court’s decision and told the parties that reasons for its decision would follow.
these are those reasons.
the law and analysis

section 11(b) of the
charter of rights and freedoms,
part 1 of the
constitution act, 1982, being schedule b to the
canada act 1982
(uk),
1982, c 11 (hereinafter the “
charter
”)
provides
that any person charged with an offence has the right to be tried within a reasonable time. in
r v. jordan,
2016 scc 27,
2016 csc 27
(hereinafter “
jordan
”)
at paragraph 19 the supreme court of canada (hereinafter “supreme court”)
reiterated the importance of a defendant’s right to be tried within a
reasonable time:
[the] right to
be tried within a reasonable time is central to the administration of canada's
system of... justice. it finds expression in the familiar maxim: "justice
delayed is justice denied". an unreasonable delay denies justice to the
accused...and the public as a whole.

the supreme court set the ceiling
beyond which
delay is presumptively unreasonable at 18 months for charges that are tried by
a provincial court of justice:
see
jordan
at para.
49.
after the supreme court’s
decision in
jordan
the onca in
r. v. nguyen
2020 onca 609
(hereinafter “
nguyen
”), made it clear that the
presumptive ceiling of 18 months applies to provincial offences contained in
part i and part iii of the
provincial offences act,
r.s.o. 1990, c. p.33
(hereinafter
the “
poa
”): see
nguyen
at para(s). 21, 22, and 26 and
r. v. battigaglia,
 o.j. no. 5267
at para. 19
(hereinafter “
battigaglia
”).

fairburn j.a. on behalf of a unanimous court of appeal in
r v. s.a.,
2024
onca 737
(hereinafter “
r v. s.a.
”) succinctly set out the law that
governs 11b applications seeking a stay for delay below the 18-month ceiling
set by the supreme court in
jordan. on behalf of the court fairburn j.a.
wrote the following:
(a)
the presumptive ceiling
21
 central to the
jordan
framework is the “ceiling beyond which
delay is presumptively unreasonable”:
jordan, at para.
49. this ceiling — 30 months
in the superior court of
justice
and 18 months in the ontario court of
justice — is the “most important feature” of the new framework:
jordan, at para.
49.
22
 ceilings are intended to provide “meaningful
direction” to those working within the administration of justice about their
s. 11(b)
obligations, and to encourage conduct and the
allocation of resources that promote timely trials:
jordan, at paras.
50, 107. toward that end, ceilings offer
participants in the criminal justice system the ability to know in advance the
bounds of reasonableness, thereby allowing them to take pro-active measures to
remedy any delay that could become unreasonable in nature:
jordan, at para.
108.
23 in setting the ceilings, the
jordan
majority was alive to the real world
within which the administration of criminal justice operates and well aware
that “resource issues are rarely far below the surface of most
s. 11(b)
applications”:
jordan, at para.
117. to this end, the ceilings
set
in
jordan
were said to “reflect[] the realities we
currently face”:
jordan, at para.
57.
(b) cases
below the ceiling
24
 the majority signaled that stays of proceedings
under the ceiling
will occur only in rare cases
where there is clearly
unreasonable delay:
jordan, at para.
48. by remarking upon the anticipated
rarity of staying cases under the ceiling, the majority made specific note of
three factors that had been considered in calibrating the ceilings of 30 months
for cases in the superior court of
justice
and 18 months for cases in the provincial court: the
increased complexity of cases, their inherent needs, and a certain “tolerance
for reasonable institutional delay”:
jordan, at para.
83.
25
 as explained above, the defence may establish
unreasonable delay below the ceiling only if the defence can establish two
things, that: “(1) it took meaningful steps that demonstrate a sustained effort
to expedite the proceedings,
and
(2) the case took markedly longer than
it reasonably should have” (emphasis in original):
jordan, at para.
82; see also
r. v. k.j.m.,
2019 scc 55,
 4 s.c.r. 39, at paras.
4, 70, 104.
in determining whether a case took markedly longer than it should have,
case-specific factors will inform how to characterize the delay:
jordan, at para.
51;
k.j.m., at para.
75. those
factors will include the complexity of the case, any local conditions that may
be operative, and whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the
proceedings:
jordan, at para.
87.
26
 as for local conditions, trial judges “should...
employ the knowledge they have of their own jurisdiction, including how long a
case of that nature typically takes to get to trial in light of the relevant
local and systemic circumstances”:
jordan, at para.
89. at the end of the day, trial judges
assessing whether the case has taken markedly longer than what was reasonably required
are advised to “step back from the minutiae and adopt a bird’s-eye view of the
case”:
jordan, at para.
91.

for a defendant to establish a below-ceiling
breach of their
s.11(b)
charter
right, they must
satisfy two criteria on a balance of probability. those criteria are (1) did
the defence take
meaningful steps
demonstrating a
sustained
effort
to expedite the proceedings; and (2) did the case take
markedly
longer
than it reasonably should have? these criteria were
outlined in
jordan
at paras
82 and 83
and
r. v. k.j.m.,
2019
scc 55,
 4 s.c.r. 39
(hereinafter “
k.j.m.”),
at paras.
4, 70, 104.

when assessing those criteria and determining
whether a stay is warranted below the 18-month ceiling set out
in
jordan
for a matter before a
provincial court
a court must be mindful of
two things. the first is that stays for matters under 18-months are rare. the
second is that a stay under 18 months should only be ordered in the clearest of
cases:
see
r v. s.a.
pa
ra
35.
1.
defence
efforts

when assessing the efforts that the defence made to expedite getting the
matter to trial a court must assess two things. those two things are (1) what
the defence could have done and (2) what the defence did to get the matter to
trial as fast as possible. with that said the defence is expected to act
reasonably, not perfectly.: see
jordan
at paras
84 and 85
and
r. v. stefan,
2024 oncj 565
(hereinafter “
stefan
”)
at paragraph 10.

the original information charging the defendant with careless driving
causing bodily harm was sworn november 2, 2023. this was three days after the
alleged offence date.

on november 10, 2023, the defendant was contacted by the police
and asked to attend a toronto police service (“tps”) station that same day. when
the defendant went to a tps station as requested on november 10, 2023, he was charged with two counts of careless driving causing bodily harm.
after being charged the defendant was given a summons to appear in court on
january 4, 2024.

after
being charged but before his first court date the defendant retained counsel. however,
it is not clear from the defendant’s factum in support of his charter
application (hereinafter “factum”) when he retained counsel.

the
defendant through counsel requested disclosure from the prosecution using the
city of toronto’s disclosure request form. however, city of toronto disclosure
request forms have no place to indicate the date that the form is filled out
and submitted. however, defence counsel, as an officer of the court, advised
the court the defendant made his initial request for disclosure on or around november
11, 2023. therefore, the court accepts as a fact that the defendant made his
initial request for disclosure on or around november 11, 2023.

on
january 4, 2024, 63 days from the date the original information was laid, counsel
for the defendant appeared for the defendant’s initial court appearance as his
agent. counsel for the defendant advised that he had not received initial
disclosure from the prosecution despite having requested it. the defendant’s
matter was then adjourned to may 26, 2024. later in the day defence counsel
wrote to the prosecution requesting disclosure. in his email defence counsel
advised the prosecution that as of the date of his email he had only received 1
page of disclosure, which was a 1-page motor vehicle collusion report.

on
january 5, 2024, 64 days from the date the original information was laid, a new
information was laid. this new information charged the defendant with one count
of careless driving causing bodily harm and one count of
bodily harm causing death contrary to
s. 130(3)
of the
highway traffic act.

on february 19, 2024, 109 days from the date the original
information was laid, counsel again wrote to the prosecution
requesting disclosure. in his email defence counsel noted that he had received
initial disclosure but noted there were 12 outstanding items of disclosure he
still required. all the outstanding disclosure requested by defence counsel on
this date was significant disclosure that the defendant would need to be able
to put forward a full answer and defence to charges before the court.

on february 29, 2024, 119 days from the date the original
information was laid, counsel for the defendant appeared as
agent for the defendant in court. according to the defendant’s factum the
defendant was made aware of this court date pursuant to a new summons that was
issued. on that date defence counsel advised the court they had “recently
received initial disclosure…there is a lot of – there are a lot of items that
are outstanding…that [he] wrote the prosecutor for.”


on may 28, 2024, 208 days from the date the original
information was laid, the matter returned to court for the
third time. when the matter was spoken to the prosecutor in court that day
advised that there were 3 informations before the court. during this appearance
defence counsel advised the court that the prosecutor in court advised him that
“the assigned prosecutor is getting those things (the disclosure requested by
the defence) to me, likely today.”

defence counsel then advised the court that the defendant was not “waiving 11b,
in the circumstances because of the late disclosure.”


on june 4, 2024, 215 days from the date the original
information was laid, defence counsel wrote to the prosecution
requesting further disclosure for a fourth time. in his email on this date defence
counsel noted that there were still 9 outstanding items of disclosure that he
was waiting for. all the outstanding disclosure requested by defence counsel on
this date was significant disclosure that was required by the defence to be
able to put forward a full answer and defence to the charges.

on
june 5, 2024, 216 days from the date the original information was laid, defence counsel wrote to the prosecution requesting a copy of the
accident reconstruction report. defence counsel made this request on this date
after finding out about the report from reading the officers notes according to
the email he sent to the prosecution about the report. this was significant
disclosure that the defence should not have had to learn about from reading an officer’s
notes.

on july 5, 2024, 246 days from the date the original
information was laid, the matter returned to court for the fourth
time. again, there were 3 informations before the court. on this date the
prosecutor in court who was the prosecutor with carriage of this matter advised
the court that they had sought a judicial pretrial (hereafter “jpt”)
placeholder date. they further advised that defence counsel had either agreed
or had indicated that they were available on that date. therefore, the matter
was adjourned to a date after the jpt placeholder date and defence counsel
advised that they had received the report (presumably the accident
reconstructionist report

)
that he had requested.

on september 5, 2024, 308 days from the date the original
information was laid, a jpt was held. on that date defence
counsel indicated that disclosure was not complete. they advised that they were
still waiting for medical records, a death certificate (presumably for the
deceased victim), and an updated reconstructionist curriculum vitae.

on
september 20, 2024, 323 days from the date the original
information was laid, the matter returned to court for the fifth
time. again, there were 3 informations before the court but the prosecution withdrew
2 of the informations so that only the january 5, 2024 information remained
before the court. on consent the remaining information was adjourned to the
first day of a scheduled 2-day trial set to commence on december 17, 2024. both
counsels agreed to schedule the trial dates despite disclosure still being
outstanding.

on
november 27, 2024, 391 days from the date the original
information was laid, defence counsel again wrote to the assigned prosecutor
requesting outstanding disclosure. in his email defence counsel noted that 8
different items of disclosure remained outstanding and reminded the prosecutor
that trial was scheduled for december 17 and 18, 2024. all the
outstanding disclosure requested by defence counsel on this date was
significant disclosure.

on
december 17, 2024, 411 days from the date the original
information was laid, the matter returned to court for the
sixth time. this court appearance was scheduled to be the first day of a two-day
trial. instead the court was advised that “counsel (defence) received a
substantial amount of further disclosure last week…(and that) [o]ne item that
still remains outstanding is communications tape.”

therefore, on an unopposed
basis the defence requested an adjournment of the trial and defence counsel
advised the court that 11b was not being waived “or any delay as a result of
this adjournment…up to and including the new trial date”.

on
february 6, 2025, 462 days from the date the original information was laid, the matter returned to court for the seventh time. instead of
proceeding with the charter application counsel for the defendant and the
prosecution advised the court that the defendant’s charter application
scheduled to be argued before trial began had to be adjourned. the reasons for
the adjournment were due to the fact there were issues with the time for
service of the applicant’s charter application and defence counsel had received
13 hours of audiotape disclosure the night before that needed to be reviewed in
the event the defendant’s trial proceeded. therefore, the parties were granted
an adjournment to february 27, 2025, the time for service of the defendant’s
application was abridged, the court seized itself of the defendant’s charter
application, and new trial dates were set.

when
the defendant’s charter application was argued the prosecution conceded during
oral argument that the defence did everything it could to expedite getting the
matter to trial. therefore, since the defence took all the
meaningful steps
it
could and demonstrated a
sustained
effort
to expedite the proceedings
the court is satisfied that the defence has met its onus in relation to the
first criteria on a balance of probabilities.
2.
did the case
take markedly longer than it should have?

for a court to determine whether a case takes markedly longer than it
should have from the date the information is laid case specific factors have to
be looked at.: see
jordan, at
para.
51
and
k.j.m.,
at
para.
75. those factors are
(1) the complexity of the case, (2) local factors that maybe operative, and (3)
whether the crown took reasonable steps to expedite the matter: see
jordan, at para.
87.
(a)
complexity of the case

in a unanimous per curiam decision

the court in
r v. cody,
(2017),
2017 scc 31
(hereinafter “
cody
”) provided
guidance to courts tasked with applying the concept of a “particularly complex”
case. in
cody
at para.
64
a particularly complex case was described as
follows:
unlike
defence delay and discrete events, case complexity requires a qualitative, not quantitative
assessment. complexity is an exceptional circumstance only where the case is
particularly complex. complexity cannot be used to deduct specific periods of
delay. instead, once any applicable quantitative deductions are made, and where
the net delay will still exceed the presumptive ceiling, the case’s complexity
as a whole may be relied upon to justify the time that the case has taken and
rebut the presumption that the delay was unreasonable (
jordan, at para.
80
).
a
particularly complex case is one that “because of the nature of the evidence or
the nature of the issues, require[s] an inordinate amount of trial or
preparation time” (
jordan, at para.
77.)
when
determining whether a case’s complexity is sufficient to justify its length,
trial judges should consider whether the net delay is reasonable in view of the
case’s overall complexity. this is a determination which falls well within the
expertise of a trial judge. (
jordan, at para.
79
). [end of quote]

both the defence and the prosecution agreed that the matter before the
court was not complex. the defendant’s counsel argued that the issue at trial
would be whether his client was driving carelessly at the time of the incident,
which they argued is a straightforward legal issue. counsel for the defendant
also argued that there would be no charter applications or motions brought during
the trial. whereas the prosecution argued that there is likely to be an agreed
statement of facts filed with the court at the start of the trial and that 3
witnesses in total, 1 by the prosecution and 2 by the defendant, will be
called. the prosecution also argued that should the defendant choose to testify
in his own defence his counsel would likely bring an
edgar

application seeking to have prior utterances made by the defendant at the scene
of the accident to a police officer deemed admissible.

the court agrees with counsel. trial in this matter, in the event it
proceeds, is scheduled to be heard over 2 days. a trial, if required, to
resolve this matter would not be complex. as noted with an agreed statement of
facts, 3 witnesses, no
charter
issues, and an
edgar
application a trial should
not require an inordinate amount of court time to be completed. barring an unforeseen
issue(s) arising a trial in this matter can be completed in 2 days of court
time.
(b)
local factors

in assessing local factors that may cause a case taking longer to get to
trial than is reasonable a court
“should
… employ the knowledge they have of their own jurisdiction, including how long a case of that
nature typically takes to get to trial in light of the relevant local and
systemic circumstances”:
see
jordan,
at para.
89.
in employing that knowledge, a court must “step back from the minutiae and
adopt a bird’s-eye view of the case”:
see
jordan, at para
91.

the onca has stated that the
poa
is intended
to provide a speedy and efficient process for dealing
with regulatory offences:
see
r. v. jamieson,
(1981),
1981 canlii 3223 (on ca), 64 ccc (2nd) 550 affirmed (1982)
1982 canlii 3910 (on ca), 66 ccc (2nd) 576.
(ont.c.a.) (hereinafter “jamieson”) and
nguyen
at para.
26. however,
the onca also stated that the supreme court’s decision in
r. v. k.j.m.,
2019 scc 55 (s.c.c.)
“
is categorical: the ceilings
established in
jordan
apply uniformly”:
see
nguyen
at para.
26.
therefore, even though the poa is meant to be speedier
and more efficient than the criminal process so long as charges laid under the
poa are disposed of within 18 months a defendant will be considered to have
been tried within a reasonable amount of time.

just because charges laid under the
poa
are disposed of within 18 months
means that a defendant’s right to be tried within a reasonable time has not
been violated does not mean that we should be satisfied with this state of
affairs. 18 months is a long time to wait for justice. however, the ceiling reflects the realities we currently face:
see
jordan
at para
57.

in toronto when a
poa
information is laid there are multiple ways
that the information can come before a
poa
court. for instance, a
poa
information can be sworn by a civilian employee of the tps before a justice of
the peace (hereinafter “justice”) in an intake court. an information can also be
brought to a clerk’s office for review and signing by a justice outside of
court without an tps civilian officer or employee being present. or an
information can be submitted electronically for review and signing by a justice.
once an information is sworn it is sent to a defendant via mail rather than
emailed to a defendant, which means many times a defendant is aware that they
have a matter before a
poa
court in toronto.

once an information has been reviewed and signed by a justice a
defendant’s matter is heard in another court other than where it was reviewed
and signed by a justice of the peace.

if the defendant elects to go to trial to resolve their matter the court
where the defendant appears for pretrial hearings is not necessarily the court
where the trial will take place. the reasoning behind this is that the
jurisdiction of toronto has 3
poa
courts. to ensure that a defendant
gets the earliest possible trial dates prosecutors can and do ask for the defendant’s
trial to be heard in one of the other toronto
poa
courts. that is what
happened in this matter. the defendant’s pretrial hearings took place at old
city hall in downtown toronto; but the pretrial charter application and now the
trial was scheduled at the
poa
court located at 2700 eglinton avenue west in
the west end of toronto. as happened in this case this system can lead to
informations being lost; they get lost because they are not transferred between
poa court locations electronically; they are, since the toronto poa court
system is still largely paper based, physically transported by the city of
toronto between
poa
courthouses. when an information is lost it sets up
a potential that there is duplicate informations before the court that cause
administrative adjournment requests by the prosecution to get the paperwork for
a defendant’s matter sorted out and ensure that the proper informations are
before the court. this is of course an inefficient system that leads to delay
in getting a defendant’s matter before a poa court resolved in a timely manner;
it also leads to the perception of justice delayed is justice denied despite
the supreme court’s decision in
jordan.

due to the sheer volume of charges laid under the
poa
in toronto
it is not unusual for a defendant to have to wait months from the date a poa is
laid before they get an initial court date. in this matter the defendant had to
wait 64 days for a first court date. for a system that is supposed to be
streamlined and more efficient as observed by the onca originally in 1981 and
then again in 2020 just over 2 months is too long for a defendant to have to
wait for an initial court date after being charged.

when an information comes before a justice for a pretrial hearing it is
not unusual for a defendant to appear in a court that has a very heavy list.
the voluminous number of charges laid under the
poa
on a yearly basis and the limits
of judicial resourcing have led to super tiers; a super tier is created when matters
from two separate courts are combined and heard by a single justice in one
court. if this were not bad enough when a defendant’s matter is before the
court a justice is reliant on establishing the court’s jurisdiction

to deal with the matter by reviewing a paper information that the court clerk must
retrieve from the clerk’s office and bring to court. if an information is not
before a court when the defendant’s matter is called it can lead to the defendant’s
matter having to be held down to allow the clerk to find the information.

often justices presiding over a poa court in toronto adjourns a defendant’s
matter due to disclosure issues. this leads to defendants coming before poa
courts in toronto sometimes a dozen or more times before their matter(s)
resolve. luckily in this case the defendant had counsel and the defendant
and/or his counsel only had to appear on three (3) occasions. however, every
time a justice adjourned the defendant’s matter in this case it was due to ongoing
outstanding disclosure.

due to the significant amount of self-represented defendants who appear
before the poa court’s in toronto often defendants resolve their matters
without reviewing the disclosure. they either do so because the matter is not
complex, they are unaware of their right disclosure, or if they know about
disclosure how they go about obtaining their disclosure. if a defendant orders
disclosure it most often is paper based disclosure that they receive either by
picking it up in person or via email from the prosecutor with carriage of the
matter. the issues with getting disclosure to defendants is archaic and lengthy
as outlined below and is just a comment on the paper-based disclosure provided to
defendants. when a defendant orders anything other than paper-based disclosure,
referred to as multimedia disclosure, it causes further and sometimes very
lengthy delays in resolving
poa
matters as was the case in the matter before
this court.

on february 19, 2024, counsel for the defendant requested that the
prosecution disclose 54 audiotape recordings made by tps officers while at the
scene of the accident amongst other disclosure that was requested. these
recordings combined were approximately 13 hours total in duration.

on september 20, 2024, despite significant disclosure being outstanding,
including but not limited to the 54 audiotapes’, on consent, the defendant’s
matter was scheduled to be heard for trial on december 17 and 18, 2024. as the
defendant’s initial trial dates approached the defendant’s counsel, on december
10, 2024, received 476 pages of e-paper disclosure, 26 separate multimedia files
that were 10 hours in length in total. this necessitated an adjournment of the
defendant’s trial, which was granted by the court on december 17, 2024, at the
request of the defendant and unopposed by the prosecution. the adjournment was
granted because defence counsel needed time to review the new disclosure and
the 54 audiotapes that had been requested still had not disclosed as of
december 17, 2024. the defendant’s matter was set for a second time to proceed
to trial on february 6, 2025, and march 18, 2025.

on february 4, 2025, according to an email dated february 5, 2025, from
the prosecutor with carriage of the defendant’s matter that formed part of the
defendant’s legal factum in support of his charter application, the 54
audiotapes requested by the defence were received by the prosecution from the
tps. according to the prosecutor’s email the 54 audiotapes were disclosed to
the defence on the morning of february 5, 2025. therefore, the defendant’s 2
nd
scheduled trial and now his charter application that was scheduled to be argued
on february 6, 2025, were adjourned to february 27, 2025, to hear the
defendant’s charter application as a standalone matter before trial and to march
21
st
and april 14, 2025, for a third (3
rd
) time for trial
if the defendant’s charter application was unsuccessful.

as
the court stated in its brief oral reasons for decision on february 27, 2025,
the fact that the defence requested substantial disclosure from the prosecution
on february 19, 2024, and disclosure was not fully provided to the defendant
until february 5, 2025 – 342 days from the date tps first received notice of
the disclosure request – which necessitated not one, but two adjournments of
the defendant’s trial is very concerning. it is very concerning because the tps
is aware of its obligation to provide complete disclosure of all evidence in
its possession and as it becomes available as soon as possible. the tps has
been aware of this obligation since at least november 11, 1991, when the
supreme court released their decision in
r.
v. stinchcombe,
1991 canlii 45 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 326
if not
before. there is simply no excuse for the tps
to
not have
provided disclosure to the prosecution,
almost all of which, save and except for the accident reconstructionist report,
was in its possession as of date of the incident or shortly thereafter.

this
is unacceptable and regrettably, as the court heard disclosure in
poa
matters is not provided in the same manner as criminal matters. this together
with submissions from the prosecution leads the court to two conclusions. the
first conclusion is that as the supreme court stated in
jordan
at
paragraph
57
the 18 months ceiling in provincial matters reflects the realities
the courts currently face when trying to resolve matters that come before
poa
courts in toronto. the second conclusion that the court came to is that the tps
prioritizes its stinchcombe obligation in criminal matters over its stinchcombe
obligation in
poa
matters. the court will not address how it came to
this second conclusion.

during submissions, the court asked the prosecution to address local
factors. in response the prosecutor advised the court as follows:
1.
the prosecutors who are responsible for trying defendants charged under
the
poa
do not have access to the provincial crown’s office scope system, which
provincial crowns trying criminal cases use to communicate with one another
about the status of criminal cases and track the progress of criminal charges
as they make their way through the criminal court system. that means that for a
poa prosecutor to get an update on what has transpired in a defendant’s poa
proceeding, unless they have carriage of the prosecution from the time the
information is laid until the charges are resolved, they have to either electronically
or physically communicate with their colleagues who have dealt with a defendant’s
poa charges to get an update;
2.
provincial prosecutors do not receive disclosure from the tps the way of
the provincial crowns who are responsible for trying criminal cases do.
poa
disclosure is received by way of an “archaic electronic system”, which the
court understands is called versadex.
disclosure for poa matters is processed and sent to provincial prosecutors by a
civilian employee of the tps through a tps terminal located in the city prosecutor’s
office. when disclosure is missing a provincial prosecutor must reach out directly
to the officer who laid the poa charge to obtain it.
3.
if multimedia disclosure, as was the case in this matter, is requested
by defence counsel, then prosecutors must use another system to receive it. two
of the systems that the prosecution explained to the court are used to receive
multimedia disclosure are evidence.com or moveit.
if disclosure is required to be sent through evidence.com then the officer must
send it through tps video services. whereas if moveit is used to send multimedia
disclosure then a prosecutor must download the program to their laptop to
receive it.

in addition to what was described by the prosecution, the court
understands that disclosure system is worse than described. it is the court’s
understanding that there is only one tps terminal located in the city
prosecutor’s office for the purpose of downloading disclosure. if the court’s
understanding is correct this would mean that if one prosecutor is using the
terminal all the other prosecutors must wait their turn.

from the outside looking in the
poa
prosecution system in toronto
can only be described as a system in shambles. it appears that the prosecutor’s
office lacks an effective and proper file management system. instead of having access
to a modern file management and disclosure distribution software program, prosecutors
are left managing their files and getting disclosure to defendants via a patchwork
system that is held together by some “bailing wire and twine”

with a hope and prayer thrown in for good measure.

if the disclosure system is as bad as the court is led to believe, then
it is no wonder why the
poa
courts in toronto have trial courts where multiple
matters are set for trial on tiers that are only scheduled to last for 1 hour
and 10 minutes but can last upwards of 1 hour and 30 minutes if required and
the court does not take a break. the
poa
trial system in toronto, if the
foregoing is correct, must be premised on the assumption that most trials set
for a tier will not proceed for various reasons. this is how the system works
in provincial criminal court as outlined in
r v.
s.a.,
2024 onca 737
at paras
39 –
41.
39 whatever
the reason, those trials that do not proceed on their trial dates fall within
the “collapse rate”, something that has “always existed in the criminal
courts”:
r. v. lui,
2024 onsc 2022,
at para.
26. as a direct
result of the collapse rate and the desire to achieve maximum efficiency by not
having courtrooms left empty, trial coordinators will deliberately overbook or
“stack” trial lists. code j. noted this reality in the toronto region: “[t]here
are almost always excess cases scheduled for trial in a given week because the
reality is that a certain number of cases invariably ‘collapse’, either on the
trial date, shortly before the trial date, or shortly after the trial date”:
liu,
at para.
27.
40 a
judicious use of stacking is to be encouraged, not discouraged, because it
avoids leaving courtrooms empty and judges without trials. done properly,
stacking will generally reduce trial delays. of course, there is a risk that,
from time to time, such as in this case, not every trial will be reached as the
collapse rate that week is less than anticipated. where this happens, it is
reasonable to expect that cases will be triaged taking into account
constitutional demands. one would expect that those cases that risk breaching
the
jordan
ceiling will likely be given priority
over cases such as this one, which was well below the ceiling and, therefore,
presumptively reasonable.
41
 in the real world, where resources are in fact
finite, this is precisely the way that the administration of criminal justice
must operate, with a view to meeting the constitutional requirements of each
individual case within the context of the system as a whole. it brings to mind
what doherty j.a. wrote more than 25 years ago, “[n]o case is an island to be
treated as if it were the only case with a legitimate demand on court
resources”:
r. v. allen
(1996),
1996 canlii 4011 (on ca),
92 o.a.c.
345 (c.a.), at para.
27,
aff’d
1997 canlii 331 (scc),
 3 s.c.r. 700.

if the court’s rational is correct the rational that underpins trial
scheduling in criminal courts is the same rational applied to trial scheduling
in toronto poa courts. no other rational would make sense. the court’s rational
would also explain why trials in toronto
poa
courts are scheduled in
what is being termed super tiers.
(c)
did crown take reasonable steps?

since the matter before the court is scheduled
to start and finish before the 18-month ceiling
established in
jordan
the court must start from the position that the state has brought the defendant
to trial within a presumptively reasonable time.: again
see
r v. s.a.
at para
35.
the court is also mindful that if the crown has
done its part, it is unlikely that the time requirements of a case will have
been markedly exceeded.: see
jordan
at paras.
90 and 112
and
stefan
at para.
12.

during oral argument defence counsel indicated that as of the defendant’s
february 29, 2024, court date they had initial disclosure and had requested
further disclosure. he also indicated during oral argument that on february 29,
2024 the he had “talked to her (the prosecutor) today, and she has kindly made
efforts already underway, to get me those additional items (the requested
further disclosure).”

a reasonable person would assume that with initial disclosure having been
provided to defence counsel within 122 days of the offence date that the
defendant’s matter would be ready to be set for trial forthwith. afterall, all
the disclosure, save and except for the accident reconstructionist report were
in the possession of the tps either as of the date the allegation arose or
shortly thereafter. however, given the local factors as outlined above, the
court must
step back from the
minutiae and adopt a bird’s-eye view of the case.

stepping back from the minutiae and looking at the
poa
prosecution system in toronto from a bird’s-eye view the supreme court’s comments
in
jordan
are apropos. the 18-month ceiling imposed by the supreme court
in
jordan
as it relates to provincial matters is unfortunately a
realistic timeframe within which a defendant should expect their matters to be
resolved; not 13 or 14 months as argued by defence counsel citing the case of
r
v. bazos,
 o.j. no. 4627 at paragraph 21
in support
of his position. the court says this even though as the onca recently reaffirm
in
nguyen
that the poa process is meant to be a
speedy and efficient process.

given the local factors as the court understands them; the volume of
poa
charges laid on a yearly basis in toronto; until there is much needed reform to
the
poa
system in toronto the
poa
prosecution process cannot and
should not be expected to be a speedy and efficient process. this is the
unfortunate situation in toronto’s
poa
courts as of the date the
defendant’s
charter
motion was argued. it is unfortunate because defendant’s
have a right to tried within a reasonable time and should expect to have their
matters resolved in less than 18 months. they should be resolved in no more
than 13 – 14 months as argued by defence counsel in this court’s opinion.
however, that is not the reality that the citizens of toronto is faced with
when coming before the poa courts in toronto.

defence counsel argued that the defendant’s case was one of those rare
cases where the court should stay the proceedings even though they still had
not reached the 18-month ceiling. defence counsel argued that his client fell
into the category of a “rare” case because:
1.
the defendant
took all reasonable steps to move the matter towards a resolution as soon as
practicable, which the prosecution conceded;
2.
there was no
defence delay as was conceded by the prosecution; and
3.
the matter was
not complex as was also conceded by the prosecution.

the court does not agree that the defendant’s case is a “rare” case as
argued by his counsel. the court does not agree because given the local
conditions so long as the defendant’s matter is started and resolved within
18-months
the prosecution has brought the defendant
to trial within a reasonable time.

even using the 1
st
trial date as
the yardstick, see
r. v. belle,
 o.j. no. 6809 at para. 8,
as argued by the defence
the prosecution did everything
it could reasonably do, given local factors, to get this matter resolved in
under 18 months. the prosecution set the first trial date on september 20, 2024,
even though disclosure was not yet competed. when the first trial date had to
be adjourned because of disclosure issues the prosecution rescheduled the
defendant’s trial to start within a reasonable short period of time given the volume
of
poa
charges before the court and the courts resources available to
hear stand alone
poa
matters that require 2 whole days of trial.
finally, when the 2nd trial date had to be adjourned due to disclosure issues
caused by local factors and a third trial date had to set the prosecution to
all reasonable steps to make sure that trial dates were secured, albeit not on
consecutive days, that would ensure that the defendant’s matter was resolve
within 18 months.
conclusion

the relief that the defendant sought in his charter application was a
stay of proceedings. this is the only relief that the defendant sought. it is
the only relief sought because it was the only relief open to the defendant to
seek: see
r. v. charley
2019 onca 726,
147 o.r. (3d) 497, and
in
r. v. hartling
2020 onca 243,
150 o.r. (3d) 224.

however, that does mean a stay of proceedings maybe the only remedy
available to a court when hearing an 11b application in the future. writing on
behalf of a unanimous court tulloch j.a. opined that there is merit to the
argument that a court does have jurisdiction to order a remedy other than a
stay of proceedings based on the language of
s.
24(1)
of the
charter, which is a position that this court agrees with.
however, the question of whether a court will have that jurisdiction will not
be answered until there is a clear holding from the majority in a scc decision about
whether jurisdiction is lost after unreasonable delay: see
r v. charity,
2022 onca 226
at para
47.

until such time as there is a clear holding from a majority of the scc
the only option open to this court is to determine whether to grant or deny the
requested stay. in the matter before the court the defendant’s request for a
stay is denied. it is denied for the foregoing reasons.
released: march
24, 2025
signed:
justice of the peace r. shawyer

february 29, 2024, court transcript.

may 28, 2024, court transcript.

supra

presumably because defence counsel did not indicate to the court on this date
what report they had been waiting for but did indicate that they were “going to
forward that to the defence expert and be ready for the jpt with any
report…(the defence) might ask the crown to consider.: july 5, 2024 transcript”

december 17, 2024, court transcript.

supra.

a per curiam decision of a court of law is a unanimous decision of a court of
law sitting as a panel of judges, as opposed to sitting as a judge alone, where
the decision delivered by the court is not attributed to one particular judge sitting
on the panel.

r. v. edgar
(d.j.),
(2010)
2010 onca 529 (canlii),
269 o.a.c. 171 (ca)

“jurisdiction” in this instance means where the court is physically located.

“jurisdiction” in this instance means the court’s legal authority to deal with
a defendant’s matter.

versadex is a suite of
software applications, also known as versadex policecad, that includes a
records management system (rms), computer-aided dispatch (cad), mobile report
entry (mre), and mobile data terminal (mdt), used by public safety agencies.

moveit transfer (formerly known as moveit dmz or
moveit file transfer) supports the exchange of files and data between servers,
systems and applications within and between organisations, as well as between
groups and individuals using a common shared folder with simple browser access
for users.

the court is using the phrase to figuratively to describe a prosecution system that
appears to be barely holding together, or that is put together in a makeshift
and unreliable way.

february 29, 2024, court transcript.