source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj173/2025oncj173.html

citation:
r. v. patel, 2025 oncj 173
date: 2025·03·31
court
file no.: 4814 998 23 40001100 toronto region
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
simitkumar patel
before
 justice david porter
decision
 and reasons on
charter
application for a stay
heard
 on july 22-25 and 30, october 28-31, november 1, 2024, and january 27-31, 2025
decision
 dated march 31, 2025
c. valarezo…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 for the crown
s. digiuseppe / j. proskos………………………………………………………………. 
 for the defendant
porter j.:

the defendant, simitkumar patel (“mr.
patel”) is charged with four offences alleged to have been committed between
february 6, 2023 and march 9, 2023:
(i)
by means of a telecommunication, communicate
with a person, who was or was believed to be under the age of sixteen years, for
the purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under s.151, contrary
to
s.172.1 (1)
(b) of the
criminal code;
(ii)
did without lawful excuse, make child pornography,
contrary to
section 163.1(2)
of the
criminal code;
(iii)
did make available sexually explicit material to a
person, who was or believed to be under the age of sixteen years, for the
purpose of facilitating the commission of an offence under
s.151
of the
criminal
code
with respect to that person, contrary to
section 171.1(1)
(b) of the
criminal
code;
and
(iv)
did, without lawful excuse, possess child pornography,
contrary to
section 163.1(4)
of the
criminal code.

counsel on behalf of mr. patel brought an
application seeking declarations that the applicant’s sections 7, 9, 10 (a), 10(b),
and s.11 (e) rights under the
charter of rights and freedoms
(“the
charter
”)
have been violated and seeking a stay of proceedings under
section 24(1)
of the
charter.

the charges arose as a result of an
undercover sting operation in which detective constable (“dc”) guy kama posed
online as a 13-year-old female named “amelie” (sometimes referred to as “emily”). 
the crown alleges that mr. patel engaged in discussions with amelie first on a
website “chatiw.com” and then on snapchat for the purpose of facilitating the
commission of sexual offences.

the crown alleges that mr. patel made an
arrangement to meet with amelie on thursday, march 9, 2023 at the york mills
centre for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity with amelie. members of
the child exploitation unit of the toronto police attended at the proposed
meeting and arrested mr. patel at 9:35 a.m. on thursday, march 9, 2023.

it is not disputed by the crown that, as the
police did not arrange for mr. patel to appear in court until 5 p.m. on march
10, the police breached mr. patel’s rights under
s.503
of the
criminal code,
and that as a result mr. patel was arbitrarily detained, and his
s.9
charter
rights were infringed. the crown does not accept the defence claim that
other
charter
rights were also infringed and, in any event, the crown
submits that this is not the clearest of cases in which a stay of proceedings
is an appropriate remedy for the s.9
charter
breach.
the alleged s.10(b) violation

the audio record of the arrest filed in evidence
records that dc kama stated to mr. patel at 9:35 a.m. on march 9, 2023: “you’re
under arrest for making arrangements to commit sexual assault on a child. 
okay? you are also under arrest for making child pornography and possessing
child pornography. i’m going to read you your rights to counsel now.”

dc kama then read to mr. patel his rights to
counsel, stating as follows:
“it’s my
duty to inform you that you have the right to retain and instruct counsel
without delay. you have the right to telephone any lawyer you wish. you also
have the right to free advice from a legal aid lawyer. if you’re charged with
an offence, you may apply to the ontario legal aid plan for assistance.
1-800-265-0451 is a number that will put you in contact with the legal aid duty
counsel lawyer for free advice right now. do you understand what i just said?
mr. patel: yes
dc kama: okay.
do you wish to call a lawyer now?
mr. patel: you
mean the free counsellor?
dc kama: yes
mr. patel: yes.
sure. sure.

dc kama made no response to mr. patel’s
affirmation that he wanted to speak to duty counsel now. he did nothing to
attempt to facilitate mr patel’s request to speak to duty counsel at 9:35 a.m.

dc kama made no further inquiries but stated
next,
“dc kama: so when we get to the station, you’re going to be
transported to a police station. once you get there, you’ll have access to the
telephone where you will be able to speak to legal duty counsel, do you
understand that part?
mr. patel: yes”.

in his evidence, dc kama stated that he
carried a special cell phone to use to facilitate a call to counsel if the
accused demands it when they are given their rights to counsel. he testified
that if mr. patel had demanded speaking to a lawyer immediately at the york mills
centre after being told of his rights to counsel, he would have made it happen. 
he testified that there was nothing to prevent him from facilitating that call.

he testified that he would caution the
accused that the privacy available for the call may not have been ideal, that
there is better privacy at the station, but if mr. patel had insisted, he would
use the cell phone he had to make it happen. he stated that he would not deny
the accused’s request to call duty counsel if an accused is insistent.

he acknowledged that mr. patel could have
been placed in the back of a scout car with the special cell phone to call
counsel. dc kama testified that he did not facilitate a call to duty counsel
for mr. patel, using the back seat of the scout car for privacy (with the
officers out of the car) because mr. patel “agreed” with the plan of going to
32 division and calling duty counsel from there.

i reject this evidence. i do not believe
dc kama when he testified that he would have facilitated a call to counsel
prior to booking if mr. patel had insisted on it. in fact, he had told mr.
patel as part of his rights to counsel, that there was a number he could call
for free legal advice from duty counsel “right now”. when he asked mr. patel
if he wanted to call a lawyer “now”, mr. patel clarified “you mean the free
counsellor?” and when that was confirmed mr. patel said “yes”.

this was a clear request that was simply
ignored by dc kama. dc kama’s conduct in ignoring mr. patel’s clear request to
call duty counsel “now” is inconsistent with his evidence that he would have
facilitated a call using his special cell phone carried for that purpose if it
had been requested.

he acknowledged that he had an opportunity
to act upon the request by facilitating a call from the scout car at the york
mills centre, or subsequently in the over 20 minutes he was at 32 division
waiting for mr. patel to be admitted into the booking hall. he did neither. i
do not believe him when he said he would have facilitated a call if mr. patel
had insisted. in my opinion, he gave misleading evidence to the court on this
issue in an attempt to justify his conduct in this case.

after advising mr. patel of his rights to
counsel, dc kama then repeated the charges for which mr. patel had been
arrested and cautioned him as follows:
dc kama: “you are
not obliged to say anything in answer to the charge, but what ever
you say may be given in evidence. do you understand that?
mr. patel: yes
dc kama: 
so that means you don’t have to talk to me. you don’t have to talk to anybody,
okay? if you understand, i’m going to, i have called for a uniform car to come
and transport you to 32 division here in toronto. i’m going to stop this
recording and when the officer gets here, we’ll walk you to the car. do you
understand?
mr. patel: okay”
mr. patel: yes

police constable (pc) brooks was the
transport officer assigned to transport mr. patel to 32 division. mr. patel
was given a pat-down search, and placed in the back of pc brooks’ scout car and
driven to 32 division between 9:49 and 10:02 a.m.

pc brooks drove mr. patel to 32 division
where the door to the sallyport was closed. she arrived at 32 division at
10:02 a.m. and waited until 10:13 a.m. to be admitted into the sallyport, where
she waited for mr. patel to be admitted into the booking hall at 10:33 a.m.

pc brooks had a work cell phone. she
stepped out of the squad car and used it to call the booking sergeant at about
10:09 a.m. to advise they were waiting outside the sallyport. she acknowledged
that the audio in the in-car camera in the scout car could be turned off and
she could have given her phone to mr. patel to use to call duty counsel but, in
her 5 years of experience, she had never seen that done. she testified that, in
her experience, the common practice is to book an accused into the station and
provide privacy after booking for the accused to call counsel.

dc kama and his partner pc purchas can be
seen on pc brooks’ in-car camera arriving at 32 division at 10:11 a.m. mr.
patel remained handcuffed to the rear in the back seat of pc brooks’ scout car
throughout the transport and until he entered the booking hall at 10:33 a.m. dc
kama made no effort to facilitate a call to duty counsel by mr. patel during
the time between 10:11 a.m. and when they entered the booking hall at 10:33
a.m.

the booking process started at 10:33, ended
at 10:55, and mr. patel was lodged in a cell at 32 division. he was removed
from his cell and spoke to duty counsel at 11:33 a.m., approximately 2 hours
after his arrest.

dc kama acknowledged that mr. patel was
co-operative at all times during and after the arrest and during the booking
process. he did not resist arrest. mr. patel was frisk-searched when he was
arrested, and had no weapon, and gave the officers no reason to be concerned
about his mental health. a criminal records check confirmed he had no criminal
record.
the law on s. 10(b) facilitation
of rights to counsel

the duty on the police to facilitate access
to counsel immediately upon arrest or detention as a component of
charter
s.10(b) rights, was summarized by abella j. in
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50 (canlii), 2
s.c.r. 495 at paras. 24-26, and 28:
“ 
the duty to inform a detained person of his or her right to counsel arises
“immediately” upon arrest or detention (
suberu, at paras. 41-42), and
the duty to facilitate access to a lawyer, in turn, arises immediately upon the
detainee’s request to speak to counsel. the arresting officer is therefore under
a constitutional obligation to facilitate the requested access to a lawyer at
the first reasonably available opportunity. the burden is on the crown to show
that a given delay was reasonable in the circumstances (
r. v. luong
(2000),
2000 abca 301 (canlii), 271 a.r. 368, at para.
12
(c.a.)). whether a delay in facilitating
access to counsel is reasonable is a factual inquiry.
 
this means that to give effect to the right to counsel, the police must inform
detainees of their s. 10(b) rights
and
facilitate access to those rights
where requested, both without delay. this includes “allowing [the detainee]
upon his request to use the telephone for that purpose if one is available” (
manninen,
at p. 1242). and all this because the detainee is in the control of the police
and cannot exercise his right to counsel unless the police give him a
reasonable opportunity to do so (see
brownridge v. the queen,
1972 canlii 17 (scc), 
s.c.r. 926, at pp. 952-53).
 
until the requested access to counsel is provided, it is uncontroversial that
there is an obligation on the police to refrain from taking further
investigative steps to elicit evidence (
r. v. ross,
1989 canlii 134 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 3,
at p. 12;
r. v. prosper,
1994 canlii 65 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 236, at p. 269).
….
 
but the police nonetheless have both a duty to provide phone access as soon as
practicable to reduce the possibility of accidental self-incrimination and to
refrain from eliciting evidence from the individual before access to counsel
has been facilitated. while s. 10(b) does not create a “right” to use a
specific phone, it does guarantee that the individual will have access to a
phone to exercise his right to counsel at the
first
reasonable
opportunity”. [emphasis in original]

in the leading
charter
case of
r.
v. strachan,
1988 canlii 25(scc), dickson c.j.c. considered a claim to a
breach of
s.10(b)
of the
charter
where, during the execution of a search
warrant, at his apartment, the accused, upon arrest, attempted to call his
lawyer from his apartment. the police did not permit this as they wanted to
have “matters under control” by conducting the search, and locating 2
registered firearms, and identifying 2 unknown people in the apartment. after
the search was concluded, the accused was taken to a police station and called
his lawyer from there.

in considering when the accused should have
been permitted to call his lawyer, dickson c.j.c. stated at para. 34:
“thus i
would say that the violation of s. 10(b) did not occur when constable bisceglia
initially prevented the appellant from telephoning his counsel. but once the
accused had been arrested, the weapons located, and the other two people had
left, the police were clearly in control and there was no reason why they
should not have allowed the appellant to telephone a lawyer. i would hold that
the denial of counsel began from that point.”

a recent decision to the same effect is the
decision of davies j. in
r. v. regan-tafreshi,
2023 onsc 4792, at paras.
248-252.

in
r. v. rover,
2018 onca 745, at
paras.
24-28, doherty j.a. summarized the obligation of the police to
facilitate access to advice from counsel under
s.10(b)
of the
charter:
“
section 10(b)
of the
charter
guarantees to anyone arrested or detained
the right “to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be informed of
that right" (emphasis added).

section 10(b) obliges the police to advise a detained person of the right to
speak with counsel without delay and, if the detained person exercises that
right, the police must immediately provide the detainee with a reasonable
opportunity to speak to counsel:
r. v. suberu, 2 s.c.r. 460,
 s.c.j. no. 33,
2009 scc 33, at paras.
38, 42;
r. v. bartle,
1994
canlii 64 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 173, s.c.j. no. 74, at pp. 191-92
s.c.r.
 the
s. 10(b) jurisprudence has, however, always recognized that specific
circumstances may justify some delay in providing a detainee access to counsel.
 those circumstances often relate to police safety, public safety or the
preservation of evidence. for example, in
r. v. strachan,
1988 canlii 25
(scc), 2 s.c.r. 980, s.c.j. no. 94, the court accepted that the
police could delay providing access to counsel in order to properly gain
control of the scene of the arrest and search for restricted weapons known to
be at the scene. subsequent cases have accepted that specific circumstances
relating to the execution of search warrants can also justify delaying access
to counsel until the warrant is executed: see, e.g.,
r. v. learning,
 o.j. no. 3092,
2010 onsc 3816, 258 c.c.c. (3d) 68 (s.c.j.), at paras.
71-75.
 these
cases have, however, emphasized that concerns of a general or nonspecific
nature applicable to virtually any search cannot justify delaying access to
counsel. the police may delay [page143] access only after turning their mind to
the specifics of the circumstances and concluding, on some reasonable basis,
that police or public safety, or the need to preserve evidence, justifies some
delay in granting access to counsel. even when those circumstances exist, the
police must also take reasonable steps to minimize the delay in granting access
to counsel: see, e.g.,
r. v. patterson,
 b.c.j. no. 104,
2006 bcca
24, 206 c.c.c. (3d) 70, at para.
41;
r. v. soto, o.j. no. 1644,
2010 onsc 1734 (s.c.j.), at paras.
67-71;
learning, at para.
75;
r.
v. wu, o.j. no. 653,
2017 onsc 1003, 35 c.r. (7th) 101 (s.c.j.), at
para.
78.

wu,
at para.
78, provides a helpful summary of the law. that summary includes the
following:
the
assessment of whether a delay or suspension of the right to counsel is
justified involves a fact specific contextual determination. the case law on
this issue reveals some general guiding principles that provide a framework for
this assessment:
a.
the suspension of the right to counsel is an
exceptional step that should only be undertaken in cases where urgent and
dangerous circumstances arise or where there are concerns for officer or public
safety......
e.
police officers considering whether circumstances
justify suspending the right to counsel must conduct a case by case assessment
aided by their training and experience. a policy or practice routinely or
categorically permitting the suspension of the right to counsel in certain
types of investigations is inappropriate.”

recently, in considering an alleged breach
of
s. 10(b)
of the
charter,
dawe j.a. stated in
r. v. samuels,
2024
onca 786
at para.
24:
“when
access to counsel is delayed, as it was here, the burden is on the crown to
show that a given delay was reasonable in the circumstances:
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50, 2 s.c.r. 495, at para.24;
r. v. hobeika,
2020 onca
750, 153 o.r. (3d) 350 at para.73.”

in my opinion, on the particular facts of this
case, the crown has not satisfied its onus to prove that the delay in the
facilitation of access to counsel was reasonable.

dc kama acknowledged in his evidence that he
had a cell phone available which could have been used to facilitate a telephone
call to counsel by mr. patel as early as immediately upon his arrest at the
york mills centre. mr. patel was frisk-searched upon arrest, had no criminal
record, and no weapons. he was placed in handcuffs when he was arrested, which
were not removed until he was paraded before the sergeant at 32 division at
about 10:33 a.m.

even after advising that he had access to
free legal advice from duty counsel “right now”, and even after mr. patel said
that he wanted to speak to duty counsel when asked if he wanted to speak to a
lawyer “now” at about 9:35 a.m., no efforts were made by dc kama to explore
options such as placing a call to duty counsel on his police cell phone and
giving mr. patel privacy to take the call inside the rear of the closed scout
car, before leaving for 32 division. dc kama acknowledged that this was
reasonably practicable, albeit with less robust privacy than would be available
at the police station, but testified he would have facilitated it if mr. patel
had insisted on it.

i find that in stating that he wanted to
call counsel “now” mr. patel asked to call counsel immediately, and that a
private call using the privacy of pc brooks’ scout car (with the icc audio off)
was reasonably practicable, but this was simply ignored by dc kama, although dc
kama acknowledged in his evidence that he had the ability to make that call
happen as early as after mr. patel’s arrest at the york mills centre. i find
that on the particular facts of this case mr patel was not given access to a
phone that was available for a private call to counsel at the first reasonable
opportunity:
r. v. taylor, supra, at para.28.

similarly, no consideration was given to
facilitating a call to duty counsel between 10:02 and 10:33 a.m. when mr. patel
was waiting in the scout car before being taken in for booking. it was clear
from pc brooks’ evidence that no thought was given to facilitating access to
counsel before booking because it was not the usual routine of the toronto
police service. no fact-specific inquiry was done by the police to consider
facilitating earlier access to counsel for mr. patel, an accused without a
criminal record, arrested for a non-violent offence who had been searched to protect
officer safety and where dc kama had a special cell phone available to
facilitate a private call to counsel.

there was no evidence that dc kama
considered facilitating a call from the back of the scout car, with officers
observing at a distance to ensure privacy. as pc brooks acknowledged, the
audio in the in-car camera in the police scout car in which mr. patel sat from
10:02 to 10:33 a.m. could have been turned off to provide privacy. this was
simply not considered by the officers. i find that the delay was not justified
by officer safety, public safety, or preservation of evidence concerns: see
r.
v. regan-tafreshi, supra, at paras. 248-252 (onsc).

the crown has not met its onus of
establishing that the delay was reasonable. i therefore find a breach of mr.
patel’s s.10(b) rights to counsel.
the interview of mr. patel

at 1:27 p.m. on march 9, dc kama and his
partner pc purchas conducted an interview of mr. patel at 32 division. the
entire interview was recorded on video, and a transcript included in the application
record.

after saying he did not need to have the
charges repeated, mr. patel said “i don’t want to talk about it, talk about
anything.”

the interview then proceeded with
questioning by dc kama as follows at p. 5 and following:
“officer: 
i would like you here to have a conversation with you, but you're not obliged
to take part of [sic] that conversation. i just want it to be clear.
patel: yeah.
officer: okay? 
uh, i will explain a little bit about ourselves. we work in the child
exploitation section of the toronto police. the focus of our job is to
identify and rescue children. and sometimes through the course of what we do,
we come into contact with people that we end up arresting, okay, which is the
case today. however, our main focus is to help and rescue children. and
that’s why we wanna talk to you today. and considering the aspect of our job,
i believe it will be neglectful of me to simply throw you in a cell and
disappear and never talk to you or try to talk to you at any point, okay? i
don’t need you to admit to anything. i don’t need you to admit to making or
possessing child pornography, because that's evidence and we're looking at that
from[sic] another factor.
patel: sure.
officer: but what
i'm interested in is getting to know you …
patel: okay.
officer: … and
finding background questions in order to determine whether or not we, at the
end, believe you -, you're a risk to the community, a risk to children.
patel: okay.
officer: okay. so
that’s -, i'm gonna start with the simple things, like, uh, background, like
your -, i understand based on the information on the driver's licence, you live
in whitby. how long have you lived there?”

after asking a series of innocuous questions
about mr. patel’s background, and asking if mr. patel knew what child
pornography and luring were, dc kama stated at pp. 12-13:
“officer: 
“uh, so i did tell you earlier that our, our main focus is, is to rescue
children, to protect children, and to make sure they're safe. and that's why,
and that’s why we wanna talk to you. uh, uh, we wanna determine whether you’re
a higher risk to the community or lower risk to the community. and the purpose
of this conversation is not to get evidence from you, not to trick you into giving
us evidence, because we already have the evidence, okay? we’ve, to talk to
you, we’ve already talked to, uh, emily (ph), okay? and we've already gotten
what we need from, from her, okay? so now we wanna talk to you to determine
like who you are. is this something that you do all the time? do you meet
underage …
patel: i don't
know if i should say it, but i have never met anybody online before.
officer: okay.
patel: this was my first
attempt to meet somebody online.
officer: okay. but do you try
to meet you-, young girls online?
patel: i never met anybody
online in my 10 years of married life.”

the officer quickly began to ask questions
about the offence of luring for which mr. patel was arrested, whether emily had
agreed to meet, that the meeting was for “sexual kind of things”, and what
website he used to start speaking to her.

when at one point mr. patel said that he did
not want to discuss what he and emily discussed, the following exchange
occurred at p. 32:
“officer:
okay. so remember that i told you we -, that we were not here to get evidence
from you, because we already have it, right? we do have copies of the chats
that we got from emily's phone. so if, if i was to put some to you. do you
remember sending this picture?
patel: yes
officer: okay.
patel: yes.
officer: did
she ask you to send this picture?
patel: no. 
but we talked about a few things, so maybe that’s why i send the picture.”

at one point, at pp. 39-40, mr. patel asked
if “amelie”, the name dc kama used as a fictitious child in the chats, was a
real person. pc purchas lied and assured him she was a real person.

pc purchas made it clear in the interview
that, in light of the fact that mr. patel had condoms when arrested, he did not
believe mr. patel when he said that he had decided it was wrong to have sex
with amelie, and decided not to do so, prior to arriving to meet her.

mr. patel’s demeanour on the video shows he
became extremely upset and, as he confirmed in his evidence, he was almost
crying.
he said at p. 47:
“as you
guys said, you are not trying to get evidence here. you already have the
evidence.”

dc kama testified that his purpose in the
interview was 2-fold – to speak to the accused to “build a better case” and
also to understand the accused to be able to conduct better investigations in
the future.

he stated that he believed too often accused
are arrested and no effort is made to speak with them. he felt it would be
neglecting his duty to not speak to the accused, and that this is a personal
duty he imposes on himself. he denied that by telling the accused that the
interview was “not to get evidence” he had subverted the previous caution because
mr. patel had understood his rights.

he admitted that he considered mr. patel to
have “opened the door” by saying, after being told that the interview was not
to obtain evidence, that this was his first attempt to meet someone online. dc
kama stated that he then seized the opportunity to get information on the
offence, and continued to do so throughout the rest of the interview. he
acknowledged that he asked numerous questions about the offence, including mr.
patel’s purpose in meeting amelie, an essential element of the offence of
luring.

dc kama acknowledged that at no time did he
or dc purchas ever advise mr. patel that the stated purpose of the interview
had changed and they were now getting evidence in relation to the offences with
which he was charged.

i find that dc kama’s purpose in conducting
the interview was principally to build a stronger case by getting admissions to
prove the elements of the offence of luring. to do this he lied to mr. patel
to reassure him that he was not obtaining evidence as the police had their
evidence. in my opinion this was a deliberate subversion of mr. patel’s right
to remain silent. the effect of this lie was to mislead mr. patel, to negate
the effect of the caution and to undermine his previously asserted right to
remain silent. it struck at the very heart of mr. patel’s fundamental rights
guaranteed by
s.7
of the
charter.

i do not believe dc kama when he claimed in
his testimony to this court that his other purpose was to learn more from mr.
patel to assist him in his other investigations into other people. i find this
was a false claim to try to justify what i find was the deliberate execution of
a trick to undermine the caution given, and mr. patel’s exercise of his right
to remain silent. i find that dc kama mislead mr. patel about the true purpose
of the interview which was, as dc kama conceded, to “build a better case”.

dc kama admitted in cross-examination that
he knew that anything of evidentiary value in the statement would be used as
evidence. the fact that dc kama was questioning mr. patel to obtain evidence, and
that he intended this, is confirmed by the fact that he expressly referred to
the interview of mr. patel in the information to obtain a search warrant for mr.
patel’s phone, and residence, the day after the interview.
other features of the march 9
interview

dc kama admitted in his evidence that he
misled mr. patel in the interview that amelie was a real child.

at the beginning of the interview, shortly
before telling mr. patel that the purpose of the interview was to determine
whether he was a risk to children in the community, he contrasted conducting
this interview with the other option of throwing mr. patel into a cell,
disappearing and never talking to him. dc kama stated:
“however, our main focus is to help and rescue children. and that’s why we
want to talk to you today. and considering the aspect of our job, i believe it
will be neglectful of me to simply throw you in a cell and disappear and never
talk to you or try to talk to you at any point okay?”

i find that the implicit assertion in dc
kama’s statement, followed by the claim that the purpose of the interview was
not to get evidence, but to assess mr. patel’s risk to children, was that answering
dc kama’s questions would assist mr. patel in being released.

i accept mr. patel’s evidence that he only
spoke to the police because they told him it was not evidence, but rather
information to assess his risk to the public. he had no knowledge of the
criminal justice system, and believed that dc kama could release him that day
if he answered their questions and showed that he was not a risk to the public.

he testified he had spoken to duty counsel
before the interview and had decided he would not answer any police questions
until he had further legal advice from duty counsel or his lawyer. when the
interview strayed into areas specific to his interaction with amelie, mr. patel
challenged why he was being asked that, only to be reassured by dc kama that
the questions were not being asked to get evidence, but only to determine his
risk to the public. mr. patel testified that based on this assurance he
answered their questions as he inferred that, if it was to assess his risk to
the public, he could be released if the officers were persuaded that he did not
present a risk.

mr. patel was challenged in
cross-examination on his evidence that he had not heard about a bail hearing to
determine if he could be released until he was told that by dc kama at the end
of his interview. the booking video showed that the sergeant said in the
course of booking, while speaking to both mr. patel and dc kama earlier that
day at 10:54 a.m.:
“okay so sir,
you’re going to be held in our custody pending further investigation and then
your bail hearing, so you could put him into cell five. keep your mask.”

mr. patel testified that he had forgotten
this reference to the bail hearing when he testified, but in any event the sergeant
did not say who made the decision on release, and when dc kama told him his
questions were to determine his risk to children he believed dc kama could
effect his release based on his answers.

i accept mr. patel’s evidence that he
believed that dc kama was in a position to decide whether he could be released
that day.

i find that mr. patel was intentionally
misled by dc kama, that he only answered questions because he was misled that
the answers would not be used as evidence, and were to assess his risk to
children, and that if he had not been mislead, he would not have spoken to the
police.
the alleged breach of s.7 of the
charter
in the conduct of the interview of mr. patel

the right to remain silent protected by
section 7
of the
charter
is the right of a person in custody to make an
informed choice as to whether to speak to the authorities:
r. v. hebert,
1990 canlii 118 (scc), 
2 s.c.r. 151, at pp. 176-178.

section 7
of the
charter
ensures that
the state cannot use its superior power over a detained person to effectively
deprive a detained person of the choice. as mclachlin j. stated in
r. v.
hebert, supra
at pp.180-181:
“the scope
of the right to silence must be defined broadly enough to preserve for the
detained person the right to choose whether to speak to the authorities or to
remain silent, notwithstanding the fact that he or she is in the superior power
of the state. on this view, the scope of the right must extend to exclude
tricks which would effectively deprive the suspect of this choice. to permit
the authorities to trick the suspect into making a confession to them after he
or she has exercised the right of conferring with counsel and declined to make
a statement is to permit the authorities to do indirectly what the
charter
does not permit them to do directly. this cannot be in accordance with the
purpose of the
charter.
”

the supreme court in
r. v. whittle,
1994 canlii 55 (scc), 
2 s.c.r. 914 at p.932 summarized the
charter
guarantee of the right of a
detainee to choose whether to speak to the police as follows:
“the
preoccupation of the common law and
charter
cases in preserving for the
suspect the right to choose has been in relation to state action. did the
action of the police authorities deprive the suspect of making an effective
choice by reason of coercion, trickery, or misinformation or the lack of
information?”

as the supreme court has noted, even where a
person is a suspect, not yet arrested and detained, police conduct that
deceives the person that a statement made is not evidence that can be used
against them is a breach of s.7 and renders a statement given by the person inadmissible
in evidence.

in
r. v. tessier,
2022 scc 35, at
para.
86, kasirer j. notes that where there is evidence that an accused’s
statement may be involuntary because he did not know that it may be used in
evidence a detailed inquiry is appropriate.

he states at para. 87:
“in these
circumstances, it is appropriate for the trier of fact to undertake a
contextual inquiry to determine whether an unfairness arose that vitiates
voluntariness by denying the right to silence. this might arise where there is
evidence that police trickery, for example circumstances in which the absence
of a caution is the result of a wilful failure to give a caution, or a
deliberate tactic to manipulate the suspect into thinking they have nothing at
stake..... impropriety on the part of the police, usually in the form of
obscuring the jeopardy faced by the suspect to encourage cooperation, may
unfairly deny a suspect their right to silence. but even if it does not rise to
that level, deceiving the interviewee into thinking that, as a mere witness
they are in no jeopardy and that their statements will not be used in evidence
against them could preclude admissibility at the end of the day. “the ability
to make a meaningful choice remains pertinent where trickery is involved” write
lederman, fuerst and stewart “and exclusion is mandated where there is a
reasonable doubt as to the confession’s voluntariness in this regard”.

as noted by hill j. in
r. v. van wyck,
1999 carswell ont. 4822
at para.149:
“custody
imports a relationship of dependency-the prisoner cannot walk away-the prisoner
relies upon his or her jailers for not only the basic necessities of life, but
also for civilized recognition of individual dignity associated with respecting
a lawful refusal to cooperate in the creation of self-incriminatory evidence. accordingly,
it has been said that a person in custody is “in a position of disadvantage
relative to the state” because he or she “may be at risk of incriminating him
or herself:
r. v. bartle, supra
at 300, per lamer c.j.c.”

accordingly, s. 7 of the
charter
protects an accused in custody from an unfair use of the state’s superior power
to unfairly subvert an accused’s constitutional right to choose not to make a
statement to the police.

as summarized by hill j. in
r. v. van
wyck, supra
at para.154:
“the loss of
equilibrium [between the accused and the state]is described in
hebert....:
“... the state is
not entitled to use its superior power to override the suspect’s will and
negate his or her choice.....
the scope of the
right [to silence] must extend to exclude tricks that would effectively deprive
the suspect of this choice.
was there other police conduct which effectively and unfairly deprived
the suspect of the right to choose whether to speak to the authorities or not?
drawing the
balance where i have suggested the
charter
draws it permits the courts
to correct abuses of power against the individual...
police persuasion, short of denying the suspect the right to choose... does
not breach the right to silence.
the violation of
the suspect’s rights occurs only when the crown acts to subvert the suspect’s
constitutional right to choose not to make a statement to the authorities.
when the police
use subterfuge to interrogate an accused after he had advised them that he does
not wish to speak to them, they are improperly eliciting information that they
were unable to obtain by respecting the suspect’s constitutional right to
silence: the suspect’s rights are breached because he has been deprived of his
choice.
this right of choice comprehends the notion that the... actions of the
authorities have not unfairly frustrated his or her decision on the question of
whether to make a statement to the authorities.”

in
r. v. van wyck, supra, the police
interviewers told accused that they had a few questions for the bail package. this
created the risk that the prisoner might be led to respond to police inquiries
out of a desire to cooperate and to provide information in the hope of securing
his release. as hill j. noted at paragraph 159 of that case:
“the
introduction of the topic of bail, without a clear line of demarcation, in the
sense of notice of the commencement of interrogation to elicit incriminatory
facts was, in the circumstances, little more than an unfair gimmick or
subterfuge designed to undermine the right to make an informed choice about
answering a series of police questions”.

as noted earlier, i find in this case that
the police lied to mr. patel about the purpose of their questions when they
told him that it was not to obtain evidence. i find that this was a deliberate
trick that subverted his right to silence. i accept mr. patel’s evidence that,
based on the police assertion that the purpose of the questions was to
determine his risk to the public, he believed, based on these assurances, that
the answers to be given were to determine his eligibility for release from
custody that day. the false statement that the interview was not conducted to
obtain evidence amounted to an unfair use of the superior power of the state to
completely subvert mr. patel’s constitutional right to choose not to make a
statement to the authorities and amounted to a serious breach of his section 7
right to remain silent.
the alleged failure to advise of
rights to counsel in an expanded investigation

when he conducted the interview dc kama was
in possession of his chats with mr. patel in which dc kama was posing as a 13-year
old girl. in the course of the chats, mr. patel claimed to have had oral sex
with a 15-year old girl before. if this had occurred, it would be the offence
of sexual interference with an unknown girl, for which mr. patel was neither
arrested or cautioned.

dc kama acknowledged that in interviewing mr.
patel he wanted to learn whether mr. patel was committing sexual offences with
other children. at p. 27 of the interview, he asked mr. patel if he had ever
touched a child for a sexual purpose. he admitted that in this question he was
asking him if he had committed sexual interference, an offence under
s.151
of
the
criminal code. he also asked mr. patel whether he had committed
luring with other children. he did not tell mr. patel that he was being
investigated for other criminal offences in addition to the offences involving
amelie.

when he testified further in reply, dc kama
testified that, although he asked mr. patel if he had ever had sex with a
child, and while having sex with a child would be a crime, he was not
investigating a separate sexual interference offence, but rather was only
interested to see how quickly he answered the question, and how “strongly” as
an indication of whether he was lying or not.

he testified that, even though mr. patel had
said in his chats that he had performed oral sex on a 15-year old girl, dc kama
claimed he had no evidentiary basis to suspect that mr. patel had had sex with
a child. while he claimed he was not investigating mr. patel for a separate
sexual interference charge he admitted that one step in such an investigation
would be to ask a person if he had ever done that.

i find that dc kama’s evidence that he was
not investigating mr. patel for a separate sexual interference offence is not
credible. his statement that he wanted to see how fast he answered as a test
of credibility does not make sense when there is no evidence that dc kama had
independent evidence that mr. patel had in fact had sex with a 15-year old as
he had claimed in his chat.

i find that in light of mr. patel’s
statement in the chat that he had had oral sex with a 15-year old, made in the
context of the highly sexual nature of mr. patel’s statements in the chats to
“amelie”, dc kama was engaged in an investigation of a separate sexual
interference offence by asking mr. patel if he had ever touched a child for a
sexual purpose.

dc kama acknowledged that in the interview
of mr. patel he also asked him about other luring offences.

the evidence is clear that he did not
provide rights to counsel or a caution in relation to these separate offences
at any time.
the law on s.10(a) and 10(b)
when there are several bases for the detention or the purpose of detention and
interrogation expands

the law is clear that, when an accused is
detained in relation to a specific offence, and the police subsequently expand
their investigation to have an additional purpose, the original offence being
investigated, and another separate offence, the police have an obligation under
s.10(a)
of the
charter
to inform the accused of the expanded
investigative intention.

as the supreme court of canada noted in
r.
v. borden,
1994 canlii 63 (scc), 1994 carswell ns 26, at para.
43:
“once
matters reached a point at which the officers were investigating two offences, the
respondent was detained in relation to both of them, and had the right to be
informed of this dual investigative intention. therefore, i find that the
right of the respondent under
s.10(a)
of the
charter
to be informed of the
reasons for his detention was violated in this case.”

furthermore, it is clear that an accused is
entitled to know the entire basis for his detention, and potential jeopardy, to
be able to meaningfully exercise his s.10(b) right to counsel.

the circumstances in which police are
required to re-state the right to counsel when the basis for detention is
expanded is comprehensively addressed by doherty j.a. in
r. v. sawatsky,
1997 carswell ont. 2994 (ont. c.a.) at paras 29-31,34-36:
“knowledge
of the purpose of the detention is so important to the informed exercise of the
right to counsel that the police are constitutionally required by
s. 10(a)
of
the
charter
to promptly inform a detained person of the reasons for her detention.
 where there is more than one reason for a detention, they must all be
disclosed:
r. v. borden, supra, at p. 165 s.c.r., p. 419 c.c.c.....
the link
between a detained person's need to understand the extent of her jeopardy, that
is, the nature and extent of her risk of self-incrimination, and the effective
exercise of the right to counsel, provides the key to the determination of when
the police will be required to reiterate the right to counsel in the course of
an ongoing detention. if the risk of self-incrimination changes, the right to
counsel must be restated so that a detainee can decide in the face of the new
risk whether to exercise her right to counsel. the risk may change either
because the reason for the detention changes or the focus of the police inquiry
changes. referring to the latter situation, mclachlin j. in
r. v. evans,
supra, at p. 893 s.c.r., pp. 306-07 c.c.c. wrote:
i do,
however, affirm that, in order to comply with the first of the three duties set
out above [the police duty to inform the detainee of the right to counsel] the
police must restate the accused's right to counsel where there is a fundamental
and discrete change in the purpose of the investigation, one involving a
different and unrelated offence or a significantly more serious offence than
that contemplated at the time of the warning. (emphasis added)
in this
passage, mclachlin j. observes that the focus of the police investigation may
change either because the offence changes to a significantly more serious one,
even though the circumstances under investigation remain the same (e.g.,
r.
v. black, supra
), or because the investigation turns to a different and
unrelated offence (e.g.,
r. v. chartrand, supra
). either change
triggers the obligation to restate the detainee's s. 10(b) rights.....
crown
counsel submits that constable chartier's questions never got beyond the “exploratory”
stage and that most, if not all, of the information pertaining to the kingston
fire was volunteered spontaneously by the appellant. relying on
r. v.
evans, supra, counsel submits that as the questioning did not go beyond the
“exploratory” stage, there was no need to readvise the appellant of her s.
10(b) rights in relation to the kingston fire.
the trial
judge made no finding of fact on this issue. the distinction between
exploratory questions preceding an investigation and questions which are part
of an investigation can be difficult to make. in many situations, there is no
clear demarcation. exploration flows seamlessly into investigation.
considering
the purpose underlying s. 10(b) and its fundamental importance in maintaining
the fairness of the criminal investigatory process, i think it is appropriate
to decide close cases in favour of the reiteration of the s. 10(b) rights. the
police should be encouraged to readvise detainees of the right to counsel when
the focus of an investigation begins to shift or broaden. the administration
of criminal justice is better served by a restatement of the detainee’s s. 10(b)
rights which is a little early than one which is too late to serve its intended
purpose. once the police have a realistic indication that a detainee may
incriminate herself in a different and unrelated offence, the police should, if
they wish to pursue that area of investigation, reiterate the detainee's right
to counsel and connect that right to the new allegations.”

in this case, prior to mr. patel’s
interview, the police were in possession of mr. patel’s chats with dc kama, posing
as a 13-year old girl, containing content of a highly sexual nature. mr. patel
had stated in the chat that he had had oral sex with a 15-year old. he
appeared to be arranging a meeting with “amelie” on march 9 for the purpose of
engaging in sexual relations. in the chats, mr. patel had expressed an
interest in oral sex with teenage girls. dc kama told mr. patel in the
interview that he wanted to determine the extent of the risk mr. patel posed to
children. in this context, he asked him if he had lured other children or had
touched a child for a sexual purpose.

in my opinion, this questioning went beyond
exploratory questions preceding an investigation, and were questions that were
part of a more general investigation of mr. patel in relation to other possible
sexual offences in relation to other children on other occasions, in addition
to the offences in relation to “amelie” in relation to which he had been
arrested and cautioned.

accordingly, the police were obliged to
re-state mr. patel’s right to counsel in relation to these additional offences
being investigated, which they failed to do. by failing to do this, they
violated mr. patel’s rights under
s.10(b)
of the
charter.
denial of access to the
telephone

mr. patel raised during his booking that he
wanted to call his family.

he asked the staff sergeant as follows:
“mr. patel: how
do i talk to someone if i need to?
dc kama: you
will have reasonable use of the telephone
sgt. sager: we’re gonna put you in touch with duty counsel. we
have a number that we call for duty counsel
mr. patel: like
what if i want to talk to a family member?
sgt. sager: a
family member? right now it’s only going to be…
mr. patel: after i talk to the duty counsel, then i’m going to
be able to talk to them?
sgt. sager: you
will probably only be able to talk to a lawyer right now.
mr. patel: okay
sgt. sager it’ll be up to the detective to decide who else. i
know nothing about your case, so i can’t tell you.”
mr. patel: okay. 
sure. no worries.”

during the interview, dc kama made it clear
that he was “the detective” referred to, as he told mr. patel that he was
detective constable kama “the officer-in-charge of this case.” (transcript, p.
3)

at the end of the interview shortly after
2:33 p.m., the following exchange occurred at p. 61 between dc kama and mr.
patel:
“officer: okay?
and we’ll walk you back to the cell. so court now is virtual. its not in
person. so you’ll be in front of a screen and that’s how you go to court
okay?
patel: okay. so right here?
officer: not here, in a different room.
patel: okay.
officer: okay. so let's go back to the cells.
patel: oh, the -, i go back to the cell and
then we’re gonna come back.
officer: and then from there, yes.
patel: so how long this going to take?
officer: oh, i can't really give you a, a
time, but it’s [sic]will be late.
patel: so when would i get my phone back to
just contact my family member?
officer: the phone was seized. you can, okay. 
the phone was seized. i explained that to you. we have to, we have to go to
the court.
patel: but then my family will be worried,
right? because i haven’t talked to them since morning, right?
officer: okay. well, you can have, uh,
reasonable use of the telephone, i’m sure here. and you'll be able to tell
them, you know your phone number by, by heart.
patel: yeah.
officer: okay. so i’m sure they can make, uh, i’m
sure they can make that happen.
patel: uh, when would that be?
officer: i, i can’t tell you. i can only ask,
okay?
patel: okay.
officer: i can't tell you when, but i can ask.
patel: okay.”

dc kama was the officer in the above
exchange. he conceded in his evidence that in this exchange mr. patel asked to
call his family. he acknowledged that as the officer-in-charge of the
investigation he was responsible to decide on a prisoner’s request to use the
phone, at least while he was on duty and at the station. i find that he lied
to mr. patel when he said that “i can only ask” if mr. patel could call his
family. he was the officer who could determine if and when mr. patel could
call his family, having been told by mr. patel that they would be worried as he
had not spoken to them since that morning.

dc kama admitted he delayed the decision on
letting mr. patel call that day until it was decided that the toronto police service
(“tps”) would not execute a search warrant that day. he agreed he was not
prepared to give him access to the phone to call his family that day.

he testified that on march 9 he did not have
enough manpower to execute a search warrant at mr. patel’s house. he stated
that he had no grounds to execute a search warrant at night.

he testified that because mr. patel had not
called his family he had no concern that evidence might be destroyed.

he testified when he left 32 division at the
end of his shift on march 9, he did not leave instructions for mr. patel to be
refused access to the phone to call his family.

he testified that he took a chance that mr.
patel might call and ask his family to destroy evidence on his computer, and if
mr. patel had used the phone that night, he knew that his family might destroy
evidence, and that nothing would be found when the search warrant was executed. 
he stated that he would not deny access to the phone for just this reason. he
stated he just took a chance by not denying access to the phone to mr. patel. he
stated that he ensured mr. patel had access to the phone and that he knew his
home number to call.

i do not accept his evidence that he ensured
mr. patel could use the phone and just took a chance that he did not.

i find that in telling mr. patel that
someone else had to decide if and when he could use the phone to call his
family, and “i can only ask”, dc kama was lying to mr. patel. the staff sgt.
had confirmed that the detective (ie: dc kama, the officer-in-charge) made that
decision.

there is no evidence that dc kama ever
“asked” anyone at 32 division for mr. patel to have access to the phone because
it was dc kama who made that decision.

dc kama mislead mr. patel because he knew he
had not yet obtained the search warrant for mr. patel’s house so he misled him
into thinking some officer may decide to let him call his home, and that dc
kama would ask.

in fact, dc kama admitted in
cross-examination that if the booker had called him when he was at the station
to get permission for mr. patel to call his family, he would have said to delay
or deny it because he had not obtained the search warrant on march 9.

i do not believe dc kama when he testified
to the court that he ensured mr. patel had access to the phone to call his
family and was prepared to take a chance that he would not make the call, and
took the chance that if mr. patel did call, the evidence may have disappeared
when he executed the search warrant the next day. i find on the evidence that,
in fact, dc kama had determined that mr. patel would not be permitted to call
his family that day.

i find that dc kama deliberately deflected
mr. patel’s stated wish to call his family and, as a result, as confirmed in
the evidence of mr. patel’s brother, parthkumar patel, and the evidence of
monali patel, mr. patel’s wife, mr. patel’s wife, parents and sibling worried
that he had come to harm when he failed to return home on march 9. they
worried that he may be dead, as it was so unusual for him to not return home, or
call to explain his delay in getting home from work. i accept monali patel’s
evidence that family members cried during this time fearing that mr. patel was
dead.

mr. patel’s brother flew from kelowna to
toronto to assist mr. patel’s family to cope with his unexplained failure to
return home on march 9. he contacted numerous hospitals to see if his brother
was there. family members contacted go transit to try to determine if he had
travelled on the go train as was his practice to and from work. they checked
to see if his bank accounts had been used. mrs. patel contacted a work
colleague of mr. patel and learned that he had not been at work that day which
increased her fear and anxiety.

mrs. patel sought assistance from durham
regional police who met with her but provided no information about mr. patel’s
whereabouts, even though they advised in an email to mrs. patel at 4:05 a.m. on
march 10 that they had informed toronto police of their efforts to locate mr.
patel.

i find that mr. patel’s wife and family
experienced significant distress over the period from march 9 in the early
evening until the morning of march 10 as a result of receiving no information
from the police that mr. patel was in custody, notwithstanding the fact that
they had reached out to durham police for assistance in finding mr. patel.

mr. patel was not taken to court on march 9 and
accordingly it was only on march 10 between 9:30 and 10 a.m., about 24 hours
after mr. patel’s arrest, that the family learned from duty counsel assisting
on mr. patel’s bail, that he had been in tps custody for the whole time they
had been anxiously searching for him.

mrs. patel testified she was shocked to hear
from duty counsel that her husband was arrested and had been in custody all the
time they were searching for him. she testified they had contacted the police
and, if he had been arrested, she assumed they would have told her in response
to their complaint that he was missing. she testified that she expected that,
by contacting the police, the family would have been told if mr. patel was in
custody. she testified that if they had been told this as a result of their
inquiries, the family would not have suffered so much.

neither the durham regional police, who had
been contacted to try to find mr. patel, or the tps, ever contacted the family
to advise mr. patel was in custody of the tps.
failure to get mr. patel to
court on march 9

dc kama finished the interview of mr. patel
at 2:33 p.m. as confirmed in the interview, his attendance for his bail
hearing was virtual, so there was no need to transport him anywhere.

dc kama testified that before the interview,
between arriving at 32 division and starting the interview at about 1:27 p.m.
he was working to prepare the case for submission to court, assisted by edit
tamas. this involved preparing the synopsis, bail papers, list of officers
involved in the investigation, etc. he testified that the time of arrest was
incorrect
ly entered into versadex as 10:40 a.m. rather
than 9:35 a.m. in error.

he testified that edit tamas worked on the
submission while he interviewed mr. patel until about 2:30 p.m. the mcneil
checklist was started at 10:48 a.m. and the video evidence log at 12:07 p.m. dc
kama testified that he discussed with his supervisor his need for a search
warrant and that they lacked the manpower to execute a search warrant on march
9 because it was after 2 p.m., the end of the shift of the persons in his unit.

the mcneil checklist part of the case to be
sent to court was entered in versadex at 15:04:42. the entire bail package
including the prosecution summary, show cause, and details for the information
to be sworn was printed at 15:04:39. dc kama testified that that was the time
it was submitted to charge processing, triggering the ability of the case to be
placed before the court.

dc kama testified that to trigger an accused
going to court, the court package is entered into versadex, and it is “pushed”
to charge processing. he testified that he called charge processing on march 9
when he forwarded the court package to charge processing. he testified that
once he submitted the case to charge processing his duty to get the case to
court for a bail hearing as soon as possible, and in any event within 24 hours,
is fulfilled.

he acknowledged that, as the officer-in-charge,
it was his responsibility under
s.503
of the
criminal code
to get mr.
patel to court for a bail hearing, “without unreasonable delay”, and in any
event within 24 hours of arrest.

he acknowledged that after he submitted the
case and told the court officers it was ready to go, he did nothing to ensure mr.
patel got into court on march 9. he made no further inquiries to ensure mr.
patel was appearing in court that day, or to determine if mr. patel had, in
fact, appeared in court on march 9.

mr. patel did not attend court at all, by
video or in person, on march 9. his first attendance in bail court did not
occur until 5:00 p.m. on march 10.

dc kama did not start drafting the search
warrant application until 6:00 a.m. on march 10. he submitted it at 9:30, the
search warrant was granted at 11:11 a.m., and the tps operations centre was
notified at 11:42 and durham regional police at 11:48 because it would be
executed in durham.

in correspondence to duty counsel at 9:22 a.m.
on march 10, ms. valarezo, the crown bail vettor, stated:
“the crown
is requesting a 2 day adjournment pursuant to s.516(1) to allow the police time
to obtain and execute a search warrant in the accused’s home. they have rpg to
believe that mr. patel has cp at home.”

shortly after she spoke to duty counsel
about being a surety for mr. patel, mrs. patel sent her identification and
photo, and a surety declaration, to duty counsel at about 10:15 a.m. on march
10.

the search warrant was executed at mr.
patel’s house in durham at 1:34 p.m. on friday, march 10. mrs. patel
facilitated the execution of the search warrant. she was distraught and broke
down.

the search of the house was completed at
2:04 p.m. and the search team left the house at that time.

dc kama did not contact the crown at 2:04 p.m.
to advise that the search had been completed, and that the request for a 2-day
hold was no longer needed.

he did not call the crown at all.

at 4:22 p.m., he got a call from defence counsel
acting for mr. patel who asked him to call the crown and advise that the search
warrant had been executed.

he emailed the crown at 4:32 p.m. and
advised that the search warrant had been executed. he acknowledged that he
could have called sooner, and in his evidence on july 25 could not recall the
reason for the delay.

when he testified on november 1 in reply, dc
kama’s evidence on this issue changed. he claimed to now remember that he had
driven back to 42 division and, as was his usual practice, he updated versadex
with a supplementary report to record that the search warrant had been executed
and that the 2-day hold was no longer required. he testified that he assumed
this information would have been available to the crown at bail court.

he acknowledged that he could have informed
the crown earlier that the 2-day hold was no longer needed, but he did not do
so.

mr. patel’s bail was not addressed in court
until friday, march 10 when he first appeared in bail court at 5:00 p.m. mr.
demarco had been retained to assist mr. patel.

in the court attendance at 5:00 p.m., the
justice of the peace stated to counsel:
“he may
want to leave, but we can’t deal with his matter today. i can suggest that his
matter be given priority on monday to the extent that it can be, insofar as we
are not able to reach his matter today.”

as mrs. patel was not accepted by the crown
as a surety for mr. patel’s release, the bail hearing was not held, and the
case was adjourned to monday march 13, 2023 when he was released on a consent
release with 2 sureties – mr. patel’s mother and his mother-in-law.
the law:
s. 503
criminal code

section 503
of the
criminal code
states:
“(1) subject
to the other provisions of this section, a peace officer who arrests a person with
or without a warrant and who has not released the person under any other
provision under this part shall, in accordance with the following paragraphs,
cause the person to be taken before a justice to be dealt with according to
law:
(a) if a
justice is available within a period of 24 hours after the person has been
arrested by the peace officer, the person shall be taken before a justice
without unreasonable delay and in any event within that period; and
(b) if a
justice is not available within a period of 24 hours after the person has been
arrested by the peace officer, the person shall be taken before a justice as
soon as possible.”

the ontario court of appeal has confirmed
the importance of the right guaranteed in
s. 503
as an important right fundamental
to the liberty of the subject.

in
r. v. poirer,
2016 onca 582,
weiler j.a. stated for the court at paras. 57 and 61:
“ section 503 reflects an important fundamental right in our
society, namely, the liberty of the subject, which is not to be taken away
except in accordance with the law:
r. v. simpson,
1994 canlii 4528 (nl ca), 
n.j. no. 69, 88 c.c.c. (3d) 377 (c.a.), at pp. 386-87 c.c.c., rev’d
on other grounds
1995 canlii 120 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 449, s.c.j. no. 12. in holding that the accused's detention
was arbitrary [page 448] in
r. v. truchanek,
1984 canlii 5683 (bc sc), 
b.c.j. no. 3200, 39 c.r. (3d) 137 (co. ct.), hogarth co. ct. j. stated, at
pp. 170-71 c.r.:
“[e]ven if
the detention was but for hours, even if the detention was to obtain evidence of
the commission of a serious crime, the deliberate illegal refusal to present
[the accused] according to law was in my view a matter of vital importance for
the people of this community, as it opens up to the police the idea that any
one of us who has the misfortune to be arrested could be held for any length of
time in order to extract a confession, to locate evidence and, for that matter,
for any other purpose at their whim.”....
first, s.
503 requires that the appellant be brought before a justice of the peace “without
unreasonable delay”, not just within 24 hours. instead, 24 hours represents
the outer limit:
r. v. storrey,
1990 canlii 125 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 241, s.c.j. no. 12, at p. 256 s.c.r....”

where the police fail to bring an accused
before a justice of the peace without delay there is an arbitrary detention, and
a breach of
s. 9
of the
charter, whether the failure to comply was
deliberate or simply neglectful:
r. v. poirier, supra, at para
89;
r.
v. raios,
2018 onsc 6867,
per
faieta, j. at para. 22.

the fact that the police
intended to seek an order under section 516 to adjourn the bail hearing for two
days, in order to execute the search warrant, is no justification for failing
to present mr. patel to a justice of the peace to ensure that any further
detention was subject to court supervision.

as the court of appeal
noted in
r. v. poirier,
supra, at para
58:
“compliance with s. 503 is not simply a matter of form. nor
does it matter that the appellant may not likely have been released by a
justice of the peace while the bed pan vigil was being conducted. if the
police had complied with section 503, the manner in which the appellant
continued to be detained would have been subject to court supervision. the
appellant’s detention would have changed from being a detention pursuant to the
execution of the general warrant to a court monitored detention that ensured
the ongoing protection of the appellant’s
charter
rights.”

in
r. v. mendez,
2014 onsc 498,
forestell j. has summarized the requirement of
s.503
of the
criminal code
and
its statutory purpose at paras. 104-109:
“ s
ection 503(1) requires the arresting officer to bring an
arrested person, who is not released under any other
provision of
the
criminal code, before a justice
without unreasonable delay to be dealt with according to law. the outer limit
for this delay is 24 hours:
r. v. simpson
(1994),
1994 canlii 4528 (nl ca), 117 nfld.
& p.e.i.r. 110 (c.a.), rev’d on other grounds,
1995 canlii 120 (scc), 1 s.c.r.
449;
r. v. koszulap
(1974),
1974 canlii 1461 (on ca), 20 c.c.c.
(2d) 193 (ont. c.a.).
 
an inquiry into the seriousness of the infringing conduct begins with an
examination of the purposes underlying
s. 503. a review of the
jurisprudence reveals two interrelated purposes: judicial review of detention
and the transfer of control of accused from the police to the courts.
 
as nordheimer j. noted in
r. v. brown,
 o.j. no. 2830
(s.c.), at para. 9, aff’d
2009 onca 633, 247 c.c.c. (3d) 11:
the clear
spirit and intent… [of ss. 503 and 516 are] to ensure that a person who is
arrested has the ability, at the earliest possible opportunity, to have a
judicial officer review their detention and determine if the continuation of
that detention is warranted. there can be no debate that any person who is
arrested is entitled to prompt and early determination as to the legitimacy and
necessity of their detention. this is normally accomplished through a formal
bail hearing.
 
nordheimer j. also noted, at para. 10, that this purpose is bolstered by
the
charter
in
ss.
11(e)
(constitutional right to bail) and 10(c) (right to have detention
determined by way of
habeas corpus
).
 
similarly, the newfoundland court of appeal stated in
r. v. simpson,
at para. 39, that:
it is the duty of the arresting officer to ensure that the
person is not detained any longer than is absolutely necessary and that, if he
or she is not authorized by law to bring about the release, the person is brought
before a justice of the peace who may determine whether the detention should
continue or not…
 section 503 has a second purpose: to
transfer control of the accused from police to the courts and the prosecution....”

the importance of this right
in the protection of individual liberty is clearly established in the
jurisprudence. as forestell j. notes at paras. 111-112 of
r. v. mendez, supra,
“ while the ability of the police to continue to
investigate is not curtailed by a judicial remand, the remand introduces a
level of judicial supervision over the detention. the importance of the
provision has been recognized by canadian courts. in
r. v.
simpson, at para. 36, goodridge c.j.n. stated,
section
503 may be one of the most important procedural provisions of the
criminal code. the liberty of the
subject is dominant. a person not convicted of an offence should never be held
in custody except in accordance with constitutionally valid provisions of
the
criminal code
or other legislation.
 
in the context of discussing the predecessor to s. 503, martin j.a. wrote
in
r. v. koszulap, at para.
32:
[t]he administration of criminal justice in this country is
predicated upon the due observance of fundamental safeguards. it is the duty of
the courts, at all levels, to be vigilant in making sure that these safeguards
are not overlooked or ignored.”

sitting in the superior court in toronto, forestell
j. noted the systemic nature of the problem of the failure of the police to
comply with
s.503
of the
criminal code
for a decade in 2014:
r. v.
mendez, supra, at para.
114.

band j. in
r. v. noor,
2022 oncj 140
at para.
50
agreed with the conclusion in
r. v. mendez, supra, that
non-compliance with
s. 503
has been systemic in toronto for, as he found, for
“close to 20 years”.

in
r. v. raios,
2018 onsc 6867, at
para.
33, faieta j. noted in a case in toronto that “the crown did not dispute
the defendant’s assertion that the breach of
s.503
of the
criminal code
is a
“systemic” problem”.

on the facts of this case, the seriousness
of the failure to comply with
section 503
of the
criminal code
was
greatly exacerbated by the police refusal to take any steps to inform mr.
patel’s family that he was safe and in custody. mr. patel alerted police on
several occasions to the fact that his family would be worried about him. rather
than telling him clearly that he would not be permitted to call, and giving him
an opportunity to request that the police themselves contact his family, he was
misled into thinking that a call would likely be permitted at some undetermined
time in the future, which in fact never occurred as long as he was at 32
division.

instead of ensuring that mr. patel appeared
in bail court without unreasonable delay on march 9, the police chose to obtain
a statement from him, induced by a violation of his right to remain silent by
misleading him as to the purpose of the statement. engaging in this
charter
breach wasted valuable time in which mr. patel was entitled to be taken to bail
court without unreasonable delay.

i find that if this had occurred, the
inevitable involvement of duty counsel, and a canvassing of possible sureties,
inevitably would have resulted in mr. patel’s wife and family learning of his
detention on march 9, and the significant suffering and anxiety which they
experienced would have been avoided. the agreed statement of facts filed in
evidence states that once a list of persons detained at police stations is sent
to duty counsel, they call into the division to speak to the person detained. i
conclude this would have happened on march 9, and mrs. patel likely would have
been contacted as a potential surety that day if mr. patel had been on the bail
court list for march 9.

similarly, the sense of isolation, helplessness,
lack of control, and vulnerability to the effect of misleading statements by
the police to mr. patel, ignoring his request for food which he could eat,
which greatly contributed to his distress, all would have been greatly reduced
by proper compliance with
section 503
of the
criminal code.

an essential purpose of
section 503
is to
ensure that the continued detention of an accused be subject to judicial
supervision, and not the unsupervised decision of the police to keep him in
custody. the effect of the failure to comply with
section 503, meant that a
judicial officer had no opportunity to consider the reasonableness of a request
to keep mr. patel in custody to facilitate the execution of a search warrant
which the police had taken no steps to obtain on march 9. a judicial officer
may well have denied the section s. 516 application, in the circumstances, or
required the police to act with diligence in seeking and executing the search
warrant in a timely way, so as not to delay mr. patel’s release beyond the end
of court on march 10.

instead, the important purpose of judicial
supervision of mr. patel’s continued detention did not occur because the police
achieved their purpose of having him detained until the search warrant had been
executed by simply breaching section 503 with the result that his continued
detention was an arbitrary detention, in breach of
section 9
of the
charter,
rather than the result of the proper consideration of the section 516
application by a judicial officer.

on the evidence before
me, i find that the failure by the police to cause mr. patel to appear in bail
court, from 32 division, was the result of unacceptable negligence by the
police in failing to ensure compliance with the obligation imposed by
section
503
of the
criminal code
to take mr. patel before a justice without
unreasonable delay.

mr. patel was arrested
at 9:35 a.m. on the evidence before me, there was no justification for failing
to produce mr. patel by video before a justice of the peace on march 9.

the breach of mr.
patel’s
s. 503
rights and his resulting arbitrary detention contrary to
s.9
of
the
charter, is rendered more serious by the fact that much of the delay
in getting him to court was caused by his interview conducted in breach of his
s. 7
charter
rights by a trick which i find would shock the conscience
of the community, namely, lying to him that the statements made were not
evidence when the police intended to and did use them as evidence.

in
r. v. truong,
2025
onca 69
at para.
48, zarnett j.a. found that a
charter
breach by the
police in implementing rights to counsel was made more serious by the fact that
it was caused by their delay in deciding whether to lay additional charges from
a
charter
-infringing search.

similarly, in this case
the police used valuable time after the arrest from 1:27 p.m. until 2:30 p.m.,
to conduct an interview in violation of mr. patel’s
s.7
charter
rights. 
mr. patel told the police at the beginning of the interview “i don’t want to
talk about it - talk about anything”. they then spent over an hour conducting
an interview obtained by a subversion of mr. patel’s s.7 right to silence. this
was
charter
-infringing conduct which makes the arbitrary detention
occasioned by the breach of s. 503 more serious.

i also find that dc kama
was negligent in failing to take any meaningful steps to ensure that mr. patel
was in bail court on march 9. in his evidence, he filed the bail materials on
versadex, and simply assumed that mr. patel would appear in court that day as
required, without taking any particular steps to confirm that this occurred.
i find that dc kama had no interest in
ensuring that this appearance occurred, as he knew he intended to obtain a
search warrant for mr. patel’s residence and he had done nothing to commence
that search warrant process on march 9. he was unmotivated to ensure that mr.
patel attended court as required, knowing that he intended to seek an
adjournment of the bail hearing pursuant to section 516 to facilitate the
execution of the search warrant before mr. patel was released.

in my opinion, these
circumstances contributed to his negligent inattention to ensuring that mr.
patel’s bail hearing was addressed before the justice of the peace on march 9.

the fact that the police
intended to seek an order under section 516 to adjourn the bail hearing for two
days, in order to execute the search warrant, is no justification for failing
to present mr. patel to a justice of the peace to ensure that any further
detention was subject to court supervision.

in the case at bar, the
combination of the police refusal to permit mr. patel to telephone his family,
combined with the breach of section 503, and the fact that mr. patel’s matter
was not in bail court until march 10, had the collateral effect of causing substantial
suffering to mr. patel’s wife and family, as they had no notice of his
detention by the police until they were contacted by duty counsel on march 10,
when mr. patel’s matter was first placed on the bail court list for that day.

this was the first time
that mrs. patel became aware of her husband’s detention. if the matter had
been placed on the bail court list, and mr. patel had appeared in bail court on
march 9 as was required, i infer based on the evidence i have heard, that duty
counsel would have contacted her on march 9 and apprised her of his detention. 
this would have saved her and her family the anxiety they experienced that
night with no information on mr. patel’s whereabouts.

mr. patel would also
have had an opportunity to ask the court that he be permitted to telephone his
wife. he was only able to raise this concern with the court at 5 p.m. on march
10 as he was never in court on march 9, or earlier than 5 p.m. on march 10.

in my view, the impact
of the application of the criminal law on the family members of accused persons
is a matter of legitimate concern for courts required to apply the law.

in
r. v. habib,
2024 onca 830, tulloch c.j. has recently discussed the importance of
considering the impact of actual incarceration on the family of an accused
person in determining an appropriate sentence. he stated at para. 46:
“while defendants and not the courts are to be
blamed for the adverse consequences that those family members may suffer (
r.
v. gauthier
(1994),
64 q.a.c. 306 (c.a.), at para. 30
), those family
members are still innocent. they do not deserve to suffer for the defendant’s
crimes. and as explained in
spencer, the restraint principle, which
parliament has directed courts
to apply, requires
courts to prevent and mitigate these adverse consequences as much as possible. see
at para. 47; see also
criminal code, ss.
718.2(d)-(e);
proulx, at paras.
16-17. this benefits society because
families are its foundational fabric. see
r. v. clayton
(1982),
1982 canlii 3860 (on ca), 69 c.c.c.
(2d) 81 (ont. c.a.), at p. 83. our society depends on families to raise and
nurture children, transmit knowledge, skills, and values from generation to
generation, and provide love, care, emotional, economic, and social support to
their members. see
moge v. moge,
1992 canlii 25 (scc), 3 s.c.r.
813, at p. 848. courts thus try to minimize the impact of sentencing on
defendants’ families because, as
spencer
recognized,
interfering with this foundational social institution,
even for just reasons, can endanger community safety and society’s well-being. see
at para. 47.”

in my opinion, the
serious emotional consequences experienced by mr. patel’s family as a result of
the combination of the police refusal to permit any steps to be taken to advise
mr. patel’s family he was in custody (after mr. patel told the police they
would worry as a result of his unexplained absence), and the failure to get him
to court on march 9
th
increases the seriousness of the s.503 breach,
and the
charter
s. 9 breach, on the facts of this case.
dc kama’s failure to act diligently to obtain the search
warrant in a timely way

on the facts of this case, i find that the
seriousness of the breach of mr patel’s
s.9
charter
rights was increased
by the casual approach dc kama took to obtaining the search warrant for the
search of mr. patel’s house, which he used to justify the request for a two-day
adjournment of the bail hearing on march 10, under section 516.

assuming the police needed the information
obtained from mr. patel to obtain the search warrant, dc kama concluded his
interview of mr. patel, on which he relied in seeking the search warrant, at
approximately 2:30 p.m. on march 9. he submitted the bail materials into
versadex a 3:04 p.m. on march 9.

he knew that the police wanted to obtain a
search warrant for mr. patel’s house, and his phone, and that, for the police,
it was important that the search be conducted before mr. patel had access to
his computer or other materials at his house.

nevertheless, dc kama did nothing further on
march 9 to seek to obtain a search warrant and only began to draft the
information to obtain the search warrant at 6 a.m. on march 10. this was the
case even though the arrest on march 9 was orchestrated as part of a sting
operation, and much of the detail included in the information to obtain the
search warrant was already in the police possession in the chats the police had
before march 9.

dc kama completed drafting the information
to obtain the search warrant by 9:30 a.m. on march 10, and the search warrant
was granted slightly more than 1.5 hours later at 11:11 a.m.

dc kama suggested in his evidence that it
was not feasible after 4 p.m. on march 9 to obtain a telewarrant permitting the
police to search mr. patel’s residence either that evening or early the next
day because the search warrant would not be considered “urgent”. i do not
accept this evidence. i see nothing in the requirements for telewarrants in
s.
487.1
of the
criminal code
that would have precluded its use.

in fact, the application record shows that
he used the telewarrant procedure the next day at 10:13 a.m. to submit the
search warrant application. the information to obtain notes that, as a result
of a regional senior justice of the peace directive, all search warrants are to
be submitted electronically. had he acted diligently in preparing the
information to obtain the search warrant and utilized the telewarrant
provisions in the
criminal code, there is no reason why a search warrant
could not have been obtained in the evening of march 9 permitting the search of
mr. patel’s residence early in the morning on march 10. when the search was
conducted, it was completed in half an hour.

if dc kama had acted diligently, he could
have completed the search by mid-morning on march 10, and he could have advised
the crown that there was no need to seek a 2-day adjournment of the bail
hearing that morning.

regrettably, this did not occur and, as
previously noted, having completed the search of mr. patel’s house at 2:04 p.m.
on march 10, dc kama took no steps to advise the crown that the search had been
completed until he was contacted by defence counsel at 4:22 p.m., and all he
did then was email the crown at 4:32 p.m. to advise that the search had been
completed.

as a result of dc kama’s dilatory approach,
there was no need for the crown to seek an order under section 516, and the
bail hearing was adjourned until monday march 13 without a s.516 application
being considered by the court.

in
r. v. donnelly,
2016 onca 988
at para.79, 
watt j.a. stated, with respect to the police failure to inform the crown that a
search warrant had been executed before a s. 516 order was sought by the crown,
that there is no
s. 7
charter
disclosure requirement by the police to
provide “error-free up to the moment disclosure of the progress of the
investigation” to the prosecutor under
r. v. stinchcombe, referring to
it as a ”standard of perfection”.

however, while holding that such an error
did not amount to “particularly egregious conduct”, watt j.a. also stated that
“conveyance of inaccurate information to prosecutors conducting bail hearings
“cannot be condoned:
r. v. donnelly, supra, at para.172.

significantly, in the case at bar a s.516
order never was obtained to support mr. patel’s detention until march 13. the
application never proceeded because, due to the failure to have mr. patel in
bail court on march 9 and the police delays in obtaining and executing the
search warrant on march 10, on friday, march 10 at 5:00 p.m., in the absence of
crown consent to mrs. patel as a surety, the court determined that the bail
hearing could not be held that day, and the matter was adjourned to monday,
march 13.

in the circumstances of this case, i find
that, while the failure of dc kama to obtain a search warrant with reasonable
diligence, or diligently advise the crown in a timely way that the basis for
the s. 516 application had been satisfied by the execution of the search
warrant, may not themselves constitute independent
charter
breaches,
they are aggravating circumstances in relation to the clear arbitrary detention
caused by the breach of s. 503.

they are reflective of the ongoing disregard
for mr. patel’s rights by dc kama, and which, in fact, resulted in his ongoing
detention until march 13 (without a s. 516 order), which may have been avoided
had the police complied with their obligation under s. 503 and the matter of
his bail had been addressed in court on march 9.
the circumstances of mr. patel’s detention from march 9 to march
13

mr. patel testified that
during the booking process he asked about getting his cell phone, and whether
he would be able to call his family, as he wished to let them know where he was
and to receive their emotional support.

he testified that after
he was lodged in the cells, a police officer walked past his cell and he asked
if he would be permitted to call his family. the officer said that he would go
and check to see if that could be done. he continued to be concerned that his
family would be worried as they did not know where he was. he repeated his
request to call his family to dc kama after the interview and was told “maybe
later - i’ll let you know”.

he testified that
although he was told during booking that he would be given a privacy shield, he
did not know what that was and it was never explained to him. the cell video
shows that a privacy shield was in his cell, but he did not know what it was or
its purpose, and he avoided sitting on the toilet to relieve himself as it was
extremely dirty and he knew that he was being videoed in the cell.

after he was placed in
the cell, before his interview by dc kama, he was offered a chicken sandwich
and a juice, but declined the chicken sandwich as he practices hinduism and is
prohibited from eating meat or even bread that has been in contact with meat.

he testified that he
told the police officer who offered him the chicken sandwich “i can’t eat it
for religious reasons”. he told the officer that he was only allowed vegetarian
food because he follows hinduism and that if they had any options that he could
eat that would be good.

he testified that the
officer said he would check, but no vegetarian food was offered to him later
that day.

mr. patel testified
that, later that day, at supper time, he was offered a patty and when he
inquired of the guard whether it had meat in it, she replied “everything we
have has meat.” mr. patel asked if she could bring something vegetarian and
she said she would check but she did not get any vegetarian food for him. he
accepted the juice that was offered and had no food.

in summary, on thursday,
march 9, according to mr. patel, he had no food to eat, was not taken to court
in person or by video and was not given an opportunity to speak to his family
by phone. no officer ever explained why he was not permitted to call his
family. mr. patel testified that if he had been told that he could not do it
he would have stopped asking. he testified that he asked at least five or six
times to call his family on march 9.

he testified that at one
point that night he became panicked and started screaming at the video camera
facing him to let him talk to his family. he felt his heart pounding and felt
nauseated. he testified that he believed this was similar to a panic attack. he
testified that there was no response by any police to his yelling at the camera
(which did not record audio).

he testified that he did
not sleep at all that night as he was concerned that his family did not know
where he was. he testified that if the police had at least called his family
that would have made him feel better as his family would know where he was, and
could seek legal help for him.

he experienced his cell
as very cold with no mattress or pillow or blankets or anything other than a
metal bed to sleep on.

on friday, march 10, the
same officer who had brought him a chicken sandwich on march 9 offered him a
chicken sandwich to eat, and when mr. patel reminded him that he is not allowed
to eat non-vegetarian food the officer said that they did not have anything
other than this, so mr. patel accepted juice and that was all he had to eat.

he testified that he had
no food to eat that day. he was permitted to speak to duty counsel before he
attended court by audio on friday. he did not attend court until about 5 p.m. at
which point he had counsel retained by his family. his appearance was by audio
from 32 division.

mr. patel testified
that, as his request to the police had never resulted in permission to speak to
his family by phone, to try to get permission to speak to his family by phone
he asked the justice of the peace in bail court if he could phone his wife. he
testified that he became extremely emotional and was crying when he learned
that he was going to have to stay in jail for another two days. he wanted to
speak to his family as he was not familiar with the rules around court
processes and wanted to see whether they could go to the court on saturday to
deal with his release.

mr. patel testified that
even though the officer told the court that mr. patel would be permitted to
call his family, once court ended, the officer said he had to check with the
lead officer and only then could he let mr. patel know whether he could talk to
his family or not. he was not allowed to call his family from 32 division.

this was confirmed in
the video of his exit from 32 division in which, when he asked about calling
his wife, he was told he could use the phone at the detention centre.

mr. patel testified that
at no point while he was at 32 division did he receive any food that he could
eat, and no officer ever expressed any concern to him over the fact that he was
not eating.
crown evidence on practices at 32 division

an agreed statement of
facts was filed indicating that while mr. patel was held at 32 division on
march 9 and 10, 2023, he interacted with 7 bookers and court officers. with
the exception of officers tarantino and sager, no bookers or court officers had
notes or an independent recollection of interactions with mr. patel.

officer tarantino had a
note at 15:17 on march 9 that mr. patel refused a meal.

retired sergeant sager
testified that he was a road sergeant in march 2023 and on march 9, 2023 he was
the officer-in-charge seen on the booking video responsible for booking in
prisoners.

when he testified, he
had not seen the booking video and testified that he had no independent
recollection of mr. patel. his evidence was limited to the general practices
at 32 division and did not address any interaction he had with mr. patel.

he testified there was
no general tps policy to permit any calls by detainees other than to a lawyer, or
to family to contact a lawyer.

with respect to
vegetarian meals, he could not say for sure whether there were vegetarian meals
available at 32 division in march 2023.

district special
constable khatera waziri testified that she was in training in the booking hall
as a booker at 32 division in march 2023. she had no notes or independent
recollection of mr. patel or of any interactions with him. as a booker, one of
her jobs was to give meals to detainees. she testified that in march 2023 vegetarian
patties were available in a freezer, and if a detainee said they were a vegetarian,
she would give them a vegetarian patty.

court officer roberto
sciammarella was a court officer at 32 division. in march 2023, had no
recollection of any dealings with mr. patel. he testified that vegetarian
patties were available at 32 division in march 2023.
circumstances at the toronto south detention centre

mr. patel was
transported to the toronto south detention centre on friday night, march 10. he
told the admissions lady that he followed a vegetarian diet and asked for
vegetarian food as he had not had anything to eat for two days. the admissions
person was creating a profile for him.

mr. patel testified that
the admissions lady told him not to mention his charges to the other inmates as
they might attack or kill him because they may have children of their own. this
made him feel very scared.

after he was placed in a
cell, he was offered food but it was non-vegetarian.

he was then taken to an
area in front of the booking station and was strip-searched. he was asked to
strip naked and he was given jail clothes to change into. he testified that
there were inmates and a male and female officer in the area walking by who
were able to see him when the strip search occurred.

he testified that this
was an area where inmates who were being released changed out of their jail
clothes and into their own clothes before being released. he testified he was
taken to the same area to change before he was released on monday, march 13.

he testified that the
officer conducting the strip search was very rude to him so he did not ask that
officer to be able to use the phone.

he waited for another
officer to walk by and then he asked that different officer to use the phone
and he was told that he could definitely call his family but not for more than
two minutes and mr. patel was taken to the phone and he called his wife and
brother. after two or three minutes, the officer came by and told him his time
was over and he had to hang up.

mr. patel was then taken
to the cell where he was to stay and found that it was extremely dirty. there
was food all over the floor with ants, and there was only one bed so he had to
sleep on a mattress on the ground next to the toilet as it was the only place
to lie down.

mr. patel testified that
he was fearful of his roommate who tried to engage him in conversation, stating
to mr. patel that he was wondering who was going to die while he was in
custody. he felt anxious around his cellmate as he had been told by the
admissions lady that his cellmate was homosexual and he needed to be extra
careful around him. mr. patel inferred from this comment that perhaps the man
had been charged with sexual assault and that made him worried for his safety
the whole time he was in custody with this individual. he candidly
acknowledged that his cell mate did not sexually assault him or touch him while
he was in custody.

mr. patel received no
offer of food while he was in his cell on friday night.

on saturday, they
brought him breakfast with eggs in it, which he is not permitted to eat, but
there was milk in a separate pouch so he accepted that and drank it as he had
with the juice at the police station. he was provided no solid food that he
could eat on saturday, march 11.

he was permitted to use
the shower on saturday and was permitted to make another two-minute call to his
family in which he spoke to his wife and his brother. he told his wife and
brother that he had not been eating food because the only food offered was non-vegetarian.
 his brother indicated in the call that he was going to get in touch with his
lawyer to see if his lawyer could do anything about that.

when the guards brought
him non-vegetarian food on saturday, he told them that he was not permitted to
eat non-vegetarian food by his religion and asked if they had a vegetarian
option they could bring him. he told the guards that he had not had anything
to eat other than drinks. the response he received was that they did not have
anything that says he was only restricted to vegetarian food. he was told that
they did not have this recorded saying he needed only vegetarian food and they
would go and check.

he did not get any
vegetarian food.

mr. patel testified he
had a panic attack on saturday night after midnight in his cell. in this panic
attack and a previous one on thursday night, he had shortness of breath and
palpitations.

the first time he
received a vegetarian meal in custody was at lunch on sunday, consisting of
lentil curry with a rice bowl and two pieces of brown bread. he received 2
vegetarian meals on sunday – one at lunch and one at dinner.

mr. patel testified that
prior to receiving the food he had not been able to sleep because of his hunger
from an empty stomach. he testified that having made requests for vegetarian
food that he could eat and not receiving it, he concluded that they did not
want to feed him and this made him sad.

on monday, march 13, he
was released with the consent of the crown with bail conditions. the release
order was made around noon, and he was released from the south detention centre
at 8 p.m.

he testified that while
waiting between noon and 8:00 p.m. he asked one of the guards after 4:00 p.m.
when he would be released and he was told that they did not know what time but
he would definitely go home today. mr. patel testified that by that point he
was not believing anything the guards or anyone else told him because he had
been told many different things on many occasions which had not happened.

the crown called no
evidence from any employee at the toronto south detention centre to testify
concerning mr. patel’s detention there from march 10-13, 2023.
mr. patel’s mental state after release

after his release, mr.
patel continued to experience panic attacks when he thought about his time in
jail with nothing to eat and having no contact with a family member. he
testified that reliving the experience that he had in jail would trigger the
panic attack. if he saw a police car, it made him fearful. the symptoms
lasted for at least the first three months after his release.

initially after his
release, he had a very hard time sleeping but by the time of this application, it
was only when he first went to bed that he had trouble sleeping but once he
started to sleep, he was able to sleep through the night. he testified that
his sleep was getting better.

he has had flashbacks
about his experiences in custody, the first being the strip search by the
officer he found intimidating, and the second was his incarceration in the cell
with the cellmate that made him worried about his safety.

mr. patel acknowledged
that when he was released, he felt regretful and ashamed about his actions and
it was very emotional for him facing his family. he testified that the panic
attacks, nightmares, and flashbacks which he experienced related to his time in
custody over the days he was in custody as distinguished from his anxiety about
his future based on the charges he is facing.

he testified that he was
fearful after his release whenever anyone came to the door, and if he saw
police when he was out of the house, he was fearful that they were following
him.

monali patel, mr.
patel’s wife (“mrs. patel”) testified concerning mr. patel’s emotional state
after his release. i was impressed with mrs. patel as a witness.

she confirmed the
indicia of anxiety and distress mr. patel exhibited upon his release. she
testified that upon his release he was very quiet and spoke little, even to the
children with whom he usually was talkative. at times, he cried and said he
had been very scared in jail, afraid his cell-mate would harm him, and had been
unable to sleep in jail.

she testified that he
cried for a period of about 1 month after his release.

mrs. patel testified
that upon his release mr. patel had trouble sleeping. he cried from time to
time and said he still felt scared when he thought about his time in jail. he
did not resume activities he had previously enjoyed. this continued for a long
time. he stopped talking to people. he did not play with the children as he
had done before. initially, he was reluctant to go outside. he would not go
out alone. when they walked outside, he was fearful that even normal people
were watching or following him. he also told her he was sorry that all of
these things happened.

i find mr. patel to be a
generally credible and reliable witness. his recollection of his interactions
with the police at 32 division, and the guards at the toronto south detention
centre are detailed. his evidence that he was extremely distraught in his
court appearance of march 10 is generally supported by the court transcript. his
state of emotional upset is confirmed by his statement to the court “i can’t
stay here till monday”, and “i need to speak to my family” and his later
request to be able to speak by telephone to his wife.

his explanation to this
court of why he did not ask for medical assistance when asked by the justice of
the peace on march 10 was compelling evidence of the emotional impact of his
circumstances of incarceration on him.

he indicated that he did
not believe any assistance would be provided since every other request he had
made for food he could eat, and a telephone call to his family, had been
ignored so he did not believe any meaningful assistance would be provided to
him in his detention.

even when the bail
court was told by an officer at 32 division that mr. patel can “ask us to get a
phone call after this is done”, and the justice of the peace stated “whatever
the process is, he can phone whoever he wants, if that’s his family that he
wants to access, okay”, mr. patel was not permitted at 32 division to make a
call. this only occurred after he was taken to the south detention centre later
that evening.

his evidence concerning
the failure of the police at 32 division, and the guards at the toronto south detention
centre, to give him food which he could eat was attacked by the crown as having
been a fabrication made to enhance his claim of a
charter
breach.

the crown’s allegation
of recent fabrication is refuted by the fact that mr. patel, as confirmed by
his brother, was asked in his telephone conversation of saturday evening if he
had been eating and sleeping well, and mr. patel responded that he had not
received food that he could eat.

mrs. patel testified
that as a result of being told this, in the telephone call with mr. patel on
saturday evening, she called the lawyer they had retained at mr. demarco’s
office, navin sookram, and asked him to do something about the fact that mr.
patel was not getting food he could eat.

the fact that mr. patel
began to receive vegetarian food on sunday is consistent with mrs. patel’s
evidence that she asked the lawyer to contact the detention centre to try to
remedy the fact that he was not being provided vegetarian food.

the crown suggested in
cross-examination that mr. patel did not eat as a choice he made, not because
he was denied vegetarian food.

mr. patel denied this. i
find the suggestion that he willingly did not eat for 3 days as part of a plan
to enhance his
charter
claim unreasonable and i accept his denial as
truthful.

importantly, mr. patel
was candid with the court in acknowledging matters not supportive of his claim. 
he candidly acknowledged that when he first saw his family upon his release he
felt “regretful and ashamed” about his actions for which he is charged and that
this made seeing his family extremely emotional for him.

he was similarly candid
in acknowledging that after his release the challenges he faced interacting
with people were significantly impacted by the shame he felt about his conduct. 
he testified that in the months after his release he had trouble interacting
with pretty much everybody in the family because he was feeling very “regretful”
and ashamed of things that happened and the things that he had done. he also
acknowledged fairly that his current pessimism about his life in general, and whether
he will be able to get a job, are the result of facing the charges he is facing.

mr. patel’s evidence
that he had been denied access to the phone to call his family by the police at
32 division is consistent with the evidence, confirmed in the transcript of his
attendance in court on march 10, that he asked the justice of the peace for
permission to call his family. his evidence to this court that he made this
request to the bail court as his previous requests to the police had been
ignored was reasonable, made sense, and i accept it.

in summary, mr. patel
candidly acknowledged in his evidence matters which did not specifically
advance his claim of severe psychological harm caused by state action. he was
measured and balanced in his evidence.

no witnesses who
actually interacted with mr. patel at 32 division or had any independent
recollection of interacting with mr. patel were called by the crown. i do not
find the evidence called concerning general practices at 32 division to be
probative on the issue of whether mr. patel was offered vegetarian food when he
advised the person distributing food that he could not eat meat.

significantly, notwithstanding
having many months to find witnesses to respond to mr. patel’s allegations
concerning his incarceration at the toronto south detention centre, the crown
called no evidence from any toronto south detention centre witnesses.

on a balance of
probabilities, i accept mr. patel’s evidence as generally accurate as a
description of the circumstances of his incarceration while in custody at 32
division and the toronto south detention centre, and of the impact of these
circumstances on him after his release.
the expert evidence of dr. jonathan rootenberg

dr. rootenberg is an
experienced forensic psychiatrist who conducted an assessment of mr. patel on
april 3, 2024 focusing on what psychological impact, if any, his period of
detention in police custody at the toronto south detention centre had on him. his
expert report dated june 11, 2024 was admitted in evidence, and his assessment
and findings were summarized in his testimony before the court.

as part of the materials
provided for the assessment, dr. rootenberg had received the toronto police service
synopsis in relation to the charges laid against mr. patel.

the scope of dr.
rootenberg’s assessment was limited to the psychological impact, if any, of mr.
patel’s detention and incarceration prior to his release and did not involve
dr. rootenberg’s inquiry of mr. patel of his response to the evidence
summarized in the synopsis. accordingly, dr. rootenberg was not in a position
to comment on the impact of the charges themselves on mr. patel’s mental state,
and his opinion was restricted to the impact of the circumstances of detention
upon mr. patel.

based on his assessment,
dr. rootenberg concluded that the circumstances of mr. patel’s incarceration
resulted in mr. patel meeting the diagnostic criteria for posttraumatic stress
disorder in remission at the time of his assessment on april 3, 2024.

in dr. rootenberg’s
assessment, mr. patel experienced his incarceration between march 9 and 13, 2023
as a traumatic event. it was traumatic for him because he experienced a marked
fear that something significant would happen to him while he was in custody. in
particular, the combination of his inability to speak to family members for two
days, the humiliation he experienced from the strip search conducted at the
toronto south detention centre, and the fear he experienced concerning his
cellmate, all contributed to his experience of his incarceration as traumatic.

in particular, the
warning he received from staff at the detention centre about the cellmate and
to “be careful around him” made him fearful and vigilant. as well, the fact
that the cellmate related to mr. patel that while he had been in custody
previously, his father had died, and the cellmate did not know who might die
this time, possibly his boyfriend, made him fearful of suffering harm from his
cellmate.

in dr. rootenberg’s
opinion, it was the exposure to the constellation of the set of circumstances facing
mr. patel that he perceived as very threatening that was traumatic. in dr.
rootenberg’s opinion, it was not necessary that mr. patel be actually touched
in a sexual way for his exposure to the cellmate, in the circumstances as he
understood them, to be perceived as very threatening and therefore traumatic.

mr. patel was made
fearful by being advised by jail staff to not discuss his charges because if
anyone found out about the charges he may be attacked physically.

he was also warned by
staff at the jail to be careful around his cellmate which contributed to his
fear.

in dr. rootenberg’s
opinion, it was the totality of the circumstances of being placed in a cell
with this particular person, who he perceived as very threatening, having no
control or agency over his circumstances, experiencing fear, lack of sleep,
being cut off from communication with his family, all in the context of not
receiving vegetarian food for several days, which were circumstances
contributing to mr. patel experiencing his incarceration as traumatic. he
noted that many people become markedly fearful about someone actually attacking
them.

as dr. rootenberg
summarized in cross-examination:
“again, this is from his recollection and his
perception of the event; that this was a traumatic event for him, being placed
in cuffs, put in-put in jail, not knowing when he would be out, not contacting
family members, being in a cell with a person he was very afraid of. that’s
what i’m referring to in terms of directly experiencing traumatic events.......
keep in mind that it is the perception of trauma
that is relevant here. for him, it is being put in a jail cell and worrying
about being harmed by somebody else in that cell is a traumatic event; losing
one’s freedom for a period that’s indeterminate as far as he was concerned, that’s
what he directly experienced. it was a traumatic incident for him.”

dr. rootenberg did not
find anything in mr. patel’s psychiatric history which made him particularly
vulnerable to post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) over and above the
vulnerability of the average person. he noted that, as far as he was aware,
mr. patel had no history of any traumatic incidents prior to his incarceration. 
he testified that there is not a direct link between a prior depressive episode
when mr. patel left medical school in the caribbean, and post-traumatic stress
disorder. it did not make mr. patel more predisposed to perceive events as
traumatic when they are not, in dr. rootenberg’s opinion.

in dr. rootenberg’s report,
he noted there are four diagnostic clusters in dsm-5 in relation to a diagnosis
of post-traumatic stress disorder namely re-experiencing phenomena, avoidance
behaviours, negative cognitions and mood and marked alterations in arousal.

based on his assessment,
dr. rootenberg found that mr. patel was experiencing recurrent involuntary
intrusive distressing memories and dreams, and flashback phenomena, which are
relevant for the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder. dr. rootenberg
understood that mr. patel experienced all of those for more than one month
after his release. even one year later, at the time of his assessment, mr.
patel was still experiencing dreams and flashbacks about the event.

he understood that for
more than a month mr. patel wanted to avoid leaving the family home where he
felt safe. he was fearful of being followed, particularly if he saw police
officers.

he also found that,
based on the information from mr. patel and mrs. patel, mr. patel experienced
the avoidance of stimuli linked to the traumatic events for more than one
month. he also had negative alterations in cognitions and mood, persistent and
exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations for more than one month. the
criterion of hypervigilance appears to have been present for several months at
least and the problems of concentration and sleep disturbance continued for
more than one month, and the sleep disturbance was present even one year
following the incident.

in the conclusion of his
report, dr. rootenberg stated at p.13 that:
“in my clinical psychiatric opinion, based on my
clinical assessment and the collateral information received as part of this
assessment, mr. patel’s interaction with police officers and with correctional
officers at tsdc from march 9-13, 2023 had a markedly detrimental effect on his
mental health, in that it triggered the following symptoms, namely
reexperiencing phenomena, some avoidance behaviours, negative cognitions and
mood and marked alterations in arousal.”

mr. patel’s symptoms
relevant to this diagnosis included nightmares experienced several times per
week at the time of the assessment of being placed in handcuffs and being
placed in a jail cell, waking up at night thinking he is actually back in jail,
and re-experiencing pleading to police to allow him to call family members.

mr. patel also avoided
going out of the family home for a prolonged period of time following the
incident, showed a marked decreased interest in activities that he previously
had engaged in such as playing with his children, as well as an exaggerated
belief that the world is a dangerous place and one cannot know who to actually
trust. these were relevant persistent negative changes in cognition or mood he
experienced.

he also experienced
hypervigilance, resulting in significant concern by mr. patel every time the
doorbell rang that the police were there to check up on him.

dr. rootenberg diagnosed
posttraumatic stress disorder, rather than acute stress disorder, based on the
duration of mr. patel’s symptoms for several months after his release. collateral
information from mrs. patel was that mr. patel had anxiety symptoms which were
quite prominent for several months after his release. as related by mrs.
patel, for several months following his release, mr. patel was anxious,
experienced sleep-related difficulties and was afraid to leave the house by
himself. he believed that someone was also always following him and was very
anxious about his surroundings.

as previously indicated,
dr. rootenberg’s focus in his assessment was on the psychological effect, if
any, of the circumstances of mr. patel’s incarceration between march 9 and 13,
2023. he did not speak to mr. patel about the allegations he was facing. dr.
rootenberg candidly acknowledged that it was possible that some of the symptoms
he attributed to mr. patel’s experience of his incarceration could also be the
result of mr. patel being charged with a serious offence. he had not discussed
the allegations with mr. patel. accordingly, he testified that he could not
comment on the psychological impact of being charged on mr. patel.

the crown did not pursue
with dr. rootenberg the effect of this limitation on the validity of the
conclusions stated in his report. apart from his acknowledgement that the
symptoms were possibly affected by mr. patel’s psychological response to being
charged, there was no further evidence on this issue in the record before me.

in conclusion, i accept
the dr. rootenberg is a highly skilled forensic psychiatrist who conducted a
focused assessment of the psychological impact, if any, of the circumstances of
mr. patel’s incarceration on him.

i am also satisfied that
the factual basis for the assessment was, with minor exceptions, proven in
reliable evidence before me by mr. patel and mrs. patel. in short, the
factual foundation for dr. rootenberg’s opinion was substantially proven before
me in the evidence of mr. and mrs. patel which i have accepted.

dr. rootenberg has
opined that in his opinion the psychological impact of the circumstances of mr.
patel’s incarceration amounted to post-traumatic stress disorder for the
reasons outlined in his report. however, he also acknowledged that it is
possible that some of those symptoms are contributed to, or caused by, the
simple fact of being charged with a serious offence which he did not explore
with mr. patel. it was not put to dr. rootenberg in cross-examination that
this limitation invalidated the conclusions in his report.

in considering
the weight to give to dr. rootenberg’s opinion, it is important to
note that dr. rootenberg’s assessment, and the symptoms relied upon, are
grounded in the particular circumstances of his incarceration related by mr.
patel such as his fear of his cellmate, his isolation due to his inability to
speak to his family, and the warnings he received from staff at the toronto
south detention centre about the risk of violence from other in inmates to mr.
patel if they became aware of his charges. all of these specific factors are
directly related to the circumstances of his incarceration, and not the simple
fact of being charged.

mr. patel candidly acknowledged that the
distress he experienced upon his release included feelings of shame for his
actions. i find that his feeling of shame for his conduct reflected in the
chats undoubtedly contributed to his distress in custody and after his release.

what was not explored further in evidence
was the impact of this on dr. rootenberg’s assessment that the specific
circumstances of mr. patel’s incarceration themselves resulted in his ptsd. it
was not put to dr. rootenberg that in light of his acknowledgement that it was
possible that any shame mr. patel felt may have caused his distress, that this
negated the conclusion he made about the specific impact of the circumstances
of his incarceration on mr. patel.

considering the totality of the evidence, and
the limitation acknowledged by dr. rootenberg on his assessment, i find that it
has been established on a balance of probabilities that the circumstances of mr.
patel’s incarceration referred to by dr. rootenberg were a substantial
contributing cause of his ptsd which may have possibly been exacerbated by his
distress at his conduct and the fact of being charged itself. the factors
referred to by dr. rootenberg as causing mr. patel’s ptsd were specific to the
circumstances of his incarceration.

i accept dr. rootenberg’s opinion on this
issue. the possibility of additional or other causes from being charged
itself, which was not assessed by dr. rootenberg does not, in my opinion, render
his conclusion invalid but rather only goes so far as to make reasonable a
conclusion that, overall, mr. patel’s distress was likely exacerbated by the
fact of being charged and his own sense of shame, but that his ptsd had, as a
substantial contributing cause, the circumstances of his detention summarized
in dr. rootenberg’s report.
the
alleged section 7 breach for state-imposed psychological stress

the test for a
s.7
charter
breach as
a result of a state-imposed psychological injury is summarized in
r. v.
donnelly,
2016 onca 988
by watt j.a. at paras 107-109:
“ security of the person protects both the physical and
psychological integrity of the individual:
blencoe
v.
british columbia (human rights commission),
2000 scc 44, 2 s.c.r. 307, at
para.
55;
r. v. morgentaler,
1988 canlii 90 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 30,
at pp. 56 and 173;
carter v. canada (attorney general),
2015 scc 5, 1 s.c.r. 331, at
paras.
64 & 71. for a restriction of security
of the person to be established, the state action in issue must have a serious
and profound effect on a person’s psychological integrity:
new
brunswick (minister of health and community services) v. g. (j.),
1999 canlii 653 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 46,
at paras.
59-60.
 the descriptive “serious state-imposed
psychological stress” fixes two requirements that must be met before the
security of the person interest protected by s. 7 becomes engaged. first, the
psychological harm must be state imposed, that is to say, the harm must result
from actions of the state. and second, the psychological harm or prejudice must
be serious. it follows that not every form of psychological prejudice or harm
will constitute a violation of s. 7:
blencoe, at para.
56-57. in other words, there is something
qualitative about the type of state interference that ascends to the level of a
s. 7 infringement:
g. (j.), at para.
59;
blencoe, at paras.
56-57. nervous shock or psychiatric illness
are not necessarily required, but something greater than “ordinary stress or
anxiety” is:
g. (j.), at paras.
59-60.
 a final point. the effects of the state
interference are to be assessed objectively. we gauge their impact on the
psychological integrity of a person of reasonable sensibility, not one of
exceptional stability or of peculiar vulnerability:
g. (j.), at
paras.
59-60.”

i have concluded, based on dr. rootenberg’s
opinion, that mr. patel’s ptsd, as found by dr. rootenberg, had as a
substantial contributing cause, the circumstances of his incarceration
involving a breach of his rights under s.503, and therefore his arbitrary
detention, which included denial of vegetarian food for 3 days, a strip search
at the tsdc in an area where he could be seen by staff and other prisoners, his
fear of his cellmate, and his sense of isolation and vulnerability as a result
of having no contact with his family, as a result of the s. 503 breach, and the
denial of his request to call his family.

to determine if this
amounts to serious state-imposed psychological stress, the state’s conduct must
be assessed objectively and an assessment made of its impact on a person of
reasonable sensibility, and not a person of peculiar vulnerability.

a person of reasonable
sensibility, in my opinion, is not a person experienced in the criminal justice
system hardened to an acceptance of the reality of the treatment of persons in
detention frequently criticized in court judgements in this province.

it would include a
person with no experience in the criminal justice system but cognizant that we
live in a society governed by the
charter, and the rule of law, in which
the
charter
is intended to guarantee to accused persons treatment that
respects the dignity and humanity of all persons, regardless of the seriousness
of the offence charged.

in my opinion, the
particular circumstances of mr. patel’s detention including a denial of food, an
intrusive strip search in a location that lacked privacy, where requests to
contact family were not granted, or answered honestly, contributing to a sense
of vulnerability and isolation, where he was arbitrarily detained as a result
of not being taken to court as required by
s. 503
of the
criminal code, being
kept in a cell with an inmate acting in a bizarre manner which caused him fear,
are, in total, circumstances which caused him significant psychological
stress, and objectively would have a significant impact on a person of
reasonable sensibility, especially one not previously hardened to the realities
of incarceration by previous criminal law experience.

in my opinion, it is
therefore serious state-imposed psychological stress which would interfere with
the psychological integrity of a person of reasonable sensibilities and which ascends
to the level of a s.7 infringement. it is therefore a breach of
s.7
of the
charter.

in the alternative, even
if the totality of the circumstances do not meet the requirements of a
s.7
charter
breach, in my opinion, they are, at the very least, aggravating
circumstances relevant to the seriousness of the
s.9
charter
breach and
the arbitrary detention of mr. patel, which increases the seriousness of the
breach of his s.9
charter
rights.
relevant law on a s.24(1) remedy

the applicant seeks a
stay of proceedings under the residual category of abuse of process,
summarized
by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. babos,
2014 scc 16, at paras.
30-32:
“
a stay of proceedings
is the most drastic remedy a criminal court can order (
r. v. regan,
2002
scc 12, 1 s.c.r. 297,
at para.
53
). it permanently halts the
prosecution of an accused. in doing so, the truth-seeking function of the
trial is frustrated and the public is deprived of the opportunity to see
justice done on the merits. in many cases, alleged victims of crime are
deprived of their day in court.
nonetheless, this court has recognized that there are rare occasions
– the “clearest of cases” – when a stay of proceedings for an abuse of process will
be warranted (
r. v. o’connor,
1995 canlii 51 (scc), 4 s.c.r. 411, at para.
68
). these
cases generally fall into two categories: (1) where state conduct compromises
the fairness of an accused’s trial (the “main” category); and (2) where state
conduct creates no threat to trial fairness but risks undermining the integrity
of the judicial process (the “residual” category) (
o’connor, at para.
73
). the impugned conduct in this case does not implicate the main category. 
rather, it falls squarely within the latter category.
the test used to determine whether a stay of proceedings is
warranted is the same for both categories and consists of three requirements:
1) there must be prejudice to the accused’s right to a fair trial
or the integrity of the justice system that “will be manifested, perpetuated or
aggravated through the conduct of the trial, or by its outcome” (
regan,
at para.
54
);
2) 
there must be no alternative remedy capable of redressing the prejudice; and
3) where there is still uncertainty over whether a stay is
warranted after steps 1) and 2), the court is required to balance the interests
in favour of granting a stay, such as denouncing misconduct and preserving the
integrity of the justice system, against “the interest that society has in
having a final decision on the merits” (
ibid., at para. 57).

moldaver j. described
the test for abuse of process under the residual category as follows at para. 35
of
r. v. babos, supra:
“
by contrast, when the
residual category is invoked, the question is whether the state has engaged in
conduct that is offensive to societal notions of fair play and decency and
whether proceeding with a trial in the face of that conduct would be harmful to
the integrity of the justice system. to put it in simpler terms, there are limits
on the type of conduct society will tolerate in the prosecution of offences. 
at times, state conduct will be so troublesome that having a trial – even a
fair one – will leave the impression that the justice system condones conduct
that offends society’s sense of fair play and decency. this harms the
integrity of the justice system. in these kinds of cases, the first stage of
the test is met.”

as moldaver j. states
for the court
in
r. v. babos, supra, at para.
39:
“at the second stage of the test, the question
is whether any other remedy short of a stay of proceedings is capable of
redressing the prejudice,.... where the residual category is invoked, and the
prejudice complained of is prejudice to the integrity of the justice system,
remedies must be directed toward that harm. it must be remembered that for
those cases which fall solely within the residual category, the goal is not to
provide redress to an accused for a wrong that has been done to him or her in
the past. instead, the focus is on whether an alternate remedy short of a stay
of proceedings will adequately dissociate the justice system from the impugned
state conduct going forward.”

it is clear that the
balancing process required at the third stage of the test for a stay for abuse
of process is of particular importance when the residual category of abuse of
process is invoked.

as the court
notes in
r.
v. babos, supra, at para.
41:
“
however, when the
residual category is invoked, the balancing stage takes on added importance. 
where prejudice to the integrity of the justice system is alleged, the court is
asked to decide which of two options better protects the integrity of the
system: staying the proceedings, or having a trial despite the impugned
conduct. this inquiry necessarily demands balancing. the court must consider
such things as the nature and seriousness of the impugned conduct, whether the
conduct is isolated or reflects a systemic and ongoing problem, the
circumstances of the accused, the charges he or she faces, and the interests of
society in having the charges disposed of on the merits. clearly, the more
egregious the state conduct, the greater the need for the court to dissociate
itself from it. when the conduct in question shocks the community’s conscience
and/or offends its sense of fair play and decency, it becomes less likely that
society’s interest in a full trial on the merits will prevail in the balancing
process. but in residual category cases, balance must always be considered.”

the court notes further in footnote 5: “at
this stage, whether the impugned conduct is a systemic and ongoing problem or
lies purely in the past may also become relevant. where the conduct is ongoing
and systemic, it may be more difficult for the court to dissociate itself from
it with anything less than a stay.”

under the residual category of abuse of
process,
section 7
of the
charter
requires the consideration of both the
impact of breaches of specific procedural guarantees provided by the
charter,
and other state conduct that undermines the integrity of the justice system
even if it does not breach other
charter
rights.

in
r. v. brunelle,
2024 scc 3, at
paras.
68-69 and 73, o’bonsawin j. stated for the court:
“where none of the specific procedural guarantees addresses the
alleged misconduct, this court has established that
s. 7
of the
charter
acts as a safeguard and provides accused persons with additional protection
from state conduct that affects trial fairness in other ways and from
“residual” conduct that otherwise undermines the integrity of the justice
system (
nixon, at para. 36). in this sense, s. 7 plays a role
complementary to that of ss. 8 to 14 by providing residual protection
against abuse of process that goes beyond the protection offered by the
specific guarantees in ss. 8 to 14. this role has also been recognized
many times by the court outside the abuse of process context (
r. v.
j.j.,
2022 scc 28, at para.
113;
r. v.
darrach,
2000 scc 46, 2 s.c.r. 443, at
para.
24;
r. v. white,
1999 canlii 689 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 417,
at para.
44;
r. v. mills,
1999 canlii 637 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 668, at paras.
72 and 76;
r. v. pearson,
1992 canlii 52 (scc), 3
s.c.r. 665, at p. 688;
r. v. seaboyer,
1991 canlii 76 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 577, at p. 603;
thomson
newspapers ltd. v. canada (director of investigation and research, restrictive
trade practices commission),
1990 canlii 135 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 425, at
pp. 537‑38).
it is therefore not uncommon for
s. 7
of the
charter
to
be invoked at the same time as one or more other procedural guarantees. this
will be the case, for example, where alleged abusive state conduct involves
more than just the infringement of a procedural guarantee set out in ss. 8
to 14. indeed, abusive state conduct may take all sorts of forms. this
court has also specifically recognized that there may be cases in which “the
nature and number of incidents, though individually unworthy of a stay, will
re quire one when considered together” (
babos, at para.
73
). 
this statement applies equally at the stage of determining whether abuse
of process has occurred. abuse of process in the residual category can thus
result from an accumulation of incidents or state misconduct. furthermore,
there is no reason why such incidents or misconduct cannot take the form of
infringements of a procedural
charter
guarantee and, consequently, why
the alleged abuse of process cannot result from an accumulation of
infringements of one or more guarantees.....
before turning to the framework applicable in this case, i want to
reiterate that proof of one or more infringements is not necessary to establish
an abuse of process in the residual category, because the focus with this type
of abuse is on
conduct
that undermines the integrity of the justice
system, regardless of whether it breaches other
charter
rights.”

where the state misconduct includes an
allegation of breaches of a number of procedural rights guaranteed by the
charter
the analysis under section 7 requires that the framework for each of the
charter
provisions at issue be examined to determine whether all of the infringements,
in combination with other state misconduct that undermines the integrity of the
justice system, taken together amounts to conduct that is vexatious to such a
degree that it contravenes fundamental notions of justice and thus undermines
the integrity of the justice system:
r. v. brunelle,
supra, at para.
75.”
false
evidence from police to deny
charter
breaches

in
r. v. harrison,
2009 scc 34, the
supreme court of canada has held that if police officers are untruthful in
their testimony in court in an attempt to defend conduct alleged to have
breached
charter
rights, the untruthful testimony makes the
charter
breach more serious. mclachlin c.j. stated at paras. 26-27:
“ i note that the trial judge found the officer’s in-court
testimony to be misleading. while not part of the
charter
breach
itself, this is properly a factor to consider as part of the first inquiry
under the s. 24(2) analysis given the need for a court to dissociate itself
from such behaviour. as cronk j.a. observed, “the integrity of the judicial
system and the truth‑seeking function of the courts lie at the heart of
the admissibility inquiry envisaged under
s. 24(2)
of
the
charter.
 few actions more directly undermine both of these goals than misleading
testimony in court from persons in authority” (para. 160).
 in sum, the conduct of the police that led to the
charter
breaches
in this case represented a blatant disregard for
charter
rights. 
this disregard for
charter
rights
was aggravated by the officer’s misleading testimony at trial. the
police conduct was serious, and not lightly to be condoned.”

in my opinion, false evidence given by a
police witness in an attempt to justify conduct alleged to constitute a
charter
breach is an extremely aggravating circumstance that increases the seriousness
of a
charter
breach, and represents a serious and fundamental attack on
the integrity of the judicial process and its commitment to its truth seeking
function. i have found dc kama gave untruthful or misleading evidence to this
court on issues previously identified in these reasons. this renders the
charter
breaches in this case even more serious than they already are, as untruthful
evidence by police trying to defend their actions strikes at the heart of the
truth-seeking function of the court.
multiple
charter
breaches in a single investigation

where numerous
charter
breaches occur
in the context of one investigation the cumulative seriousness of the breaches
may exceed the seriousness of the breaches considered separately. as zarnett
j.a. notes in
r. v. truong, supra, at paras.
42 and 43:
“ a failure to consider related breaches together can distort
the view taken of the seriousness of the
charter
-offending
conduct:
mhlongo, at paras.
60-62. similarly, a failure to consider
related breaches together may fail to capture the overall impact of the
offending conduct on the accused’s
charter
-protected interests,
since they are all “part of the constellation of factors” relevant to this
question:
just, at paras.
22, 38 and 54;
r. v.
zacharias,
2023 scc 30, 487 d.l.r. (4th) 571, at
para.
49.
 rather than
considering the breaches together for each factor of the
grant
analysis,
the trial judge conducted a siloed review of the s. 10(b) breach and expressed
the conclusion that she would dismiss the application to exclude based on it. although
she went on to consider the s. 8 breaches and conducted an alternative
s. 24(2)
analysis
in relation to them, she did not consider the s. 10(b) breach as part of that
analysis. two separate analyses will not necessarily equate to one analysis
that considers the cumulative effect of the related breaches – the whole may be
more than the sum of the parts.”

in this case, there was a cascading series
of related
charter
breaches evidencing a complacency by the police with
respect to
charter
compliance. i have found breaches of s. 10(b) in the
failure of the crown to show that the delay in the implementation of the rights
to counsel was reasonable.

shortly thereafter, in the interview of mr.
patel the police breached his s.10(b) rights by failing to repeat rights to
counsel when the scope of the investigation changed. this occurred in an interview
which involved a serious s.7 breach of mr. patel’s right to remain silent by
actively misleading mr. patel that the interview was not intended to obtain
evidence, when in fact it was.

all of this was compounded by the arbitrary
detention of mr. patel by failing to comply with
s.503
of the
criminal code,
thus rendering his detention arbitrary and a breach of
s.9
of the
charter. 
while this was happening at 32 division, i have found that mr. patel was denied
access to food he could eat. this continued after transfer to the south
detention centre until, likely as a result of a complaint his wife asked his
lawyers to make, he finally was provided with vegetarian food on sunday after 3
days without it.

the delay in getting mr. patel to court, in
breach of
s. 503
of the
criminal code
was made more serious by occurring
in the context of the police using the time from 1:30 to 2:30 on march 9 to
subvert his
s.7
charter
rights, rather than taking steps to get him to
court without unreasonable delay. it was also made more serious by causing his
family to be worried and anxious about his failure to return home, which i have
found would not have occurred if mr. patel had attended court on march 9, and
duty counsel had contacted his family then to obtain a surety, as occurred on
march 10 when he was first taken to court.

the s. 503 breach is also made serious, as i
have found, because non-compliance with s. 503 has been identified as a
systemic problem in toronto by forestell j. in
r. v. mendez, supra, band
j. in
r. v. noor, supra, since at least 2014, and by faieta j. in
r. v.
raios, supra,
at para.
33, in 2018.

in
r. v. raios, supra, the systemic
nature of the problem of
s.503
breaches by the toronto police service was
admitted by the crown. the court found the police’s flagrant or inadvertent
disregard for
s.503
of the
criminal code, and
s. 9
of the
charter
undermines public confidence in the rule of law. in that case the court made
specific remedial recommendations for the toronto police service to address the
systemic problem that resulted in charter-infringing state conduct:
r. v.
raios, supra, at para.
34.

furthermore, i have found that the totality
of the circumstances of mr. patel’s detention were a substantial contributing
cause of the psychological harm found by dr. rootenberg in his assessment. they
were sufficiently serious to be likely to cause serious psychological harm to a
person of reasonable sensibilities, on an objective basis, such that they
amounted to an independent breach of
s.7
of the
charter.

in the alternative, if they did not amount
to a
s.7
charter
breach, they amounted to aggravating circumstances in
relation to mr. patel’s arbitrary detention which increased the seriousness of
the breach of his
s. 9
charter
rights.

as previously noted, i have found that dc
kama gave evidence which i found was misleading, or untrue, in his attempt to
justify the police conduct in this case. pursuant to
r. v. harrison, supra,
this makes the
charter
breaches even more serious.

applying the test for a stay in
r. v.
babos, supra, there is, as a result of the findings summarized above,
prejudice to the integrity of the justice system that would be perpetuated
through the conduct of this trial. this is one of those rare clearest of cases
where the totality of the
charter
breaches and police misconduct is so
offensive to societal notions of fair play and decency that proceeding with a
trial in the face of that conduct would be harmful to the integrity of the
justice system. i find that the totality of the
charter
breaches and
police misconduct would be shocking to reasonable members of the community. to
allow the trial to proceed would leave the impression that the justice system
condones conduct that offends society’s sense of fair play and decency.

in my opinion, there is no alternate remedy
that would adequately dissociate the judicial system from the impugned conduct
going forward. the crown argues that excluding mr. patel’s statement pursuant
to
s.24(2)
of the
charter
would be a sufficient remedy. however, the
crown conceded that it could not prove mr. patel’s statement to be voluntary, and
abandoned its application to have the statement found to be voluntary. if a
statement is not proven voluntary,
charter
s.24(2) is never engaged. as
the supreme court noted in
r. v. grant,
2009
scc 32, at para.
90:
“only if such a statement survives scrutiny under the confessions
rule and is found voluntary, does the s.24(2) remedy of exclusion arise.”

furthermore, in any event, given the number
of serious
charter
breaches, in this case, their serious impact on the
accused and the integrity of the administration of justice, and the numerous
instances in which i have found police evidence to be misleading or untrue, the
mere exclusion of the statement is a totally inadequate remedy.

i have engaged in a stage 3 balancing under
r.
v. babos. there is no doubt that the offences with which mr. patel was
charged are serious offences in relation to the potential sexual exploitation
of someone he believed was a 13-year old girl, but who in fact was an officer
engaged in a sting operation. nevertheless, the offences are extremely serious
and the crown’s case would appear to be strong. however, as noted by the
supreme court in
r. v. grant, supra
at para.
84:
“moreover, while the public has a heightened interest in seeing a
determination on the merits where the offence charged is serious, it also has a
vital interest in having a having a justice system that is above reproach, particularly
where the penal stakes are high for the accused.”

i note that, in relation to the
s. 503
criminal
code
breach, and the resulting breach of
s. 9
of the
charter, the
problem of police failure to comply with s.503 has been identified as systemic
in prior cases in toronto even 10 years ago, and yet it persists.

considered as a whole, the sheer number of
breaches, and the seriousness of the police subversion of mr. patel’s
s.7
charter
rights, the willingness of the officer-in-charge to give evidence which i found
to be misleading or untruthful, and the cumulative disregard for mr. patel’s
charter
rights in the police conduct in this case, in total amounts to conduct which
would shock the community and offend the community’s sense of fair play and
decency. for these reasons, the balancing at stage 3 leads to the conclusion that
the protection of the integrity of the justice system requires that the
proceedings be stayed, rather than having a trial despite the conduct that
offends the community’s sense of fair play and decency.

in my opinion, the balancing in this case
favours staying the charges as society’s interest in protecting the integrity
of the system of justice in the circumstances of this case must prevail over
society’s interest in having a trial, despite the egregious state conduct.

accordingly, the charges are stayed pursuant
to
s.24(1)
of the
charter.
dated: 
march 31, 2025 ______________________________
justice
david porter