source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj310/2025oncj310.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. afemui, 2025 oncj 310
date: 
2025 06 04
court
file no.: 23- 48121917
toronto
region
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
wayne afemui
before
justice cidalia c.g. faria
heard
on february 20 and march 26, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 4, 2025
meher singh......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
elysia nocida............................................... 
 counsel for the defendant wayne
afemui
faria j.:
i.
introduction

wayne afemui is charged with assault with a
weapon and dangerous operation of a motor vehicle causing bodily harm, contrary
to
ss. 267
(a) and
320.13(2)
of the
criminal code.

the crown called two witnesses: the complainant,
sheldon arnold; and a security guard, tanya khagram. the crown also filed the
video surveillance that captured the event.

mr. afemui testified in his own defence and
filed several photos of the scene.
ii.
issue

the issues are:
(1)
the credibility and reliability of the
witnesses.
(2)
whether the crown has proven the manner of
driving was dangerous and a marked departure from the required standard of care
beyond a reasonable doubt.
(3)
whether mr afemui intentionally struck mr.
arnold with his car beyond a reasonable doubt.
iii.
positions of the parties

ms. singh for the crown submits the court should
accept the evidence of mr. arnold, reject mr. afemui’s evidence and find him
guilty of both charges. she emphasizes mr. afemui’s evidence is inconsistent
with the independent video surveillance of his conduct, and she has met her
burden.

ms. nocida, counsel for mr. afemui submits mr.
arnold’s evidence should be rejected as he was evasive on more than one
occasion, he demonstrated
animus
toward mr. afemui, and downplayed his
own actions. she submits mr. afemui’s evidence should be accepted. in the
alternative, she argues mr. afemui’s evidence raises a reasonable doubt, and provides
an alternate reasonable inference as to why mr. afemui drove the way he did. in
either case, both charges should be dismissed.
iv.
legal principles

as in every criminal case, mr. afemui is
presumed innocent. the burden is on the crown to prove each element of the
charges beyond a reasonable doubt. the burden never shifts. reasonable doubt is
based on reason and common sense from the evidence or lack of evidence. it is
higher than a balance of probabilities, yet less than proof to an absolute
certainty.


when considering the credibility and reliability
of a witness, i may accept some, none, or all, of a witness’ evidence. 
credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the truth. reliability
relates to the actual accuracy of the testimony. the credibility and
reliability of a witness must be “tested in the light of all the other evidence
presented.”


as mr. afemui testified in his defence, the applicable analytical
framework is that of
w.(d.).:
i.
if i accept the evidence of mr. afemui, i must acquit him.
ii.
even if i do not accept the evidence of mr. afemui, if his evidence
raises a reasonable doubt, i must acquit him.
iii.
even if i do not accept the evidence of mr. afemui, nor does it raise a
reasonable doubt, on the totality of the evidence i do accept, i must be
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt the crown has proven every element of both
offences.

the
actus reus
and
mens
rea essential
elements of the charge dangerous operation causing bodily harm is every person
who operates a motor vehicle in a manner dangerous to the public having regard
to all the circumstances, including the nature, condition, and use of the place
at which a motor vehicle is being operated and the amount of traffic that at
the time is or might reasonably be expected to be at that place, and where the degree of care
exercised by the accused being a marked departure from the standard of care a reasonably
prudent driver, in the same circumstances of the accused.


the
mens rea
test is a modified objective
test.

bodily harm means any hurt or injury to a person
that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and that is more than
merely transient or trifling in nature per
s. 2
of the
criminal code.

the elements of an assault with weapon are when,
in committing an assault, the application of intentional force to another
person, directly or indirectly, without the consent of the other person, carries,
uses or threatens to use a weapon or an imitation thereof.
v.
evidence
the video

wayne afemui is seen on video, on september 28,
2023, after a verbal altercation with sheldon arnold in front of 121 ling rd., getting
into his vehicle, driving forward and to the left, then reversing at a fast
rate of speed back through the circular driveway. as he drives by sheldon
arnold standing by his own vehicle, he swerves into him, and hits mr. arnold
with his vehicle.

just before he gets hit, mr. arnold is standing
in the driveway, by his parked vehicle, 20-30 feet behind mr. afemui’s vehicle.
he is standing with both arms raised, hands up and open.

when mr. afemui’s vehicle swerves into him, he
gets jammed into his own vehicle, lifted into the air, and then hits the
pavement.
sheldon arnold

mr. arnold, age 41, testified that he was driving
home from work that afternoon, eastbound on highway 401 when he saw a vehicle swerving
in and out of traffic at a high speed, “break checking people” including
himself. the driver braked in front of mr. arnold, causing him to slam on his
breaks. he almost collided with the guardrail.

mr. arnold decided to follow the car to get its licence
plate. he exited the highway at the kingston rd. and followed the car to a condo. 
once the driver parked, mr. arnold pulled up behind him and parked about 20 to
30 feet behind. the driver popped his head out of his driver’s window and asked
him “can i help you?” mr. arnold testified that he told the driver he wanted to
take his licence plate down because he had been driving dangerously.

the driver then exited his vehicle as did mr.
arnold. the two men continued the conversation calmly, but the driver kept
repeating himself, as did mr. arnold. mr. arnold testified the driver became aggressive
and walked toward him.

mr. arnold believed the driver “meant him harm”.
so as to scare him, he told the driver he had something in his car for him, and
headed to the trunk of his car where he kept a baseball bat. the driver
responded “i’m gonna hit you with my car”. there was never any reference to a
gun.

when mr. arnold saw the driver head back to his
vehicle, he closed his trunk and stood by his car. he thought the driver was
leaving. then mr. arnold testified he saw the car reverse, accelerate and angle
toward him before he was hit.

mr. arnold testified numerous parts of his body were
hit and then he landed on the pavement. he got up, and saw the car stop, then exit
the driveway the same way it came in.

mr. arnold testified his wife attended the scene
and took him to hospital. he described having pain in various parts of his
body, sustaining a concussion and attending physiotherapy because of the
collision.

in cross-examination, mr. arnold:
•
agreed he did not know where mr. afemui was
driving and did not know how long he would follow him.
•
agreed he followed mr. afemui for about 5 to 10
minutes.
•
did not give any thought as to whether the
driver would know he was being followed.
•
did not own a cell phone at the time. he had a
tablet with photo capability, but intended on writing down the licence plate.
•
did not take down the licence plate before or as
he was engaged in conversation with the driver.
•
did want to scare mr. afemui when he went to his
trunk.
•
did not believe mr. afemui would actually hit
him with his car after having said he would as it was broad daylight, and
security was there.
tanya khagram

ms. khagram was the security guard on duty at
the 121 ling rd. that day. she was monitoring the cctv in the front lobby. she
observed a car pull up and park. she thought it was a food delivery truck. she saw
two men yelling at each other. when she approached them, they were both
swearing and loud.

she is not sure who said, “you want to fight” or
“you want to do it” which made it “worse”. she thought both men said this but
could not recall who said it first. she never heard any reference to a gun. she
saw one man go to his car for a baseball bat but never removed it from the car.
she saw the other man get into his car, reverse, hit the first man and exit the
circular driveway the same way he came in.
wayne afemui

mr. afemui he did not intentionally hit mr.
arnold with his vehicle, and never threatened him to do so. he testified that
he reversed at a fast rate of speed because he was trying to leave the
situation, he accidently over-corrected when he saw mr. arnold behind him, and
swerved into him.

mr. afemui, age 33, a self-employed maintenance
technician, confirmed much of the narrative provided by mr. arnold with a few
exceptions.
•
he was driving his toyota corolla on highway 401,
though he thought he drove “normally”.
•
he noticed he was being followed sometime during
the 10 to 15 minutes from the time he exited the highway to when he parked at 121
ling rd. to do some work that day.

mr. afemui further testified:
•
the vehicle that had followed him pulled up and
parked behind him at 121 ling rd.
•
he stuck his head out of his window and asked mr.
arnold what the issue was.
•
both men got out of their vehicles.
•
the conversation was not loud to start.
•
he repeatedly asked the driver what the “issue”
was and became irritated.
•
mr. arnold told him he had something in his
trunk for him.
•
he told mr. arnold the same thing, that he had
something in his trunk for him too.
•
he disagreed mr. arnold ever gave him an answer
to his question, though he conceded he understood there was an “insinuation” he
had tailgated mr. arnold on the highway.

mr. afemui testified that he was scared, and the
way mr. arnold dismissed him made him think mr. arnold had gun. he went to his
car to get away. he drove forward, and as “it looked a lot farther ahead then
behind me”, so he reversed to get out of the driveway quickly because he
thought mr. arnold was a threat.

he testified he looked but did not see mr. arnold
standing directly behind his car when he reversed. when he saw mr. arnold at
the “last second”, he “overcorrected” and “swerved in the wrong direction”
which is when his vehicle “made contact” with mr. arnold. he did not see,
feel, or hear his car hit mr. arnold.

mr. afemui testified he believed mr. arnold was on
the other side of his car when he first reversed. he conceded he reversed fast
and that this “would confuse” mr. arnold.

after hitting mr. arnold, mr. afemui saw him
fall to the ground and get up. he realized he could not exit, so made “a
3-point turn or a 2 point turn to get out of the situation”. he drove to a
plaza parking lot and called police. he told police mr. arnold had a gun.

in cross-examination, mr. afemui:
•
agreed he continued toward mr. arnold even after
mr. arnold started walking away.
•
disagreed he ever told mr. arnold he would hit
him with his car.
•
agreed he told the police mr. arnold had a gun
although he never saw a gun and there never any mention of a gun.
vi.
analysis

ms. khagram did not add much to this narrative
however she did testify both men were yelling and swearing. she was direct,
specific, and cautious with her evidence. she was both credible and reliable on
this point. i accept her testimony that both men were engaging in a loud verbal
dispute with profanity uttered by both men by the end of their verbal
altercation.
sheldon arnold

mr. arnold testified as if it was his civic duty
to follow a driver who had been driving badly, even dangerously, on the
highway, for almost 15 minutes out of his way, no less, to write down his
licence plate, and, presumably report the driver to authorities.

throughout the narrative mr. arnold presented
himself as a calm, rational, and law-abiding citizen who just wanted report
bad driving. though he described mr. afemui as polite and calm to start, he
testified mr. afemui became increasingly aggressive and loud. he described mr.
afemui as enraged, a psycho, and a man who meant him harm, while he himself, was
regulated and reacted in a measured way.

although i find mr. arnold did get loud and swear
as described by ms. khagram, nonetheless, i accept the substance of his
evidence. he testified against his interest when he admitted he wanted to scare
mr. afemui by saying he had something in his car for him, and again, albeit
reluctantly, that though he never removed the baseball bat, he admitted he intended
to protect himself with the bat.

i find, that as mr. arnold described, and the
video shows, mr. afemui was the physically aggressive one of the two, who moved
toward mr. arnold.

i also find that mr. afemui did threaten to hit mr.
arnold with his car. although there is no audio, the video does show mr. afemui
pointing to his car as mr. arnold retreats.

there was certainly a ring of truth to mr.
arnold’s evidence that he did not believe mr. afemui would actually hit him
with his car that corresponds with the video’s depiction of mr. afemui unexpectedly
doing just that in broad daylight with security standing by.

i find mr. arnold credible and reliable, though
self-serving in, on the progression and content of the verbal altercation, though
not its tenor or tone, and i accept the undisputed bodily harm he sustained as
a result of mr. afemui’s car hitting him.
wayne afemui

in the circumstances mr. afemui was understandably
irate with being followed and confronted about his driving by a stranger,
however, he testified he was scared.

i find neither his language by his own
admission, nor his demeanour as seen on the video, nor the way he operated his
car, support his assertion he was afraid.

mr. afemui was the physical aggressor from the
moment he stepped out of his car and headed toward mr. arnold, and continued to
move forward even as mr. arnold retreats to his own car.

when mr. afemui gets into his car, there is a clear,
wide, unobstructed exit of the circular driveway in front of him to get away
from mr. arnold. instead, he reverses and drives toward mr. arnold. he
testifies this was a closer and faster exit to get away from mr. arnold.

that is simply not the case.

even if the actual distance to the exit behind
him was shorter than the exit in front of him: to reverse, is to get closer to,
and have to drive by mr. arnold and his vehicle; to reverse is to get directly
into mr. arnold’s line of vision; to reverse in a circular driveway is to
choose a more difficult driving manoeuvre than to drive straight forward; to
reverse is to have to navigate driving between mr. arnold’s parked car and the grassy
curb when the path forward is clear and wider. the point is made by his very
own admission that after driving by mr. arnold and hitting him, he had to do a
3 or a 2 point turn to exit the driveway.

reversing was the opposite of “trying to get
out” and “away” from the “danger” mr. afemui said mr. arnold posed.

mr. afemui was not credible, and he certainly
was not reliable. he testified that even though he saw no gun, there was no
reference to a gun, he thought mr. arnold had a gun. he told the 911 operator
mr. arnold had a gun. it does not go unnoticed that mr. arnold is a black man.

mr. afemui also testified that he looked behind
him but did not see mr. arnold as he reversed towards him. the video is clear mr.
arnold was directly behind mr. afemui when he reversed, if mr. afemui looked,
he would have seen him. he is therefore not being honest that he looked, or
that he did not see mr. arnold.
dangerous operation

justice watt in
r. v. stennett,
2021 onca
258
helpfully stated:
•
“it is the
manner
in which the motor
vehicle was operated that is at issue, not the consequences of driving.” (para.
87)
•
“the focus of the inquiry into whether an
accused’s driving, viewed objectively was dangerous to the public in all the
circumstances is on the risks created by the manner of the accused’s driving,
not its consequences such as an accident...” (para. 88)
•
the “
actus reus
of the dangerous
operation offence requires that the trier of fact be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that viewed objectively, the accused was driving in a manner
that was dangerous to the public in all the circumstances:
beatty
at
para.
43
”. (at para. 89)
•
“the focus of the analysis on the fault element
or
mens rea
is on whether the dangerous manner of driving was the result
of a marked departure from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
have exercised in the same circumstances:
beatty, at para.
48;
roy,
at para.
36
” (para. 90)

the video shows a clear unobstructed way forward
to exit the circular driveway, and mr. arnold, not of small stature, clearly
standing by mr. afemui’s car when he reversed and swerved into him.


a reasonable driver in the circumstances would, drive
forward and out. a reasonable drive would, if choosing to reverse, in the tight
confines of the obstructed circular driveway, do so with caution not speed, and
look behind him, when he knows both a parked car and at least two people are
behind his vehicle.

instead, mr. afemui reverses quickly and does
not take care to observe who is behind him and where. driving in this manner exacerbated
the risk he was taking, given the nature of the location, a circular driveway,
and the circumstances, that at least two people are somewhere behind him.

his driving is made more dangerous when he did
see mr. arnold, mr. afemui did not minimize the risk by slowing down or
stopping, but rather, accelerated and swerved his vehicle directly into mr.
arnold.

all these decisions: reversing; speeding; not
looking at his side mirrors, rearview mirrors and through his back window as he
reverses; not slowing down or stopping when he says he sees mr. arnold; and
then swerving into the very person in his way; is a marked departure from the
standard of care expected of a reasonable person in equivalent circumstances
under those conditions.

although i find mr. afemui was not scared and
trying to get away, even if i did, the driving would still be a marked
departure of a reasonable person in circumstances as the driving was toward the
threat, not to get away from the perceived threat. furthermore, the video
illustrates it is not a reasonable inference that mr. afemui would reverse
rather than drive forward if he was afraid of mr. arnold.
assault with a weapon

i do not accept mr. afemui’s evidence that he
swerved into mr. arnold accidentally when he saw him. his testimony is not
credible given the totality of the evidence and the facts as i have found them.

the video shows mr. afemui angle his car and
swerve directly into mr. arnold at the exact moment he drives by mr. arnold.


mr. afemui’s threat, his driving, and the video
all substantiate his intention and his action: that he intentionally hit mr.
arnold with his car.
vii.
conclusion

i do not accept mr. afemui’s evidence, nor does
it raise a reasonable doubt.

further, on the totality of the evidence i
accept, particularly the evidence of the video surveillance, there is no
alternative reasonable conclusion than that mr. afemui intended to execute the
actions he did, with the results he achieved.

the crown has proven all the elements of both
charges.

i find wayne afemui guilty of dangerous
operation of a motor vehicle causing bodily harm and assault with a weapon.
released: june 4, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320 at para.
14.

r. v. stewart,
1994 canlii 7208 (on ca), o.j. no.
811 (c.a.) at para.
27.

r. v. w. (d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 1 scr 742.

r. v. beatty,
2008 scc 5.

r. v. roy,
2012 scc 26
at para.
30.

there was no inquiry on the evidence made by either the crown, or the defence,
as to the role of race, conscious and unconscious bias, if any, in mr. afemui’s
erroneous accusation to the 911 operation that mr. arnold had a gun.

exhibit 1: video surveillance, 121 ling rd. september 28, 2023 at 16:01:02 to
16:01:05.

exhibit 1: video surveillance, 121 ling rd. september 28, 2023 at 16:01:06 to
16:01:10.