source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj350/2025oncj350.html

citation:
r. v. allen, 2025 oncj
350
date: june 25, 2025
ontario
 court of justice
toronto
between:
his
 majesty the king
— 
 and —
trevor allen
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
 the crown
t.
 yin
for
 the defendant
a.
 longueville
heard:
may 1-2, 2025
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction

mr. allen is charged with impaired operation
of a conveyance and with having a blood alcohol concentration equal to or
exceeding 80 mg in 100 ml of blood within two hours of ceasing to operate a conveyance.

the charges arise out of an investigation
into mr. allen that began with an ambulance attending near st. clair avenue and
avenue road in toronto, ontario on october 6, 2022. someone had called 911 to
report that a man (who turned out to be mr. allen) was unresponsive behind the
wheel of a parked car. police also attended. as a result of the police
investigation mr. allen was arrested and, once back at the station, he eventually
provided two samples of his breath, both times registering 270 mg of alcohol in
100 ml of blood, according to the certificate of analysis.

ms. longueville, on behalf of mr. allen, has
brought a
charter
application alleging that:
(1)
the
arresting officer, p.c. snider, did not promptly inform mr. allen of the reason
for his detention, thus violating his section 10(a)
charter
rights.
(2)
p.c. snider failed to promptly inform
mr. allen of his right to consult counsel and failed to promptly implement that
right, in breach of s. 10(b) of the
charter.
(3)
the seizure of mr. allen’s breath
samples at the roadside constituted a s.8
charter
breach because the
demand for that sample was unlawful, not having been made immediately upon p.c.
snider developing the requisite reasonable suspicion.
(4)
as a result of the s.8 breach at the
roadside, p.c. snider lacked reasonable grounds to make a demand that mr. allen
provide breath samples into an approved instrument at the police station,
rendering that seizure a further s. 8 breach.
(5)
the seizure of mr. allen’s breath
samples at the police station was not done as soon as practicable.

ms. longueville further argues that the
numerous
charter
violations support the exclusion of the breath sample readings
pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.

mr. yin argues that mr. allen’s
charter
rights were not violated, but if they were, the violations do not support the
exclusion of the breath sample readings.
b.
the
evidence
(a)
introduction

the trial proceeded in a blended fashion. the
evidence relevant to the
charter
and trial issues consists of police
video and audio of their interaction with mr. allen, the testimony of sheng ze
xu, who was the emt who dealt with mr. allen, and the testimony of p.c.
snider, the arresting officer. mr. allen did not testify nor call any evidence
on the
charter
application or the trial proper.
(b)
mr. xu’s testimony

mr. xu responded to a 911 call made by a
passer by. when he arrived on scene mr. allen was speaking to firefighters from
the driver’s seat of a motor vehicle that was parked up against the curb.

mr. xu escorted mr. allen to the back of his
ambulance to be medically assessed. mr. allen appeared responsive and alert,
although his heart rate was elevated, and he seemed to be somewhat anxious.

mr. xu did not note that mr. allen had any
trouble walking nor any speech or gait issues although mr. xu was not looking
for signs of alcohol consumption.

mr. allen was confused as to where he was,
believing he was on danforth avenue.
he told mr. xu he
had been parked in his car drinking vodka.
(c)
the salient details of mr. allen’s interaction
with police

most, but not all, of mr. allen’s interactions
with police are clearly captured on video or audio, making fact finding
relatively straight forward.

p.c. snider drove to the scene in response
to a radio call to the effect that there was a man passed out and unresponsive
in the driver’s seat of a car at st. clair avenue and avenue road. as p.c.
snider arrived on scene at 20:51 he saw mr. allen being assisted into the back
of an ambulance by mr. xu.

shortly after 20:52 p.c. snider entered the
back of the ambulance as mr. xu was in the midst of his medical evaluation.
p.c. snider listened as mr. allen told mr. xu that he had received a call from
his lawyer, then left work and went to the liquor store. p.c. snider then asked
mr. allen if he’d had anything to drink. mr. allen said yes and told p.c.
snider that he had consumed a mickey. he also said that he had pulled his car
over to drink.

p.c. snider left the ambulance at 20:53:23
without saying anything to mr. allen. immediately upon exiting the ambulance, p.c.
snider told another officer on scene that they would need an approved screening
device (asd), which he did not have with him.

p.c. snider then walked a few meters to mr.
allen’s car and looked inside with the help of a flashlight. he saw opened and
unopened liquor bottles in the car.

at 20:54:09 p.c. snider radioed for an asd
to be delivered to him. mr. allen was still in the ambulance.

at 21:08, just after the arrival of the asd,
p.c. snider re-entered the ambulance and learned from mr. xu that the medical
assessment was over. he had a discussion with mr. allen who again admitted that
he had been drinking but said he did so outside the car and had not been
“drinking and driving”. p.c. snider directed mr. allen to come out of the
ambulance and, at 21:09:20 asked for his i.d. which mr. allen clumsily produced
from his wallet.

at 21:10, when mr. allen was standing in
front of the police car, p.c. snider read him a formal demand for a breath
sample into the asd which had by then arrived and had been prepared. mr. allen,
after a couple of failed attempts, provided a sample and registered a “fail” at
21:13:20. at 21:14 p.c. snider placed mr. allen under arrest and at 21:14:50
informed him of his rights to counsel. mr. allen said he understood his rights
and when asked if he wished to call a lawyer, he shook his head, indicating
that he did not.

p.c. snider then read a caution and made a
formal demand for a breath sample into an approved instrument. mr. allen was then
placed in the back of p.c. snider’s police car. at 21:22 p.c. snider began the
drive to traffic services, which he was told was the closest police station
with a breath technician.

they arrived at traffic services at
approximately 21:51. at 22:02 mr. allen‘s parade before the staff sergeant
began. he was again read his right to counsel, and he asked for his phone so
that he could call a lawyer. he was told that he would have that opportunity
after the booking procedure.

when again asked at 22:04 if he wanted to
speak to a lawyer he said “i will” and was told that he only had to speak to
one of the officers and that would be arranged through access to his cell
phone. he was again told about the availability of duty counsel and that he
would have reasonable access to the phone.

the booking sergeant asked mr. allen a host
of questions concerning his health and the amount of alcohol he had consumed.
he was subjected to a level two search and his belongings were inventoried. at
22:15 he was taken to investigative room #3. duty counsel was called immediately.

p.c. snider testified that at 22:35 duty
counsel returned a call placed to them by the police. mr. allen spoke in
private to duty counsel. mr. allen provided his first breath sample at 22:42.

even though p.c. snider did not tell mr.
allen that he was detained, he would not have allowed mr. allen to leave the
scene after first encountering him in the ambulance. he did not read mr. allen
his rights to counsel while he was in the ambulance because mr. allen was still
undergoing a medical assessment. p.c. snider felt that after speaking to mr.
allen in the ambulance he had reasonable and probable grounds to suspect that
mr. allen had committed the offence of impaired care and control.
c.
the
alleged section 10(a) violation

regardless of whether mr. allen was detained
when p.c. snider first dealt with him in the back of the ambulance (which is
discussed more fully below), there is no doubt that mr. allen must have
appreciated that he was being investigated for a drinking and driving offence
by p.c. snider. this would have been immediately apparent from the questions
posed by p.c. snider in the back of the ambulance.
r. v. evans,
1991 canlii 98 (scc), 
s.c.j. no. 31 at para.
35;
r. v. gardner,
2018 onca 584
at para.
26.
d.
the
alleged section 8 violations
(a)
introduction

ms. longueville’s s.8 arguments come down to
these assertions:
(1)
the
seizure of mr. allen’s breath samples at the roadside constituted a s.8
charter
breach because the demand for that sample was unlawful, not having been made
immediately upon p.c. snider developing the requisite reasonable suspicion.
(2)
as a
result of the s.8 breach at the roadside, the asd “fail” must not be considered
when deciding whether p.c. snider had reasonable grounds to make a demand that
mr. allen provide breath samples into an approved instrument at the police
station. without the asd “fail”, the officer lacked the necessary grounds to
make a demand for a breath sample into an approved instrument, rendering that
seizure a further s. 8 breach.
(3)
the
seizure of mr. allen’s breath samples at the police station were not taken as
soon as practicable.

mr. yin disagrees with those assertions.

the parties correctly agree that the
warrantless seizure of mr. allen’s breath samples will only be
charter
compliant if the crown demonstrates, on a balance of probability, that the
search was authorized by law - in this case,
s. 320.28
of the
criminal code.
r. v. collins
1987 canlii 84 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 265;
r. v. guenter,
2016 onca 572
at para.
85.
(b)
did p.c. snider make a lawful screening device
demand?

insofar as p.c. snider relied on the asd
fail for grounds to make his arrest and subsequent demand for a breath sample
into an approved instrument it is necessary to determine whether the asd
seizure was
charter
compliant.

before the seizure of a suspect’s breath
sample by the administration of an asd test can be
charter
complaint, it
must be pursuant to a lawful demand. that demand is only lawful if it is made “immediately”
upon the officer developing reasonable grounds to suspect that the suspect has
alcohol in their body. section 320.27;
r. v. breault,
2023 scc 9;
r.
v. woods,
2005 scc 42.

exceptionally, unusual circumstances may justify
giving the word “immediately” a more flexible interpretation than its usual
meaning demands.
breault
at paras.
7, 53-60. (in
breault
the court
was addressing the word “forthwith” as it appeared in the predecessor section,
while acknowledging that forthwith and immediately have the same meaning.)

in my view, the fact that mr. allen was
being assessed by ems meant that it was appropriate for p.c. snider to wait
until that assessment was completed before making the asd demand. put another
way, given this unusual circumstance, p.c. snider’s delayed demand was
nonetheless “immediate”. the demand was lawful, and the seizure of the asd
sample was thus
charter
compliant.
(c)
did p.c. snider make a lawful demand for a sample
into an approved instrument?

this issue comes down to whether p.c. snider
had reasonable grounds to believe that mr. allen had operated his motor vehicle
while impaired by alcohol. given my findings regarding the
charter
compliance of the asd demand, i find that the arrest and subsequent demand for
a sample into an approved instrument were also
charter
compliant.
(d)
was the seizure of mr. allen’s breath samples at
the police station taken as soon as practicable

the approximate 30-minute delay in getting
mr. allen to traffic services was not
prima facie
unreasonable and is
explained by the fact that that was the closest station with a qualified breath
technician.

the subsequent delays such as waiting at the
sally port and waiting for the breathalyzer to be prepared were short. the
booking procedure was performed with alacrity. the breath samples were taken as
soon as practicable.

in the result, i find that the seizure of
mr. allen’s breath samples into an approved instrument at traffic services was not
in breach of his s. 8
charter
rights.
e.
the
alleged 10(b) violations
(a)
introduction

to reiterate, ms. longueville alleges that p.c.
snider failed to promptly inform mr. allen of his right to consult counsel and
failed to promptly implement that right.
(b)
when did mr. allen’s detention begin?

it is now well settled law that the police
must inform a detainee of his rights to counsel immediately upon detention,
unless to do so poses undue risk to the safety of officers or the public.
r.
v. debot,
1989 canlii 13 (scc), 2 s.c.r.
1140 at paras
3 and 42;
r. v. suberu,
2007 onca 60
at paras
47-48;
r.
v. pino,
2016 onca 389.

it is thus a critical first step to
determine when mr. allen’s detention began.

mr. allen was not physically restrained in
the ambulance. p.c. snider did not tell mr. allen that he was not free to
leave. if he was detained, his detention could only have been of a
psychological nature.

whether mr. allen was psychologically detained
after his initial encounter with p.c. snider in the back of the ambulance is principally
governed by four supreme court judgments:
r. v. lafrance,
2022 scc 32,
r.
v. le,
2019 scc 34,
r. v. grant,
2009 scc 32, and
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33. the law on this issue can be succinctly stated as follows: even
absent physical restraint by the state, a detention exists in situations where
a reasonable person in the accused's shoes would feel obligated to comply...
and that they are not free to leave".
le, at para. 26. not every
encounter between the state and a citizen effects a detention.
suberu,
at para. 3;
le, at para. 27.

three factors are to be considered and
balanced:
1. the
circumstances giving rise to the encounter as they would reasonably be
perceived by the individual;
2. the nature of
the police conduct; and
3. the particular
characteristics or circumstances of the individual where relevant
lafrance
at para.
22;
grant, at para.
44;
le, at para. 31.

mr. allen had just
been discovered by emergency personnel passed out behind the wheel of his car,
which contained several open liquor bottles. p.c. snider entered the ambulance
and asked him questions concerning his consumption of alcohol.

there is no doubt
that mr. allen realized at the time that he was not free to go and that the
investigation into his possible criminal liability had only just begun.
moreover, this realization was objectively reasonable.

mr. allen was
detained upon p.c. snider’s first question to him in the back of the ambulance.
(c)
was mr. allen’s right to be informed of his
right to counsel upon his detention breached?

section 10(b) of the
charter
requires
police to inform a detainee of his right to counsel “without delay”. the
supreme court made it clear in
suberu,
supra, at para. 42 that
“without delay” means immediately.

while “immediately” does not mean
instantaneously, and police are allowed to take certain public safety issues
into account, there was nothing preventing p.c. snider, once he learned that
mr. allen had been drinking and occupying the driver’s seat of his car, from
informing mr. allen that he was detained and that he had the right to consult
counsel.
r. v. fisk,
2020 oncj 88;
r. v. agnihotri,
2019 oncj
551;
r. v. bernard,
2018 onsc 5134.

p.c. snider breached mr. allen’s right to be
informed of his right to counsel upon his detention without delay.
(d)
the alleged failure of the police to facilitate
access to counsel without delay.

the duty to facilitate access to a lawyer
arises immediately upon the detainee’s request to speak to counsel. where the
police delay access to counsel the crown bears the burden of demonstrating that
the delay was reasonable in the circumstances.
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc
50, at para.
24;
r. v. desilva,
2022 onca 879.

in mr. allen’s case, when he was read his
right to counsel (albeit not immediately), he clearly told p.c. snider that he
did not want to contact counsel. when, later at the station he raised the
possibility of wanting counsel, the police made it quite clear to him that he
could use his cell phone and a telephone to find the number to his counsel of
choice, or he could speak to duty counsel, which he did in fact do very soon
after the booking was completed.

no evidence was led to support the defence
argument that mr. allen’s desire to speak to counsel was ever thwarted by the
police. in so far as it might be concluded that mr. allen did ask to speak to
counsel while being booked, it was perfectly acceptable for the police to
finish the booking before setting up a call to counsel.
r. v. samuels,
2024
onca 786
at paras.
36-37.
f.
section
24(2)

section 24(2) of the
charter
reads as
follows:
where,
in proceedings under subsection (1), a court concludes that evidence was
obtained in a manner that infringed or denied any rights or freedoms guaranteed
by this charter, the evidence shall be excluded if it is established that,
having regard to all the circumstances, the admission of it in the proceedings
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

there is no dispute as between the parties
that if the alleged breach occurred, the breath results were obtained in a
manner that infringed mr. allen’s
charter
rights.
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 12

whether the admission of the evidence would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute is governed by the test
first articulated in the supreme court’s decision in
r. v. grant,
2009
scc 32
at para.
71:
[w]
hether
the admission of evidence obtained in breach of the charter would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute engages three avenues of inquiry,
each rooted in the public interests engaged by s. 24(2), viewed in a long-term,
forward-looking and societal perspective. when faced with an application
for exclusion under s. 24(2), a court must assess and balance the effect of
admitting the evidence on society’s confidence in the justice system having
regard to: (1) the seriousness of the charter -infringing state conduct (admission
may send the message the justice system condones serious state misconduct), (2)
the impact of the breach on the charter-protected interests of the accused
(admission may send the message that individual rights count for little), and
(3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits. the
court’s role on a s. 24(2) application is to balance the assessments under each
of these lines of inquiry to determine whether, considering all the
circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute.
see too
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 12
(a)
the seriousness of the breach

i have found one
charter
breach.

a delay in informing a detainee of his right
to contact counsel is always somewhat serious, but in this case the seriousness
of the breach is mitigated by several factors:
•
p.c. snider did not purposely set out to trample
on mr. allen’s
charter
rights. his missteps were well intentioned.
•
the delay in advising mr. allen of his right to
counsel was not particularly long.
•
no attempts were made to elicit evidence from
mr. allen during the delay.
•
all the officers who dealt with mr. allen that
night were kind to him. he was treated with dignity and respect. the police arranged
a call to duty counsel.
•
there was no evidence at trial that the
charter
-infringing
conduct was systemic.

i find that the breach lies at the less
serious end of the seriousness spectrum. the breach mildly favours exclusion.
(b)
the impact of the breach on mr allen’s
charter
protected interests

mr. allen did not learn of his right to
contact counsel as soon as he should have. yet, when he was informed of that
right after a short, albeit unconstitutional delay, he clearly told p.c. snider
that he did not want to contact counsel. there is no evidence to support the
proposition that the impact of the breach of the informational component of
p.c. snider’s s. 10(b) obligations was anything other than trivial. there is
nothing to suggest that had he been properly informed when in the back of the
ambulance, he would have opted to contact a lawyer.

this second
grant
factor neither
favours admission nor exclusion.
(c)
society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits

the supreme court in
tim,
supra
at para.
96
said
this:
the third line of inquiry considers factors
such as the reliability of the impugned evidence and its importance to the
crown's case. it asks "whether the truth-seeking function of the criminal
trial process would be better served by admission of the evidence, or by its
exclusion" (
grant, at para.
79
). reliable evidence critical to the crown's
case will generally pull toward inclusion (
see
grant, at paras.
80-81;
harrison, at paras. 33-34)

the supreme court in
harrison,
2009 scc 34, at paras.
33 and 34, deals with this factor as follows:
at this
stage, the court considers factors such as the reliability of the evidence and
its importance to the crown’s case.
the
evidence of the drugs obtained as a consequence of the
charter
breaches
was highly reliable. it was critical evidence, virtually conclusive of guilt on
the offence charged.
the evidence cannot be said to
operate unfairly having regard to the truth-seeking function of the trial.
while the charged offence is serious, this factor must not take on
disproportionate significance. as
noted in
grant, while the public
has a heightened interest in seeing a determination on the merits where the
offence charged is serious, the public also has a vital interest in a justice
system that is beyond reproach, particularly where the penal stakes for the
accused are high. with that caveat in mind, the third line of inquiry under the
s. 24(2) analysis favours the admission of the evidence as to do so would promote
the public’s interest in having the case adjudicated on its merits.

the evidence (the breath samples and readings) is crucial to
the crown’s case and is highly reliable.

society has an interest in seeing trials of this nature dealt
with on their merits given the terrible toll impaired driving takes every year.

i find that the third
grant
factor favours admission
of the evidence.
(d)
balancing the three
grant
factors

the supreme court in
harrison,
supra, at para.
36
explains the proper approach to balancing the three
grant
factors:
the
balancing exercise mandated by s. 24(2) is a qualitative one, not capable
of mathematical precision. it is not simply a question of whether the majority
of the relevant factors favour exclusion in a particular case. the evidence on
each line of inquiry must be weighed in the balance, to determine whether,
having regard to all the circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute. dissociation of the justice
system from police misconduct does not always trump the truth‑seeking
interests of the criminal justice system.
nor
is the converse true. in all cases, it is the long-term repute of the
administration of justice that must be assessed.

the breach of mr. allen’s s. 10(b)
charter
rights was moderately
serious and mildly favours exclusion of the evidence. the impact of the breach
was minor and neither favours inclusion nor exclusion. the reliability of the
evidence, its importance to the crown’s case, and the public interest in an
adjudication of this case on its merits favour admission of the evidence.

balancing these factors, i find that the admission of the
evidence would not bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

the breath samples are admitted.

mr. allen is guilty on count #2 on the information.
g.
the
impaired charge

mr. allen was at the wheel of his car when
found by emergency personnel. the car contained liquor bottles, several of them
empty. his speech was slow and deliberate. his skin was flushed, and his eyes
seemed glossy to p.c. snider. he told ems xu that he thought he was on danforth
avenue. he struggled to remove his i.d. from his wallet. he told ems xu that before
the ambulance arrived, he had been parked in his car drinking vodka.

this evidence convinces me beyond a
reasonable doubt that mr. allen’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was
impaired by alcohol at the material time and that he was in care or control of
his car at the time. per s. 320.11 of the
criminal code, the word
“operate” means “to drive…or have care or control”.

i find mr. allen guilty of impaired operation
of a conveyance; count #1 on the information.
released on june 25,
2025
justice
russell silverstein