source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj212/2025oncj212.html

citation:
r.
v. mccluskey, 2025 oncj 212
date: 2025·04·16
toronto
ontario
 court of justice
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
andrew mccluskey
before
 justice peter scrutton
heard
 on april 1, 2025
judgment
 released april 16, 2025
l. petryshen………………………………………………………………………………… 
 for the crown
h. r. wellington
 ………………………………………………………………………. for the defendant
scrutton j.:
overview

andrew mccluskey is charged with having a
blood alcohol concentration exceeding the legal limit within two hours of
operating a conveyance. he was stopped at a ride check by members of the toronto
police service just after 11:00 p.m. on december 9, 2023. the police had set up
at an intersection not far from the scarborough town centre, near an area with many
licensed establishments. it is accepted by both parties that mr. mccluskey’s
section 8 and 9
charter
rights were breached in the course of his
interaction with police. it is also accepted that the breath samples he
provided into an approved instrument establish the elements of this offence. the
issues i must decide are whether there were additional
charter
breaches
and whether his breath samples should be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.
the evidence

the team set up the ride check at 9:45 p.m.;
it was anticipated to finish around 4:00 a.m. a number of officers and scout
cars, a supervisor, and at least two approved screening devices (asd) were on
scene. the entirety of the interaction between the police and the defendant was
audio and video recorded.

after flagging down mr. mccluskey’s jeep, p.c.
ryan pulumbarit asked if he had consumed any alcohol that night. mccluskey answered:
“ya, maybe a couple of hours ago.” his response prompted p.c. pulumbarit to
demand that he provide a sample of his breath into an approved screening device.
for hygienic reasons, it is standard practice to provide each detainee with a
new mouthpiece prior to using an asd. unbeknownst to p.c. pulumbarit, the team
had run out of mouthpieces at the time he gave mr. mccluskey the asd demand. p.c.
pulumbarit learned about this shortage when he went to get the device from a
scout car. he was advised that the supervisor on scene had left to bring mouthpieces
back to the ride check. p.c. pulumbarit did not know how many mouthpieces they
had started out with that night or how many cars had been stopped before mr.
mccluskey’s but he could see from the counter on the asd that it had been used
a number of times.

p.c. pulumbarit advised mr. mccluskey that
he would have to wait, told him that he was being detained, and provided him
rights to counsel. mr. mccluskey asked if he could refuse to provide a sample;
p.c. pulumbarit said that he could not but because of the delay mr. mccluskey could
call a lawyer or duty counsel for free legal advice with a 1-800 number that he
could provide. he reiterated that because of the “holding pattern”, he wanted
mr. mccluskey to know that he could make a phone call. mr. mccluskey indicated
that he understood and declined.

twelve minutes elapsed between the time p.c.
pulumbarit realized there were no mouthpieces on scene and the time he was
provided a mouthpiece at 11:15 p.m. mr. mccluskey provided a sample without
incident. it registered a “fail” and p.c. pulumbarit arrested him for “over
80”, demanding that he provide a sample of his breath into an approved
instrument. he cautioned him and provided rights to counsel again. mr. mccluskey
was taken to a mobile ride command centre with a qualified breath technician
and facilities for detainees to consult counsel that had been set up a short
drive away. they arrived at 11:30 p.m.; mr. mccluskey spoke to duty counsel 9
minutes later. he provided his first breath sample at 12:20 a.m.; his blood
alcohol content (bac) was 140 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood. his second
sample, provided at 12:43 a.m., indicated a bac of 130 mg of alcohol in 100 ml
of blood.

p.c. pulumbarit testified that at the time
he made the asd demand he was not aware they were out of mouthpieces and believed
he would be able to obtain a sample immediately. when he went looking for
mouthpieces, he learned that steps were already being taken to obtain more. p.c.
pulumbarit understood that a valid demand required that the asd device be
operational. he believed his demand was valid because at the time he made it he
had a working device and no reason to think he could not use it to take a breath
sample. he would not have allowed mr. mccluskey to leave the scene during
their wait. mr. mccluskey was detained and would have been arrested for
refusing to provide a sample had he attempted to leave because p.c. pulumbarit
had a responsibility to ensure that the roads were safe.

p.c. pulumbarit denied the suggestion that
he would not have actually facilitated a call to counsel from the roadside if
mr. mccluskey had requested one. he explained that he had already permitted mr.
mccluskey to use his cell phone earlier in their interaction, something that is
clear from the video. he said he would have looked for a private place for mr.
mccluskey to make the call and would have let mr. mccluskey call from his
inside his jeep if he was satisfied there was nothing in it to be concerned
about.
the parties’ positions

defence counsel argues that p.c. pulumbarit breached
mr. mccluskey’s section 8, 9, 10(a) and 10(b)
charter
rights. he
submits that everything that followed the invalid asd demand was unlawful and
that evidence of the breath samples should be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of
the
charter
because of the inter-related, successive
charter
violations.

crown counsel concedes that mr. mccluskey’s
section 8 and 9 rights were breached in virtue of the fact that p.c. pulumbarit’s
demand was invalid at the time he made it because he could not use the asd to
obtain the samples immediately. she characterized the breach as a technical
one which was the product of good faith and ought not to result in the
exclusion of the breath samples mr. mccluskey provided at the station. crown
counsel disputed any other
charter
breaches.
section 8 and 9 of the
charter

p.c. pulumbarit’s initial detention of the
defendant in the context of the ride spot check was lawful:
r. v. dedman,
1985 canlii 41 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 2;
r. v. elias,
2005 scc 37. i agree with defence
counsel, however, that this detention became unlawful when p.c. pulumbarit continued
it for the sole purpose of having the defendant provide a sample of his breath
into an asd. while the defendant’s utterances clearly furnished the requisite
legal basis to make the asd demand,

the detention became arbitrary when p.c. pulumbarit continued it
for the purpose of administering the asd when he was unable to do so:
r. v.
breault,
2023 scc 9 (canlii), 2023 s.c.c. 9;
r. v. robbins,
 m.j. no. 62 (k.b.).

p.c. pulumbarit did not note or observe any
indicia of impairment during his interactions with the defendant. because his
grounds to arrest were based entirely on the results of the asd, which must be
excised from the
charter
analysis, all of the state action that
followed, including the defendant’s arrest and the samples of his breath that
were collected at the station must be characterized as consequential
charter
breaches:
r. v. zacharias,
2022 scc 30;
r. v. tavora,
2024
onsc 6568
(s.c.a.) at para.
39. i am satisfied, though, that the absence of a
fully functioning asd is the only state action (or inaction) that contributed
to the subsequent
charter
breaches here. put differently, had the asd demand
been valid, everything that followed would have been occurred in a
constitutionally compliant manner.
section 10(a) and 10(b) of the
charter

there was no breach of s. 10(a) of the
charter.
 p.c. pulumbarit
advised mr. mccluskey that he was detaining
him for a ride check immediately upon directing him to pull over. he also told
him that he was being detained pursuant to the asd demand when he made that
demand. the officer informed the defendant of his right to counsel at the
roadside as soon as he realized that he would not be able to operate the asd
without delay. the audio and video recording make clear that he told the
defendant he would allow him to make a private call to counsel while they
waited for new mouthpieces to arrive.

i accept p.c. pulumbarit’s evidence that he
would have facilitated this call had the defendant decided to avail himself of
that offer. p.c. pulumbarit appears almost sheepish about the delay in his
interactions with the defendant on the video. he was friendly and
conversational. i find that he was trying to be helpful and am satisfied that
his offer to allow mr. mccluskey to call duty counsel was sincere.

after seeing that mr. mccluskey had failed
the asd, p.c. pulumbarit advised him of his rights to counsel immediately upon
arresting him for over 80. he fulfilled the implementational component of that
right by putting the defendant in touch with duty counsel less than 10 minutes after
their arrival at the mobile police station. i am satisfied that there were no
deficiencies in either the form or substance of how p.c. pulumbarit advised mr.
mccluskey of his s. 10(b) rights or how he implemented them.
section 24(2) of the
charter
(a)
the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing state conduct

the first line of inquiry under s. 24(2)
asks whether the
charter
-infringing state conduct was sufficiently
serious as to warrant disassociation from it. the spectrum of seriousness runs
from inadvertent or minor to wilful or reckless disregard for
charter
rights:
r. v. zacharias,
supra
at para.
51;
r. v. grant,
2009 scc 32
at para.
74. the consequential breaches of sections 8 and 9 of the
charter
relating to mr. mccluskey’s arrest and the breath samples the
police collected at the station must be considered under the first two parts of
the
grant
analysis but because those breaches flowed only from the
initial unlawful conduct, and not any subsequent act or omission, they do not significantly increase the overall seriousness of the conduct at
issue:
r. v. zacharias,
supra, at para.
52.

i would not describe this as a “technical
breach”, given the supreme court of canada’s determination in
breault
that
police must be able to administer an asd immediately if they are going to detain
someone for the purpose of demanding a sample.
i agree with the crown,
though, that this breach was inadvertent and the product of good faith. the
defendant’s initial detention pursuant to the ride stop was lawful. p.c. pulumbarit
had grounds to detain the defendant and make an asd demand in virtue of the
defendant’s admission that he had recently consumed alcohol. p.c. pulumbarit
believed he would be able to administer the asd immediately. when he learned
that he would be unable to do so, he ameliorated the situation as best he could,
having regard to the public safety concerns raised by a potentially impaired
driver, by providing rights to counsel and offering to facilitate a call to
counsel. it is unfortunate that the ride check ran out of mouthpieces and also
that no one advised p.c. pulumbarit of this but i accept his evidence that
there are a lot of “moving parts” to ride spot checks. in the circumstances, am
satisfied that this was a minor breach.
(b) the impact on the
charter
-protected
interests of the accused

to
assess
this
factor,
i
must
consider the interests
engaged
by
the
infringed
rights
and
examine
the
degree
to
which
the
violation
impacted
those
interests:
r. v. grant,
supra,
at para.
77.
this analysis is not limited to the initial state action
on which the consequential breaches are premised but requires consideration of the
defendant’s subsequent arrest and the collection of his breath samples at the
station. it bears repeating here that mr. mccluskey’s initial detention was
lawful because a fully operational asd is not a constitutional precondition of
a ride spot check, it is only a precondition to a valid asd demand.
the absence of a new mouthpiece added precisely 12 minutes
to what began as a lawful detention. in that time, mr. mccluskey was given the
opportunity to speak to counsel, was treated cordially and respectfully, and no
attempt was made to obtain evidence that could incriminate him. the opportunity
to speak to counsel at the roadside prior to providing a breath sample, which mr.
mccluskey declined, distinguishes this scenario from
r. v. kubacsek,
2021 onsc 5081
at para.
66
and
r. v. macmillan,
2019 onsc 3560
at para.
30, authorities upon which defence counsel relies.

mr. mccluskey’s arrest was unlawful because
the failed asd result must be excised from review of p.c. pulumbarit’s grounds
to arrest. if the police had repeated the asd demand once the new mouthpiece
arrived, it is arguable that this demand would mean the subsequent asd sample,
arrest, and collection of breath samples at the station were done lawfully,
such that there were no consequential breaches, and the only impact on his
charter
-protected
rights was the 12-minute detention at the roadside. regardless, the collection
of his breath samples was minimally intrusive. so, while mr. mccluskey’s unlawful arrest
occasioned a serious intrusion on his liberty, in my view, the aggregate impact
on his
charter
-protected rights was only moderately serious.
(
c) society's interest in an adjudication on the
merits

the third line of inquiry asks whether the
truth-seeking function of the trial process would be better served by admission
of the evidence or by its exclusion. the court must consider both the negative
impact of admission of the evidence and the impact of excluding it on the
long-term repute of the administration of justice:
r. v. grant,
supra,
at para.
79;
r. v.
harrison,
2009 scc 34 (canlii), 2 s.c.r. 494 at para.
36. the
evidence in this case is real, reliable, and crucial to the crown’s case. mr.
mccluskey’s bac was significantly above the legal limit. operation of a
vehicle while “over 80” is a serious offence that engages real public safety
concerns. society has a significant interest in a trial on the merits:
r.
v. tavora,
supra,
at para.
58.

the overriding consideration in any s. 24(2)
analysis is whether admitting the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute: r. v. whittaker,
2024 onca 182. in my view, the
first two
grant
factors do not pull strongly toward exclusion. the predicate
breach was minor and its impact was attenuated by the opportunity to consult
counsel. this court does not need to disassociate itself from the manner in
which the breath samples were obtained. in the circumstances, i think that an
informed, reasonable person would conclude that exclusion would bring the long-term
reputation of the administration of justice into disrepute.

mr. mccluskey’s application to have the evidence excluded
pursuant to s. 24(2) is dismissed. i find him guilty of the offence charged.
dated: april 16, 2025 ________________________________
justice
peter scrutton

p.c. pulumbarit was relying on s. 320.27(1) of the
code
rather than s. 320.27(2).