source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj608/2025oncj608.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. moquin, 2025 oncj 608
date: 
2025 11 21
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
tanya moquin
before justice j.r.
lalande
heard
on november 10 2025
reasons
for judgment released on november 21, 2025
r. feldstein.......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
r. langevin........................................................ 
counsel for the accused tanya moquin
lalande j.:
overview

tanya moquin is charged with causing a disturbance and assaulting a
peace officer. while the evidence is conflicting on the various accounts, at
its highest, the assault consists of an allegation that, while being removed
from her vehicle during the process of arrest for causing a disturbance, ms.
moquin kicked the leg of one of the officers.

ms. moquin seeks a stay of proceedings, arguing that her right to be
tried within a reasonable time has been breached. i accept her argument and the
case will be stayed for the reasons set out below.

the overall delay in this case is 718 days or 23 months and 18 days. it
exceeds the presumptive ceiling of 548 days or 18 months.

the framework in
jordan
requires me to consider first whether
there is any defence-caused delay by conduct or waiver. after deducting any
defence delay from the overall delay, the remaining time is measured against
the presumptive ceiling. should it exceed the ceiling, the burden is on the
crown to rebut the presumption of unreasonableness on the basis of exceptional circumstances
either in the form of discrete events or unusual complexity. failure to do so
must result in a stay.

essentially, there are two issues to be resolved in this application.
the first is the characterization of certain periods as defence-caused delay.
the crown alleged that some delay was attributable to defence during the
initial period following the swearing of the information and prior to the trial
dates being set. the crown also sought to characterize periods of
unavailability for the continuation dates as defence-caused delay. after
considering the matter, i would deduct 99 of the proposed 128 days sought by
the crown.

the second issue is whether any delay beyond the presumptive ceiling is
justified based on exceptional circumstances. no argument was raised by the
crown as to discrete events. instead, it argued that the case was of a
particularly complex nature such that it warranted further reductions from the
overall delay (
jordan,
2016 scc 27
at para
77-79
). as i will explain, i
decline to do so.

the net delay is 619 days or 20 months and 10 days. it exceeds the
presumptive ceiling by more than two months. therefore, as the law instructs, i
must find that ms. moquin’s right to be tried within a reasonable time has been
breached and the charges will be stayed.
preliminary observations

as the local administrative judge, i am aware that in recent years, the
number of incoming cases in this jurisdiction has increased substantially, at a
far greater rate than other jurisdictions in our region or province. in
addition, it is well-known that the local trial rate has been well above the
provincial and regional average for years. in recent times, justice system
participants have strived to reduce the overall delay to trial in an effort to
comply with provincial directives and to recover from the backlog caused by the
covid-19 pandemic. in short, we are taking on more work, trying many more cases
than other jurisdictions, and doing so on tighter timelines than ever before.

this case is, in several ways, symptomatic of some of the
problems that plague our collective ability to effectively manage cases in this
difficult climate. overall, it took approximately six hours of court time to
complete but was scheduled for a total of five and a half court days. this was because
the matter was dealt with in fits and starts over its first two days and was
not reached on the third and fourth. disclosure issues arose during the trial and
additional time was required to complete the matter and to accommodate a lost
evidence application as well as the need to recall a witness. these avoidable issues
took up a significant amount of the overall trial time.

without them, the case could have taken significantly less time. i
would conservatively estimate four hours as the appropriate duration for the
trial. despite this, the matter occupied more than five days on the court
calendar and significantly more actual court time than was warranted. these references
do not include the additional resources and time required to process and hear
the 11(b) application.

in short, there were challenges and failings on multiple levels
in this case. when this occurs, i recognize that it often falls on the crown to
explain the consequences to victims, law enforcement and the public. i also
appreciate the many challenges that come with stacking our court lists.
day-to-day, prosecutors in my courtroom have attempted to triage the scheduled
matters in an efficient manner but far too many cases are scheduled for trial.
 public confidence demands that all professional participants in the
justice system pay close attention to the resources available and a sharper
focus is required at all pretrial and trial stages to keep our dockets
manageable. i call on all members of the local bar, crown or defence, to be
mindful of these challenges and the pressing need for the efficient use of our
resources.
issue 1 – defence-caused delay
positions of the parties

mr.
langevin, on behalf of the applicant, suggested that some 30 days ought to be
characterized as defence delay during the initial phases of the prosecution.

mr.
feldstein suggests deducting the following 128 days as defence-caused delay:
•
28 days from january 16 to february 13, 2024 – defence caused
delay for failing to retain counsel
•
28 days from april 18 to may 16, 2024 - defence caused delay as
additional time required to obtain instructions on potential resolution
•
13 days from may 16 to july 4, 2024 – defence caused delay due to
unavailability for earlier judicial pre-trials

•
59 days from july 23 to september 10, 2025, and october 24 to
november 4 2025 - defence caused delay due to unavailability for trial
continuation dates
analysis

the
defence-caused delay in the early part of the case’s lifespan is easily dealt
with. given the concession by mr. langevin that defence caused approximately
one month of delay at the beginning of the case, the first period of 28 days
for failing to retain counsel will be attributed as defence delay.

as
well, the additional 28 days needed to obtain instructions from april through
may of 2024 is clearly defence-caused delay. the evidence is clear that defence
had three weeks to obtain instructions before seeking this adjournment while
the court and crown were ready to proceed to the next phase. no argument made
by defence with respect to this period in submissions.

i
also agree that the 13 days of delay due to mr. langevin’s unavailability for a
judicial pretrial is attributable to defence. again, no argument was made by
defence as to this segment.

while
these issues are straightforward, the crown’s argument regarding defence
unavailability for the trial continuation for 59 days between june 23rd and september
10th 2025 is more complicated. to begin, according to the supreme court’s
decision in
hanan,
2023 scc 12
at paragraph
9, there is no bright line
rule according to which all the delay following defence counsel’s rejection of
a date until the next available one must be characterized as defence delay.
referencing
boulanger,
2022 scc 2
at paragraph
8, the supreme court in
hanan
instructs that all relevant circumstances should be considered in a what they
describe as a ‘contextual approach’. recently, justice schrek, in
bowen-wright,
2024 onsc 293
at paragraph
40, a summary conviction appeal, reviewed factors
that are usually relevant to the contextual approach in this type of situation:
•
the reason for the need to reschedule
•
the extent to which defence was available
•
the reasons for defence’s unavailability
•
the extent of notice given of a new trial date

i
turn now to a review of each of these factors.
a)
the reason for the need to reschedule

first,
the reason for the need to reschedule in this case was not caused by defence.
on the four days scheduled for trial, ms. moquin and her counsel attended on
time and prepared to proceed. unfortunately, the matter was only reached for
approximately two hours on the first day in may and for just over one hour on
the second day. on the second day, the matter was plagued by disclosure issues
that necessitated a lengthy break and the recalling of an officer.

unfortunately,
the matter was not reached at all on the remaining two days. rather, the crown
opted to prioritize other matters over that of ms. moquin. decisions of this
nature are difficult ones, and i do not fault the crown whatsoever for their
assessment and prioritization of the competing matters on any of the scheduled
days for trial. in fact, a review of the dockets for each of the scheduled
trial days reveals that two to three other trials were scheduled along with ms.
moquin’s, in addition to other matters. many of them were serious in nature.

to
illustrate, on may 26, 2025, court started an hour early to deal with
sentencing in a matter involving a tragic motor vehicle collision. that was
followed by the conclusion a serious multi-day sexual interference trial. also
scheduled were trials for assault with a weapon and a dangerous driving. over
lunch, another sentencing matter was completed. eventually, ms. moquin’s matter
was heard for approximately two hours towards the end of the day.

on
may 27, 2025, two sentencing hearings were held between 9 and 10am. there were
also three other trials on the docket to be dealt with, including an in-custody
matter involving allegations of intimate partner violence. over the lunch hour,
a sentencing hearing took place on a serious matter where an offender failed to
provide the necessities of life. when a french trial involving stolen property completed
in the mid-afternoon, ms. moquin’s matter was continued in two segments with a
break in between to deal with a disclosure issue. during that break, another
case was dealt with.

the
remaining days where ms. moquin’s trial was not reached, may 30 and june 24,
2025, had similar dockets.

in
short, ms. moquin bears no responsibility for the matter being adjourned.
rather, the delay is the product of the crown making responsible choices in
line with its duty to call the list and to manage a high volume of serious
cases.
b)
the extent to which defence was available

after
the matter failed to complete on time, a date was required to continue. that
date was chosen on june 24 2025.

despite
having a trial scheduled in the same courtroom that day, defence was willing to
schedule the matter for june 27th. unfortunately, the assigned crown was
unavailable. defence counsel was available for other dates offered by the trial
coordinator, including september 10
th
and october 15
th
2025.

when
it comes to the dates in july that were unavailable to defence, the transcript
from june 24 2025 reveals that, initially, no dates were available between june
and september. after the trial coordinator took a few minutes to “work some
magic”, two dates were offered in july. the first, july 9, was unavailable for
both parties and july 24 was unavailable to defence. no other dates were
offered until september 10th when the crown was unavailable.
c)
the reasons for defence’s unavailability

according
to the transcripts, defence counsel in this case was unavailable for two dates
due to pre-existing court commitments. with respect to the july 9 date, mr.
langevin had a bail hearing scheduled on a serious matter. the trial
coordinator then offered july 24th in a satellite court in alexandria, ontario.
defence unfortunately had a trial booked in cornwall that day.

while
crown counsel argued during submissions that defence ought to have prioritized
this matter, i see the situation as quite understandable. as was observed in
safdar,
2021 onca 207
at paragraph
50, counsel cannot be expected to “compromise one
client’s interests for another.”
d)
the extent of notice given of a new trial date

here,
there was little notice that a date would be offered within one month after ms.
moquin’s matter failed to complete in late june 2025. as pointed out in
bowen-wright
at paragraph
48, judicial experience shows that, “counsel are much more likely
to be booked up nearer in the future.”

applying
a contextual approach to this segment of delay, i decline to attribute the
entire period between july 23, 2025 and september 10, 2025, as defence delay
due to unavailability. defence was not responsible for the continuation and was
available for some dates offered. this includes one available date the very
same week. that he had some commitments in the weeks ahead is entirely
understandable. he was also willing to double-book himself with this matter in
the same courtroom where he had a trial scheduled and the date that was refused
in july was offered in a satellite location.

on
balance, i conclude that a fair apportionment of the delay is to attribute 30
of the 59 days elapsed as defence-caused delay.
conclusion

the
following portions will be deducted from the overall delay of 718 days as
defence delay:
•
28 days (from january 16 to february 13 2024)
•
28 days (from april 18 2024 to may 16 2024)
•
13 days (within may 16 2024 to july 4 2024)
•
30 days (within july 23 2025 to september 10 2025)

these
deductions, totaling 99 days, reduce the overall delay to 619 days. thus, the
matter exceeds the presumptive ceiling by 71 days. the crown bears the onus of
establishing that this delay beyond the presumptive ceiling is justified based
on exceptional circumstances.
issue 2 – exceptional circumstances: complexity
positions of the parties

relying
on
anderson,
2025 onca 172, mr. feldstein, for the crown, argues that
ms. moquin’s matter had certain administrative complexities that require
further qualitative deductions from the overall delay. these deductions, in his
submission, ought to result in a net delay below the presumptive ceiling. no
argument was put forward in terms of any discrete events.

mr.
langevin submits that no deductions should be made for any exceptional
circumstances.
analysis

the
characterization of “cases that are particularly complex” was described by the
majority in
jordan,
2016 scc 27, at paragraphs
77 and 79
in the
following terms:
particularly complex cases are
cases that, because of the
nature
of the evidence or the nature of the
issues,
require an inordinate amount of trial or preparation time … hallmarks of
particularly complex cases include voluminous disclosure, a large number of
witnesses, significant requirements for expert evidence, and charges covering a
long period of time. … a large number of charges and pre-trial applications;
novel or complicated legal issues; and a large number of significant issues in
dispute…
… the trial judge will also
want to consider whether the crown, having initiated what could reasonably be
expected to be a complex prosecution, developed and followed a concrete plan to
minimize the delay occasioned by such complexity … where it has failed to do
so, the crown will not be able to show exceptional circumstances, because it
will not be able to show that the circumstances were outside its control.

an
example of what constitutes a complex case is found in
tsega,
2017 onca
3090. the court of appeal described it at paragraphs 78 in this way:
the investigation involved four
separate police services. more than 103 witnesses were interviewed, 74 of them
made video recorded statements. part vi authorizations under the code resulted
in 39,129 intercepted communications. ten production orders were executed
capturing phone records from 27 different phones. nine search warrants were
executed involving homes in ottawa and toronto and 900 photographs were taken.
several expert witnesses were consulted and retained, including those in the
fields of pathology, dna, firearms, gsr, and cellular phone operations. in all,
308 items were seized or collected, resulting in 130 exhibits. in the end,
there were 12 disclosure packages containing over 20,000 pages of disclosure
along with electronic media amounting to over 51 gbs of disclosure….

this
description stands in stark contrast to ms. moquin’s matter. i would describe
her case as routine and straightforward. it involved a count of cause
disturbance and a count of assault police stemming from a single discrete
incident. four witnesses testified, including the accused. also, as i
mentioned, cumulatively, the entire case, including evidence and submissions on
the trial as well as a lost evidence application, took less than six hours.
plainly, this case does not meet the usual criteria for what is, at law,
considered exceptionally complex.

while
the crown acknowledges that this case does not have the usual hallmarks of
complexity, it relies heavily on the authority of
anderson, in support
of its argument that an ‘administrative complexity’ complicated ms. moquin’s
matter. as i understand it, ms. moquin’s case required an out-of-jurisdiction
prosecutor as the accused is or was apparently related to a staff member at the
crown’s office.

in
anderson, justice chaffe attended a jurisdiction from out-of-region to
preside over a lengthy matter with out-of-town staff owing to a conflict with
respect to one of the complainants. justice chaffe’s 11(b) ruling, which was
upheld on appeal, relied in part on the complexity of the case to establish
exceptional circumstances.

having
reviewed and reflected on the
anderson
decision, i conclude that it does
not assist the crown in ms. moquin’s matter for the following two reasons.
first,
anderson
bore the hallmarks of a typical complex case. the
accused faced 19 charges of a serious nature involving sexual violence against
10 complainants. there were several complicated procedural applications as well
as various
charter
applications. any ‘administrative complexity’
referred to in that case was in addition to these factors (
anderson, at
para
32
). by contrast, as i have described, ms. moquin’s matter is
uncomplicated and straightforward. it simply cannot be assessed as complex when
regarded qualitatively or as a whole.

second,
the ‘administrative complexity’ in
anderson
involved, principally, some
difficulty scheduling around holidays and prior court commitments of the
various parties and, to some extent, issues with litigation support and
disclosure (
anderson, at para
32
). none of those issues featured
prominently in this case. at best, crown counsel has articulated two issues
related to what was termed ‘administrative complexity’.

the
first issue argued by the crown involved scheduling a jpt. mr. feldstein was
unavailable for two jpt slots offered in may of 2023 as they began at 9:30am,
which coincided with his existing trial commitments. mr. feldstein complains
that his home jurisdiction starts their trials at 930am, which puts him at a
disadvantage given that cornwall’s trials start at 10am. with respect, i
disagree. invariably, court days in this jurisdiction begin at 9am or 930am
with other matters, including jpts. for instance, my court opened at 9am or
930am on every single one of ms. moquin’s scheduled trial days, and her 11(b)
application was heard between 9-10am on november 10, 2025, in advance of a
trial list being called. in short, while mr. feldstein may regularly prosecute
trials beginning at 930am in his home jurisdiction, the local crowns in
cornwall also have early court commitments daily.

the
second issue argued by the crown is that there was some confusion as between
the crowns and defence counsel because of the ‘administrative complexities’
involving an out-of-jurisdiction prosecutor. at one point, he met with duty
counsel for a cpt, and the next day, the accused retained mr. langevin, who, in
turn, met with a local cornwall crown for a cpt. at the time, mr. feldstein had
been assigned to the matter for nearly a month and mr. langevin’s agent had
been appearing for two months indicating that the retainer was being perfected.
while some 18 days of delay elapsed before the two assigned lawyers were able
to connect, i am not prepared to attribute these events to exceptional
complexity.

while
i appreciate that prosecuting matters in a neighbouring jurisdiction may
require additional administrative legwork, what is absent from these confusing
events is evidence of any ‘concrete plan’ (
jordan, para
79
). the supreme
court instructed in
jordan
that this a precondition to accessing the
‘complexity’ branch of exceptional circumstances which justify delay. for
example, experience suggests that an out-of-jurisdiction prosecutor may benefit
from introducing themselves upon assignment to the lawyer appearing in court on
behalf of the accused or by leaving a note-to-file for any local crowns to
forward any pretrial requests or correspondence to the assigned crown. the
bottom line here is that there were minimal measures available to the crown
that could have easily avoided this confusion.

finally,
as part of his overall argument that this case was complex, mr. feldstein
submits that i should consider as a part of the analysis that i was only judge
available in this jurisdiction to hear the case. as he explained in
submissions, in addition to the conflict at the crown’s office, the accused
also had a connection to a former special constable who worked in the
courthouse. prior to the matter being scheduled for trial, this issue prompted
informal determinations that three of the four local judges would be unable to
hear the matter due to a conflict of interest. as a result, the trial was set
in accordance with my availability. local staff were employed for the trial and
a local defence lawyer acted for mr. moquin.

i
do not regard the judicial conflicts as significant. first, another local
judge was able to deal with jpt in this matter and discuss time estimates
without the matter being delayed. second, there is no evidence that the
scheduled trial dates were delayed whatsoever when set with my availability.
third, there is no evidence that, at the time of trial-setting, the crown was
concerned by any delay of this nature such that it sought to pursue the matter
further or develop a concrete plan to manage any delays. these steps could have
included prioritizing the matter over other scheduled trials or initiating a
request to engage judicial resources from out-of-jurisdiction to prevent any
undue delay. instead, the crown was content to set a trial date beyond the
presumptive ceiling. for these reasons, i do not accept the crown’s argument
that the judicial conflicts are germane to my determination of whether exceptional
circumstances existed in this case due to its complexity.
conclusion

having
made the identified deductions for defence-caused delay and declined any
deduction for complexity, the matter remains above the presumptive ceiling. i
find that ms. moquin’s section 11(b) right to have been violated. in the
result, the charges will be stayed.
released: november 21, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. lalande

initially, the crown sought to deduct 49 days for defence delay relating to the
scheduling of jpts. when reviewing the application record in submissions, mr.
feldstein fairly conceded that only 13 days of delay ought to be deducted.