source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj44/2025oncj44.html

citation:
r. v. hall, 2025 oncj 44
date: january 17, 2025
ontario court of justice
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
daniel
hall
before
justice b. green
reasons
for sentence january 17
th, 2025
mr. g. jarrar.................................................................. counsel
for the crown
mr. j. lisowski.......................................... counsel
for the defendant mr. hall
a non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has
been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code. this
subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code, which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order restricting publication -- sexual offences. -- (1) subject to subsection (2), the
presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i)
an offence under
section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1,
172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03,
280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)
any offence under this
act, as it read from time to time before the day on which this subparagraph
comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred to in
subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being
dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred
to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on
application
-- in
proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
)
or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable
opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim
of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the
victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order.
486.6 offence
-- (1) every person who fails to comply
with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
green j.:
a.
introduction:

on december 31
st,
2022, mr. hall and the victim, ms. r.c., met on an online dating site. after
chatting throughout the day, they agreed to meet and spend new year’s eve
together. ms. r.c. was unequivocal, before meeting him, that she was not
interested in a sexual encounter. mr. hall had a young daughter. ms. r.c. did
not want him to leave her alone so she agreed to meet him at his home. the fact
that mr. hall’s child was sleeping upstairs gave ms. r.c. a sense of safety. she
attended his home with the intention of getting to know each other better.

despite ms. r.c.’s
clear expressions that she was not interested in a sexual encounter of any kind,
mr. hall quickly made sexual advances which she rebuffed repeatedly. mr. hall
was undeterred by ms. r.c.’s protests, pleading and ultimately her tears. he
violently sexually assaulted her. he violated her orally and then forcefully penetrated
her vaginally and anally without using any protection. he also bit her breast
and struck her across the face. ms. r.c. was finally able to escape by talking her
way out of mr. hall’s home. the next day a battered and bruised ms. r.c.
attended the hospital for an examination and reported to the police the crimes that
had been committed by mr. hall the night before.

mr. hall was arrested
and charged with sexually assaulting and assaulting ms. r.c. he pled not
guilty, and the matter proceeded to trial over a period of two days. mr. hall
was convicted of both counts.

ms. r.c. was a
thoughtful and credible witness. it was obvious that recounting these events
was particularly difficult for her, but she persevered through a challenging
cross-examination which included degrading suggestions that she was the sexual
aggressor. in stark contrast, mr. hall provided an unbelievable account while
trying to shift blame to the victim. mr. hall’s descriptions of a wanton woman
who was focussed entirely on her own pleasure were obviously fictious, if not,
ridiculous when considered within the context of the evidence as a whole.

mr. hall’s denials of
responsibility during the trial and to the probation officer who prepared the
presentence report cannot be aggravating factors. however, there is an absence
of significantly mitigating factors. in addition, mr. hall’s justifications of
his shocking misconduct, which bordered on suggesting that ms. r.c. deserved
what happened to her, cause me significant concerns about the risks that he
poses to other vulnerable women in the future. it is doubtful that he will
sincerely invest in any rehabilitative programs to address his deviant attitude
of entitlement to disregard a woman’s sexual autonomy and her dignity.

the crown emphasized the
shocking circumstances of the offence. mr. hall sexually violated ms. r.c. in
various ways without using protection which exposed her to risks of additional
harm. he engaged in gratuitous violence causing injuries to her. the victim has
suffered lasting trauma. this event has detrimentally impacted every aspect of
her life. the crown forcefully submitted that the fit sentence is a period of
incarceration of 5 years in the penitentiary to be followed by a soira order of
20 years, dna, and a weapons prohibition.

in contrast, counsel
focussed on the circumstances of the offender. he highlighted mr. hall’s very difficult
upbringing and the lack of any criminal antecedents at the time of this
offence. he is successfully self employed. once incarcerated, he will lose the
business that he worked to build on his own. mr. hall enjoys the ongoing
support of his new partner and his life long best friend who both spoke highly
of him. mr. hall is the single parent of an 11-year-old child who will suffer
the loss of her father while he is incarcerated for this offence. the
realization that mr. hall will be absent from his daughter’s life understandably
causes him pain and sadness.

to reflect the
collateral consequences of this conviction and the mitigating factors, counsel
urged me to grant his client a sentence at the lower end of the range for these
types of offences of 3 ½ years incarceration. counsel opposed the imposition
of a soira order because it would be disproportionately punitive for this
offender. he also opposed the imposition of a peace bond that would give the
victim a sense of safety.

since the supreme court
of canada’s watershed
decision in
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9, the
sentences for sexual offences have been increasing across canada. the range
relied on by both the crown and counsel for this type of offence is 3 to 5
years. nevertheless, that range is not a straitjacket that binds me to stay
within in it. despite the mitigating factors, the impact on mr. hall’s
daughter and his business, and the lack of any criminal record at the time of
this offence, i agree with the crown that the circumstances of these offences
demand a significant penitentiary sentence.

the issues to be decided are the
total length of the sentence of incarceration and whether the ancillary soira
order is disproportionately punitive in the unique circumstances of this offence
and this offender. finally, i invited further submissions from counsel and the
crown about the imposition of a common law peace bond to provide a very
traumatized victim with the sense of safety that she is requesting from the
court.
b.
facts:
i.
circumstances of
the offence:

ms. r.c. went to mr. hall’s home in the
hopes of amicably ringing in the new year with a new friend. instead, she was subjected
to violent and relentless sexual assaults and assaults.

contrary to mr. hall’s deluded beliefs that
ms. r.c. wanted or invited his attention, there was absolutely nothing in ms.
r.c.’s conduct that would have
communicated
to mr. hall that she was a willing
participant or that she was consenting in any way at all. she told him before
she met him that she was not interested in a sexual encounter. once she arrived
at his home, every step of the way, ms. r.c. repeated that she did not want any
sexual contact. she asked him to stop and/or told him no and that she did not
want him to touch her.

ms. r.c. initially and briefly reciprocated
mr. hall’s insistent advances by kissing him back. however, he became even more
aggressive and began biting her mouth. from that point onwards, mr. hall
callously ignored ms. r.c.’s pleas to stop and that she did not want to have any
intimate contact with him whatsoever. she was crying throughout most of his
attacks.

the crown proved being a reasonable doubt
that:
•
mr. hall initiated each
physical occurrence of kissing despite ms. r.c.’s objections. he became
increasingly physically aggressive with ms. r.c. including biting her mouth
which caused her pain. she consistently told him to stop and unequivocally
communicated that she was not consenting to any sexual contact.
•
while ms. r.c.
struggled with mr. hall, he overpowered her. he forcibly removed her pants and
underwear. there are photos of abrasions to her pelvic area. he performed oral
sex on her vagina over her objections.
•
ms. r.c. repeated that
she needed to go home and that she wanted him to stop it. at one point she
recalled him making demeaning remarks to her like
"just be a good little bitch and it will be
done" (p. 27 july 17
th
). he made these types of comments
throughout her ordeal whenever she would say no, struggle or try to squirm away
from him (p. 53 july 17
th
). she believed that if she stopped
resisting him, it would be “done faster”.
•
ms. r.c. lost her
concept of time while she was being attacked. she could not reliably recall how
long each event lasted because it seemed like forever in her mind. just as
suddenly as he started, he stopped performing oral sex and repositioned her
legs. he got more upright and positioned his body between her legs. he pulled
down the front of his pants and penetrated her vagina with his penis without a
condom. at this point, ms. r.c. was overwhelmed by what he was doing to her.
she emotionally checked out and stopped talking to him. she recalled him
putting his hands on her shoulders and arms so that she was bearing the weight
of his body. she could not move away from him.
•
ms. r.c. provided
additional details of what mr. hall was doing while penetrating her. he reached
under her shirt to grope and fondle her breasts. at one point, he even bit one
of her breasts. the bite was so forceful that it broke the skin and left a very
distinctive bruise. a photograph was tendered of an oval shaped bruise,
separated in half like the upper and lower teeth, on her breast.
•
during the sexual
assault, ms. r.c. heard mr. hall’s daughter upstairs. ms. r.c. tried to alert her
by making noise in the hopes that he would finally stop hurting her. instead of
stopping the attack, mr. hall “backhanded” her across the face. he used quite a
bit of force. she recalled that her lip began to bleed, and it was swollen
afterwards. he told her to “shut the fuck up” because his daughter was going to
hear her (p. 32 july 17
th
). there were also pictures of her swollen
lips with bruising on the bottom.
•
mr. hall was very angry
with her for calling out. he told her that was a “dumb choice” and he was
cursing at her. he pulled himself out of her and stood up. he grabbed a hold of
her and flipped her on to her stomach. he got behind her and pushed her face
down into a “knitted afghan type blanket” that was on the couch. she distinctly
recalled his hands on the back of her head pushing her face down while the
sexual attack continued.
•
at one point, mr. hall
briefly left the room to bring his daughter some water. ms. r.c. was too
frightened to run at that moment. within minutes, mr. hall came back down the
stairs, and she had not moved from the couch/loveseat. mr. hall pulled her to a
standing position and bent her forward. he tried to shove his penis into her
anus, but she was “doing everything in my power to prevent it” (p. 37 july 17
th
).
because she was standing, she was able to move more freely, and she kept
shifting around while he was behind her. she dropped her knees to the floor so
he could not get his penis inside of her anus.
•
mr. hall became
increasingly angry with her resistance. he grabbed her and repositioned her
face down on the couch again. he penetrated her vagina with his penis from
behind her. she recalled that his hands were pressed on the back of her
shoulder blades. she had to move her face sideways so she could breathe because
she was being smothered by the blanket.
•
ms. r.c. explained how,
after being repeatedly assaulted, she became numb. she wasn’t fighting or
saying anything to him. she was crying. mr. hall was making comments “
about me wanting it, just to be good and take it, it
will be done sooner. yeah, it will bitch" (p. 39 july 17
th
).
while he was penetrating her with his penis, he roughly thrust his fingers into
her anus (p. 40 july 17
th
). during the vaginal intercourse, mr. hall
did not ejaculate. he blamed her for not being able to climax.
•
ms. r.c. described the
unwanted vaginal sex and digital penetration of her anus with more than one
finger as “extremely painful” and “very forceful”. mr. hall was very
aggressive, “ramming” and “shoving” himself inside of her. (p. 40-41 july 17
th
).
mr. hall was exerting himself so much
that he became out of breath.
•
mr. hall forcefully
controlled ms. r.c.’s movements and engaged in a series of progressively
non-consensual, invasive, sexual acts including forced vaginal penetration with
his penis, attempted anal penetration with his penis and painful digital
penetration of her anus with more than one finger. ms. r.c.’s crying and pleas
fell on deaf ears.
•
throughout these acts
of degradation, mr. hall projected blame on to ms. r.c. by accusing her of
flirting with him, wanting it or inviting him to do these things with her eyes.
•
the attacks only
stopped because of mr. hall’s compromised breathing, and he could not continue
exerting himself. ms. r.c. made up a convincing story to get out of the house. as
she walked towards the front door to put her shoes on, mr. hall shoved his hand
down the back of her pants and penetrated her anally with his fingers again. he
excused his behaviour stating that he was a “freak” and, frighteningly, that he
liked “that kind of thing”. ms. r.c. retreated from his home but he followed
her outside. she was able to drive away.
•
there were photographs tendered
as exhibits of ms. r.c.’s injuries. her lips were swollen and split from where they
had been bleeding. there was some visible discolouration or bruising above and
below the corner of her mouth as well as on the inside of her lip. ms. r.c.
believed the injuries to her lip were from being bitten and slapped by mr.
hall. there was also a photograph of a semi-circular bruise on her breast from
when mr. hall bit her breast. there were bruises on her wrist and arm from
being restrained by him. she had a cut or tear on her skin and red marks around
her pelvis. she could not recall how she sustained those injuries other than
being aggressively handled by mr. hall.
•
mr. hall was so forceful
while penetrating ms. r.c. that it caused her to bleed from her vagina and anus
for days afterwards. for a significant period after the sexual assaults, ms.
r.c. was in pain. her lips hurt and the bruises were tender. all the muscles in
her body hurt, she described it as feeling like she had been “hit by a truck”.
her groin and pelvis were quite painful. it hurt to sit in certain positions.

ms. r.c. endured relentless, painful, and
progressively invasive sexual assaults. mr. hall bit her, hit her and demeaned
her by referring to her as a “bitch” who wanted what he was doing to her. he
projected blame for his misconduct on her during the attacks and during the
trial. he testified that she was giving him “signals” with her eyes even though
she did not communicate her consent in words. he engaged in extensive victim
blaming.
ii.
victim impact:

in
r. v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc
26
at paras
30 and 31
the supreme court reiterated that more punitive sentences
are necessary to reflect the enduring harm caused by sexual offences:
friesen
recognized that the focus of the
legislative scheme of sexual offences against children has shifted to protect a
child's personal autonomy, bodily integrity, sexual integrity, dignity and
equality. the court outlined how sexual offences against children produce
profound physical and psychological harms to the most vulnerable members of our
society. it was deeply concerned with how the sexual assault of children may
produce shame, embarrassment, unresolved anger, a reduced ability to trust and
fear that other people would also abuse them (
friesen, at
para.
57
). it set out the disproportionate impact of violence on girls, women,
indigenous persons and other vulnerable groups.
friesen
sends the clear message that
sentences for these crimes must account for the far-reaching and ongoing damage
sexual violence causes to children, families and society at large, which may
take many years to manifest. consequently, sentences for offences involving
sexual violence against children must generally increase to reflect society's
modern understanding of such offences and parliament's choice to increase the
sentences associated with these crimes (paras. 3-5). [citations omitted]

the concern about the devastating impact of
these offences applies to adult victims as well. mr. hall’s crime has negatively
impacted every aspect of ms. r.c.’s life. she detailed in her victim impact
statement the suffering that she endured over the past few years since the date
of this offence. while she healed from her physical injuries, ms. r.c. is
emotionally and mentally scarred and she is unable to work or function like she
did before these offences. she has also been economically disadvantaged because
of the costs of therapy, medication and lost work. ms. r.c. explained that:
i
have zero trust in men, i have nightmares still, i take ativan like candy
still. i get anxious in crowds and large events. i hate myself and my body
still. i don’t know when or if i will stop these things.
maybe it is the 5 new
prescriptions i am now on daily to combat my anxiety, depression, nightmares,
ptsd meds. i could add up the last 2 years’ worth of meds, that would be in the
thousands as 2 of them are over $100 each. and who knows how long that regiment
will need to continue.
what
about the thousands i have had to spend on therapy & continue to?
what
about the 3 times i’ve moved because i don’t feel safe or feel like he can find
me.
maybe it is the 2 years
of loss wages? i can give you that number too $60,192.
honestly, nothing he
gets will be justified or satisfactory to me. he is still no matter what he
gets, will be less time than what i have and will continue to suffer from this.
this trial and whole thing has stripped me right down. bared me naked and
stripped all dignity and embarrassed me.

there are many reasons why pleas of guilty
substantially mitigate a sentence for sexual offences. one of those reasons is
that this process exacerbates the victim’s suffering and trauma. ms. r.c. had
to relive the most degrading, horrifying moments of her life and then be
subject to cross-examination that suggested she was responsible for what
happened to her that night. i do not say this to fault counsel for fulfilling
his ethical and professional obligations. rather, it highlights why defendants
who admit responsibility and spare the victims the added shame and
embarrassment of publicly recounting their humiliation and abuse are deserving
of lesser penalties.

it is essential to try to break this
ongoing cycle of sexual violence by predators of the vulnerable through
consistently denunciatory and deterrent sentences in the hopes that it will help
to protect members of our communities and prevent similar offences.
iii.
circumstances of
the offender:

there was a fulsome presentence report that
was filed as an exhibit. it provided a lot of information about mr. hall’s
background.

mr. hall had a tumultuous upbringing. while
his parents were together, he witnessed domestic abuse and he suffered physical
abuse at the hands of his father. after his father left his mother, mr. hall
had a difficult relationship with his mother. as a result, he eventually went
to live with his father and, when that didn’t work out, he went to live with his
grandfather. he had a good relationship with his grandfather who was described
as a positive influence. mr. hall’s mother passed away when he was in his late
teens. he currently has no contact with his father. he maintains relationships
with his siblings.

as result of mr. hall’s childhood
instability and other issues, he had difficulties in school. he completed grade
10 in high school but then he dropped out. he focussed on gaining employment experience
working in the trades and manual labour. he is currently self employed as a roofing
contractor which is seasonal work. his best friend and former coworker
described
mr. hall as a “hard worker, with good work ethic” and he “has only witnessed
prosocial relationships with other employees when they worked together on job
sites”. once incarcerated, mr. hall will lose the business that he spent years
building up and his current contracts.

mr. hall had three long term relationships.
he has full custody of his 11-year-old daughter from a previous relationship. he
recently met his current partner online in 2023 while these charges were
outstanding. she moved in with him along with her two daughters. his partner
was interviewed by the author of the presentence report. she described mr. hall
as “kind, respectful and loyal”. his partner expressed shock about this offence
because “sexual impropriety” is inconsistent with the man that she knows. of
course, the man that she knows was awaiting the outcome of this proceeding
throughout their relationship. this woman is so committed to mr. hall that she
will be taking care of his daughter while he is incarcerated for these offences.

mr. hall’s best friend, who has known him
for 25 years, explained that mr. hall faced life challenges because of his difficult
upbringing. he also expressed
to the
probation officer “a strong disbelief in the subjects’ current criminal
entanglement. conveying “this just does not align with his character”.

it is hardly surprising that his lifelong
friend or the intimate partner he met after the charges were laid do not know
this dark side of mr. hall. unfortunately, none of his previous partners were
interviewed by the probation officer. their perspectives could have been
illuminating. the only information that was provided was that one of his former
partners was unsuitable to parent their child. to mr. hall’s credit, he volunteered
that he was abusing cocaine in the past, but he stopped to gain custody of his
child. in addition, he advised that his partner from 2018 to 2021 filed a
restraining order against him that is not set to expire until 2026.

mr. hall is entitled to maintain his
innocence and that is not, in any way, an aggravating factor. nevertheless, his
mindset that he is the victim of a wrongful conviction can factor into the sentencing
considerations.
in the oft cited decision of
r. v. shah,
2017 onca 872
at para
8, the ontario court of appeal explained that while the lack of a
guilty plea or an expression of remorse must not be treated as aggravating
factors, a court can still consider these facts when assessing the need for
specific deterrence and an offender’s potential for rehabilitation:
lack of remorse is not
ordinarily a relevant aggravating factor on sentencing. it cannot be used to
punish the accused for failing to plead guilty or for having mounted a defence.
absence of remorse is a relevant factor in sentencing, however, with respect
to the issues of rehabilitation and specific deterrence, in that an accused's
absence of remorse may indicate a lack of insight into and a failure to accept
responsibility for the crimes committed and demonstrate a substantial
likelihood of future dangerousness. [citations omitted and emphasis mine]

more recently,
in
r. v. walker,
2021 onca 863, the ontario court of appeal observed that:
in addition,
in the case at bar, the thrust of the defence submission was that the appellant
posed a low risk to re-offend and that a conditional sentence was fit in the
circumstances.
in
considering that argument and the issue of future dangerousness, it was open to
the trial judge to consider that the appellant did not appear to understand the
seriousness of the offences.
[emphasis mine]

i acknowledge that mr. hall has the support
of his best friend and a partner who speak highly of him. nevertheless, i am guided
by the directions of the supreme court of canada in
r. v. profit, 
s.c.r. 637 that:
the reasons of the trial judge must be viewed in light of the
fact that as a matter of common sense, but not as a principle of law, a trial
judge may take into account that in sexual assault cases involving children,
sexual misconduct occurs in private and in most cases will not be reflected in
the reputation in the community of the accused for morality.
as a matter of weight,
the trial judge is entitled to find that the propensity value of character
evidence as to morality is diminished in such cases.
[emphasis mine]

similarly, in
r. v. k.m.,
2017 onsc 2690,
justice edwards reiterated that:
sexual
offences are, by their very nature, generally perpetrated in private. it is
largely for that reason that many cases of sexual assault are characterized as
a "he said, she said" type of case.
the supreme court of canada has made it quite clear that the
good community reputation of an accused has little probative value in the
overall assessment of an appropriate sentence in a case of sexual assault.
[emphasis mine]

there are enumerable sentencing decisions,
across canada, with offenders of supposedly stellar character and/or no
criminal records, committing inexcusable acts of depravity, violence and/or
sexual abuse. abusers who commit inexplicable acts of sexual violence but
maintain positive relationships with other partners. generations of children,
women and men, the socioeconomically disadvantaged and the vulnerable have
fallen prey to these offenders who are secretly sexual predators. when victims
like ms. r.c. find the strength or have the means to report their abuse, their
abusers often hide behind carefully constructed façades of respectability to
avoid being held accountable for their actions. mr. hall is no exception.

glowing character references cannot be an
aggravating factor. his friends and partner are entitled not to believe that someone
they love committed such heinous acts of sexual violence. however, their
comments highlight the absence of some important mitigating factors. as noted,
i have substantial concerns about mr. hall’s potential for rehabilitation especially
when his support system does not believe that he committed these crimes.

mr. hall preyed on ms. r.c.’s
vulnerabilities and brutalized her while his daughter was a flight of stairs
away from them. absent any acceptance of responsibility or expressed insight,
it is unlikely that he will seek or meaningfully participate in any treatment
for the issues that precipitated the offending behaviour. he certainly has
unresolved issues with his mother that he needs to address. accordingly, i am
concerned that there is a risk for recidivism.

mr. hall is 39 years old. he had no
criminal record at the time of this offence, but he was convicted of an assault
and a breach of undertaking while this charge was outstanding. he was sentenced
to a period of
imprisonment
of 45 days to be served intermittently and a period of 18 months of probation.
he has been complying with the terms of his probation order. his record is not
an aggravating factor, but he also cannot assert that he is a first offender
before more than one court. one way or the other, the principle of restraint
will apply considering this will be his first penitentiary sentence.

in summary, mr. hall had a difficult
childhood and suffered alienation from his mother and his father. while he did
not complete high school, that was attributable to his early life challenges.
he has a positive work history in the trades. he is not struggling with any
mental health issues or substance abuse. mr. hall is a single parent who
supports his family through his own seasonal business. his daughter’s life will
undoubtedly be upended while her father is incarcerated as well as after he is
released from custody and struggles to rebuild his business.

despite alcohol being involved in this
offence, mr. hall continues to consume alcohol casually. he denies that he has
an alcohol problem. he denied that he was drinking heavily that night. there
are no factors that would attenuate his moral culpability for this offence.
c.
sentencing
principles and law:
i.
principles of
sentencing:

the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to denounce unlawful conduct
and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by
unlawful conduct;
(b)
to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences;
(c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
(d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to
the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.

section 718
of the
criminal code
provides that
any sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender. as a result, d
epending on the circumstances of the offence and the circumstances of
the offender, a court may focus on specific principles of sentencing as the
most important factors to guide the court’s decision.

unquestionably, the predominant sentencing principles
in sexual assault cases with vulnerable victims are general deterrence and
denunciation. the
criminal code
was amended to reiterate the
primary
importance of these sentencing principles:
objectives —
offence against vulnerable person
718.04
when a
court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person who
is vulnerable because of personal circumstances — including because the person
is aboriginal and female —
the court shall give primary consideration to the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence of the conduct
that forms the
basis of the offence. [emphasis mine]

ms. r.c. trusted mr. hall’s assurances that
he respected her choice not to engage in any sexual relations. she was
vulnerable because of her naivety, gender, and size difference. mr. hall was
able to overpower her and force himself upon her.

in addition,
section 718.2
of the
criminal
code
specifically directs that a court “
shall
also take into consideration”, when sentencing mr. hall, the following
statutorily aggravating factor:
(iii.1)
evidence that the offence had a significant
impact on the victim, considering their age and other personal circumstances,
including their health and financial situation.

ms. r.c. was physically injured because of
the forcefulness and violence of this attack. she was and continues to be emotionally
and psychologically devastated by these offences. she has lost an incalculable
amount of money in wages, paying for therapists and medication costs. she is so
afraid of him that she relocated her home. significant victim impact is an
understatement.

the predominant principles of sentencing are
denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general. of course, rehabilitation
remains an important goal with any sentencing particularly in a case involving
a person with no criminal record prior to the offence.
ii.
collateral
consequences of a custodial sentence:

before addressing the principle of
restraint and reviewing other sentencing precedents, i will address counsel’s
submission that the impact of a custodial sentence on mr. hall’s daughter is an
exceptional circumstance that should factor into the determination of the appropriate
sanction.

the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
suter,
2018 scc 34
at para
46, recognised that the collateral consequences
of a crime
may
attenuate the overall sentence. this ensures
proportionality by “taking into account all relevant circumstances related to
the offence and the offender”. the court cited a sentencing text at para 47:
there is no
rigid formula for taking collateral consequences into account. they may flow
from the length of sentence, or from the conviction itself… [citations omitted]
in his text
the law of sentencing
(2001), professor allan manson notes
that they may also flow from the very act of committing the offence:
as a
result of the commission of an offence, the offender may suffer physical,
emotional, social, or financial consequences. while not punishment in the true
sense of pains or burdens imposed by the state after a finding of guilt, they
are often considered in mitigation. [emphasis added; p. 136.]
i agree
with professor manson's observation, much as it constitutes an incremental
extension of this court's characterization of collateral consequences in
pham.
in my view,
a collateral
consequence includes any consequence arising from the commission of an offence,
the conviction for an offence, or the sentence imposed for an offence, that
impacts the offender.
[emphasis mine]

the supreme court went on to explain at
para. 48 that these unique considerations are part of the circumstances of the
offender:
though
collateral consequences are not necessarily "aggravating" or
"mitigating" factors under
s. 718.2
(a) of the
criminal code
-
as they do not relate to the gravity of the offence or the level of
responsibility of the offender - they nevertheless speak to the "personal
circumstances of the offender" (
pham, at para. 11). the relevance
of collateral consequences stems, in part, from the application of the
sentencing principles of individualization and parity:
ibid.; s.
718.2(b) of the
criminal code.
2
the question is not whether collateral consequences diminish the
offender's moral blameworthiness or render the offence itself less serious, but
whether the effect of those consequences means that a particular sentence would
have a more significant impact on the offender because of his or her
circumstances.
like
offenders should be treated alike, and collateral consequences may mean that an
offender is no longer "like" the others, rendering a given sentence
unfit. [emphasis mine]

justice moldaver, writing on behalf of the
majority, explained that there are limitations. when the collateral
consequences are so directly linked to the circumstances of the offence “as to
be almost inevitable”, the mitigating impact or attenuation of the sentence is
substantially diminished:
suter, supra, at paras
49 and 50. furthermore,
it is essential that these consequences are not “used to reduce a sentence to a
point where the sentence becomes disproportionate to the gravity of the offence
or the moral blameworthiness of the offender”:
r. v. suter, supra
at
para.
56.

it was entirely foreseeable that mr. hall’s daughter
would lose the continued presence in her life of her only custodial parent when
he committed such egregious offences. he made the informed choice to risk his
daughter’s stability and happiness by engaging in these crimes, especially when
these events occurred in the home that he shared with his daughter.

the ontario court of appeal recently
reiterated in
r. v. habid,
2024 onca 830
at 42 and 43
that the impact of
incarceration on an offender’s family is a relevant consideration but it must
not overwhelm the sentencing considerations:
as
recognized
in
r. v. spencer
(2004),
2004 canlii 5550 (on ca),
72 o.r. (3d) 47
(c.a.), at para.
46, leave to appeal refused,

s.c.c.a. no. 4, it is
an unfortunate reality that sentencing defendants to prison often harms their
families. family members are deprived of the defendant's love and care and
suffer the emotional pain of separation. they must often assume the added
burdens of the breadwinning and caregiving responsibilities that the defendant
formerly performed. further, they may suffer financial hardship, educational
deprivation, and even the loss of the family residence. as well, being unable
to care and provide for their families increases the severity of incarceration
for defendants.
the courts
have been careful not to let these consequences overwhelm the other principles
of sentencing. as emphasized
in
spencer, these consequences are not an
excuse to overlook the harm that the defendant's criminal conduct caused
victims of crime, or the importance of protecting those victims and society, or
the need for denunciation and deterrence. likewise, family separation may have
a reduced impact on the sentence if its effects on defendants and their
families are less strong. further, these consequences cannot justify imposing a
disproportionate sentence. thus, this court has sometimes imposed or affirmed
significant prison sentences to respect the other principles of sentencing even
after accounting for family separation consequences. [extensive citations
omitted]

it is unfortunate that an innocent child will
suffer because of her father’s misdeeds. the collateral consequences are
relevant considerations in the sense that the period of incarceration will be
more punitive for mr. hall. nevertheless, the impact on mr. hall’s daughter and
the loss of his business cannot justify imposing a disproportionate sentence
for these offences in these circumstances.
iii.
principle of
restraint:

sentencing is a delicate balancing act of
competing considerations to achieve a just disposition. courts in canada have
been unequivocal that the lack of criminal antecedents should weigh very
heavily in terms of tipping the scales towards a more lenient sentence.

except for very serious offences or crimes
of violence, the primary objectives when sentencing a first offender are
considerations of individual deterrence and rehabilitation. please
see:
r.
v. stein
(1974)
1974 canlii 1615 (on ca),
15 c.c.c. (2d) 376 (ont.c.a.). these objectives are best
achieved by non-custodial sentences. this principle of restraint was codified
in
section 718.2
of the
criminal code:
(d)
an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders.

there are some offences, like violent rapes,
that are so serious that the paramount principles of denunciation and
deterrence demand a lengthy custodial sentence despite a lack of criminal
antecedents at the time of the offence.
the supreme court of canada in
r. v.
lacasse,
2015 scc 64 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 64
at para
12
(s.c.c.)
explained:
the more serious the
crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender's degree of
responsibility, the heavier the sentence will be. in other words, the severity
of a sentence depends not only on the seriousness of the crime's consequences,
but also on the moral blameworthiness of the offender. determining a
proportionate sentence is a delicate task. as i mentioned above, both sentences
that are too lenient and sentences that are too harsh can undermine public
confidence in the administration of justice.

this offence is so deplorable that a custodial
term is essential to achieve the principles of sentencing. of course, even with
serious offences, the sentences meted out for “first offenders” must be the
shortest term of imprisonment that achieves the predominant sentencing
principles. i observe, however, that mr. hall had the benefit of being treated
as a “first offender” when he received his last sentence. while his subsequent
convictions cannot be an aggravating factor, he cannot receive the benefit of
being treated as a “first offender” again at this sentencing because his
convictions are out of sequence. the subsequent convictions
can
be
relied on as “evidence of the character or rehabilitative potential of the
accused” or lack thereof:
r. v. wilson,
2020 onca 3
at paras
61 and
67.

it must be emphasized, regardless of an
offender’s record, that parliament has directed that a court “
shall”
give
primary consideration
to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence when the victim is “a person
who is vulnerable because of personal circumstances”.

it would be an error in principle to fail
to give “primary” consideration to these objectives by unduly focussing on the
offender’s mitigating factors and the impact that a custodial sentence will
have on him. in
r. v. b.m.,
2023 onca 224
at paras
14 to 16, the ontario
court of appeal considered the similar
section 718.01
of the
criminal code
and emphasized the court’s obligation to give “primary consideration” to
deterrence and denunciation:
the court
emphasized
in
friesen
that the expression "primary
consideration" in
s. 718.01
prescribes a relative ordering of sentencing
objectives that is absent from the general list of six objectives in s. 718(a)
through (f) of the code: at para. 102. at para. 104, the court went on:
section
718.01 thus qualifies this court's previous direction that it is for the
sentencing judge to determine which sentencing objective or objectives are to
be prioritized.
where parliament has indicated which sentencing objectives
are to receive priority in certain cases, the sentencing judge's discretion is
thereby limited, such that it is no longer open to the judge to elevate other
sentencing objectives to an equal or higher priority.
however, while
s.
718.01
requires that deterrence and denunciation have priority, nonetheless,
the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other
factors (including rehabilitation and
gladue
factors) in exercising
discretion in arriving at a fit sentence, in accordance with the overall
principle of proportionality. [emphasis added.]
the
sentencing judge erred by failing to adhere to this clear sentencing principle.
the reasons for sentence reveal an erroneous reordering of sentencing
principles in a way that clearly conflicts with s. 718.01 of the code and the
supreme court's admonition that it does not fall to judges to reorder what
parliament has already ordered.

similarly,
in
r. v. bertrand marchand,
2023 scc 26, the supreme court reviewed an identically worded section and highlighted
that parliament has specifically limited judicial discretion for these offences:
parliament
has specifically indicated that in sentencing offences involving abuse of
children, including child luring, the objectives of denunciation and deterrence
must be given primary consideration or "
une attention particulière
"
(
friesen,
at para.
101;
criminal code, s. 718.01).
section 718.01
's open
textured language limits judicial discretion by giving priority to these
objectives, but their primary importance does not exclude consideration of
other sentencing objectives, including rehabilitation (
rayo, at
paras. 102-8). the judge can accord significant weight to other factors, but
cannot give them precedence or equivalency.

when balancing competing sentencing
considerations in a sexual assault case, there is a statutorily prescribed
weight on one side of the scale to ensure that jurists prioritize denunciation
and deterrence. this is not to say that the competing considerations are
irrelevant, rather, they ought not predominate a court’s deliberations. as a
result, the precedential import of more dated decisions must be cautiously
viewed through the lens of more recent developments in the law.

considering the aggravating factors and the
mitigating considerations as well as the principle of restraint, the sentence of
3 ½ years that was advocated by counsel, would not adequately address the
primary principles of deterrence and denunciation. frankly, it would be
woefully inadequate. i adopt the language of the ontario court of appeal in
r.
v. macintyer-syrette,
2018 onca 706
at para.
21
that:
this
offence requires denunciation, as an affirmation of the dignity of the
complainant, and no appropriate sentencing proposal or sanction, short of a
custodial disposition, appears to be available. [emphasis mine]

a very strong message must be sent to mr. hall, to the
public and to likeminded offenders that a heavy price will be paid by anyone
who sexually assaults a vulnerable victim. sentences must unequivocally
communicate that these offences will not be tolerated or condoned by our
courts. as the supreme court
stated in
friesen, supra,
at para
45:
the criminal
law in general and sentencing law specifically are important mechanisms that
parliament has chosen to employ to protect children from sexual violence, to
hold perpetrators accountable, and to communicate the wrongfulness of sexual
violence against children. it is our duty to give parliament's sentencing
initiatives their full effect.

the principles enunciated
in the
friesen
decision apply equally to other sexual offences with vulnerable victims. in
r.
v. r.s.,
2023 onca 608
at paras
28 and 29, the court underscored that:
time
and again, this court has emphasized the considerations that inform
proportionality determinations in sexual offences, not only against children
but also adults. as trotter j.a.
noted in
r. v. brown,
2020 onca 657,
152 o.r. (3d)
650, at para.
59:
sexual offences raise particular
considerations in the proportionality analysis.
in
r. v. friesen,
the supreme court said, at para. 75: "in particular, courts need to take
into account the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual offences against
children when applying the proportionality principle. accurately understanding
both factors is key to imposing a proportionate sentence." there is no
reason to think that it does not also apply to sexual offences at large. as the
supreme court observed, "taking the harmfulness of these offences into
account ensures that the sentence fully reflects the 'life-altering
consequences' that can and often do flow from the sexual violence":
friesen,
at para.
74. [citation omitted.]
as
fairburn a.c.j.o. noted
a.j.k., at para. 74, sexual assaults are "serious
acts of violence", the victims of which "suffer profound emotional
and physical harm and their lives can be forever altered

the sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of
this offence and mr. hall’s sole responsibility for the commission of the
crime.
the need for
denunciation and deterrence is so pressing that the only means to sufficiently
express condemnation is with a period of incarceration in the penitentiary even
after balancing the mitigating facts and considering the principle of restraint.

ultimately, i must sentence mr. hall to the
shortest period of incarceration that fairly achieves all the competing
sentencing objectives and reflects the seriousness of this crime as well as the
mitigating facts. to arrive at a sentence that balances these opposing
considerations, it is helpful to review any sentencing precedents that have
considered the appropriate sentence ranges for these types of cases.
iv.
the principle of parity:

in addition to these guiding sentencing
principles, the principle of parity is an important consideration. it is set
out in subsection 718.2 of the
criminal code
which requires that:
a sentence should be
similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed
in similar circumstances.

while this is a worthy goal, each individual case is
often so unique that it is difficult to achieve parity in sentencing.
ultimately, considering the unfortunately
countless ways to commit a sexual assault, the distinctiveness of each offence
and each offender, it is often challenging to find comparable cases. as
chief justice lamer stated in
r. v. m.
(c.a.),
1996 canlii 230 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 500
at paragraph
92:...sentencing is an
inherently individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate
sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a
fruitless exercise of academic abstraction.

sexual offences range from minimally
intrusive momentary occurrences to horrifying facts. offenders can be
responsible, sympathetic, and apologetic or they can be recalcitrant,
unrepentant recidivists. the ontario court of appeal observed in
r. v. e.c.,
2019
onca 688
that:
the offence of sexual
interference can be committed in any number of ways, and with varying levels of
moral turpitude.
the broad range of
available sentences is rooted in the "infinitely variable ways in which
the offence can be committed":
r. v. m.b.,
2013 onca 493,
at para.
21. within the wide range of available sentences, the court must
impose an appropriate sentence - one that is proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender, and, respecting
the principle of parity, is proportionate to sentences imposed for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances:
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64,
 3 s.c.r. 1089, at para.
53.

despite the myriad of ways that victims of
sexual violence are unfortunately violated, there is a very clear and
consistent trend in the appellate authorities that the sentence range must
increase. appellate courts have been clear that sexual violence must be
denounced and deterred in a manner that is intended to stop this seemingly
endless cycle of violence. modern sentences must reflect the egregious nature
of these offences and our present understanding of the impact on the victims.

the supreme court was unequivocal
in
r.
v. friesen,
supra, that sentences must increase to reflect that “
our understanding of the profound physical
and psychological harm that all victims of sexual assault experience has
deepened”. while the supreme court declined to set a specific sentence range
for sexual violence, they emphasized at para 114 that:
nonetheless,
it is incumbent on us to provide an overall message that is clear (
d. (d.),
at paras. 34 and 45).
that
message is that mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against
children are normal and that upper-single digit and double-digit penitentiary
terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional
circumstances.
we
would add that substantial sentences can be imposed where there was only a
single instance of sexual violence and/or a single victim, as in this case,
woodward,
and
l.m.
in addition, as this court recognized in
l.m.,
maximum sentences should not be reserved
for the "abstract case of the worst crime committed in the worst
circumstances
"
(para. 22). instead, a maximum sentence
should be imposed whenever the circumstances warrant it (para. 20).
[emphasis mine]

the supreme court deferred to the provincial
courts of appeal to set sentencing ranges at para. 106:
we would
decline the crown's invitation to create a national starting point or
sentencing range for sexual offences against children. generally speaking, this
court is reluctant to pronounce on the specific length of sentence. the
appropriate length and the setting of sentencing ranges or starting points are
best left to provincial appellate courts.

since this direction
in
friesen, the
ontario court of appeal has consistently and repeatedly reiterated that the
appropriate range of sentence for the sexual violation of a vulnerable person by
an adult is between 3 to 5 years of incarceration:
r. v.
a.j.k,
2022 onca 487
at
para
77: although the facts were different, the majority of the court of appeal
made the following oft-cited guiding remarks:
absent
some highly mitigating factor, the forced penetration of another person will
typically attract a sentence of at least three years in the penitentiary. while
bradley
and the cases following it suggest that the range is three to
five years, this is of course just a range, a quantitative sentencing tool
designed to assist busy trial judges with where to start:
parranto, at
paras. 15-17. accordingly, there will be circumstances where a departure
from the range, either above or below the
range, is entirely appropriate.
r. v.
henry,
2022 onca 191: the
appellant met the victim online and they went on a date.
he sexual assaulted her, including acts
of forced fellatio and vaginal intercourse. the appellant's behavior towards
the complainant was described as “demeaning”. the court of appeal found that “the
trial judge correctly identified the range of sentence for this offence as
being between three and five years”. the sentence of 3 ½ years was upheld.
r. v.
r.s.,
2023 onca 608: the
defendant sexually assaulted and attacked the victim in her own apartment. they
were previously involved in an intimate relationship. the victim was stripped,
her tampon removed, and she was digitally penetrated. the court repeated that “
denunciation and deterrence are primary
considerations on sentencing in cases of serious sexual assault”. despite
various mitigating considerations, the court of appeal overturned a sentence of
90 days intermittent with a conditional sentence and probation:
40
as i have said, this was a
serious sexual assault. the crown accepts, and i agree, that this was a case in
which r.s.'s moral culpability could rightly be considered to be reduced by his
background, but not to the extent that the sentencing judge concluded. this was
a case in which nothing less than a term of imprisonment was appropriate.
taking into account all of the aggravating factors, mitigating factors, and the
gladue
factors, a proportionate global sentence for the sexual assault
and choking offences was at the lower end of the 3 to 5-year range - a
penitentiary term of 3 years.
r. v.
s.w.,
2024 onca 173: the
court of appeal was emphatic that the absence of certain aggravating factors
does not justify a sentence below the range of 3 to 5 years, but additional
violence may justify a sentence beyond the range:
39
notably, the three to five year range
comes from
bradley, which did not involve any additional
violence, beyond the violence inherent in non-consensual sexual intercourse.
moreover, as this court
described in
a.j.k.,
non-consensual sexual intercourse is inherently violent. added violence may
justify additional or different charges, for example under s. 272 (sexual
assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm) or s. 273 (aggravated sexual assault)
of the
criminal code.
added violence may also be an aggravating factor that would
justify a sentence at the higher end of the range or, in appropriate
circumstances, beyond the higher end of the range.
however, the use of the word
"forced"
in
a.j.k.
should not be taken to mean anything
more than a reference to the fact the sexual assault was non-consensual.
[emphasis mine]

counsel relied on a series of appellate
decisions to support a sentence at the bottom end of the applicable range.

i will not review
r. v. p.m.,
2022
onca 408, because the sentence reflected the trial judge’s concerns about the
appropriate range of penalty for intimate partner as opposed to stranger
violence. this conflict has since been resolved in more recent decisions. similarly,
in
r. v. ruelas,
2022 onca 262, the court of appeal upheld a 3 ½ year
sentence imposed by the trial judge as “entirely fit” even though the offender
had good rehabilitative prospects, completed some counselling, and had engaged
in a risk assessment. none of these mitigating factors are present in this
case. moreover, the trial judge did not have the benefit of
the reasons in
r.
v. a.j.k.
supra
or more recent cases and the sentence was reflective of the
crown’s position.

in
r. v. c.p.,
2024 onca 783, the offender
had an “unblemished record”, strong community ties and he was prepared to pay
$10 000 in restitution to the victim. the trial court sentenced him to a
conditional sentence. the court of appeal found the sentence to be unfit and
observed that:
35
the trial judge went on to incorrectly
state that certain other factors, including the fact that this was not a
planned offence and that c.p. did not ply the complainant with alcohol or use a
weapon, mitigated the seriousness of the offence. it is an error in principle
to treat the absence of an aggravating factor, including the absence of
gratuitous violence in a sexual assault, as mitigating:
see
r. v.
friesen,
2020 scc 9,
 1 s.c.r. 424, at para.
150;
r. v. b.m.,
2008 onca 645, at para.
7.
36
we are not persuaded that the trial
judge's mischaracterization of some of the circumstances of the offence and the
offender as mitigating factors, materially affected the sentence she imposed.
overall, however, we conclude that the general tenor of her reasons minimizes
the seriousness of the offence. in particular, we note that, after reviewing
the authorities submitted by counsel, the trial judge emphasized the facts that
the appellant did not supply the complainant with alcohol, that his actions were
not predatory and that the choking that occurred was not done to overcome the
complainant's resistance. these comments fail to capture the very serious
nature of the appellant's actions in using force to sexually assault in
multiple ways a highly vulnerable sleeping and intoxicated victim.

the only reason why the court of appeal did
not order the offender to serve the appropriate period of incarceration in the
penitentiary was because it was no longer in the interests of justice to
incarcerate him.

in
r. v. m.g.,
2024 onca 443, the
facts involved an intimate partner. these cases also fall within the
3-to-5-year range. the trial judge provided detailed reasons for the lenient sentence
in a reported decision,
2021 onsc 6359. there were unusually mitigating
considerations including that the offender was bound by restrictive bail terms
that prohibited him from seeing his daughters for years. mr. hall was released
on an undertaking. his liberty was not curtailed by the terms of his release. in
addition, in
m.g.
the victim was supportive of the offender because he
was the sole provider of their family. the court of appeal upheld a sentence at
the bottom end of the range of 3 years because of these uniquely and
substantially mitigating facts.

in
r. v. s.w.,
2024 onca 173, the
offender sexually assaulted his intimate partner in their bed while she
pretended to be asleep. the court of appeal found that a conditional sentence
was “manifestly unfit” and ordered a sentence of 3 years incarceration. notably,
the crown only sought a sentence of 3 years incarceration. a sentence is
reflective of the positions advocated by the litigants.

sentencing precedents that set out recommended
ranges for certain offences are intended to provide guidance as opposed to
dominating the sentencing process.
in
r. v. rawn,
2012 onca 487
at
paras.
29 and 30, the ontario court of appeal emphasized that:
it goes
without saying that a fit sentence must be ascertained on an individual basis.
it is therefore inappropriate to allow the parity principle, a principle that,
by definition considers another sentence imposed on another offender, to
dominate the determination of a fit sentence.
in
r. v.
issa (t.)
(1992),
57 o.a.c. 253, this court expressed the role of the
parity principle as follows, at para. 9:
so long as
sentencing remains an individual process there may be sentences meted out to
offenders for participation in the same offence which are justifiably
disparate. [we] think that clayton ruby's statement in
sentencing
is
correct, that the rule against unreasonable disparity in sentencing "does
not require equal sentences, but only understandable sentences when examined
together."

in
r.
v. kelly,
2022 onsc 5500
at paras.
35
and 36, the court cautioned that:
the supreme
court of canada has emphasized that usual ranges of sentence are neither
"straitjackets" nor hard and fast rules. rather, they are properly
understood as "historical portraits for the use of sentencing judges, who
must still exercise their discretion in each
case":
r. v. lacasse,
2015
scc 64
at paras.
56-60. there is no requirement for exceptional
circumstances for a sentencing judge to impose a sentence outside the usual
range:
friesen, at paras.
36-39; 111-112.
thus, while
ranges are relevant to the analysis, sentencing is best understood as an
exercise of judicial discretion to individualize the sentence for a particular
offender who committed particular offences, in a particular community.
proportionality remains the overarching objective.

this sentence range of 3 to 5 years
represents a “historical portrait” of previous sentences. it is not a portrait
that has been drawn in indelible ink. rather, that portrait will and should change
as crowns advocate for longer sentences to reflect the upward trend in
sentences for sexual violence and trial judges have the benefit of the guidance
from more recent appellate decisions upholding higher sentences.

the aggravating considerations of
gratuitous violence, victim blaming, demeaning language, various penetrative sexual
acts without protection and the victim impact justify a sentence well beyond
the historical portrait for sexual offences without these additional facts. a sentence
longer than the 5 years requested by the crown, would have been entirely justified
in the circumstances of this case even with the mitigating considerations. ms.
r.c.’s sexual and physical integrity could not have mattered less to mr. hall. mr.
hall’s must be deterred from future sexual violence and his crimes must be
denounced in the strongest possible language.

in 2017, years before the court of appeal
set out the current range of 3 to 5 years, justice o’marra sentenced an
offender with similarly aggravating considerations
in
r. v. clase,
2017
onsc 2484. the victim was choked and restrained by her assailant who raped her.
after a hard struggle that left bruising on her neck, she relented only to make
the violence stop.

the offender faced deportation because of
his crimes. he was 36 years old and the father of two children who his grandmother
was caring for by the time of the sentencing. he had a good job and a
supportive partner. he was sentenced to the upper end of the range proposed by
counsel and the crown of 5 years incarceration. almost 8 years later, with
ample additional insight from the supreme court of canada and the ontario court
of appeal, similar facts should warrant an even longer period of incarceration.

mr. hall perpetrated multiple acts of
sexual violence while callously disregarding the victim’s pleas for him to stop
and her tears. he forced cunnilingus on her. he forced vaginal sex without
protection. he attempted anal intercourse. when he was unsuccessful, he
digitally penetrated the victim’s anus with more than one finger causing her considerable
pain. ms. r.c. was bitten, struck, and she was penetrated so violently that she
bled from her vagina and anus for days. she has been emotionally, psychologically,
and financially devastated by this offence.

the ontario court of appeal has been
unwaveringly clear that the bottom end of the range of sentencing for this type
of offence is, absent some exceptional circumstances, 3 years incarceration. sentences
at the lower end of the range should apply to cases in which an offender pleads
guilty, demonstrates insight and sincere remorse, has significant potential for
rehabilitation or has invested in counseling, there are some other uniquely or substantially
mitigating considerations or the absence of certain aggravating features.

there is nothing exceptionally mitigating about
mr. hall’s background or his current circumstances that attenuates his moral
culpability. the unintentional but entirely foreseeable impact of rendering an
innocent child without the support of her only custodial parent is tragic but that
is mr. hall’s fault. mr. hall cannot use the child who he risked exposing to
his acts of depravity as a shield to prevent him from being held fully
accountable for these offences.

it would be a clearly unfit sentence for
mr. hall to receive the benefit of the lower end of the range of 3 ½ years that
was advocated for by counsel. even after considering the principle of restraint
and the mitigating factors, the crown’s position of 5 years incarceration is lenient.
it must be emphasized that the upper end of the range is a glass ceiling that
can and should be broken when the facts warrant a higher penalty. a sentence in
the range of 6 to 7 years of incarceration would be a balanced and proportionate
penalty.

in response to my queries about ordering a
sentence beyond the upper end of the range, the crown fairly and professionally
stressed the principle of restraint and that there are collateral punitive
impacts that should attenuate the period of incarceration considering the loss
of mr. hall’s business and the lack of access to his child for the next few
years. upon further reflection, i also contemplated the principle of totality considering
the additional orders of the
s.o.i.r.a.
order which will be a constant
reminder for mr. hall of one of the consequences of being a sex offender. i
considered the additional order of a lengthy common law peace bond to give the
victim an added sense of safety that there is an order protecting her when mr.
hall is ultimately released from jail.

while i was inclined to order a sentence in
excess of the crown’s position, i reviewed the decision of
r. v. a.b.,
2023 onca 254. the court of appeal
urged caution before exceeding the crown’s position.
the litigants should have a fulsome opportunity to address any concerns about
the adequacy of the crown’s position. like this case, the trial judge was
sentencing a sexual offender to a period of incarceration. the crown advocated
for a period of 5 years. the trial judge exceeded the crown’s position and
ordered a sentence of incarceration of 7 years. candidly, while i engaged the
crown, i should have given mr. hall’s counsel more of an opportunity to address
the possibility of exceeding the crown’s position. however, counsel’s position
was very clear when he advocated for a disproportionate sentence to reflect the
mitigating facts, restraint, and the collateral consequences of incarceration.

although the facts are distinguishable, i
note that the court of appeal overturned the sentence of 7 years because:
50
the appellant was a first offender.
unquestionably, denunciation and deterrence were the predominant sentencing
factors in this case. however, five years is a significant penitentiary
sentence for a first offender. where incarceration is required, indeed, even
where a penitentiary sentence is required, the principle of restraint dictates
that the sentence imposed not be longer than is necessary to achieve other
sentencing goals, such as denunciation and deterrence.

the offender in that case sexually abused
his stepdaughter for years and there was significant victim impact. nevertheless,
the court of appeal found that “
the goals of denunciation and deterrence are achieved, while also
weighing the other relevant sentencing principles, by a sentence of five years
imprisonment.”

while the aggravating facts cry out for a
longer period of incarceration than the top end of the range, i will reluctantly
accede to the crown’s position primarily because of the principle of totality
when considering the other orders that i will be imposing on mr. hall.

mr. hall is sentenced to a period of 5 years
of incarceration for the sexual assault and 6 months concurrent for the assault.
this period of incarceration is consecutive to any sentence that he is
currently serving. i will address the ancillary orders requested by the crown
and opposed by defence.
d.
ancillary
orders: soira and a peace bond

the law recently changed with respect to
the imposition of soira orders. mr. hall has been convicted of a designated
offence and the crown elected to proceed by indictment. as a result,
subsection
490.012(3)
of the
criminal code
applies:
490.012
(
3
)
subject to subsection (5), when a court imposes
a sentence on a person for a designated offence in circumstances in which
neither subsection (1) nor (2) applies, or when the court renders a verdict of
not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder for a designated
offence, it
shall make an order
in form 52 requiring the person to comply with
the
sex offender information registration
act
unless the court is
satisfied the person has established that
(a)
there would be no
connection between making the order and the purpose of helping police services
prevent or investigate crimes of a sexual nature by requiring the registration
of information relating to sex offenders under that act; or
(b)
the impact of the order
on the person, including on their privacy or liberty, would be grossly
disproportionate to the public interest in protecting society through the
effective prevention or investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be
achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under
that act.
factors
(4)
in determining whether
to make an order under subsection (3) in respect of a person, the court shall
consider
(a)
the nature and seriousness
of the designated offence;
(b)
the victim’s age and
other personal characteristics;
(c)
the nature and
circumstances of the relationship between the person and the victim;
(d)
the personal
characteristics and circumstances of the person;
(e)
the person’s criminal
history, including the age at which they previously committed any offence and
the length of time for which they have been at liberty without committing an
offence;
(f)
the opinions of experts
who have examined the person; and
(g)
any other factors that
the court considers relevant.

i have considered the mandatory nature of the order,
the aggravating features of this serious offence and the concern that mr. hall
lacks any insight into the seriousness his crime. i have also considered that
while this charge was outstanding, he committed an offence of violence for
which he was sentenced to a period of custody even though he was considered a
first offender at that time.

the imposition of a s.o.i.
r.a.
order is not grossly disproportionate to the public interest in protecting vulnerable
members of our society and the effective prevention or investigation of crimes
of a sexual nature. accordingly, i shall make an order for mr. hall to comply
with a s.o.i.r.a. order for the next 20 years.

in terms of the common law peace bond, counsel opposed
the imposition of this order in addition to the other sanctions. he aptly noted
that mr. hall has abided by the terms of his release with respect to
non-communication with the victim for years. he also highlighted that mr. hall
will face additional consequences if he breaches the terms to keep the peace
and be of good behavior that exposes him unnecessarily to additional jeopardy.

in
r. v. musoni,
2009 canlii 12118 (on sc),
 o.j. no. 1161
(ont.s.c.)
affirmed
2009 onca 829
and leave to appeal refused, justice durno
explained that:
the determination in a
common law peace bond application is whether there are grounds to conclude that
the accused may breach the peace in general or in relation to a specific
person. on the information before him the trial judge could make an independent
determination that there were grounds to require the appellant to sign the
bond.

in this case, ms. r.c. lives in constant
fear of seeing mr. hall. she has moved three times because she is so afraid to
bump into him even though they live far apart. while i have some degree of confidence
presently that he will remain away from her based on his compliance with the
bail terms, he may be a different man after he is released from this
penitentiary sentence. in addition, he was recently convicted of failing to
comply with terms of bail on an unrelated offence of violence while this charge
was outstanding.

at the very least, ms. r.c. should be
afforded the comfort of an ongoing sense of safety for the next 8 years. this
order is not onerous. quite the contrary, it has been factored into the overall
sentence. absent considerations of totality, i would have imposed a longer
period of incarceration.
e.
conclusion:

this sentence cannot possibly undo or
ameliorate the lasting emotional and psychological harm that mr. hall caused to
ms. r.c. nor is that the purpose of a sentence. rather, mr. hall must be held proportionately
accountable for the consequences of the crimes that he committed against an
innocent woman. he is solely responsible for harming her. the 5-year sentence reflects
the mitigating factors, the collateral consequences, and the multitude of
aggravating considerations. it is intended to give primary consideration to deterring
mr. hall from future sexual offences, deterring other would-be predators, and
denouncing his crimes while still considering his potential for rehabilitation and
his personal circumstances and restraint when imposing his first penitentiary
sentence.

in summary, for the sexual assault, mr. hall
is sentenced as follows:
•
he will be incarcerated
for a period of 5 years or 60 months.
•
there will be a peace
bond in the amount of $2500 without deposit and without surety for a period of 8
years to keep the peace and be of good behaviour and the following terms:
o
do not contact or communicate in
any way, directly or indirectly, by any physical or electronic or other means
with ms. r.c.
o
do not be within 100 meters of any
place where you know ms. r.c. to live, work, go to school or any place that you
know the person to be except for required court appearances.
o
do not to post any information about,
depictions of, recordings of or photographs of ms. r.c. on any social media
site.
•
pursuant to
section
743.21
of the
criminal code, mr. hall is prohibited from communicating
with ms. r.c. while he is in custody.
•
he will abide by a
s.o.i.r.a order for a period of 20 years.
•
he is prohibited from
possessing weapons or authorization pursuant to
section 109
of the
criminal
code
for a period of 10 years.
•
he will be required to submit
a sample of his d.n.a.

there will be a concurrent sentence of 6
months incarceration for the assault since the gratuitous violence was factored
into the sentence for the sexual assault. the victim fine surcharges are waived
as an undue hardship.