source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj733/2025oncj733.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. r.d., 2025 oncj 733
date: 
september 8, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 2020 1856
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
r.d.
before
justice g.p. renwick
heard
on 04 september 2025
reasons
for sentence released on 08 september 2025
j. gardezi................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
s. wagman and s. grewal............................................... counsel
for the defendant r.d.
reasons for sentence
renwick j.:
introduction

following a contested trial, i found the offender
guilty of sexual assault and sexual interference committed against a 13-year
old female over several dates from december 2020 until january 2021.

pursuant to the principles in
r.
v. kienapple,
1974 canlii 14 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 729, the prosecutor sought a stay of sexual assault and seeks
the offender to be sentenced to 15 months imprisonment for sexual interference,
along with ancillary orders. the offender seeks a conditional
sentence or intermittent jail (if the sentence is low enough), citing
the offender’s personal circumstances and the nature of the offence.

the conviction relates to repeated incidents of
sexual touching over clothing of the complainant’s breasts and thighs. the
offender was a trusted family friend and the offences occurred in the
complainant’s home and during car rides.

these reasons explain why a 12-month sentence of
imprisonment is appropriate.
governing principles

the fundamental purpose of sentencing under
s.
718
of the
criminal code
is to promote respect for the law and
a just, peaceful, and safe society. the sentence must be proportionate to the
gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender (
s.
718.1
). it must also reflect parity, restraint, and the need to consider all
reasonable sanctions other than imprisonment (s. 718.2).

in
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9, the
supreme court emphasized that sentences for sexual offences against children
have historically been too low and must better reflect the harm caused and the
moral blameworthiness of the offender. the court reaffirmed that denunciation and deterrence are
paramount in sentencing for sexual offences involving children.

in
r.
v. proulx, the supreme court spoke about the principle of
restraint when considering imprisonment:
parliament has sought to give increased prominence to
the principle of restraint in the use of prison as a sanction through the
enactment of s. 718.2(d) and (e). section 718.2(d) provides that "an
offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may
be appropriate in the circumstances", while s. 718.2(e) provides that
"all available sanctions other than imprisonment that are reasonable in
the circumstances should be considered for all offenders, with particular
attention to the circumstances of aboriginal offenders". further evidence
of parliament's desire to lower the rate of incarceration comes from other
provisions of bill c-41: s. 718(c) qualifies the sentencing objective of
separating offenders from society with the words "where necessary",
thereby indicating that caution be exercised in sentencing offenders to
prison...


the supreme court has instructed that
section 718
requires a sentencing
judge to consider more than simply denunciation, deterrence, and
rehabilitation. the court must also consider the restorative goals of
repairing the harms suffered by individual victims and by the community as a
whole, promoting a sense of responsibility and an acknowledgment of the harm
caused by an offender, while attempting to rehabilitate or heal the offender.


although the rehabilitation of the offender is a secondary consideration
in the overall calculus of an appropriate sentence in this case (behind
denunciation and deterrence and along with restraint and totality), it is still
a factor i must consider.
discussion

the following aggravating factors exist:
i.
the complainant was a child. at the time of
the offence she was 13 years old;
ii.
the offender was in a position of trust
over the complainant. he was checking in on the complainant or providing her
car rides on her mother’s behalf;
iii.
some of the instances of sexual touching occurred in
the complainant’s home, a place where she was entitled to feel safe;
iv.
the complainant has suffered emotional trauma
which has disrupted her education and emotional well-being; and
v.
the offending was repeated over a period of
time, suggesting a pattern of behaviour rather than an isolated lapse of
judgment.

these factors are consistent with those
identified in similar cases relied upon by the prosecution:
r.
v.
rustaie,
 o.j. no. 6250 (c.j.),
r.
v.
lloyd,

o.j. no. 5163 (c.j.), and
r.
v.
h.a.c.,
 o.j. no. 7686
(c.j.). in those cases custodial sentences of a similar duration were imposed
for similar conduct.

there are also mitigating factors present:
i.
the offender is a first offender, with no prior
criminal record;
ii.
the offender has the support of his wife and a
family friend;
iii.
the offender suffers from asthma and diabetes;
iv.
the offender has been on bail for four years,
without incident;
v.
the offender has expressed remorse for the
complainant; and
vi.
the offender consented to the ancillary orders
sought.

while these factors are mitigating, they do not
rise to the level of
exceptional circumstances
that would
justify a conditional sentence. as noted by the ontario court of appeal,
conditional sentences for sexual offences against children are only appropriate
in rare and exceptional cases:
r.
v. m.m.,
2022 onca 441.

the offender is not a canadian citizen and he
also faces the collateral consequence of deportation to jamaica, following the
completion of his custodial sentence. while this consequence is significant and
may impact his future in canada, it does not outweigh the need for a custodial
sentence in light of the seriousness of the offence. as held in
r. v.
pham,
2013 scc 15, immigration consequences may be considered at
sentencing, but they cannot override the principles of proportionality,
denunciation, and deterrence, or skew the sentencing process.

the sentencing authorities relied upon by the
offender to justify community custody were largely unhelpful because they involved
situations of exceptional circumstances (for example a global pandemic), a
guilty plea (where the offender had also received treatment), or a joint
request by both parties for a conditional sentence of imprisonment.
sentence
imposed

i have taken into account that the offender is a
first offender. he deserves the least restrictive form of punishment
commensurate with his culpability. a sentence of imprisonment is required but
it must not be likely to crush the offender’s spirit and hinder his
rehabilitation. there is no alternative form of punishment that equally
responds to this offence, the moral blameworthiness of this offender, and the
harm he has caused.

in the absence of any exceptional circumstances,
a conditional sentence of imprisonment is insufficient to deter others or appropriately
denounce this offence.

i have considered the sentencing authorities
submitted by the parties, the aggravating and mitigating features of this
offence, the collateral consequences facing the offender, and the fact that is
it unknown if the offender suffers from paedophilia or his offending was merely
predatory and opportunistic.


a sentence of 12
months imprisonment is appropriate. this length of imprisonment reflects
the gravity of the offence, the harm caused to the complainant, and the
offender’s moral blameworthiness. it is also the least restrictive
custodial sentence that adequately addresses the principles
of denunciation, deterrence, and proportionality. lastly, this length and
form of custody also accounts for the offender’s prior unblemished character in
the short period of time he has been in canada and his several years on bail.

following his release, the offender shall be
subject to 2 years of probation with the
following conditions:
1.
keep the peace and be of good behaviour;
2.
report to a probation officer within 5 days of release and
thereafter as directed;
3.
notify your probation officer in advance of any changes of name,
address, or occupation;
4.
have no contact with the complainant (who will be named in the
order);
5.
do not attend at or within 50m of any place where the complainant is
found or known to be, including her place of residence, education, employment,
or worship;
6.
do not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code;
7.
complete any treatment or counselling for sexual boundaries as
required by the probation officer; and
8.
complete any releases of information that will enable your
probation officer to monitor your attendance and completion of any required
treatment or counselling.

the following ancillary orders are imposed on
consent.

while in custody, the offender is prohibited
from contacting the complainant (who will be named in the order) directly or
indirectly, pursuant to
s. 743.21(1)
of the
criminal
code.

while in custody, pursuant to
s. 487.051(1)
of the
criminal code, the offender will submit to a sampling of his deoxyribonucleic acid (“dna”) to be
analyzed and to have the results uploaded into the national dna databank. the
offender’s dna is to be taken by a qualified person in circumstances that are
hygienic, that respect the offender’s bodily integrity and privacy, and that respect
his health and safety. force may be used to extract the offender’s dna if he does
not submit to the dna sampling voluntarily.

the offender must comply with the
provisions of the
sex offender information and registration act
for 20
years (
s. 490.013(2)
(b) of the
criminal code
).

pursuant to
s. 109
of the
criminal code, the
offender is prohibited from possessing the listed items for 10 years.

pursuant to
s. 161
of the
criminal code,
for ten years following release from imprisonment, the offender is prohibited
from:
i.
attending a public park or public swimming area
where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can reasonably be
expected to be present;
ii.
attending a daycare centre, schoolground,
playground, or community centre;
iii.
seeking, obtaining, or continuing any employment
or voluntary position in any capacity that involves being in a position of
trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16 years; and
iv.
having any contact or communicating by any means
with a person who is under the age of 16 years, unless in the direct company of
an adult who is aware of your conviction.

for the offender’s sake and the sake of our
community if he remains in canada, it is hoped that the offender becomes fully
rehabilitated upon the completion of his sentence.
released: 08 september 2025
justice
g. paul renwick

2000 scc 5 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 6, at para.
17.

r.
v.
gladue,
1999 canlii 679 (scc), s.c.j. no. 19 at paras.
43 and
48.

parenthetically, it is also unknown whether this offender is at a
low, medium, or high risk to re-offend.