source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj322/2025oncj322.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. g.c., 2025 oncj 322
date: 
june 11, 2025
court
file no.: brampton 998 23 31113362
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
g.c.
before
justice g.p. renwick
application
was heard on 09 and 10 june 2025
reasons
for judgment were released on 11 june 2025
r. mullins.............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
a. kahlon and s. diclemente.......................................... counsel
for the defendant g.c.
ruling on voluntariness of the defendant’s
statement to police
renwick j.:
introduction

at the
start of his trial, i am being asked to determine if a statement made by the
defendant to the police while he was under arrest at the police station was voluntary.

the
statement was given during the investigation of a motor vehicle collision
(“mvc”) that occurred on 22 october 2023. the defendant was initially detained
and arrested for dangerous operation of a conveyance. subsequently, after
several hours in police custody, the defendant was re-arrested for dangerous
operation causing death.

once he
had been re-arrested, the defendant was asked by the officer-in-charge, detective
constable (“d.c.”) aimee colvin, whether he wished to provide additional
information beyond what she required of him as an involved motorist. though the
defendant declined to speak to the police, he did provide answers to some of the
officer’s questions. these utterances are at issue.
general principles

the
supreme court of canada has recently reiterated the legal principles that
govern the fact-finding process engaged during a trial.


in order
to find a defendant’s statement to police was voluntarily given, the court must
be satisfied that the voluntariness has been proven
beyond a reasonable
doubt. a reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or frivolous doubt. it must
be based upon reason and common sense and it logically derives from the
evidence or the lack of evidence adduced during a hearing. while likely or even
probable voluntariness is not enough to meet the high threshold, proof of
voluntariness to an absolute certainty is inapplicable and unrealistic.

the
supreme court of canada has cautioned that there is no mathematical precision
to proof beyond a reasonable doubt, but it lies much closer to absolute
certainty than to proof on a balance of probabilities.

if after considering all of
the admissible evidence, i am sure that the defendant spoke voluntarily to the
police, then i may find that the statement is admissible. conversely, if i am
unsure, or if a reasonable doubt remains on the issue of voluntariness arising
from the evidence or the lack of evidence adduced during the
voir dire,
i cannot find that the statement is voluntarily made and it will become
inadmissible in the trial for all purposes.

triers of fact must consider both credibility
and reliability in determining the facts in a given hearing. credibility is
shorthand for truthfulness and believability. reliability is the lens through
which one evaluates the accuracy of evidence. trial judges must be careful not
to conflate credibility with reliability, otherwise the fact-finding net might
entangle even the least reliable piece of evidence.

in assessing credibility and reliability i have considered the
general capacity of the witness to make observations, to remember what was
perceived, and the ability to accurately testify and communicate one’s
recollections. it is also important to determine whether the witness was trying
to tell the truth and whether the witness was sincere, candid, biased,
reticent, or evasive. a court may accept some, none, or all of what a witness
says while testifying.

a valuable means of assessing the credibility of any witness is to
examine the consistency between what the witness said throughout their testimony.
i must also assess what is testified to in the context of all of the evidence adduced
on the hearing and not on an isolated basis. this is true for any
inconsistencies and whether these are significant or inconsequential to the determination
at hand. if an inconsistency is significant, then i must pay careful attention
to it when assessing the reliability of the witness' testimony.

admissibility
and the weight attached to evidence are two distinct considerations. the
probative value of evidence is not presumed. in all cases, a trier of fact must
determine the appropriate weight to give each piece of evidence and what, if
anything, is established or proven and to what degree. i have reminded myself
to treat the evidence of all witnesses the same. there is no preference for nor
status conferred upon police testimony.

given the
credibility issues at play, i must apply the principles articulated by the
supreme court of canada in
r.
v. w.d.,
1991 canlii 93 (scc),
 s.c.j. no. 26:
i.
if i believe evidence that is inconsistent with the defendant’s
voluntariness, i cannot admit the statement;
ii.
even if i do not entirely believe evidence inconsistent with the
defendant’s voluntariness, if i cannot decide whether that evidence is true,
there is a reasonable doubt and the defendant’s statement has not been proven
voluntary;
iii.
even if i entirely disbelieve evidence that is inconsistent with the
defendant’s voluntariness, the mere rejection of that evidence does not prove
voluntariness; and
iv.
even where i entirely disbelieve evidence that is inconsistent with the
defendant’s voluntariness, the statement should not be found to be voluntarily
made unless the evidence that is given credit proves the defendant’s
voluntariness beyond a reasonable doubt.
evidence

the
prosecution called police officers tahmina said dawod, harjot singh, and aimee
colvin to testify on the
voir dire. the defendant did not lead any
evidence directly.
constable tahmina
said dawod

police constable
(“p.c.”) said dawod testified that she attended the scene of the mvc and
interacted with the defendant, who identified himself as the driver of the
lexus involved in the collision. she asked the defendant what happened, and he
stated that he was driving westbound on queen street, he guessed that the road
was wet, his vehicle spun out, and he could not recall anything else about the
collision. officer said dawod did not observe any signs of impairment or confusion
on the part of the defendant.

during
cross-examination, p.c. said dawod confirmed that the defendant volunteered that
he was the driver of the lexus and she testified that she had briefed her
supervisors, including sergeant ricci and d.c. colvin, about her interaction
with the defendant. her testimony established that she was not aware of any
threats or inducements made to prompt the defendant to speak with the police.
constable harjot
singh

police constable
singh testified that he arrested the defendant for dangerous operation of a conveyance
after observing a video from a tesla vehicle which had captured the collision. upon
the arrest, p.c. singh read the defendant his rights to counsel and a caution
that anything said could be given in evidence. he testified that the defendant
indicated that he understood his rights. constable singh facilitated the defendant's
contact with duty counsel once they arrived at the police station.

during
cross-examination, p.c. singh confirmed that he did not recall specific details
of the defendant's utterances but he noted that the defendant understood his
rights. the officer did not observe any signs of impairment and neither he, nor
others in his presence, made any threats or promises to the defendant.
detective constable aimee
colvin

officer colvin
testified that she was called to investigate the mvc due to the severity of the
injuries and her role in the major collision bureau. she conducted a formal
interview with the defendant at the police station, during which she informed
him that the charge had been upgraded because the other motorist had died. the
charge for which the defendant was now under arrest was dangerous operation
causing death. officer colvin read the defendant his rights to counsel again
and provided a secondary caution. for the third time that day, he then spoke to
a lawyer, before the interview continued.

during
cross-examination, d.c. colvin acknowledged that her notes erroneously referenced
a doubt concerning the grounds for the charge. she testified that she had used
the wrong word and there was no doubt in her mind that there were reasonable
and probable grounds to arrest the defendant for dangerous operation, but she
had meant to convey that she wanted more information before charging the
defendant. she also testified that by the time of the interview she had decided
to release the defendant unconditionally. officer colvin confirmed that she did
not inform the defendant and she had no memory or note whether she had informed
his counsel of her decision to release him unconditionally prior to the formal
part of the interview. she also testified that she did not turn her mind to
what effect the news of the fatality may have had upon the defendant during his
interview.
positions of the parties
the
prosecution

the
prosecution argued that the defendant’s statement was proven voluntary, beyond
a reasonable doubt. it was emphasized that the police provided the defendant
with his rights to counsel, that he spoke to counsel no less than three times,
and he received a secondary caution from both p.c. singh and d.c. colvin. the
prosecution contended that there was no evidence to suggest that there were any
threats, promises, or inducements made to the defendant to encourage or induce
him to speak to police, and the circumstances under which he spoke were not
unusual or oppressive, nor did they have any effect upon his choice to answer
some of the investigator’s questions. moreover, it was argued that d.c. colvin
acted reasonably and with sensitivity toward the defendant, and his responses to
her (some of which resisted answering) were cogent, indicating that he
understood his rights and the situation he was in, before making a conscious,
voluntary decision to speak to police.
the defence

the
defendant argued that the statement was not truly voluntary and several factors
were raised which cast doubt upon the voluntariness of the statement. it was
highlighted that there was a prolonged delay (from approximately 10:00 a.m.
until approximately 4:00 p.m.), while the defendant remained in police custody,
until his interview with d.c. colvin. it was submitted that this created an
oppressive atmosphere that should not easily be discounted.

further,
it was submitted that d.c. colvin questioned whether there were reasonable
grounds for the arrest, which is supported by her decision to unconditionally
release the defendant after his interview. this factor is significant, it was
argued, because the plan to release the defendant without a charge was never
communicated to the defendant or his counsel, prior to the interview, despite
that this decision was made much earlier. again, this circumstance would have
left the defendant, after several hours in custody, wondering about his legal
jeopardy (would he be detained until a bail hearing, for instance), and the
logic of declining to speak to police.

third, it
was argued that the decision to inform the defendant about the other motorist’s
death at the start of the interview, some six hours after this unfortunate
circumstance was known, was calculated to induce strong emotions, in order to reduce
the defendant’s will.

lastly,
the mischaracterization of key pieces of the investigation would also have
impacted the defendant’s perception of the strength of the charge he was facing
and the futility of refusing to cooperate with police. this was also coupled
with an inducement that his explanation would be given “consideration,” leaving
the implication that he may benefit by participating in the request for a
statement. the mischaracterization of the investigation, including the
defendant’s utterance at the scene, coupled with the
consideration
to be
given for his cooperation, it was suggested, was coercive, and when combined
with other police tactics, would have made it untenable for even the
strongest-willed person to maintain confidence and remain steadfast in refusing
police questioning.
findings
constable tahmina
said dawod

constable
said dawod’s testimony was consistent, credible, and reliable. there was no
significant challenge to her testimony during cross-examination or submissions.
she did not observe any coercion or threats during her interaction with the defendant.
constable harjot
singh

constable
singh’s testimony was also credible. again, there was no significant challenge
to his testimony. this officer apparently followed proper procedures in
arresting the defendant and ensuring that he understood his rights. similarly,
he did not observe any threats or inducements made to the defendant.
detective constable aimee
colvin

detective
colvin’s testimony was detailed and somewhat consistent. she appeared conscientious
and respectful during her interaction with the defendant. however, there are concerns
with the timing of the news of a fatality and the upgraded charge for which he
was re-arrested and the possible impact of this information on his ability to
make a voluntary statement.

i accept
that there was no actual plan to keep the defendant in the dark about his
eventual release from custody that day. i believe d.c. colvin’s testimony that
she was not trying to conceal this fact for tactical purposes during the
interview. however, the fact remains that the six-hour delay during the
defendant’s detention in custody, the failure to advise him that he was not
being charged that day, the defendant’s increased legal jeopardy upon his
re-arrest, and the news of a fatality, all would have had a significant impact
upon the defendant’s decision whether to remain mute or to participate in the
police investigation.

when i
consider the totality of the evidence, i find that i am left with a residual,
reasonable doubt whether the defendant truly answered the police questions with
the free-will of an operating mind. to be clear, i have a reasonable doubt
about the defendant’s decision to answer the questions he did in light of the
following factors:
i.
the
defendant’s age and lack of prior dealings with police;
ii.
the trauma
of the significant mvc and the defendant’s role in that event;
iii.
the
length of time that the defendant was held in police custody prior to his
interview and the likely effect this had upon his resolve;
iv.
the
impact and timing of the news that the other motorist had died. the defendant was
understandably shaken by this information, which is obvious by his demeanor and
his words throughout the interview;
v.
the
increased gravity of the charge for which the defendant was re-arrested,
including the timing of the re-arrest; and
vi.
the
failure to advise the defendant at the start of the interview that it was
likely that he would be released shortly, pending further investigation.

i am not
troubled by the suggestions made by d.c. colvin that it was inevitable that she
would find that the defendant had been speeding. nor do i find that d.c. colvin
intentionally mischaracterized the defendant’s words in order to create an
impression that it was futile to remain silent. moreover, while unfortunate,
the use of the word “consideration” did not necessarily imply that there was to
be a
quid pro quo
that would benefit him if the defendant chose to
provide his understanding of the collision to d.c. colvin. to the contrary,
this officer was sensitive to the physical needs of the defendant, his right to
know his full legal jeopardy, and the necessity that he consult his lawyer again.
conclusion

in the
end, there is evidence which casts doubt upon the voluntariness of the
defendant’s statement to police. the defendant advised the officer that he should
not say much. this undermines the suggestion that he understood that he did not
have to say
anything
to assist the police. on the contrary, the
defendant continued and eventually made several potentially damning admissions.
again, this seems inconsistent with his stated intention to decline answering incriminating
questions. there is enough in the circumstances of the taking of his statement
that raises a reasonable doubt about the defendant’s ability (at that time) to freely
decide whether or not to speak to the police.

for these
reasons, i do not find that it is proven beyond a reasonable doubt that g.c.
spoke voluntarily with the police on 22 october 2023.

the
application fails and the defendant’s statement is inadmissible at trial.
released: 11 june 2025
justice
g. paul renwick

r.
v. kruk,
2024 scc 7
at paras.
59-62.

r.
v. starr,
2000 scc 40 (canlii), s.c.j. no. 40 at para.
242.