source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj678/2025oncj678.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. j.m.-f., 2025 oncj 678
date: 
2025 12 18
court
file no.: hamilton 25-47101503
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
j.m.-f.
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on november 3, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 18, 2025
claire sweeny..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
lauren wilhelm.................................................................. counsel
for the accused j.m.-f.
fiorucci j.:
overview

the accused, j.m.-f. and the complainant, g.h., began
dating in february 2021. they have a four-year-old daughter together. the
relationship ended on december 22, 2024, but the accused and the complainant
continued living in the family home together with their daughter.

on february 12, 2025, the complainant left the home
with their daughter and did not return. on february 14, 2025, she told the
accused that the relationship was over. the accused wanted to see his daughter,
but the complainant withheld access to the child. the accused called the police.
when the police contacted the complainant on february 15,
she told them she had safety concerns
but made no complaint of wrongdoing against the accused.

the accused hired a lawyer who sent the complainant a
letter, on february 18, which set out the accused’s concerns about his
daughter’s safety and not knowing his daughter’s whereabouts. the accused’s
lawyer threatened legal action if the complainant failed to confirm the child’s
location and enter a parenting time arrangement with the accused.

on february 23, 2025, the complainant called the police
and told an officer that the accused had raped her. during this call, the
complainant mentioned that she had received a letter from the accused’s lawyer
about an impending motion in family court. on february 27, the complainant provided
a formal statement to police, in which she said that the accused “came from
behind and had sex with me”.

the accused was charged with sexual assault. the crown
proceeded by indictment. the accused elected to have his trial in the ontario
court of justice and entered a not guilty plea. the complainant was the only
crown witness. she testified about an incident of forced vaginal intercourse
that occurred on the night of december 11 into the early morning hours of
december 12, 2024. the accused was the lone defence witness. he denied having
sex with the complainant on this occasion and denied that he ever sexually
assaulted her in the manner she described.

these reasons explain why i am left in a state of
reasonable doubt about the sexual assault allegation made by the complainant,
which mandates that i find the accused not guilty of the charge.
legal principles

the crown bears the onus of proving each and every
element of the offence charged beyond a reasonable doubt. the accused carries
no onus to prove or disprove anything. he is presumed innocent of the charge. a
reasonable doubt must be based on reason and common sense. it is logically
derived from the evidence or absence of evidence. it is not enough for me to
believe that the accused is probably guilty or likely guilty of the offence. probably
guilty or likely guilty does not meet the standard of proof beyond a reasonable
doubt and must result in an acquittal. although the crown is not required to prove
the charge to an absolute certainty, proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls much
closer to an absolute certainty than a balance of probabilities.

the accused testified and denied committing the
offence. i must apply the framework set out in
r. v. w.(d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 
1 s.c.r. 742.
first, if i accept the accused’s exculpatory version of
events, when i consider his evidence in the context of all the evidence, i must
acquit him. second, even if i reject the bulk of the accused’s
evidence, some elements of his evidence may raise a reasonable doubt, or i may
simply conclude that i do not know whether to believe the accused’s testimony
or not. in either circumstance, the accused is entitled to an acquittal:
r. v. s. (j.h.),
2008
scc 30, at paras.
10 – 12. at this second stage, if, after a careful
consideration of all the evidence, i am unable to decide whom to believe, i
must acquit:
r. v. s.h.,
2016 onsc 4492, at para.
39, aff’d
2021 onca 41. at the third stage of the analysis, even if i
am not left in reasonable doubt by the evidence of the accused, i still must
determine whether, on the basis of the evidence that i do accept, i am
convinced beyond a reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused.

although the
w.(d.)
analysis
refers to
three steps or stages, the overriding consideration is whether the evidence as
a whole leaves me in any reasonable doubt about the accused’s guilt:
see
r.
v. thomas,
2012 onsc 6653, at para.
24. the
w.(d.)
analysis
ensures that my verdict is not based on a choice between the crown evidence and
the defence evidence: see
r. v. a.j.k.,
2022 onca 487, at para.
22.
exculpatory evidence is not limited to defence evidence. it can also arise from
the crown’s case:
r. v. b.d.,
2011 onca 51, at para.
114.
analysis
analysis of
the complainant’s evidence

i start with my analysis of the complainant’s evidence. i have
significant concerns about the complainant’s credibility and the reliability of
her testimony. i have identified several aspects of the complainant’s evidence
which have led me to find that it would be unsafe to rely on her testimony to
ground a conviction.

the complainant testified in-chief that the relationship ended on
december 22, 2024, but the couple continued to reside with their daughter in
the family home. the accused and the complainant would sleep in the master
bedroom and their daughter slept in the next bedroom.

the complainant testified that on the night of december 11 or the
early morning hours of december 12, 2024, the accused woke her up in their bed.
when crown counsel asked how the accused woke her up, she replied, “i felt my
pants being pulled down”. according to the complainant, she said “no” to the
accused and rolled over. after about a minute, the accused “came in from
behind”, pulled her pants down and penetrated her vagina with his penis from
behind. the complainant said that her body tightened up, she clenched and was
crying into her pillow.

in-chief, the complainant explained that when the accused first woke
her up, she was on her back, had her left arm up and her left leg was up a bit.
she said she felt the accused trying to get her leg down, but he was probably
having difficulty and that’s when she woke up and said “no” and rolled over
onto her right side. in-chief, the complainant testified that the accused did
not say anything to her when she awoke to him removing her pants. she just
remembered grunting noises when he penetrated her.

when she was asked again by crown counsel whether the accused said
anything to her during the entire time, the complainant said that she could not
recall. she also could not recall whether she said anything to the accused,
saying that she was “just in shock”.

the complainant testified that she did not want to have sex with the
accused. she said the penetration lasted three to four minutes and ended with
the accused ejaculating in her. she went into the bathroom crying. when she
went “pee”, it hurt and burned. according to the complainant, she stayed in the
bathroom for a couple of minutes with her head in her hands, in disbelief that
someone that she once loved and trusted did that to her. the complainant returned
to the bed and cocooned herself in the blankets so “he couldn’t get me again”.
the accused was not in bed when the complainant returned from the bathroom.

defence counsel’s cross-examination of the complainant exposed frailties
in her evidence, including inconsistencies between the complainant’s
evidence-in-chief and her police statement regarding how the sexual assault
started, a potential motive to fabricate tied to the timing of her disclosure
of the sexual assault, and the complainant’s failure to provide to police the full
text message exchange that occurred between her and the accused on december 12,
2024. the text messages the complainant did not give to the police contradicted
the claim she made during her examination-in-chief that she did not respond to the
accused all day because she was really upset with him about the sexual assault.

a further inconsistency arose when the complainant reported a new
allegation of sexual assault for the first time during cross-examination.
i will begin there. the complainant
spoke with the police on three occasions prior to the accused being charged: on
february 15, 2025, when the police called her regarding the accused’s complaint
that she had taken their daughter and was withholding access, on february 23,
2025 when she called the police and made an allegation of rape for the first
time, and on february 27, 2025 when she provided her videotaped police
statement and made the same allegation.

during cross-examination, when defence counsel asked the complainant
whether she had told the police everything they had to know and had not left
anything out, she said, “to my knowledge, yes”. the complainant then agreed
with defence counsel that, a week before the trial, she had met with crown
counsel and the officer in charge for trial preparation and that she had read
the transcript of her february 27 statement. the complainant also agreed that,
at that time, she was provided with an opportunity to let crown counsel, and
the detective, know if she had left anything out. she confirmed that, at that
time, there was nothing she had to add or change to her statement.

however, as defence counsel pressed on and questioned the
complainant about the fact that the relationship did not end after the incident
she alleged happened on december 11 or 12, but rather on december 22 because of
an argument unrelated to any sexual misconduct by the accused, the complainant
made a new allegation of sexual assault. the following exchange occurred
between defence counsel and the complainant on this issue:
q. and you were provided an opportunity to let [crown
counsel] or detective barron know if there was anything that you’d left out?
a. yes.
q. and there was nothing that you had to add or
change, right?
a. yes.
q. because otherwise, you would have taken the
opportunity to tell [crown counsel] or detective barron, right?
a. yes. it’s overwhelming, though.
q. you had nothing to add or change?
a. there’s a lot that’s gone on between him and i.
q. if you had something to add or change to your
statement, you would have told the officer and the crown attorney, correct?
a. yes.
q. now, let’s talk about the timeline of you
contacting police. the allegation you’ve talked about today took place in
december of 2024, right?
a. yes.
q. it wasn’t reported at the time?
a. no.
q. nor did it cause you to end the relationship?
a. it did eventually.
q. well, you ended the relationship you say on the 22
nd
of december, right?
a. yes.
q. and your decision to do so was because on that day
you had an argument in which you say mr. m.-f. took your child out of your
arms?
a. yes. after he hid my keys.
q. in any event, the argument wasn’t about this
alleged sexual assault?
a. it started from a different sexual assault. 
another one he did the day before that on the 21
st, the morning of
the 21
st.

the crown and defence filed an agreed statement of facts, exhibit 5
on the trial, which confirms that the complainant did not report any criminal offence
with an offence date of december 21, 2024 to police. the central issue in this
case is credibility. the fact that the complainant spoke with police on at
least four prior occasions and made no disclosure of a sexual assault that
occurred on december 21, yet made this allegation for the first time in
cross-examination is a material inconsistency. it is significant that the
complainant made this allegation for the first time when defence counsel
suggested that the relationship had ended on december 22, not because of sexual
misconduct by the accused, but because of an argument over the accused taking
their daughter from her arms. at first, the complainant appeared to agree with
defence counsel’s suggestion, adding that the accused also hid her keys.
however, she then went on to make the new allegation of sexual assault that she
said happened a day earlier. in essence, the complainant claimed for the first
time during cross-examination that the relationship ended on december 22, 2024,
at least in part, because of sexual misconduct that occurred a day earlier. this
material inconsistency struck a significant blow to the testimonial credibility
of the complainant especially considering the other frailties in her evidence
which i will now go on to discuss: see
r. v. s.g.,
2022 onca 727, at
paras.
20-23.

the complainant testified in-chief that she was sleeping on the
night of december 11 into the early morning hours of december 12 when she awoke
to the feeling of her pants being pulled down. she agreed with defence counsel
that she wanted the court to infer from her in-chief testimony that she was
solidly asleep and woke up because the accused was pulling her pants down. furthermore,
when crown counsel asked the complainant whether the accused said anything to
her when he woke her up and was removing her pants, the complainant’s response
was: “no. he made, like, i just remember grunting noises when he penetrated me”.

defence counsel then confronted the complainant with her february
27, 2025 police statement which contained a much different account of how the
sexual assault began. in her february 27 police statement, the complainant made
no mention of waking up to the accused pulling down her pants. in fact, she did
not mention her pants at all in this statement. instead, when the detective
asked her whether the accused woke her up, she replied, “yeah, yeah, he-yeah,
yeah, like, he was waking me and i was, like, ‘what are you doing?’, he’s like,
‘come on’, and, like, pushing himself on me. and i was like, ‘no, i’m sleeping,
like, i’m sleeping’, like, i turned over so he wouldn’t, and he came from
behind”.

in the following exchange with defence counsel, the complainant
acknowledged the inconsistency between her police statement and her in court
testimony and attributed it to the “multiple scenarios” she was dealing with
when she gave her police statement “because she went into another one right
after”:
q. what you suggest to detective barron is that he
comes in and is sort of saying, ‘come on, wake up,’ right?
a. yeah.
q. that he’s trying to rouse you, not that he’s
immediately touching you or pulling your clothing off, correct?
a. correct.
q. and in fact, nowhere in that statement do you say
anything about pulling your clothing off, do you?
a. no.
q. a pretty big difference, isn’t it?
a. i think i was wrapped up in my head about every –
telling the detectives everything. because there was multiple scenarios.
q. you were wrapped up in your head about telling the
detectives everything because there was multiple scenarios?
a. because i went into another one right after.
q. so, you didn’t tell the officer a truthful,
accurate, detailed narration of this event because you were thinking about
something else?
a. i guess so, it looks like it.
q. he asked you a direct question, right?
a. yep.
q. and you gave him a direct answer, didn’t you? 
didn’t you?
a. yes.
q. and the direct answer was not, ‘he started pulling
my pants off while i was still asleep.’ is it?
a. no.
q. that’s much more serious what you’ve told the
court today than what you told the police, isn’t it? right?
a. yes.

this inconsistency in how the complainant described the beginning of
the sexual assault in her police statement versus how she described it in her
evidence in-chief is a material one which pertains to a matter of substance,
the very criminal act the accused is alleged to have committed.

i have considered the explanation the complainant appeared to
advance for this inconsistency, and i find that it was not credible. she attempted
to explain the inconsistency by saying, “i think i was wrapped up in my
head about every – telling the detectives everything. because there was
multiple scenarios”. she went on to say, “[b]ecause i went into another one right
after”. it is difficult to decipher the complainant’s explanation for the inconsistency,
but i infer from her testimony that she is alluding to the fact that, when she
spoke with police on february 27, she was dealing with multiple scenarios
including the sexual assault that she says happened on december 21. it is
difficult to accept that the inconsistent version of the december 11 or 12
incident the complainant gave the police on february 27, 2025 is in some way
attributable to confusing that incident with the december 21 incident which the
complainant did not mention to police on february 27, or at any time prior to
her cross-examination at trial.

the complainant provided the police with a screenshot of text
messages she received from the accused after she went to work on december 12, 2024.
the screenshot the complainant provided to police is exhibit 1 on the trial. it
shows a message received from the accused at 10:26 a.m. on december 12 which
says, “i enjoyed fondling your dumper last night:)”. at 2:42 p.m., the accused
sent the complainant the following messages: “wowwy! your day must have been super
busy! i know you loves it lol call me later, bitch i miss your phat tits”.

when crown counsel asked the complainant about the 10:26 a.m.
message, she said it was disgusting and that she did not know how to respond
because she was really upset with the accused from the night before. she went
on to say, “that’s why i didn’t respond to him all day”. the complainant said
that “fondling your dumper” to her meant that she and the accused had sex and “i
guess from behind, ‘dumper’ meaning your butt and he’s trying to be funny about
it”.

when asked in-chief about the 2:42 p.m. message the accused sent,
which said her day must have been super busy, the complainant stated:
i – i believe he knew what he did was wrong and i was
upset and i wasn’t messaging him back. he was trying to be funny. but – and i
wasn’t responding, i wasn’t giving him that satisfaction. i didn’t want to
argue, i was still trying to interpret what happened and what my next step was
to do because i didn’t want this to continue or to happen again.

therefore, during her examination-in-chief, the complainant portrayed
december 12 as a day during which she was angry with the accused because of the
sexual assault that occurred the night before and ignored him by not messaging
him back.

defence counsel’s cross-examination on this issue dealt yet another
significant blow to the complainant’s testimonial credibility. the complainant
agreed with defence counsel that she was absolutely certain that the sexual
assault took place in either the late hours of december 11 or the early morning
hours of december 12. the complainant testified that the text messages and call
logs she provided to the police assisted her in determining the exact date that
the incident occurred. she said, “i knew it was mid-december and then
when i found the text messages, i knew for certain the dates”.

the
following exchange then occurred between defence counsel and the complainant:
q. and you say that because of the message that
you’ve been shown this morning, the ‘fondling my dumper’ message, right? 
you're nodding your head; you have to give a verbal response.
a. yes.
q. and you say this because, as you’ve told this
court, “i was not responding to him all day,” or, “i didn’t talk to him all
day.” is that your evidence?
a. yes.
q. you didn’t speak to [j.] all day long?
a. i spoke to him that evening and i told him, i
confronted him.
q. okay. and other than that call that evening, you
ignored him, right?
a. yes.
q. ignored his calls, ignored his messages until that
call in the evening that you’ve just made mention of?
a. yes.
q. and once again, you’re as certain about that as
anything else?
a. i’m positive.
q. i’m sorry?
a. i’m positive that’s when i told him.
q. that wasn’t my question. my question was are you
positive you ignored him all day as you’ve already testified to this court that
you did?
a. i believe i spoke briefly earlier in the day with
him, there was a short conversation, but it was just to let him know, like, i
was okay and alive, but it was a quick phone call.
q. and that’s it?
a. yes.
q. other than that, you were back to ignoring him all
day as you categorically said in your evidence in-chief?
a. yes.
q. you provided that screenshot to police, right?
a. yes.
q. and you provided it to police because you wanted
to be believed, right?
a. yes.
q. and you think that that message supports your
evidence, correct?
a. yes.
q. and you provided your call logs because you say
that supports your evidence, correct?
a. yes.

the
complainant denied defence counsel’s suggestion that she misled the police by
only providing messages from december 12 that painted a picture of her ignoring
the accused all day which supported her claim that he had sexually assaulted
her. however, defence counsel then confronted the complainant with the complete
record of her text message exchanges with the accused on december 12, which is
exhibit 3 on the trial.

the complainant claimed that she did not provide the police with all
the text messages from december 12 because she did not think they were
relevant. defence counsel countered by suggesting that she did not provide the
complete record of text messages because they did not support her assertion
that she ignored the accused all day. the complainant replied, “i did while i
was at work”. therefore, the complainant’s evidence changed from ignoring the
accused all day to ignoring him while she was at work.

the complete text message chain from december 12 also contradicts
the complainant’s claim that she was upset with the accused that day. as the
following exchange between defence counsel and the complainant demonstrates, the
couple even exchanged mutually affectionate messages that day:
q. these messages don’t demonstrate any level of
anger or upset by you other than being frustrated about dirty dishes, right?
a. yes.
q. in fact, over the course of these messages we see
some expressions of warmth or affection, right?
a. yes.
q. 4:34 p.m. in response to him giving you a
compliment that you’re beautiful inside and out, you reply, “aww, thank you,”
with a heart smiley face emoji?
a. yes.
q. that’s not consistent with what you’ve told the
court about how upset you were and ignoring mr. m.-f., is it?
a. i was trying to play it cool and calm because i
didn’t – i didn’t know what – how to act or believe until i spoke to him.
q. well, trying to play it cool and calm is different
from your evidence about ignoring him, right? yes?
a. yes.
q. you share a laugh at 4:42 p.m., page three, about
the elf on the shelf? right?
a. yes.
q. you’re texting, “ha ha ha,” with a laughing face?
a. yeah.
q. so, you said a moment ago the only expression of
frustration or anger or upset of any kind from you in these messages is the
next messages about the air fryer and the dirty dishes, right?
a. yes.
q. and in fact, when you’re expressing your
frustration about the dirty dishes, you begin that text by affectionately
calling mr. m.-f. ‘babe.’
a. mm-hmm, yes.
q. right? nothing in these messages demonstrates a)
that you’re ignoring him, right?
a. mm-hmm.
q. it also doesn’t justify your belief that he’s
acting like he’s done something wrong, does it?
a. not yet. i didn’t want to say it through text.
q. it doesn’t justify the belief you shared with the
court that he was acting like he did something wrong, right?
a. okay.
q. well, does it or doesn’t it?
a. i don’t know.
q. this complete picture, ma’am, i’m going to suggest
is just normal banter between the two of you about your kid and your day and
the ins and outs of daily life, isn’t it?
a. yes.

it is difficult to accept the complainant’s claim that she did not
believe these additional text messages were relevant and thus did not provide
them to the police. she acknowledged that the reason she provided the texts she
did to the police was to support her assertion that she did not respond to the
accused’s messages all day. the complete record of text messages from december
12 shows that the complainant did communicate with the accused and the texts do
not support her claim that she was angry with him.

similarly, the screenshot of the call logs, which is exhibit 4 on
the trial, together with the complete record of the text messages shows that
the complainant not only text messaged the accused on december 12, but also called
him. again, the complainant agreed with defence counsel that she provided the screenshot
of the call logs to police to support her assertion that she ignored the
accused all day.

however, the call logs show that the complainant placed three
outgoing calls to the accused over the course of the day. ultimately, in
cross-examination, the complainant acknowledged that the call logs and complete
record of text messages did not support her claim that she ignored the accused
all day:
q. now, looking at the call log, again we can’t tell
the times but we can tell that your calls to [j.] come in between missed calls
from him, right?
a. yes.
q. you’re not ignoring him, you’re playing phone tag,
right?
a. yes.
q. and if you look at that text log again, we can
actually tell from some of the text messages when some of these calls might
have been placed. because if you have a look at that text document, there’s
three messages from [j.] where he’s saying things like, “i will call you
back.”
a. yeah.
q. so, there’s one at 3:43, right?
a. yes.
q. where he says, “i’ll call you back,” which means
there must have been a call from you that he missed before that…
a. yes.
q. …right? one at 4:23, “i’ll call you later, i’m in
the middle of some training,” which means you must have called him again in
between 3:43 and 4:23, right?
a. yes.
q. and then one again at 4:30 saying, “i’ll call you
back,” right?
a. yes.
q. so, again indicating that you must have called him
again between 4:23 and 4:30, right?
a. yes.
q. not ignoring him, are you?
a. no.

in the following exchange with defence counsel, the complainant again
concedes, although reluctantly, that her in-chief testimony was discredited by
the full record of the text messages that she did not provide to the police:
q. your entire memory of this event is predicated on
a text message and a representation about ignoring your partner all day that
simply isn’t true.
a. i was scared.
q. “i was scared” is not an answer to the question i
just asked you. is your entire memory of this allegation, as i suggested a
moment ago, predicated on a text message and a representation about ignoring
him all day that simply isn’t true?
a. no.
q. did you lie to the police about ignoring him all
day?
a. i did ignore while i was at work.
q. ‘all day,’ ma’am, that’s what you said to this
court. ‘i was really upset already from the night before and that’s why i
didn’t respond to him all day.’ right?
a. yes.
q. not, ‘while i was at work,’ that’s not what you
said, is it?
a. no.
q. ‘all day,’ leading us to believe that you were so
upset about what you say happened that you couldn’t even bring yourself to call
or text
et cetera, right?
a. yes.
q. and as we’ve seen from the messages that you
didn’t share with police, that simply wasn’t the case.
a. yes.

there is no inviolable rule on how people who are the victims of
trauma like a sexual assault will behave:
r. v. d.d.,
2000 scc 43, at
para.
65. a
failure to demonstrate avoidant
behaviour or a change in behaviour must not be the subject of any presumptive
adverse inference based upon now rejected stereotypical assumptions of how
persons react to acts of sexual abuse:
r. v. d.d.,
2000 scc 43,
at para. 63;
r. v. a.r.d.,
2017 abca 237, at para.
42, aff’d
2018 scc 6, at para.
2;
r. v. a.b.a.,
2019 onca 124;
r.
v. g.h.,
2024 onca 523, at para.
20.

in
this case, i am not making a finding that the complainant is less credible
because she failed to ignore the accused. however, what is relevant, and what
diminishes the complainant’s credibility, is the stark inconsistency in her account
on this issue. she claimed in her evidence-in-chief that she did not return the
accused’s messages because she was angry about the sexual assault. the call
logs and the text messages produced by the defence reveal that she did not
ignore the accused, a fact she was ultimately forced to admit during
cross-examination.

at the time of trial, the complainant and the accused were still
involved in family court proceedings, in which they continued to litigate the
issue of the accused’s entitlement to parenting time. defence counsel advanced
a theory that the complainant had a motive to fabricate the sexual assault
allegation to gain an advantage in the family court case. in doing so, defence
counsel cross-examined the complainant about the timing of her disclosure of
the allegation.

a delay in disclosure, standing alone, does not give rise to an
adverse inference against the credibility of a complainant. in assessing the
credibility of a complainant, the timing of disclosure of an allegation or
allegations is simply one circumstance to consider in the context of all of the
evidence:
r. v. s.g.,
2022 onca 727,
at para.
43;
r. v. d.d.,
2000
scc 43, at para.
65. the timing of disclosure is not irrelevant to credibility.
a delay in disclosure can undoubtedly damage a complainant’s credibility,
particularly when disclosure is made coincident with the impetus of a motive to
fabricate: see
r. v. j.m.,
2018 onsc 344, at para.
67, rev’d on other
grounds at
2021 onca 150.

the complainant’s first disclosure of the sexual assault was on
february 23, 2025, five days after receiving a letter from the accused’s lawyer.
the letter said that the lawyer was instructed to bring an urgent motion to
return the child to the accused’s care if the complainant failed to confirm the
child’s whereabouts and confirm that parenting time with the accused would
commence immediately. the letter from the accused’s lawyer, which is exhibit 2
on the trial, also said that the complainant was not entitled to hold a child
hostage from their parent as a bargaining tactic while negotiating parenting
terms and that such conduct would not be looked upon favourably by a judge
hearing the matter.

when the complainant spoke with the police officer on february 23, she
referenced the letter she had received from the accused’s family law lawyer. initially,
the complainant denied defence counsel’s suggestion that one of the factors
motivating her to go to the police was the letter from the accused’s lawyer
about the impending motion in family court. however, she then said, “it was one
of the factors but there was multiple”.

on february 24, the complainant was served with an urgent notice of motion
in which the accused was seeking parenting time. the complainant acknowledged
that she filed an affidavit to oppose the accused’s application, wherein she
stated that the abuse recently escalated to sexual violence when the accused
raped her while the child was home. she agreed with defence counsel that the
allegation she was referring to in her affidavit was the incident that she says
occurred in the late hours of december 11 or early morning hours of december
12, 2024. the complainant also agreed with defence counsel that the issue of
parenting time remains outstanding in the family court proceedings and that she
is using the sexual assault allegation as one of the reasons the accused should
not have the parenting time he is requesting.

the timing of the complainant’s disclosure coincided with the
commencement of family court proceedings by the accused seeking parenting time
with their daughter. the complainant agreed that she relied on the sexual
assault allegation as a basis to oppose the accused’s request for parenting
time.

i am not relying on the myth or stereotype
that complainants in sexual assault cases have a higher
tendency than other complainants to fabricate stories based on “ulterior
motives” and are therefore less worthy of belief:
r. v. a.g.,
2000 scc
17, at para.
3;
r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7, at para.
36.
on the record before me, there exists a potential motive to
fabricate which accompanies the delay in disclosure of the allegation. while i
am not making a conclusive finding that the complainant fabricated the sexual
assault allegation to gain an advantage in the family court proceedings, in the
circumstances of this case, i find that the potential motive to fabricate
provides a further basis to approach the complainant’s claim that she was
sexually assaulted with extreme caution. the circumstances include the delay in
disclosure and the other frailties i have identified in the complainant’s
evidence, which affected her credibility.
analysis of
the accused’s evidence

in this case, i chose to review the complainant’s evidence first and
identify the frailties in her evidence which caused me to doubt the credibility
of her claim that the accused sexually assaulted her. i will now move on to assess
the accused’s evidence in the context of the totality of the evidence.

the accused testified that on december 11, 2024, he returned home
from work, probably after midnight. in examination-in-chief, when defence
counsel asked him what would have happened when he got home, the accused said,
“[w]hen i got home i would have taken a shower, had a little something
to eat, gotten in bed with [g.], snuggled her, watched something on my phone
maybe, and then gone to sleep”.

when
defence counsel showed the accused the text message he sent on december 12 that
said, “i enjoyed fondling your dumper last night”, he testified that this message
was “referring to snuggling [the complainant] the night prior and touching her
butt”. the accused testified that, on december 11 into the
early morning hours of december 12, 2024, there was no vaginal intercourse
whatsoever. he denied that he had sex with the complainant without her consent
in the manner she described in her testimony.

crown counsel suggested to the accused that december 11 was
unremarkable, and that therefore, it was difficult for him to recall exactly
what happened that night. he agreed. he said, “i don’t remember the finer
details of that evening, no”. the following was an exchange between crown
counsel and the accused regarding his ability to recall the details he
recounted in his testimony:
q. okay. why is it that you remember that night in
particular?
a. it was – well, this night was brought up, i mean,
it was few months later but not so long ago that i couldn’t remember the, like,
vaguely what happened that evening.
q. okay. so, why don’t you tell me what you actually
remember happening that night?
a. for sure. i went home, i took a shower, i made
some food, i got in bed, i snuggled [the complainant], watched something on my
phone, i went to sleep.
q. how did you snuggle her?
a. this same way i normally do. like, spooning,
curling in there, hugging her on the bed. that’s snuggling her.
q. okay. and that’s what you actually recall
happening on that night?
a. yeah.

crown counsel submits that i should reject the accused’s evidence
about what happened when he returned home from work because it defies common
sense that he would be able to remember specifically what happened on a night
that he admitted was unremarkable. crown counsel says that the accused’s
testimony would have been more believable had he said that this is probably what
happened because it was what normally would happen.

first, i note that the accused made concessions about the
limitations of his memory. he acknowledged that he could not recall the finer
details of that evening and that the complaint against him was not made so long
after the date in question that he could not remember
vaguely
what
happened. he also said that he snuggled the complainant that night the “same
way i normally do”.

furthermore, the accused tied his memory of having snuggled the
complainant to the text message he sent the morning of december 12. he
testified that the message, “i enjoyed fondling your dumper last night”,
referred to having snuggled the complainant and touched her buttocks the night
before. the accused’s evidence is plausible. the complainant was cross-examined
about this message by defence counsel:
q. and the message, the ‘fondling your dumper’
message, quite literally, if we were to take those words at their literal
meaning, it’s about touching your butt.
a. mm-hmm.
q. right? right?
a. yes.
q. it’s not about sex.
a. it would be, yes.
q. no, no, you want us to believe it’s about sex but
that message does not say, ‘it was great having sex with you last night,’ does
it?
a. i know that’s what he meant, though.
q. does it say anything about sex?
a. no.

therefore, even the complainant ultimately acknowledged that the
text message did not say anything about sex and the accused’s testimony that it
referred to having snuggled the complainant and touched her buttocks is
consistent with the literal meaning of the words contained in the text message.

crown counsel cross-examined the accused about his message “wowee,
your day must have been super busy” and suggested that he sent the message because
he had not heard from the complainant all day. the accused agreed, which i find
to be another example of the accused making an appropriate concession. crown
counsel suggested that this message and another message he sent at 5:17 p.m.
which said, “okay, it seems like you’re stressing out. we can talk later when
you’re not in the middle of stress”, demonstrate that he was picking up on the
fact that the complainant was not behaving normally and was stressed about the
non-consensual sex that happened the night before. the accused disagreed with
crown counsel and again denied that he sexually assaulted the complainant.

crown counsel submits that the accused’s unwillingness to admit that
these messages demonstrate that communication between the couple was not normal
that day should cause me to reject his evidence. i decline the crown’s
invitation to do so. i note that when the complainant was confronted with the
entire record of the text message exchanges between the couple that day, she
too was forced to agree with defence counsel’s suggestion that the text
messages were “just normal banter between the two of you about your kid and
your day and the ins and outs of daily life”.

i accept the accused’s evidence that, on the night of december 11
into the early morning hours of december 12, he did not have sex with the complainant
and did not sexually assault her as she alleged in her evidence. there was
nothing in the substance of the accused’s evidence or the way he testified that
caused me to doubt his credibility or the reliability of his evidence.
conclusion

having considered the accused’s exculpatory account in the context
of the totality of the evidence, i find that i believe his denial. he must
therefore be acquitted of the charge.
my acceptance of the accused’s evidence is sufficient to dispose of
the charge. however, as i stated in these reasons, i have significant concerns
about the credibility of the complainant and find that her evidence is not
sufficiently credible to meet the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt
under the third branch of
w.(d.).

the accused is found not guilty of the charge of sexual assault.
released: december
18, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci