source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj177/2025oncj177.html

warning
the court
hearing this matter directs that the following notice be attached to the file:
a non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1), read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to
subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that
any information that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be
published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in
proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155,
160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272,
273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or
347, or
(ii) any offence under this act, as it read from time to
time before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct
alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on
or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being dealt with in the same
proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory order on application
—
in proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
)
or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness
under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right to make an
application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the victim, the prosecutor or
any such witness, make the order....
486.6 offence
— (1) 
every person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections
486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. stratigakos,
2025 oncj 177
date: april 4, 2025
ontario
 court of justice
toronto
between:
his
 majesty the king
— 
 and —
stelios
 stratigakos
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
 the crown
d.
 spence
for
 the defendant
y.
 johri
heard: july 22, 23;
 december 19, 20, 2024
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction

in the early morning hours of january 1, 2023,
the complainant, h.k., and her close friend, darya
styczynsky-rossy
(hereinafter referred to as “ms. rossy”)
arrived at the home of the accused
with the intention of celebrating new year’s. the three of them drank and
partied together for a few hours. ms. rossy left around 4:51 am. sometime
between 4:51 am and 7:21 am, at which time h.k. left mr. stratigakos’s home, he
had sexual intercourse with h.k.

three witnesses testified at trial: h.k.,
ms. rossy and mr. stratigakos. electronic communications between ms. rossy and
mr. stratigakos on january 1, 2023 were entered as exhibits.

h.k. testified that she did not consent to
the sexual intercourse. mr. stratigakos testified that he did indeed have
sexual intercourse with h.k. and that the intercourse was consensual.
b.
the
evidence
(a)
introduction

i will summarize the salient aspects of the
witnesses’ testimony. a full transcript of the evidence is available.
(b)
h.k.’s version of events

h.k. was 17 years old on the night in
question - 18 years old when she testified, recently having graduated from high
school. while she and ms. rossy were close friends that night, they had, as of
two weeks after the incident, ceased to be friends.

h.k. met mr. stratigakos through his best
friend, don larusso, whom h.k. had been dating for some time prior to january
1, 2023. she had been to mr. stratigakos’s home on three or four prior
occasions with mr. larusso.

prior to her arrival at mr. stratigakos’s
home that night, h.k. had smoked a considerable amount of marijuana (which was
not unusual for her). at mr. stratigakos’s home she smoked some more marijuana
and had three or four shots of vodka (less than her usual intake) which had a
heavier effect on her than usual.

mr. stratigakos consumed about the same
amount of alcohol as she did while ms. rossy consumed a bit more.

when ms. rossy voiced an intention to leave
the party h.k. tried to get mr. larusso to come over so she would not have to
be alone with mr. stratigakos. it soon became clear that mr. larusso was with
friends in guelph and would not be coming.

h.k. was wearing a short dress that night,
but she had brought along a pair of sweatpants as well. after the drinking,
while ms. rossy was in another room and while h.k. was still wearing her dress
and seated in the kitchen with mr. stratigakos, he began to touch her thighs in
a way that made her uncomfortable. she went into the guest room, put on her sweatpants,
and lay on the bed with ms. rossy while telling her what had just occurred in
the kitchen. mr. stratigakos soon came into the bedroom wearing only his boxer
shorts asking the women if they wanted to cuddle with him. ms. rossy told him
to go in the other room which he did. ms. rossy then told h.k. she was going to
leave and that she would tell mr. stratigakos to leave h.k. alone. h.k. fell
asleep.

sometime after falling asleep, she felt
herself being lifted and carried to another room. she believed she was being
carried by mr. stratigakos. she was scared and tried to tell him to stop but
nothing came out of her mouth. mr. stratigakos placed her on the bed in his
bedroom, took off her sweatpants and inserted his penis in her vagina without a
condom. h.k. did not consent to this sexual activity but could not say anything
because she was “passed out”, although she could tell what was being done to
her. she felt “really heavy” and “couldn’t move”. she “lost consciousness” and
when she later regained consciousness, he was still raping her. the sexual assault
seemed to go on for hours.

at one point she asked mr. stratigakos if he
was don. he said yes. she said this hoping that mentioning his best friend
would scare him into stopping the rape.

when the sexual assault was over h.k. went
to the washroom where she realized that mr. stratigakos had ejaculated during
his assault. she then put her sweatpants back on and placed her underwear in
her pocket with the intention of eventually turning them over to the police.

mr. stratigakos ordered a ride for her to
union station. while in the car on the way to the station h.k. communicated
with ms.
rossy, and with don larusso, telling them
both what had happened. she lost her copies of those text messages when she
later reset her cell phone.

she also confronted mr. stratigakos by
electronic message a few days later. these messages between the two of them
were also lost to her because of the cell phone reset.

h.k. went to the police approximately one
month later. she did not go to them immediately because she feared that her
parents and peers would then learn about the incident. ms. rossy also advised
her against reporting to the police.
(i)
cross-examination of h.k.

h.k. understood mr. stratigakos’s
relationship with ms. rossy to be one of “friends with benefits”.

h.k. denied defence counsel’s suggestion
that
she had had consensual sex with mr. stratigakos and
had then concocted her rape allegation to capture mr. larusso’s attention and
so as not to reveal to mr. larusso, whom she saw as a boyfriend, that she had
been unfaithful to him. she also denied the suggestion that she had lied to ms.
rossy about the encounter so that she wouldn’t think h.k. had had consensual sex
with mr. stratigakos which would have had serious consequences for her
relationship with ms. rossy.

after mr. stratigakos began raping her h.k.
“passed out” or “lost her awareness” intermittently during the sexual assault.
she also called that state of mind “semiconsciousness”.

in june 2023, h.k. was telling her friend,
khabija about the sexual assault. khabija wanted to know what mr. stratigakos
looked like. h.k. showed her his instagram account on her phone and khabija
accidentally sent him an instagram request.

when first asked, h.k. denied that she did
this purposely to keep tabs on mr. stratigakos. she then said that she had
indeed sent the request so that he would be reminded that he had done something
wrong to her.

when h.k. spoke to police, she provided them
with portions of a snapchat conversation between ms. rossy and mr. stratigakos
that took place on january 1, 2023. she had originally received them from ms. rossy.


h.k. was communicating by snapchat with ms. rossy
on january 1
st
at the same time as ms. rossy was communicating with
mr. stratigakos on the same medium. h.k. was thus privy to the communications
between the other two, although mr. stratigakos did not know this at the time.
at the same time as h.k. was telling ms. rossy what had happened the night
before, ms. rossy was confronting mr. stratigakos with the allegation of sexual
assault.

it was ms. rossy’s idea to try to get mr. stratigakos
to send money to h.k.

h.k. vehemently denied being attracted to
mr. stratigakos.
(c)
the testimony of ms. rossy

ms. rossy was 20 years old when she
testified, working at a nike store.

she and h.k. were friends on the night in
question. she had met mr. stratigakos through h.k.’s boyfriend at the time,
whom she thought was named “dom”.

she developed what she referred to as a purely physical relationship with mr. stratigakos,
having seen him once or twice before the evening in question. she considered
him a “one-night stand”.

she and h.k. travelled together to mr. stratigakos’s
apartment that night. h.k. consumed five or six drinks and some marijuana. ms.
rossy and mr. stratigakos consumed three or four drinks.

shortly before ms. rossy left around 4 am
mr. stratigakos was wearing his boxer shorts and was asking both women, who
were on the bed in the living room, to cuddle with him. h.k. was wearing the
dress she put on in the train, while travelling to the apartment that night. h.k.
was very intoxicated at this time. ms. rossy asked h.k. if it was alright if
she went home. h.k. said that that was fine. before leaving, ms. rossy warned
mr. stratigakos not to do anything to h.k. h.k. said nothing to ms. rossy about
mr. stratigakos behaving inappropriately in the kitchen.

h.k. messaged ms. rossy the next morning and
told her she’d been sexually assaulted by mr. stratigakos. ms. rossy then (with
h.k.’s consent) messaged mr. stratigakos on snapchat and confronted him with h.k.’s
allegations. according to her, he confessed and apologized. she took
screenshots of this conversation and sent them to h.k. she and h.k. were
essentially working together to coax a confession out of mr. stratigakos.

h.k. told ms. rossy that she had a video of
the sexual assault. ms. rossy reported this to mr. stratigakos. mr. stratigakos
offered to pay money to h.k. and with h.k.’s consent ms. rossy encouraged mr. stratigakos
to do so and gave him h.k.’s email address.
(i)
cross-examination of ms. rossy

ms. rossy did not send h.k. the entire
conversation she had with mr. stratigakos. she only sent the pages that would
help h.k. if she went to the police. ms. rossy never discouraged h.k. from
reporting the incident to the police.

ms. rossy admitted on cross-examination that
she was not sure if mr. stratigakos was in his boxer shorts when she left. when
she did leave there was nothing about the environment that she thought was
unsafe.
(d)
mr. stratigakos’s version of events

mr. stratigakos was 25 years old when he
testified – 23 years old on the evening in question. he was working at
completing his high school credits.

mr. stratigakos met h.k. through his friend
don larusso, who was dating h.k.

h.k. introduced mr. stratigakos to her
friend ms. rossy, whom mr. stratigakos referred to in his testimony as his “former
girlfriend”. the four of them would often hang out together and became a close
friendship group.

ms. rossy and h.k. arrived at his home after
2 am on the night in question.

all three drank at least three shots that
night although ms. rossy drank more than the other two. he and h.k. also smoked
some marijuana.

mr. stratigakos mention that don was with
someone else, and this seemed to make h.k. upset.

at one point ms. rossy left the other two
alone in the kitchen and h.k. began flirting with mr. stratigakos. mr. stratigakos
thought it was odd, but he flirted back in part because he knew that don was no
longer that interested in h.k..

after ms. rossy returned to the kitchen,
they all went into the living room, sat on the bed, and talked. ms. rossy
announced that she was leaving, and that h.k. would be staying behind and
sleeping at mr. stratigakos’s house. mr. stratigakos was upset. he expected
that ms. rossy would be spending the night there.

ms. rossy left at 4:51 am. mr. stratigakos then
went to his bedroom after h.k. said she was fine where she was. he got into his
pajamas and went to bed. h.k. then came into the room and initiated sexual
intercourse with him. he reciprocated and they had consensual sex for about 20
minutes then they both fell asleep. he offered to wear a condom, but she said she
didn’t care.

h.k. left his home at 7:27 in a lyft he had
arranged for her.

later, on january 1
st, mr. stratigakos
heard from ms. rossy via the social message app called snapchat. mr. stratigakos
engaged in a conversation with her via this app. she was accusing him of raping
h.k.. mr. stratigakos responded by saying that he had no memory of what had
occurred between him and h.k. as he testified:
“darya started confronting me about
what took place between [h.k.] and myself. i realized that darya found out that
[h.k.] and i had sex and i was ashamed and scared that my girlfriend had caught
me cheating so i thought it would be easier to blame my lack of memory and say
that i didn’t remember anything, instead of accepting that [h.k.] and i had
sex, and breaking her heart by doing so.
…
“so, i continued to blame my lack of
memory to get out of trouble with her, and i thought she would forgive me for
sleeping with [h.k.] if i blamed my memory instead of accepting that i had sex
with [h.k.].
…
“i wasn’t apologizing for any rape. i
was apologizing for being a part in putting us all in such an awkward position,
because we were all close friends at one point, and now things were awkward, so
i felt bad about that.
…
“as i said earlier i – darya started
saying that [h.k.] became suicidal and was not in a good state, so i felt bad
about engaging with her and i– like i said i wasn’t apologizing for any rape. i
was apologizing for us being apart and putting this whole friend group in the
awkward position, because we were all like close friends and now things were
awkward.
…
“well like i said i was trying to
defend myself, like against my girlfriend, like i wanted to try to make sure
that darya and i didn’t break up and also like basically like you know i was
trying to, like just cool the situation down from it being as tense as it got.
…
“i was just trying to cool the
situation down because it was – the conversation that was getting intense, and
you know like i said i wanted to keep the relationship with darya so i just
wanted to cool the – try to cool the intense conversation down.
…
“well, like at this point i was –
like i said i knew that darya had found out that i had cheated on her, so i was
basically trying to defend myself with her and say that you know i’m upset with
myself for cheating on her.”

mr. stratigakos identified those portions of
the snapchat conversation that had been preserved by h.k. and ms. rossy and
testified that there were parts of their conversation that were not preserved,
particularly the parts where ms. rossy accused him of cheating on her, as
opposed to accusing him of raping h.k.

during the conversation ms. rossy asked him
to send h.k. $600 for her car. mr. stratigakos didn’t know why but he offered to
do this and send her a dab pen to “cool things down”. he never did send her
either of these items.

he also testified that what he meant when he
told ms. rossy that h.k. wasn’t letting him do anything was that “when [h.k.]
came to my bedroom and was being playful trying to take my phone from me to get
my attention she wasn’t letting me do anything at that point.”

h.k. sent him a request to follow him on
instagram in june 2023.
(i)
cross-examination of mr. stratigakos

mr. stratigakos recalled that he had exactly
three shots of alcohol that night. likewise, h.k. had precisely three shots of
alcohol.

mr. stratigakos never touched h.k.’s leg in
the kitchen. nor did he ever take his pants off before ms. rossy left the
apartment when he put his pajamas on. he never sought to cuddle or have sex
with both women.

he also denied that he and h.k. spoke about
the awkwardness of having had sex given the relationships he described between
him and don, her and don, or him and ms. rossy.

he denied ever receiving text messages from h.k.
alleging he had sexually assaulted her.
c.
analysis
(a)
introduction

this case turns principally on the
credibility and reliability of the witnesses. mr. stratigakos testified that
the sexual intercourse he had with h.k. was consensual – that she had initiated
it. i must thus apply the rule in
r. v. w.d.,
1991 canlii 93 (scc), s.c.j. no. 26, which
can be summarized as follows: if i believe the testimony of mr. stratigakos, i
must of course find him not guilty. even if i am not convinced by his
testimony, it may nonetheless, when examined in the context of all the
evidence, raise a reasonable doubt. if it does, i must also find him not
guilty. if it does not raise a reasonable doubt, i must examine the evidence
that i do accept to see if it proves the criminal allegation against him beyond
a reasonable doubt. if it does not, the defendant must be acquitted. if it
does, he must be found guilty.
(b)
the credibility of the witnesses and their
accounts

mr. stratigakos’s responses to ms. rossy’s
allegations on snapchat are lies. he admitted as much in his testimony.
according to him, when confronted with the rape allegation, instead of telling
ms. rossy that he had had consensual sex with h.k., he lied and told her that
he was so drunk and upset that night that he had no recollection of what had
occurred between them. he testified that he told those lies so as not to upset
ms. rossy. according to him, he and ms. rossy were, for want of a better term,
boyfriend and girlfriend. admitting to her that he had been unfaithful to her
would have jeopardized their relationship.

the credibility of mr. stratigakos’s
testimony depends in large measure on what i find was the nature of his
relationship with ms. rossy.

ms. rossy testified that she considered mr. stratigakos
to be no more than a one-night stand. h.k., who had spent considerable time in
their company described their relationship as one of “friends with benefits”.

i believe the women’s
testimony and i do not believe mr. stratigakos’s characterization of the
relationship. the fact that ms. rossy decided not to spend the night with him
supports her description of the nature of the relationship.

mr. stratigakos’s testimony over all was not
convincing. in examination-in-chief he said that he had drunk
at least
three drinks that night. in cross-examination he insisted that he had consumed
exactly
three drinks.

his willingness to pay money and supply food
to h.k., as expressed in the snapchat conversation suggests that he felt
remorse towards her in particular, rather than the remorse he says he felt
towards the entire group of friends.

mr. stratigakos’s responses to ms. rossy’s
allegations of rape, and his explanations therefor, defy common sense. i would
expect any innocent person in his position, when accused of such a serious
sexual assault to strongly, and repeatedly deny the allegation in a detailed
fashion, rather than feign a lack of memory of the event.

h.k.’s testimony as to mr. stratigakos
coming into the room where she and ms. rossy were lying on the bed and asking
them to be physical with him is supported by ms. rossy’s testimony. i found ms.
rossy to be a forthright witness intent on telling the truth. while she was
once h.k.’s close friend, she is no longer, and i consider her to be a
relatively independent witness. she did not recall some of the details reported
by h.k., but i do not find that these lacunae erode her credibility or the
reliability of her testimony.

i found h.k.’s testimony to be sincere,
measured and largely consistent. it was, with only minor exceptions,
corroborated by ms. rossy’s testimony. there were some inconsistencies in h.k.’s
testimony concerning the june instagram communication. there were also some
inconsistencies between hers and ms. rossy’s accounts concerning the dynamics
of the january 1
st
snapchat conversation but i consider these
inconsistencies to be minor. they do not detract from the credibility and
reliability of her testimony concerning the sexual assault.

h.k. admitted to being very intoxicated at
the time she said she was raped. she was forthright about this. despite her
intoxication, i find her testimony to be credible and reliable.

ms. johri postulated that h.k. had
consensual sex with mr. stratigakos and then concocted her story to capture mr.
larusso’s attention, and so as not to reveal to mr. larusso, whom she saw as a
boyfriend, that she had been unfaithful to him. she also postulated that h.k.
lied to ms. rossy about the encounter so that she wouldn’t think h.k. had had
consensual sex with mr. stratigakos, which would have had serious consequences
for her relationship with ms. rossy. h.k. denied this, and i accept her denial
of this far-fetched alleged motive to fabricate. to achieve the result ms.
johri suggested h.k. desired it would have been easier and less complicated for
h.k. and mr. stratigakos to simply keep secret their alleged tryst.
d.
conclusion

i reject mr. stratigakos’s testimony. it is
not credible, nor does it raise a reasonable doubt.

i accept the material aspects of h.k.’s
testimony and am thus convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that she did not
consent to the sexual intercourse between her and mr. stratigakos on january 1,
2023.

i find mr. stratigakos guilty as charged.
released on april 4,
2025
justice
russell silverstein
appendix a
ms.
rossy
but ur lucky for that
shit could have gone
bad
mr. stratigakos
im not right mentally
rn
ms.
rossy
but damn man she’s been----so
many times
and it breaks my heart
to see
this
happen again:,/like dam
u broke her again
man
this is so wrong
i cried
fuck man
why
mr. stratigakos
i was already in a shit
time then my pup died on
christmas n it really
fucked me up
ms.
rossy
your pup?
dad?
mr. stratigakos
yea puppy got put to
rest on christmas morning
ms.
rossy
ur fucked
imma make sure shit is
known ab you
i told you to let her
sleep
like don’t u understand
u raped the 17 year old
girl
she gave u no
permission
and u played like u was
don
fuck outta here
mr. stratigakos
not even what happened
wtf
how’s she gonna lie on
my name like that
ms.
rossy
what happened then
mr. stratigakos
she came to cuddle with
me cuz she couldn’t
sleep and i crash right
after that’s all i remember
ms.
rossy
so you didn’t carry he
to ur room
mr. stratigakos
she wasn’t letting me
do anything
ms.
rossy
so u didn’t fuck her?
or u did
….
of you
mr. stratigakos
of me doing why
what
ms.
rossy
when she was passed out
she asked u if u were
don
u said yes
and she took a video of
you low key and u was
doing her side way man
like
stop
playng
mr. stratigakos
bro there’s no way
ms.
rossy
right before you turned
off the light
man
like i wouldn’t be
accusing you
mr. stratigakos
all i remember is
crashing
ms.
rossy
but there’s literal
proof of it
ion know if u was just
so fucked up
but dam
i didn’t know u was
like that
mr. stratigakos
i got too fucked up and
don’t remember shit
after we crashed on my
bed
ms.
rossy
dam well ion know man,
she’s scared of you
and
that’s another readon
why she acted “sitting on
u
ur lap” before she left
cuz she needed to get
away from you so u can
uber her home
like no tryna sound
like a bitch but dam man
she’s 17
ur 23
cmon
like
i trusted you
since when do u do this
since when
?!
like
smh
mr. stratigakos
i don’t
not even in my reckless
days
ms.
rossy
i can’t fwu any more man,
not after this bro. yk
how fucked she is ab
this
like
u guys are delusional
you thin that cuz u had
fun you had fun
that shit won’t come
out
mr. stratigakos
lk and ik u didn’t fw
me to begin with so it’s cool
i was honestly so
fucked up last night
tell her i’m really
truly sorry for everything
u don’t owe me anything
i owe you guys
tell her i’m really
sorry for everything
ms.
rossy
and idk maybe it will
let her breath
thank you
i’m still upset with
you
but at the end of the
day
mr. stratigakos
ik
ms.
rossy
things happen
but still omg
mr. stratigakos
i’m more upset with
myself trust me
ms.
rossy
yes you should be man,
1 thing can change
someone life:/
mr. stratigakos
send me her email for
etransfer
and msg me if u want me
to order some food
ms.
rossy
(h.k.’s email address)
it’s okay thank you for
being honest that’s all i
wanted
mr. stratigakos
i’ll order her a dab
pen
ms.
rossy
and it’s all fully 100%
cuz of you but man
heartbreaking i
literally cry everyday for her, this
girl overdoses like crazy
it’s scary
she’s my little sister
it’s not fully*
mr. stratigakos
i will do my part to
make this better as best as i
can i promise
i don’t want her to
hurt anyone especially herself

the preserved portions of the snapchat
conversation were made an exhibit at trial and are reproduced in appendix “a”
to this judgment.

there
is no doubt that “dom” is don larusso.

i
am not relying on anything h.k. said to ms. rossy as to the nature of the
relationship, which would be an impermissible use of a prior consistent
statement from ms. rossy. rather i rely on the observations that h.k. would
naturally have made when in the company of mr. stratigakos and ms. rossy.