source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj530/2025oncj530.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. t.j.l.,
2025 oncj 530
date: 
2025 10 09
court
file no.: sault ste. marie 998-24-13301136
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
t.j.l.
before
justice michael perlin
heard
on august 13 and 14, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 9, 2025
marie-eve talbot................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
kenneth walker............................................................................ counsel
for the defendant
perlin j.:
a.
the charges and narrative

tjl is charged with sexual assault, assault, and
uttering death threats, all allegedly committed against the complainant, zs. the
complainant testified for the crown. tjl testified in his own defence. the case
turns on their credibility and reliability, and the application of the burden
of proof through the framework in
r. v. w. (d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 1
s.c.r. 742.

there is no dispute that tjl and complainant began a relationship
in january 2024. she was 16. he was 21. the evidence conflicted on the
seriousness of this relationship and its dynamics. it is consistent that
between january and june 2024, the two spent a great deal of time together at tjl’s
house in sault ste. marie, where he lived with his brother, his mother and her
boyfriend.

the complainant described three incidents that are the subject of
the charges.

first, she testified that on february 29, 2024, she and tjl were at
his house doing xanax and cocaine together. she was extremely intoxicated;
unable to move or speak. while she was in this state, tjl began touching her
sexually, culminating in sexual intercourse to which she did not consent.

tjl denies this occurred.

second, the complainant testified that on april 23, 2024, she was
at tjl’s house. she was pregnant at the time. he became violent and squeezed
her belly forcefully. they both fell onto a couch. he placed his hands on her
neck and squeezed. during these events, he told her he was “squeezing the baby
out of her” to kill the baby and said, “you and this baby are going to die”.

tjl recalled an incident in april 2024. he described the
complainant as the aggressor. she was upset, and intent on destroying his
property. they both testified that on this date police and an ambulance attended.
she testified she went to the hospital.

third, the complainant testified that on june 3, 2024, she went
to tjl’s house at his request. he was drunk. they both ended up lying in his
bed. he was behind her and started grinding his pelvis against her. she pushed
him off and said no. he persisted. she said no again. he continued persisting
and eventually forced intercourse on her. the next morning, she was upset. she
told him what had happened. he said he had no recollection of it.

tjl agrees he had intercourse with the complainant that day. he
agrees she left in anger in the morning. but he says she initiated consensual
intercourse. he understood she was angry about a list of girls’ names she had
found on his phone that morning. the theory of the defence is that this anger
prompted her to fabricate all the allegations and provide a video statement to
police on june 5, 2024.
b.
issues and
applicable legal principles

tjl
and complainant offer conflicting accounts of the events at issue. while this
case turns on their credibility and reliability, i must not approach it as a
contest between them – comparing their evidence and deciding which version i
prefer. tjl enjoys the presumption of innocence, which will be displaced,
resulting in a finding of guilt for an offence, only if the crown proves each
essential element of that offence beyond a reasonable doubt.

to
determine whether the crown discharged its burden, i will analyze the evidence using
the supreme court’s framework from
w.(d.), at p. 758, which instructs as
follows:
first, if you believe the evidence of the
accused, obviously you must acquit.
second, if you do not believe the testimony
of the accused but you are left in reasonable doubt by it, you must acquit.
third, even if you are not left in doubt by
the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself whether, on the basis of the
evidence which you do accept, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by
that evidence of the guilt of the accused.

i note that evidence was introduced without
objection regarding the allegedly abusive dynamics of the relationship. i
understood the evidence was intended to complete the narrative and
contextualize the relationship, the allegations, and the manner in which the
allegations were reported. defence counsel also commented on how some evidence spoke
poorly to tjl’s character. i remind myself i must not use this evidence to reason
that tjl is of bad character or the kind of person who would likely commit the
offences alleged: see e.g.,
r. v. d.s.f.
(1999),
1999 canlii 3704 (on ca), 132 c.c.c. (3d) 97
(ont. c.a.).

there are three counts before the court, and
four allegations. there was no similar-fact evidence application. as such, i
have assessed each allegation independently without reference to the
substantive testimony given in relation to each other allegation. i have
assessed credibility based on the evidence as a whole:
r. v. mrs,
2020
onca 667, at paras.
63-64.
c.
positions of
the parties

the
defence argues tjl’s evidence should be believed. the intercourse on june 3 was
consensual and the other allegations are untrue. the complainant had a strong motive
to fabricate the allegations, which calls all her evidence into question. there
is a reasonable possibility that the allegations are not true. defence counsel
urges me to keep in mind tjl’s learning disability when assessing his evidence.

the
crown argues that the complainant was an honest witness who provided a reliable
account of what happened to her. i should accept her evidence. tjl’s evidence was
highly problematic. i should reject it and find it does not raise a reasonable
doubt.
d.
do i believe tjl’s
evidence? if not, does it raise a reasonable doubt?

the
crown submits there are serious issues with tjl’s credibility.

in
some respects, i disagree. the crown points to tjl’s failure to agree with the
crown’s assertion that he wanted the complainant to end her pregnancy. i
disagree that this harms his credibility. he agreed that he asked her to have
an abortion and that he thought a baby would be too much responsibility for
them. he essentially agreed with the crown’s suggestion; he was clearly
uncomfortable with adopting it in the terms used by the crown. this does not
strike me as an unusual response from a parent discussing a pregnancy that led
to the birth of a child.

the
crown says tjl was impeached by prior statements showing that he was much more
invested in his relationship with the complainant than his trial evidence
suggested. in some instances, tjl did not admit to having made the prior
statements the crown alleged. the crown did not lead evidence to prove the prior
statements. the unadopted, unproven prior statements have no evidentiary value.

there
were exceptions, however. first, tjl was asked to confirm his earlier testimony
that he “never told [the complainant] you love her”. he agreed: “i’ve never
said ‘i love you’”. it was put to him that he had sent her a message on
instagram in december 2024 saying, “i did love you”. he accepted he might have
done so. in re-examination, he testified that whatever the message said, he had
never told her, “i love you”. notwithstanding that the instagram message was
framed in the past tense, i agree with the crown that this message was
inconsistent with his earlier evidence that he would not tell her he loved her
and does not really use those words. when asked earlier if he had ever loved
her, he said “not really”.

second,
tjl acknowledged, or at least accepted it was possible, he had sent other
instagram messages in december 2024 like “you were my world”, “i always hoped
it would work out”, “i was going to be that guy […] who [would] always hug you,
cuddle you, make you laugh”. tjl explained that he was probably emotional
because he was going back to jail for breaching his release order by contacting
her. i accept that these statements speak to an emotional disposition toward
the relationship at times that was quite different than his evidence in chief
and at the beginning of cross-examination that they “were just friends” or
“friends with benefits”. his apparent emotional state in december 2024—lamenting
the loss of the relationship—also appears inconsistent with his evidence that
he only considered the prospect of a serious relationship at its very beginning
and that he did not have an interest in her after the charges were laid in
mid-2024.

more
generally, i agree with the crown that tjl’s evidence regarding his feelings toward
the complainant shifted throughout his testimony. he testified in chief “we
were just friends”. in addition to the evidence i have just discussed, he testified
in cross-examination that
•
he was not committed; they were just friends with benefits,
•
they were more than friends,
•
he had romantic interest in her, but only at the beginning of the
relationship,
•
he did not know how he felt at the beginning of the relationship,
•
he cared for her and liked her, but that was it.
although it is possible that some of tjl’s inconsistent
responses reflect his feelings at different points in the relationship, i am
satisfied that his evidence regarding his feelings toward the relationship was
inconsistent. this harms tjl’s credibility.

i
agree with the crown that tjl’s evidence regarding his drug and alcohol use was
concerning. i do not believe his claim that he never took drugs or drank when
the complainant was present. he testified he was addicted to alcohol and
cocaine. as defence counsel acknowledged, addiction suggests relatively
persistent consumption. for much of the relevant period, tjl and complainant
were also together persistently: he agreed she was at his home several days a
week, sometimes for days at a time. if they were together persistently and he
was persistently consuming drugs and alcohol, it is not plausible that he was
not consuming drugs and alcohol in her presence. in cross-examination on this
issue, tjl walked back his evidence that he was addicted to drugs and alcohol,
in part by noting that there were hours or days when he would not use drugs or
drink. none of this reflected well on his credibility.

i
am also troubled by the way tjl’s evidence on this issue morphed with respect
to the june 3 allegation:
•
on whether he was intoxicated, he accepted he had been
intoxicated. he also testified, “not really, i wasn’t drunk”. he also agreed he
was intoxicated in the complainant’s presence, and testified, “[t]his is why
she got mad. i wouldn’t drink like that ever.” later, when asked about the
impact of intoxication on his memory, he testified that he was just “just
buzzed”, which he does “not consider” to be “intoxication”.
•
after he accepted in cross-examination that he had been
intoxicated at 9 pm, it was put to him that he testified earlier that he would
never get intoxicated with alcohol with her in the house. he disagreed, “[w]ell
no. i think i just – i wasn’t intoxicated at the time is what i’m saying”. he later
accepted that he had been intoxicated with her in the home. he denied his
initial evidence about never being intoxicated with her had been a lie, but
agreed it had been a mistake.

tjl’s
evidence regarding the relationship, substance use with the complainant, and addiction
varied significantly throughout his testimony.

tjl also gave inconsistent evidence on a key aspect of his
defence: i.e. the claim that the complainant became angry at him on june 3
after finding a list of girls in a social-media account on tjl’s phone. tjl
testified that after they had had sex on june 3, he woke up and caught the
complainant using his phone. asked if he knew why she was angry in the morning,
he testified that he assumed it was about his phone, but he did not know why. his
counsel then prompted him with a leading question: “there was a suggestion made
to her [in cross-examination] about girls” being the reason for her anger. tjl
then adopted this central pillar of his defence. a few minutes later, he
testified that he had “caught a glimpse” of what she had been looking at on his
phone. his initial inability to recall this key aspect of his defence went
unexplained.

after considering these factors, i do not accept tjl’s evidence denying
his culpability. nor does it raise a reasonable doubt in my mind. his evidence was
too improbable and inconsistent for me to have any faith that he was testifying
truthfully when denying the core allegations before the court.

i highlight two factors that i have not considered in this analysis.
first, evidence was led of a criminal finding of guilt with an offence date
post-dating the events at issue in this trial. i have not considered that
finding of guilt in assessing tjl’s credibility.

second,
i note that tjl, in testifying, sometimes took long pauses and expressed his
responses tentatively, with uncertainty. in assessing his credibility, i do not
rely on this testimonial demeanour. i cannot be sure whether his pauses or
uncertainty can be explained by his learning disability, which i accept makes
it difficult for him to understand or respond to questions. i have excluded
this from my analysis.
e.
does the
evidence that i do accept prove beyond a reasonable doubt that tjl is guilty of
any of the offences charged?

this
question turns primarily on the credibility of the complainant. the defence
contends she had a motive to fabricate the allegations. the defence also points
to parts of her evidence that counsel submits should cause me to find her
incredible.
1.
alleged motive to fabricate

while
tjl has no burden to demonstrate why the complainant would fabricate her
evidence, if a motive to do so is shown, this factor may bear significantly on
credibility:
r. v. ignacio,
2021 onca 69, at paras.
52, 59, leave
to appeal ref’d,
2021 canlii 58907 (scc);
r. v. j.h.,
2020 onca
165, at para.
148;
r. v. batte,
2000 canlii 5751 (on ca), at para.
120. however,
motive to fabricate is just one factor to be considered in a credibility
assessment:
batte, at para.
121. where a motive to fabricate is alleged,
it is for the trier of fact to conclude whether the motive existed and what weight
to give it in the credibility assessment: see e.g.
r. v. mckenzie,
2020
onca 646, at para.
34;
j.h., at para.
146;
r. v. swain,
2021 bcca
207, at para.
32.

the
defence alleges that the complainant’s motive to fabricate materialized on june
3, 2024, when, in the morning after they had consensual sex, she accessed tjl’s
cellphone and found a list of girls in his social-media account. she was upset.
the relationship, which had been fine until june, suddenly changed. she was
pregnant and vulnerable, and had been, in defence counsel mr. walker’s words,
“tossed away”.

the
defence contends that the complainant lashed out in anger by fabricating the
allegations and reporting them to a children’s aid society worker almost
immediately. this led to the complainant providing a video statement to police
on june 5, 2024. the defence adds that the complainant, by her own admission,
had many interactions with cas workers and police in the preceding months during
which she could have reported what she later described as regular physical and
sexual abuse. the defence submits she only complained once she had a motive to
fabricate on june 3.

the alleged motive was advanced in part through tjl’s testimony.
he testified that in the morning after they had had sex on june 3, the
complainant was “throwing a fit”. he had seen her accessing his phone. he
assumed, but did not really know, that what she had seen had made her upset. in
response to a leading question from defence counsel, tjl agreed that he
believed she had been upset about the list of girls. he later explained that
this was a list of female friends on social-media app snapchat. in
cross-examination, he testified that something had clicked in her brain that
caused her to lash out and hate him suddenly.

i
accept the defence submission that the complainant had negative feelings toward
tjl, at least in part arising from his social-media activity involving other women.
the complainant gave the following evidence in her video statement and in court:
•
the relationship was good until she found out he was talking to
his ex-girlfriends;
•
at one point, she did not remember when, she accessed his phone
and saw a list of girls;
•
the list of girls upset her;
•
with respect to june 3, she did not recall whether she was going
through tjl’s phone when she woke up after the alleged incident;
•
she agreed that she was upset that morning. she denied it was
because of having seen a list. she testified she was upset because she had been
sexually assaulted;
•
she agreed that she had regretted reporting to her cas worker
what had happened to her. she did not want her report to “come this far” (i.e.,
to a trial). she told tjl that she was going to tell the police that the
allegations were a mistake and a lie.

while
i accept that the complainant was—and remains—angry at tjl, in part based on his
list of girls, i am satisfied for that the motive alleged by the defence should
have little bearing on my credibility assessment of the complainant. i reject
the suggestion that it was a factor that suddenly caused her to lash out in
anger and allege sexual and physical abuse.

as
noted before, the theory, tying the complainant’s anger on june 3 to the list
of girls, was only introduced into tjl’s evidence when prompted by a leading
question from his counsel. i find this prompting makes tjl’s evidence on this
point less worthy of belief: see
r. v. parkes,
2005 carswellont 925 (s.c.), at para. 44. i
accept tjl’s initial response, which was not prompted: he did not know what had
angered her but had assumed it was something she saw on his phone.

further,
the evidence is unclear on when the complainant became aware of the list of
girls. regardless of when it occurred, there are significant logical
difficulties with the defence argument that the list was a sudden breaking
point on june 3 that led her to fabricate the allegations.

if,
on the one hand, she discovered the list on some other day, there was no
apparent innocent trigger on june 3 for the sudden change in the complainant that
tjl described.

if,
on the other hand, she discovered the list on june 3, two factors demonstrate that
this discovery did not prompt a sudden change in the complainant’s conduct that
the defence alleges. first, i accept that the complainant had already reported
tjl to police before june 3 when the alleged motive to fabricate arose. the
parties agreed that police became involved during the april 23 incident. she says
she reported an assault (not a sexual assault). tjl testified that he had shown
his hands to police that day to demonstrate that there were no marks on his
hands. she understood that police decided not to charge tjl that day because
she had also assaulted him by throwing a box of kraft dinner at him. she also testified
that she had told the nurse at the hospital about the assault and that police
had been present in the room at the time. i accept she reported abuse to police
in april 2024.

second,
if the list was discovered on june 3, it did not prompt her to take the action
the defence alleges shows she was intent on harming him: reporting to police. rather,
she told her cas worker, who chose independently to notify the police. the
complainant agreed in cross-examination that she did not want her cas worker to
report the allegations to police and did not know that the worker was going to
do so. the complainant was 16 at the time and is only 17 now. i do not believe
she was so sophisticated that she would share allegations with her cas worker
in an effort to get the information to police indirectly. she confided in
someone close to her. her regret in telling her cas worker speaks to the fact
that she never intended to bring the sexual-assault allegation to police. this
weakens the defence argument.

the
defence emphasizes one passage of the complainant’s video statement as evidence
that she felt betrayed and reported the allegations as a result. the
complainant said, "[tjl] says he wants to be a part of the baby's life, so
i make him a part of the baby's life, not my life, the baby's life".
defence counsel points to the words “i make him a part of the baby’s life, not
my life” as indicating that she felt like she had been tossed away and was
upset tjl did not want to be a part of her life. i disagree. i understood her
statement that tjl would “not” be in “my life” not as an expression of remorse
over his disinterest, but as an assertion of her disinterest in him at the time
she gave her statement.

for
these reasons, i reject the defence theory that the allegations were fabricated
in anger. i do not find that the complainant reported just after the june 3
incident out of anger about discovering a list of girls on tjl’s phone that day.
if she found the list on june 3, it was not the dramatic breaking point that
the defence contends prompted her to report false allegations to police: she
had already complained to police in april; and she did not report the june
allegations to police; she reported them to her worker. if she found the list
at some other time, there was no apparent innocent trigger that day to prompt a
false complaint.

i
accept that the complainant was unhappy with the relationship and was angry
with tjl based on her perception of how he acted during the relationship. while
this factor weighs somewhat against her credibility, i do not see it as doing
so significantly. it does not explain the timing of her decision to speak to
her cas worker just after june 3, when she says she was sexually assaulted, and
before she provided a statement to police on june 5.
3.
other issues bearing on credibility

the
defence submits the complainant’s evidence was calculated to paint tjl in a
negative light. i reject this argument. her evidence shows she was trying to be
fair and accurate. she readily acknowledged facts that would paint her
unfavourably: e.g., her drug addiction, her history of self-harm, her assault
on tjl by throwing a box at him on april 23, her apparent concession that she
sometimes stayed at tjl’s residence longer than she should have when his mother
wanted her to leave (i.e., she agreed she always left, eventually). she was firm
in cross-examination but did not reflexively deny every point put to her. she
was willing to accept defence counsel’s assertions when she agreed with them,
even if they would make her look bad. this speaks favourably to her honesty.

she
was also fair to tjl. for example, she had said in her video statement that tjl
struck her in the face on april 23. when asked about this at trial, she said
she could not remember if it was tjl or his mother who had struck her.
similarly, in her video statement, she told police that she could not remember
if tjl or his mother had punched her in the stomach. if she was intent on
maligning tjl, i would expect she would not make these concessions in his
favour. these facts also suggest she was an honest witness.

the
defence made several other arguments.

first,
the defence submits the complainant’s evidence that she had contracted an std
from tjl was fabricated to attack his character. tjl testified that he never
had the std, so she could not have gotten it from him. i reject the argument
that the complainant concocted this story to malign tjl. the evidence does not
allow me conclude whether tjl gave the complainant an std. i accept that she
genuinely believed he did. (i note that whether or not he did is irrelevant to
the issues before the court.)

second,
the defence says the complainant exaggerated when she estimated the that tjl
had been intoxicated in her presence and aggressive with her 40 or more times
during the relationship. the crown submits that it is not inherently
implausible: spread out over a relationship between january and early august,
during which they saw each other frequently and sometimes for days on end, her
estimate works out to just five or six times per month. i agree. the
complainant’s estimate is consistent with her overarching narrative of the
relationship. both parties admitted to having addiction issues and that they
would see each other several times per week. she testified he would pretty much
only call her to come over if he was intoxicated. she testified there was
aggression “like […] every time i’m there”. i reject the argument that her
estimate harms her credibility.

third,
the defence submits that the complainant’s description of the june 3 allegation
of sexual assault in inherently unbelievable. she testified that tjl had put
his penis “right in between [her] thighs” while his pants were still on.
defence counsel contends tjl’s penis could not be both between her legs and
still within his pants. i disagree. the complainant explained that tjl was
wearing “joggers” (i.e., sweatpants) and that they were being stretched by his
erect penis. this does not strike me as implausible.

fourth,
the defence points to the complainant’s admission that she had self-harmed. i
do not see how this admission suggests she was being untruthful with the court.

fifth,
counsel submits that i should be concerned that the complainant was looking at
notes while giving her video statement to police. she had dictated the notes to
her cas worker. the complainant has difficulty reading due to dyslexia. i asked
counsel to elaborate on why her use of notes was concerning. he submitted it
was a bit “weird”. i rewatched the video. i found nothing concerning in her use
of notes or demeanour. it appeared to me that she was referring to notes just to
refresh her memory on dates, not to assist in recalling the allegations.

sixth,
and finally, counsel says i should be concerned by the lack of corroborative
medical records to support the complainant’s claim that she overdosed on the
night of the february sexual-assault allegation. counsel submits it would have
been possible for the crown to obtain and produce medical records if they
existed, and i should infer from their absence at trial that they do not exist
and she is lying about an overdose.

i
disagree with defence counsel that the records, if they existed, would have
necessarily found their way to crown and, in turn, defence counsel. assuming
the proper procedures were followed by counsel, the records could only have been
provided to the defence through a third-party records application:
criminal
code, r.s.c. 1985, c. c-46, s. 278.2. if the crown had them, it should not
have disclosed the records but should have given the defence notice of their
existence: s. 278.2(3). if the crown did not have them, the defence could still
have sought their production; the claim of an overdose was disclosed in the
video statement.

i
do not know why the records are not before the court: perhaps they do not exist;
or perhaps they exist and are not before the court due to decisions made by the
crown, the defence, or police. i make no findings on this point. i cannot draw
any conclusions from the records’ absence. doing so would be speculative. i do
not see the absence of medical records as a reason to question the honesty or
accuracy of the complainant’s evidence.

i
did not identify any significant inconsistencies in my review of the
complainant’s evidence. to be clear, the absence of inconsistencies does not
enhance her credibility. it means factors that could have harmed her
credibility were absent.

ultimately,
notwithstanding the complainant’s admitted negative feelings towards tjl, i find
she was a compelling witness who testified honestly. in spite of her young age,
she was a poised and confident witness who was fair to both herself and tjl. she
was firm in cross-examination, but not reflexively so, and answered candidly
regardless whether the answer would portray her negatively.
f.
conclusions with respect to each of the allegations

there
is a single charge of sexual assault with a timeframe covering both the
february and june incidents. tjl will be found guilty if either alleged sexual
assault is proven beyond a reasonable doubt.

although
i have found the complainant credible, i have concerns about the reliability of
her account of the february 29 allegation of sexual assault. on her evidence,
she was extremely intoxicated on xanax and cocaine. in her video statement and at
trial, her evidence of this incident was far less fleshed out than her evidence
in respect of the other allegations. she did not recall if anything was said by
tjl. she did not recall many mechanics of the incident. in the following days,
she had a stinging pain in her vagina. but there could have been reasons for
that pain other than just non-consensual intercourse.

i
am satisfied that the evidence with respect to this incident is insufficiently
reliable to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that this sexual assault occurred. due
to her professed high degree of intoxication, i cannot be satisfied that her
recollection of events is accurate. i cannot be sure of what was said or what each
party did. i accept the complainant believes she was sexually assaulted. the
evidence does not allow me to conclude her belief is accurate.

i
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that tjl should be found guilty in
relation to the june 3 sexual assault. they agreed there was intercourse that
day. i accept the complainant’s evidence that she did not consent and expressed
her lack of consent, and that he persisted in forcing sexual intercourse on her
over her objections. on these facts, he could not have believed that she
communicated consent.

i
am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that tjl assaulted the complainant
on april 23 in the manner she described. the alleged assault, in the context of
a fight, involved tjl squeezing the complainant’s belly and expressing his
desire to “squeeze the baby out of” her before placing his hands on her throat
and squeezing. i note that tjl agreed in cross-examination that he had asked
the complainant to end the pregnancy. in his mind, they were not ready for the
responsibility of a baby. he also testified that she had said no, and that he
had been fine with this. nonetheless, he effectively agreed he had the motive
that apparently animated his actions that day.

i
note that i do not rely on the fact that both witnesses agreed that police and
ems attended on that date as confirmatory. this fact simply suggests a
complaint was made; it is not evidence that the complaint was true.

finally, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that tjl
said, “you and this baby are gonna die”, or words to that effect, during the
april 23 assault. those words satisfy the essential elements
of threatening death. they were uttered in the context of a fight in which tjl
was using force in an apparent effort to make good on a threat to “squeeze the
baby out of you”. a reasonable person would clearly understand those words to
convey a threat to cause death. the only reasonable inference is that they were
intended to be taken seriously. as such, the act and fault requirements of s.
264.1(1) are satisfied: see
r. v. mcrae,
2013 scc 68, at paras.
10-23.
g.
conclusion

i am satisfied that tjl is guilty of all three
counts. i reject tjl’s denials. they do not leave me with reasonable doubt. the
complainant’s evidence proves the essential elements of all three charges
beyond a reasonable doubt.

there will be findings of guilt for sexual
assault, assault and uttering death threats.
released: october
9, 2025
signed:
justice michael perlin