source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj519/2025oncj519.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. munro, 2025 oncj 519
date: 
2025 10 06
court
file no.: newmarket 24-91109702
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
keegan william munro
before
justice michael perlin
heard
on june 26, 27 and september 2, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 6, 2025
lilah vassilenko................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
irwin isenstein and laheeb
akbarzad................................. counsel for the
defendant
perlin j.:

on october 7, 2024, police, acting on information regarding an
alleged intoxicated driver, stopped mr. munro operating his car in a wendy’s
drive-through lane. following an investigation, mr. munro was charged with 80+
operation – i.e., having a blood-alcohol concentration (bac) exceeding the
legal limit within two hours of operating a conveyance contrary to
criminal
code, r.s.c. 1985, c. c-46,
s. 320.14(b)).

the case turns on mr. munro’s application under s. 24(2) of the
charter
to exclude his breath samples from evidence. if this evidence is admitted, the
defence concedes the charge is made out. the trial proceeded as a blended
voir
dire. the crown called the investigating officers. the defence called mr.
munro and his father on the
voir dire
only.

mr. munro alleges the police breached his
charter
rights by
(1)
arresting him and demanding that he provide breath samples into an
approved instrument (ai) without grounds to do so, contrary to ss. 8 and 9,
(2)
delaying informing him of his right to counsel for 12 minutes, contrary
to the s. 10(b) requirement that this be done immediately,
(3)
failing to discharge their s. 10(b) implementational obligations to
facilitate (a) a call to counsel at the roadside, (b) access to counsel of
choice, and (c) a second call to a lawyer after his call to duty counsel, and
(4)
video-recording the cells while he urinated, contrary to s. 8.

i will address each argument in turn. if i find any
charter
infringements,
i will consider whether they justify exclusion of the evidence of mr. munro’s breath
samples.
i.
the narrative necessary to contextualize the
charter
arguments

york regional police constable graham was on duty when he was
approached by a staff member from a nearby bar. she told him a man had been
asked to leave the bar after consuming alcohol and vomiting into a wine glass.
the man had gotten into his vehicle, vomited again, and driven to the
drive-through of a nearby wendy’s restaurant.

pc graham attended the wendy’s parking lot and found a car
matching the one the staff member had described. the restaurant was closed. the
car was stopped in the drive-through lane, with its horn blaring constantly. pc
graham conducted a stop, and demanded that the driver, mr.
munro, provide a breath sample into what pc graham believed was an approved
screening device (asd).

mr. munro provided a sample, and the device
registered a “fail”. based on the “fail”, at 12:49 a.m., pc graham placed mr. munro
under arrest and demanded that he provide a breath sample into an approved
instrument (ai) at the station.

at 1:01 a.m., pc graham read mr. munro his right
to counsel.

throughout the process leading to the arrest and
subsequent transport to the police station, mr. munro repeatedly asserted that
he wanted to speak to a lawyer, or “my lawyer”, or his family. during transport,
pc graham asked mr. munro for the name of his lawyer. mr. munro said it was
“nick” but refused to provide a last name. he testified nick was his friend, who
was not a lawyer.

at the station, sgt. price asked mr. munro
whether he wanted to speak to a lawyer. mr. munro said “yes”. sgt. price asked mr.
munro if he had “a specific lawyer you’d like us to try to phone, or just duty
counsel for free”. mr. munro responded, “i guess duty counsel for free”. he
spoke with duty counsel.

in the breath room, mr. munro asked the
qualified breath technician, pc su, several questions about the investigation
and the consequences of not providing breath samples. mr. munro provided two breath
samples into an ai, which produced readings of 250 and 239 mg of alcohol per
100 ml of blood.

mr. munro was lodged in a cell that was videotaped.
at around 2:23 a.m., he stood, facing the toilet with his back to the camera and
appeared to urinate.
ii.
analysis
a.
alleged
charter
breaches
1
charter, ss. 8 and 9: grounds
for the arrest and ai demand

mr. munro argues the police lacked reasonable grounds
to arrest him and demand that he provide a breath sample into an ai. the
lawfulness of both the arrest and demand turn on whether police had reasonable
grounds to believe mr. munro committed the offence of 80+ operation.

that offence rests on proof
that the suspect has, “within two hours after ceasing to operate a conveyance,
a blood alcohol concentration that is equal to or exceeds 80 mg of alcohol in
100 ml of blood”. if pc graham did not have reasonable grounds to believe these
elements were satisfied, the ai demand and arrest were unlawful, and infringed
mr. munro’s rights under ss. 8 and 9 of the
charter.

an officer has reasonable grounds where “compelling and credible
information” establishes “a reasonable probability of crime”. the officer must
have subjective and objective grounds. subjective grounds exist where “the
arresting officer honestly believed that the suspect committed the offence”.
the officer’s subjective belief “must be justifiable from an objective
viewpoint”. “the objective assessment is based on the totality of the
circumstances known to the officer at the time of the arrest, including the
dynamics of the situation, as seen from the perspective of a reasonable person
with comparable knowledge, training, and experience as the arresting officer”.
see
r. v. beaver,
2022 scc 54, at paras.
72
(1), (2), (3), (6) (emphasis
in original).

mr. munro was clearly operating a conveyance. the
question is whether pc graham had reasonable grounds to believe mr. munro’s had
an illegally high bac.

pc graham’s grounds rested on mr. munro having
failed a roadside screening test on what pc graham believed was an asd. “normally,
where a properly conducted roadside screening test yields a ‘fail’ result, this
alone will be sufficient to furnish a police officer with […] grounds”:
r. v. bernshaw,
1995 canlii 150 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 254, at paras.
48-49, 80.. the defence submits pc graham was not entitled
to rely on the “fail” reading to form grounds. pc graham’s testified he had
used an “alcotel” screening device to analyze the accused’s breath sample at
the roadside. if such a device exists, it is not an asd: see
criminal code,
s. 320.11 and
approved screening devices order, sor/2024-66. the defence
submits that the fact that pc graham used something other than a true asd meant
that he lacked objectively reasonable subjective grounds.

in
r. v. gundy,
2008 onca 284, the court
of appeal set out a framework for analyzing allegations that an ai demand was unlawful
due to issues with respect to the use of a screening device. the following
points are relevant:
(1)
in a
charter
challenge where grounds for
an ai demand “depend upon a ‘fail’ from an [asd], the crown must prove that the
officer reasonably believed that he or she was using an approved device”: para.
50.5;
(2)
an officer who knows that a device is not
approved or is unreliable cannot rely on its results to form grounds to make an
ai demand: para. 41 (citing
r. v. bernshaw,
1995 canlii 150 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 254, at
paras.
48, 80);
(3)
the test is whether the officer had subjective
and objectively reasonable grounds. if the device used was not in fact an asd,
“the objective component may or may not be made out; it depends upon whether
the officer could reasonably believe that the device he or she was using was an
approved device”: para. 43;
(4)
"in the absence of credible evidence to the
contrary, the officer’s testimony that he or she made a demand with an approved
screening device is sufficient evidence that the officer had the requisite
reasonable belief. the officer is not required to give the particular model
number or otherwise identify the device. obvious errors such as incomplete
reference to the model number do not undermine the officer’s testimony that the
device was an approved screening device”: para. 51.6;
(5)
“[i]f the officer in his or her testimony refers
to the device as an ‘approved screening device’, the trial judge is entitled to
infer that the device was indeed an approved device”. this evidence “is direct
evidence upon which the trial judge can rely”: paras. 44, 45;
(6)
a trial judge may infer that something other
than an asd was used where there is “some credible evidence to the contrary”,
that undermines the officer’s stated belief that he or she used an asd: para.
47.

for pc graham to rely on the “fail” reading at
the roadside, he needed to believe he was using an asd, and his belief needed
to be objectively reasonable.

i am satisfied that pc graham believed he was
using an asd. pc graham testified he was using an asd. although he thought that
the device was called an “alcotel”, he was clear that he believed it was “an
approved screening device”, calibrated to report a “fail” only if the subject’s
blood alcohol exceeded the legal limit.

the remaining question is whether pc graham’s
identification of the device as an “alcotel” provides “credible evidence to the
contrary” that causes me to conclude that something other than an asd was used,
such that pc graham’s stated belief is objectively unreasonable.

in
gundy, at paras.
47 and 50.6, the
court of appeal held that “obvious errors” in identifying a device by name do
not qualify as “credible evidence to the contrary”.

i am satisfied that pc graham made an “obvious
error” as to the name of the device he used, and that the device was in fact an
asd. when asked by defence counsel about the device he had used, pc graham
testified, “[i]t’s the alcotel […] i don’t remember the exact name of it. but
it’s the alcotel [….] [i]t’s called an asd, which stands for alcotel, i think,
screening device […] the alcotel 7000, i think”.

pc boyd was also on scene at the time of the
arrest. he testified that the device pc graham had used was an “alcotest 7000”
— which is an asd for the purposes of
s. 320.11
of the
criminal code:
see
approved screening devices order, sor/2024-66.

the defence submits that i cannot prefer the
evidence of one officer over the other regarding the identity of the device
used. i disagree. pc graham had in his possession a police-issued device that
he believed to be a “approved screening device” to test at the roadside for
excessive blood alcohol. an “alcotest 7000” is an approved screening device; an
“alcotel 7000” is not. pc graham was unsure of the device’s name. pc boyd was unequivocal
and certain that pc graham was mistaken about the name of the device. pc boyd
was in a position to identify the device. he handled it and held it up to the
in-car camera to show the “fail” indication on its display screen. i am
satisfied that pc boyd’s identification of the device should be preferred. pc
graham’s misidentification of the device as an “alcotel 7000” rather than an
“alcotest 7000” is a minor and obvious error.

pc graham believed he was using an asd. he was
using an asd. he was entitled to rely on the “fail” to form the belief that mr.
munro had excessive blood-alcohol. i am satisfied that the ai demand and arrest
were based on sufficient grounds so did not infringe mr. munro’s ss. 8 and 9
charter
rights.
2
charter, s. 10(b)

mr. munro alleges that his s. 10(b) right to retain
and instruct counsel without delay, and to be informed of that right, was
infringed in four ways. he submits police
(1)
delayed reading him his right to counsel, thus
infringing the right to be informed immediately of the s. 10(b) right,
(2)
failed to facilitate access to counsel at the
roadside, thus infringing the right to consult with counsel immediately,
(3)
steered mr. munro to duty counsel, thus
infringing his right to consult with counsel of choice, and
(4)
should have inquired into the sufficiency of
advice received from duty counsel and facilitated a second call to counsel.
a)
delayed reading of rights

section 10(b) of the
charter
provides that a person, “on
arrest or detention”, has the right “to retain and instruct counsel without
delay and to be informed of that right”. in
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33,
at paras.
41-42, the supreme court explained that the phrase “‘without delay’
must be interpreted as ‘immediately’”. in an impaired driving investigation,
the obligation to inform a detainee of the right to counsel is suspended until
that person is arrested. at that point, the arrestee must be informed
“immediately” of the right to counsel, “[s]ubject to concerns for officer or
public safety, and such limitations as prescribed by law and justified under s.
1 of the
charter
”:
suberu, at paras.
41, 42. if there is a delay
in informing the detainee of their right to counsel, the crown bears the burden
of showing that the delay “was reasonable in the circumstances”:
r. v.
taylor,
2014 scc 50, at para.
24.

pc graham arrested mr. munro just before 12:49
a.m., and read him his right to counsel at 1:01 a.m.

from the arrest until 12:52:30 a.m., the
officers were engaged in dividing up tasks, securing the accused in the back of
the cruiser and securing his property. i do not understand the defence to take
issue with the necessity of taking those steps. in any event, i accept the
delay they occasioned was necessary and reasonable in the circumstances.

i am satisfied that the right to counsel could have
been read as early as 12:52:30 a.m., when pc graham and mr. munro were first
alone together in the cruiser. it was not read until 1:01:17 a.m. the defence
takes issue with the remaining delay, a period of approximately nine minutes from
12:52 a.m. until 1:01 a.m.

part of that time—perhaps three or four minutes—was
consumed by discussion between pc graham and mr. munro regarding the right to
counsel:
(1)
there was little or no discussion from
approximately 12:52:30 until 12:53:24;
(2)
from 12:53:24 until 12:54:08, pc graham
indicated he was “gonna read some stuff” to mr. munro and mr. munro asked about
speaking to his family. there was also a brief discussion about some seized property;
(3)
from 12:54:08 until 12:55:13 a.m., there was
little discussion, other than mr. munro asking once if he could call his family;
(4)
from 12:55:13 a.m. until 12:56:02, a discussion
occurred during which mr. munro asked about calling his lawyer, and pc graham
told him “i’m gonna get the number for your lawyer and all that stuff”. pc
graham told mr. munro that the car was being audio and videotaped, and “i don’t
want you to say anything to incriminate yourself, or anything to that effect”;
(5)
there was little or no discussion from 12:56:02
a.m. until 12:58:25 a.m.; and
(6)
at 12:58:25 a.m., mr. munro asked again to “call
my lawyer”. pc graham indicated he could afford mr. munro privacy in the
cruiser and told mr. munro that after transporting him to the station, “we’re
gonna allow you to speak with your lawyer”. discussion about this continued
steadily, with mr. munro repeatedly asserting that he wanted to speak to a
lawyer, until just after 1:01 a.m., when pc graham began to read mr. munro his
right to counsel.

pc graham explained that the time when he and
mr. munro were not speaking was spent inputting data into his computer – a
series of steps that he testified were necessary to move forward with the investigation.
he testified that, at the time of the arrest, york regional police had recently
moved to a new computer system. he understood it required officers to input
certain information “before you get to the page where the rights to counsel and
all that stuff is.” his work on the computer involved running mr. munro’s
driver’s licence on the system to confirm his identity, and inputting
information, like name, arrest time and location. he understood that all these
steps needed to occur before he could begin transporting mr. munro back to the
police station, where he would be given access to counsel.

while i accept pc graham’s evidence that these
steps were necessary in the sense that they needed to occur at some point, i
cannot accept that they could be prioritized over the constitutional obligation
to inform mr. munro of his right to counsel under s. 10(b) “without delay”. many
different activities can justify delay in informing an arrestee of their right
to retain and instruct counsel. these include safety concerns for the police,
pubic or detainee; medical concerns; and concerns relating to the preservation
of evidence or integrity of the investigation:
r. v. shang en wu,
2017
onsc 1003, at para.
78;
r. v. rover,
2018 onca 745, at paras.
26-27.
i
am aware of no authority that authorizes delay to permit an officer to perform
administrative tasks.

the crown has not demonstrated that the delay in reading mr.
munro his right to counsel was reasonable in the circumstances. i find that the
delay infringed mr. munro’s right to be informed of his s. 10(b) right to
counsel without delay.
b)
access to counsel at roadside

mr. munro submits that the police infringed the implementational
component of his s. 10(b) right to counsel by failing to provide him access to
counsel at the roadside.

section 10(b) guarantees access to counsel “at the
first
reasonable opportunity” (emphasis in original) or “the earliest practical
opportunity”. if access to counsel is delayed, the crown must demonstrate that
the circumstances could not afford a realistic opportunity to consult with
counsel. a realistic opportunity to consult with counsel is not necessarily the
same thing as an opportunity to make a phone call. a reasonable or realistic
opportunity to consult with counsel requires the ability and opportunity to
contact, seek advice from, and receive advice from counsel. “[p]ractical
obstacles to access” and “privacy and safety issues” may justify delay. see
r.
v. taylor,
2014 scc 50, at paras.
27-29, 32, 34;
r. v. torsney,
2007
onca 67, at para.
13.

mr. munro’s argument rests on the fact that pc graham, in explaining
why he did not facilitate access to counsel at the roadside, focussed on the
fact that he needed to keep the in-car-camera system (iccs) running so would
have been unable to afford mr. munro the privacy he would need to consult with
counsel confidentially. in cross-examination, pc graham was confronted with a york
regional police policy permitting officers to turn off the iccs to allow
consultation with counsel. faced with this, pc graham ultimately accepted that
if had recalled yrp policy, he would have permitted mr. munro to speak to
counsel at the roadside.

although pc graham testified he would have been willing to turn off
the iccs had he been aware of the policy, in re-examination, he gave evidence
that cast real doubt on whether he would have concluded it was appropriate to do
so had he turned his mind to it. he cited the risk that an accused might harm
himself or become ill while the camera was off as good reasons to keep it
running. there are many things that may occur in a police cruiser for which an
accurate video and audio record would be highly desirable. the need to record a detainee’s time in custody strikes me as a
sound reason to keep the iccs active, depending on the circumstances. when
recording is reasonably necessary, privacy cannot be afforded, and access to
counsel at the time may be neither practical nor realistic.

notwithstanding the above, in cross-examination, pc graham was clear
that he would have been willing to turn off the iccs had he been aware of the
yrp policy. i accept this evidence.

i do not accept that this demonstrates there was a realistic,
practical opportunity to consult with counsel in the circumstances. even if the iccs had been turned off, there were practical barriers
to providing access to counsel at the roadside. first, pc graham cited mr.
munro’s handcuffs—and the fact pc graham was not prepared to remove the
cuffs—as a barrier to mr. munro using a phone.

second, pc graham testified he was unwilling to give mr. munro
unsupervised access to a cellphone at the roadside. courts have accepted that relevant
safety concerns mean police have no legal duty to allow detainees unsupervised
access to a personal cellphone or an officer’s cellphone at the roadside:
r.
v. bernard,
2018 onsc 5134, at para.
31, citing
r. v. taylor,
2014
scc 50, at para.
27.

so, although pc graham conceded he would have facilitated a call to
counsel, the evidence suggests this could not have been accomplished. i am not
entitled to speculate a theory on how a call might have been accomplished in a
way that permitted private consultation while ensuring safety and security on
scene:
r. v. bernard,
2018 onsc 5134, at para.
30.

the evidence leads me to conclude on a balance of probabilities that
a call could not have been facilitated at the roadside. as such, failing to
provide access at that time did not infringe mr. munro’s right to counsel under
s. 10(b).
c)
access to counsel of choice at station

mr. munro submits his right to counsel was
further infringed by police failing to take adequate steps to give him access
to his counsel of choice at the station. mr. munro ultimately spoke to duty
counsel after the following exchange with the booking sergeant:
sgt. price: you
wanna speak to a lawyer?
mr. munro: yes
sgt. price: do you have a specific lawyer you'd like us to try
to phone, or just duty counsel for free?
mr. munro: i
guess duty counsel for free.

mr. munro submits that this exchange, when assessed in context
with his time with pc graham at the roadside and during transport, demonstrates
that police failed to discharge their duty to ensure that he understood he had
options available to contact counsel of choice. while alone with pc graham, mr.
munro said numerous times that he wanted to speak to “my lawyer”. he had indicated
that he wished to call his family “at the right time” to get the lawyer’s number.
he had said his lawyer was named “nick”, while declining to provide a last name.
pc graham had said that police would, at the station, get the number for mr.
munro’s lawyer and put the two in touch.

mr. munro testified that he thought this background had been conveyed
to the booking sergeant. when sgt. price gave him a choice between a specific
lawyer and duty counsel, he was left with the impression that if he did not already
have the specific lawyer’s number, his only choice was duty counsel. mr. munro
submits that after he asked for duty counsel, pc graham should have interjected
to ensure mr. munro would not prefer to call family to get the number for a specific
lawyer.

when a detainee is advised of their right to counsel and indicates
a desire to exercise that right, the police must facilitate access. a detainee
has the right to chose duty counsel or counsel of choice, without facing undue
pressure from police to select one option or the other. where the detainee
expresses a desire to speak to counsel of choice, police must exercise reasonable
diligence in facilitating access.
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50, at para.
24;
r. v. rover,
2018 onca 745, at para.
25;
r. v. edwards,
2024
onca 135, at paras.
36-42;
r. v. willier,
2010 scc 37, at para.
43;
r.
v. jhite,
2021 onsc 3036, at paras.
42-45.

for the following reasons, i reject mr. munro’s evidence that he
believed he had no choice but to call duty counsel. i find that mr. munro
understood police would help him access counsel of choice if he so desired. he
chose to consult duty counsel instead.

mr. munro was not a credible or reliable witness. he testified
that when he was in the wendy’s drive through, he honked his horn multiple
times and was stationary because another vehicle was blocking his way. this was
inconsistent with pc graham’s evidence, which i accept, that the horn was
blaring constantly and no car was blocking mr. munro’s vehicle. pc graham’s
evidence is corroborated by the icc, which shows that for approximately 24 seconds
leading up to the initiation of the traffic stop, mr. munro’s vehicle was
stationary in the wendy’s drive through with no other car in front of it.

mr. munro gave internally inconsistent evidence on his reasons
for asking for counsel immediately at the roadside. he testified he did not
know his rights, having never been in the situation of having to comply with a
roadside demand before. he also testified that he had been stopped in a ride
program when he was younger and had done a roadside test.

mr. munro’s evidence regarding his state of mind in the booking
hall was inconsistent with what transpired. the language used by police could
not be understood as pushing him toward duty counsel. sgt. price gave mr. munro
a true choice between duty counsel and “a specific lawyer you’d like us to try
to phone”. the language pc graham used in reading mr. munro his rights also
underscored the same message: “you have the right to telephone any lawyer you
wish. you also have the right to free advice from a legal aid lawyer.”

sgt. price’s language in the booking hall was open ended. it did
not suggest mr. munro should pick one option or the other. he did not imply that
“a specific lawyer” could be contacted only if mr. munro already had the
number. rather, the words “a specific lawyer you’d like us to try to phone”,
implied that police were willing “to try to” help him find that lawyer.

this was consistent with what mr. munro had heard before. pc graham
had told mr. munro police could take steps to facilitate access to counsel of choice,
and mr. munro appeared to understand:
pc graham: is your lawyer’s
number in your phone?
mr. munro: my
lawyer’s number is present with my family, and i will call them at the right
time.
…
mr. munro: […]
am i able to call my family?
pc graham: i
explained to you that when we get you to the station, and we can afford you the
privacy, we will give your lawyer a call. i asked you for the number. you
haven’t given a name or a number for your lawyer, okay.
mr. munro okay.
pc graham: so,
when we get to the district, we’ll sort all that out.

i reject mr. munro’s evidence that the circumstances made him feel
like he could not speak up to assert his rights. this testimony is inconsistent
with his conduct that evening. throughout the night, mr. munro was not shy. he asked
pc graham more than a dozen times to speak to his lawyer. he was similarly forthcoming
with requests while speaking with sgt. price and other officers. i cannot accept
while that he advocated for himself persistently throughout the night, at the
moment when he was asked an open-ended question, he felt he had no choice but
to select only one of the options presented to him.

i reject mr. munro’s evidence that when he asked for duty
counsel, he believed he could only have one phone call, so could not contact
his lawyer if he did not yet have the number. just after asking to speak to duty
counsel, he asked to call his wife. the request was refused. but the fact it
was made demonstrates that up to that point—including moments earlier when he
selected duty counsel—he thought he might be able to make more than one call. he
testified he believed he only had one phone call, and it had to be to a lawyer,
because that is what he had been told. but he was only told this in response to
his question about speaking to his wife, which occurred after he had indicated
he wished to speak to duty counsel. he had also indicated in the cruiser, in
response to a question whether his lawyer’s number was in his phone, that “my
lawyer’s number is present with my family, and i will call them at the right
time, okay?” before beginning the booking process, in response to the question
“when can i use my phone call?”, pc graham told mr. munro, “[w]e’re gonna book
you in, and then we’re gonna get the number for your lawyer, and we’ll put you
in contact with him.”

i am satisfied that mr. munro knew he had the option of relying
on police assistance to reach counsel of choice. in these circumstances, his stated
preference for duty counsel must be understood as reflecting just that: his preference.
he wanted to speak to duty counsel. i suspect mr. munro decided this was a good
option, since he did not have a specific lawyer in mind to contact. on his own
evidence, he had only offered the name “nick” in the cruiser in an effort to have
pc graham help put him in contact his friend nicholas, who was not a lawyer.

i reject the defence submission that pc graham should have interjected
after mr. munro stated his preference for duty counsel to inquire whether he
instead wanted to contact some other lawyer. “[w]hat the police are required to
say and do in a particular case to fulfill their duties under s. 10(b) will
depend on what the accused says and does and what the police could reasonably
surmise in the circumstances”:
r. v. badgerow,
2008 onca 605, at para.
45, leave ref’d, s.c.c.a. no. 483;
r. v. ruscica,
2019 onsc 2442,
at paras.
38, 43. mr. munro had earlier expressed the desire to speak to “my
lawyer” and had indicated he would call his family to get the number “at the
right time”. however, when mr. munro was asked how he would like to proceed
once at the station, he indicated his preference for duty counsel. pc graham testified
he understood mr. munro preferred duty counsel. this was a reasonable
conclusion. as i noted before, mr. munro was vocal throughout his interactions
with police. if he had wanted counsel of choice he would have said so. the
police had no obligation to double check on mr. munro’s fully informed choice:
see e.g.,
r. v. willier,
2010 scc 37, at para.
43;
r. v. jhite,
2021 onsc 3036, at paras.
42-45.

i find on a balance of probabilities that the police did not
breach mr. munro’s s. 10(b) right by failing to facilitate access to counsel of
choice. police discharged their implementational obligations by putting him in
touch with duty counsel, as he requested.
d)
failing to provide a second call to counsel

briefly during closing submissions, defence counsel raised an
argument that events in the breath room should have caused police to ask mr.
munro about the sufficiency of the advice he had received from duty counsel,
with a view toward providing a second call to a lawyer.

the supreme court majority held in
r. v. willier,
2010 scc
37, at para.
41, that s. 10(b) does not require police “to monitor the quality
of advice once contact is made”. unless “a detainee indicates diligently and
reasonably, that the advice he or she received is inadequate, the police may
assume the detainee is satisfied with the exercised right to counsel and are
entitled to" proceed:
willier, at para.
42. an obligation to provide
another opportunity to consult with counsel may be triggered by (i) a change in
jeopardy, (ii) a new procedure involving the detainee, or (iii) an objectively
observable indication that the detainee had not understood the advice received:
r. v. sinclair,
2010 scc 35, at paras.
2, 55;
r. v. kistuk,
2025
onca 195, at para.
33. in
r. v. lafrance,
2022 scc 32, the supreme court
found the third category was triggered where the accused came out of his
initial conversation believing that he needed to “get a lawyer before i
continue talking”. the accused “was obviously ignorant as to his rights”. the
majority distinguished this situation from “general confusion”, which is not a
ground requiring further consultation:
lafrance, at paras.
84-86, citing
sinclair, at para.
55.

mr. munro asked several questions of the qualified breath
technician, pc su, about his circumstances and the consequences of different
courses of action, including the consequences of complying or not complying
with the breath demand. i do not find that these questions demonstrated that he
had not understood the advice he had received from duty counsel. the series of
questions began with mr. munro confirming that he understood the breath demand
and asking whether it was in his best interests to have a lawyer present. pc su
explained that the lawyer was not coming and noted that mr. munro had just
spoken with duty counsel. mr. munro agreed (“i did, yeah”). mr. munro then
volunteered that he was “just asking questions, you know. never been in a situation
like this”. pc su indicated this is not uncommon. he volunteered to answer any
questions mr. munro had and to walk him through the process.

it appeared to me that mr. munro simply wished to walk through
what was happening, step by step, as pc su had offered to do. a desire to do so,
to my mind, is not a clear indication that he misunderstood the advice he had
received from his lawyer on whether to cooperate with police.

there could have been many different motivations for wanting to
talk things through with the officer before providing a sample. the defence argument
rests largely on mr. munro’s evidence that he did not feel like he had received
everything he needed from duty counsel, and did not raise this concern because
he was not asked. i reject mr. munro’s evidence on this point, in part based on
the general concerns regarding his credibility that i raised earlier, and in
part because his professed reluctance to speak up on his own behalf is
inconsistent with his conduct throughout the evening.

in his testimony, mr. munro did not elaborate on what he did not
understand coming out of his call with duty counsel. i am satisfied, however,
that if mr. munro had been dissatisfied with the advice he had received, he
would have said so. while speaking with pc su, mr. munro twice mentioned having
spoken with duty counsel. he did not express uncertainty regarding the advice
he had received.

i conclude that pc su was not obliged by s. 10(b) to inquire
further whether mr. munro was satisfied with the advice he had received. i find
no s. 10(b) breach occurred at this stage of the investigation.
3
charter, s. 8: video
recording cell toilet

a booking video entered as an exhibit at trial
depicts the cell area. after mr. munro was lodged in a cell, he was videotaped
standing, facing the toilet with his back to the camera. he appeared to
urinate. mr. munro testified on the
charter
voir dire
that this
was embarrassing to him, as parts of his underwear were exposed.

defence counsel argues that the video recording
of his client in these circumstances infringed his s. 8
charter
right to
be free from unreasonable search and seizure. the argument rests on
r. v.
mok,
2012 oncj 291, rev’d,
2014 onsc 64, leave to appeal ref’d,
2015 onca
608. in that case, the trial judge and summary-conviction-appeal judge (whose
decision is binding on me) found a s. 8 breach when a detainee was videotaped
using the cell toilet.

determining whether the videotaping in this case
infringed mr. munro’s rights depends on whether it interfered with a reasonable
expectation of privacy that he enjoyed in the circumstances. a search occurs
within the meaning of s. 8 where state conduct interferes with a reasonable
expectation of privacy. video surveillance interfering with such an expectation
will qualify as a search, which must conform with the requirements of s. 8. to
determine if there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, courts consider the
“totality of the circumstances”, including the claimant’s subjective
expectation of privacy and the objective reasonableness of that expectation. see
r. v. mok,
2014 onsc 64, at paras.
54-55, citing
r. v. wong,
1990 canlii 56 (scc), s.c.j. no. 118, at para.
47,
r. v. edwards,
1996 canlii 255 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 128,
at para.
45, and
r. v. tessling,
2004 scc 67, at para.
19.

i am prepared to assume that mr. munro had a
subjective expectation of privacy. he testified that he was told the cell was
being videotaped, and that if he used the washroom, the camera would block out
his genital area. he testified that he believed nothing would be seen if he
used the toilet. he testified he was embarrassed that the rear of his underwear
had been depicted on the video. notwithstanding my earlier comments about mr.
munro’s lack of credibility, i am prepared to assume that he believed a larger
area surrounding the toilet was obstructed and would not be captured on video,
such that if he lowered his pants and stood facing the toilet his underwear
would not be recorded.

i note, however, that having reviewed the video,
mr. munro’s underwear is not visible when he stands to urinate. further, i am satisfied
that any subjective expectation of privacy was not objectively reasonable.

the videotaping at issue occurred while mr.
munro was a detainee in police custody. this diminishes the objective reasonableness
of any expectation of privacy. police record the cells for a variety of reasons
relating to health, safety and security: see e.g.,
r. v. mok,
2014 onsc
64, at para.
76-78. in this context, many of the factors identified in
r. v.
edwards
as informing the totality of the circumstances point away from
finding an expectation of privacy. police possess and control the place
searched and have sole authority to regulate access to the cells.

the superior court in
mok
held that
police have a legitimate interest in recording the cells, but that this must be
balanced against a detainee’s legitimate expectation that they will not be
recorded using the toilet. placed in the terms of the
edwards
factors, mr.
munro’s presence at the time of the recording points towards an expectation of
privacy. his inability to leave, combined with the biological fact that he may
need to use the toilet while in custody, creates a very real prospect that he
may have to engage in a private activity while in that space.

the court in
mok, faced with these
circumstances, was satisfied that the “use of a modesty screen that protects
the lower part of a person’s body while using the toilet” would appropriately
balance state and individual interests:
r. v. mok,
2014 onsc 64, at
para.
77. in response to that judgment, york regional police and other police
services implemented measures to ensure that detainees have privacy while using
the toilet: see
r. v. mok,
2015 onca 608, at para.
5. as a result, the
portion of the cell video of mr. munro that would otherwise depict the toilet
is blacked out. the police have taken steps to ensure that the area in which a
detainee would most likely be naked is not captured on the video.

police took steps to ensure that mr. munro was
aware of the video monitoring and recording and that the toilet area was
obscured. mr. munro was advised that the cells were video-recorded, and that
the area of the toilet was obscured, so as not to be captured on video. sgt. price
is seen on the video gesturing in the air to explain the privacy box. mr. munro
acknowledged in his testimony being aware of these facts.

mr. munro had options open to him if he did not
want to be captured on video as he testified he was. he could have sat on the
toilet to urinate. sgt. price testified that nothing would have been visible on
screen if mr. munro had been seated. it appears that a detainee could also urinate
without lowering the rear of their pants below their buttocks, simply by opening,
or lowering, only the front of his pants. this is what mr. munro did.

what was captured on video in this case is
starkly different than what was captured in
mok. in that case, the
camera “captured a full frontal view of [the detainee]” as she lowered her
pants and “had an unobstructed view of [her] sitting on the toilet”. the
placement of the toilet paper in cell led her “to stand up, with her pants at
her ankles and take 2 steps in order to retrieve the paper and then return to
sitting on the toilet”. the camera had an unobstructed view of her using the
toilet paper. it captured her “fully exposed to the video camera” as she pulled
up her undergarment and pants. it depicted her genitalia and use of the toilet:
r. v. mok,
2014 onsc 64, at paras.
32, 48.

in contrast, what happened to mr. munro was
benign. mr. munro is seen adjusting his pants and facing a toilet. there is no
nudity. you can infer he is urinating. but no stream of urine is depicted. all
that is seen is what one would expect to see in a large public men’s room with
multiple urinals: a fully-clothed man standing, facing a wall.

i find that the videotaping of mr. munro’s cell
did not interference with a reasonable expectation of privacy: there was no
search, and no infringement of the s. 8 right against unreasonable search and
seizure. people in police custody are entitled to expect accommodations will be
made to ensure that they are not recorded naked when they must expose
themselves to use the washroom. yrp have made accommodations that appropriately
balance the need to afford some privacy while monitoring the cells to ensure
health, safety and security. a reasonable person in the circumstances would
understand that the toilet area was blocked from monitoring and recording, but
areas beyond it may be visible. people in these circumstances, armed with this
knowledge, have options to ensure that they are not recorded while naked (e.g.,
sitting on the toilet).
b.
should the evidence be excluded under s. 24(2)?

the defence submits that the infringement of mr.
munro’s s. 10(b) right to counsel should lead to the exclusion of his breath
samples from evidence under s. 24(2). section 24(2) directs courts to exclude
evidence “obtained in a manner that infringed or denied any of the rights or
freedoms guaranteed by the
charter
” if satisfied that “the admission of
it in the proceedings would bring the administration of justice into disrepute”.

evidence will meet the threshold of having been
“obtained in a manner” that breached the accused’s rights where a connection
exists between the evidence and the breach. the connection may be causal,
temporal or contextual, or a combination of all three. but it must not be too
tenuous or remote. the fact that the discovery of evidence and a breach occur
in “the same transaction or course of conduct” is indicative of the evidence
being tainted, and potentially excludable under s. 24(2). see
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12, at para.
78;
r. v. pino,
2016 onca 389, at para.
72.

i am satisfied the samples were obtained in a
manner that infringed mr. munro’s
charter
rights. mr. munro’s breath
samples were seized and analyzed in the same transaction in which his right to
counsel was infringed. there is no causal connection between the evidence and
the breach: the breach did not cause the police to seize mr. munro’s breath
samples. but the evidence and breach are temporally and contextually connected.
the connection is not tenuous or remote.

i must next consider the factors set out in
r.
v. grant,
2009 scc 32, to determine whether admission or exclusion of the
evidence would better serve the “overall repute of the justice system, viewed
in the long term”. the analysis starts from the conclusion that a breach has
occurred, “and seeks to ensure that evidence obtained through that breach does
not do further damage to the repute of the justice system”:
grant, at
paras.
68-70. the analysis considers three factors: (1) the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
state conduct; (2) the impact of the breach on the accused’s
charter
-protected
interests; and (3) society’s interests in an adjudication of the case on its
merits:
grant, at para.
71.
1
seriousness of the
charter
-infringing state
conduct

the delay was approximately nine-minutes long. this
period is significant from a constitutional perspective, as the right to
counsel must be explained immediately. but the period was relatively brief.

assessed in context with the remainder of pc
graham’s conduct, the delay appears to be an aberration. i am satisfied that pc
graham was aware of the obligation to read the right to counsel without delay, and
was doing his best to comply with that obligation in a context where he
believed he needed to delay:
(1)
pc graham was not ignorant of mr. munro’s
charter
rights. he testified he had been taught that the right to counsel had to be
read immediately. he indicated almost right away after they entered the police
cruiser that he needed to read mr. munro something. pc graham did not try to
elicit any incriminating information from mr. munro, which would have
aggravated the seriousness of the breach:
r. v. davis,
2023 onca
227, at para.
67;
(2)
the delay was subjectively motivated by a desire
to take steps that pc graham believed were necessary before he could read mr.
munro his rights, not out of ignorance for or disregard of mr. munro’s
charter
rights or out of bad faith. i find he was working diligently to reach the point
where the computer system would allow him to read mr. munro his rights;
(3)
pc boyd cautioned mr. munro right at the outset
of the arrest regarding his right to silence. pc graham told him, informally,
within about four minutes of entering the cruiser that he would have an
opportunity to speak to counsel and that police would help facilitate access to
counsel of choice. this is not a substitute for a full reading of the right to
counsel, which would have additionally provided information about the
availability of free duty counsel. but it demonstrates that at least part of
the message included in a full recitation of the right to counsel was provided
relatively early in the post-arrest interactions;
(4)
approximately four minutes of the nine minutes
were consumed responding to mr. munro’s questions. this does not change the
facts that the right to counsel could have been read immediately. but it does
explain some of the delay; and
(5)
throughout the time in the car, pc graham
expressed what i find to be genuine concern about ensuring that mr. munro would
not incriminate himself, would have access to counsel in private, and would
have access to counsel of choice, if he so desired.

these factors suggest that the seriousness of
the
charter
-infringing state conduct should offer little support for
exclusion.

however, what happened in this case does not
appear to be an isolated incident. the seriousness of the breach is increased
significantly by the fact that what happened in this case has happened before
in this jurisdiction. crown counsel shared with me
r. v. khan
(6 march
2025), newmarket (ont. c.j.). in that case, robinson j. found a s. 10(b) breach
where the reading of the right to counsel was delayed by just under five
minutes. the delay was attributed to the operational requirements of the in-car
computer system:
according to p.c.
kadva’s testimony, he did not begin reading ms. khan her right to counsel until
3:25, as he had to first input her information into the onboard computer before
it would allow him to proceed to the right to counsel screen.
he testified
that he could have attempted to do it from memory but chose to do it from the
computer screen to make sure that he was reading it
verbatim. he did not
know if he was able to skip forward to the rights to counsel screen without
first completing the screens requiring the accused’s information.
…
… i accept
p.c. kadva’s evidence that he did not know how to fast forward to the right to
counsel screen without first inputting information on the previous screens. i
also accept his evidence that he did not want to “wing it” because he wanted to
make sure that he provided right to counsel
verbatim. p.c. kadva was not
asked if he had the right to counsel script printed at the rear of his physical
notebook.
the solution,
moving forward, must involve officers being trained how to access the right to
counsel screen before completing the previous screens; if this feature is not
available, police officers ought to carry a printed copy of the right to
counsel with them from which they can read before inputting all information on
their onboard computer
khan
(2025), at paras. 43-44, 68-69.

in both this case and
khan, police felt like they had to delay
reading the right to counsel until they reached the appropriate prompt from
their in-car computer systems. in both cases, the clocked ticked away while the
arresting officers typed data into the computer as a prelude to arriving at the
right-to-counsel screen. pc graham testified that this was a new system that
had been rolled out by yrp.

given the similarity between the two
cases, i have considered whether i should treat the breach as systemic. in
r.
v. rover,
2018 onca 745, at para.
40, our court of appeal explained that systemic
charter
breaches—ones “that are the direct result of systemic or
institutional police practices”—must be treated as more serious under the first
grant
factor. the court explained why: “a police
practice that is inconsistent with the demands of the
charter
produces
repeated and ongoing constitutional violations that must, in the long run,
negatively impact the due administration of justice.”

is this breach the result of
a systemic or
institutional police practice
? i am aware of two examples in this
jurisdiction. the two cases were separated by about ten months: mr. munro was
arrested in october 2024; ms. khan was arrested in december 2023. the evidence
does not allow me to conclude that this issue is systemic in the sense that all
or most officers are doing it, or that officers were directed to do it. the
evidence does allow me to conclude that there is a larger problem than just one
officer’s misunderstanding of how to balance the operational requirements of a
computer system with the constitutional requirement that the right to counsel
be read immediately.

this fact aggravates the seriousness of the breach and the need for
the court to dissociate itself from the police misconduct. i note that while the events at issue in
this case occurred in october 2024, ten months after the events at issue in
khan,
in december 2023, they occurred about five months before robinson j. released
his reasons in
khan. when mr. munro was arrested, robinson j. had not
yet alerted yrp to the problem, or its clear solutions. if what happened in
this case had occurred after robinson j. put yrp on notice that this issue
needed to be fixed, the seriousness of the breach would have been far worse.

it should be clear from these comments that if the problem evident
in this case and
khan
has not been eliminated already from yrp
practices, this must be done now.
2
impact on the accused’s
charter
-protected
interests

this line of inquiry does not favour exclusion.
the informational component of s. 10(b) is a means to enjoying the
implementational component of the right. it also serves to assure
detainees that “‘they are not entirely at the mercy of the police while
detained’ and are entitled to a ‘lifeline to the outside world’ through which”
they can learn of their legal rights and obligations:
r. v. davis,
2023
onca 227, at para.
41.

the delay here unreasonably deprived mr. munro of information to
which he was entitled regarding his right to consult counsel. however, i am satisfied
that the breach had little impact for mr. munro. in the time leading up to pc
graham reading mr. munro his right to counsel, mr. munro asserted his desire to
speak with a lawyer at least ten times, and had asserted his right to silence: e.g.,
“without my lawyer present, i’m not answering”. although pc graham did not
formally read mr. munro his right to counsel until 1:01 a.m., early in their
interactions in the cruiser, shortly after 12:55 a.m., pc graham confirmed mr.
munro’s understanding that he would be able to speak to a lawyer, but not until
they were at the station.

the fact that mr. munro plainly understood there is a right to
counsel does not undermine the seriousness of the breach. a detainee’s prior
knowledge of their rights is no substitute for police complying with their
informational obligations. however, mr. munro’s knowledge that he was entitled
to legal advice, as confirmed relatively quickly by pc graham, shows that in
this case the delay and breach had little discernible impact
on mr. munro’s
charter
-protected interests. mr. munro firmly
believed he would be able to implement his right to counsel, so would have a
“lifeline to the outside world” while in police custody.
3
society’s interest in an adjudication on the merits

this factor strongly favours admission of the
evidence. the breath-sample analysis is essential to the crown’s case. it is
highly reliable evidence demonstrating that mr. munro’s bac was nearly three
times the legal limit. society has a compelling interest in prosecuting allegations
of drinking and driving given their prevalence and the
grave risk this conduct poses to public safety. excluding reliable evidence
critical to the crown’s case would “undermine the truth-seeking function of the
justice system and render the trial unfair from the public’s perspective, thus
bringing the administration of justice into disrepute”: see
r. v. beaver,
2022 scc 54, at para.
131.
4
balancing

the final stage of the
grant
analysis involves assessing
and balancing each of the three factors, “focussing on the long-term integrity
of, and public confidence in, the administration of justice”:
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12, at para.
98. the question is whether admitting the evidence would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute:
beaver, at para.
133. in this analysis, the first two
grant
factors will generally pull
only in favour of exclusion. the extent of that pull varies in each case. where
both of the first two factors strongly favour exclusion, the third factor “will
seldom, if ever” lead to inclusion; if only one of the first two factors
strongly favours exclusion, the third factor becomes important. it always
pushes, to varying degrees, in favour of inclusion. it does so strongly “where
the evidence is reliable and critical to the crown’s case”:
r. v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 365, at paras.
62-63.

the breach, viewed in isolation, was not serious. but assessed in
light of the highly similar breach found in
khan, the breach must be
seen as serious and weighing firmly in favour of exclusion: yrp is using a
computer system that has caused at least two officers to conclude that
administrative tasks needed to be prioritized over the
charter
-mandated obligation
to read a detainee the right to counsel immediately.

while the breach is serious, the impact on mr. munro’s
charter
-protected
interests was small. for around nine minutes, pc graham delayed reading mr.
munro his right to contact counsel; all the while, mr. munro persistently
asserted his desire to contact counsel and, relatively early in the
interaction, pc graham assured him that he would indeed have access to counsel.

the
evidence is highly reliable and critical to the crown’s case. its exclusion
would result in an acquittal. its inclusion would result in a finding of guilt.

i
find that the third factor tips the balance. i am satisfied that exclusion of
this evidence would do more harm to the long-term repute of the justice system
than would its admission. the public would be alarmed by the exclusion of such
critical evidence of a serious offence based on a breach that, while serious, lasted
only nine minutes and had limited effect on the accused’s
charter
-protected
interests.
iii.
disposition

the
application to exclude evidence under s. 24(2) of the
charter
is
dismissed. i admit the breath-test results into evidence. the readings of 250
and 239 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood are conclusive proof that mr. munro’s
bac at the time of the samples was the lower of the two numbers, so 239 mg/100
ml:
criminal code,
s. 320.31(1).

the
samples were taken at 1:56 and 2:18 a.m., which is within two hours after mr.
munro ceased to operate a conveyance when he was pulled over just before 12:45
a.m. as such, the crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. munro had
a bac exceeding the legal limit within two hours of operating a conveyance. i
find him guilty of 80+ operation contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(b) of the
criminal
code.
released: october 6, 2025
signed:
justice perlin

reasonable grounds to believe a suspect has committed this specific offence
authorize the ai demand:
criminal code,
s. 320.28(1)(a)(i).
reasonable grounds to believe a suspect has committed any indictable offence
authorize an arrest without warrant:
criminal code,
s. 495(1)(a).
an unlawful arrest offends the s. 9 charter right against arbitrary detention.
breath samples seized pursuant to an unlawful demand are seized in
contravention of the s. 8
charter
right against unreasonable search and
seizure.