source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj613/2025oncj613.html

ontario court of
 justice
citation:
r. v. tverberg, 2025
oncj 613
date: 2025·11·24
newmarket
between:
his
 majesty the king
—
 and —
todd
tverberg
judgment
evidence and
submissions heard: november 24, 2025.
delivered: november
24, 2025
ms. lindsay young................................................................................. 
counsel for the crown
mr. jason rabinovitch.................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
kenkel j.:
introduction

constable godin was conducting a mobile ride
at an lcbo store in vaughan. he saw mr. tverberg stumble as he walked to his
vehicle carrying a bottle of vodka. the officer stopped mr. tverberg to conduct
a sobriety check. his observations, including an odour of alcohol from the
driver led to an approved screening device (asd) test. the “fail” result led to
two approved instrument tests at the station showing blood alcohol
concentrations of 221 and 219mgs/100ml. mr. tverberg was charged with having a
blood alcohol concentration in excess of the legal limit within 2 hours of
operation (80+) s 320.14(1)(b).

the final submissions in this case focused
solely on the
charter
application.
the crown has otherwise proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt. the parties
have identified the following
charter
issues for decision:
•
whether the stop to investigate driver sobriety
without prior reasonable grounds to arrest or reasonable suspicion is arbitrary
and contrary to s 9 of the
charter?
•
whether the crown has proved that the officer
had a reasonable suspicion for the asd demand?
•
whether the crown has proved that the officer
had reasonable grounds for the approved instrument demand?
•
if the
charter
breach(es) are proved, should the breath test evidence be excluded
pursuant to s 24(2)?
arbitrary stop – charter s 9

the defence questioned the officer about his
basis for the stop. the notice of application submitted that the stop and
detention of the accused was arbitrary and a breach of s 9 of the
charter.

“driving is a heavily regulated activity.
the police are engaged, not so much in after the fact investigations of
completed crimes, but in pre-emptive investigations intended to avoid the
serious harm caused by those who are involved in dangerous ongoing criminal
conduct. the police’s goal is to catch the drinking driver at the roadside and
not at the scene of the accident. drivers expect to be stopped and questioned
by the police concerning matters relating to the operation of their vehicles.
that expectation is part and parcel of the privilege of operating a motor
vehicle.”
r v smith,
1996 canlii 1074 (on ca), oj no 372 (ca) at para
52.

constable godin had authority at common law
and under
section 48(1)
of the
highway traffic act
rso 1990 c h.8, to
stop mr. tverberg to investigate his sobriety. such a stop can be random. this
stop wasn’t completely random as constable godin saw mr. tverberg stumble in
the lcbo parking lot.

arbitrary or random stops of drivers for
sobriety checks are authorized by law and are reasonable limits on the mobility
rights of drivers in this regulatory context –
r v ladouceur,
1990 canlii 108 (scc), scj
no 53. the ride checkstop program in this province is the best-known example of
that authority.

on the same day they delivered the decision
in
r v ladouceur,
the supreme court also held that the principle was not
confined to organized programs. in
r v wilson,
1990 canlii 109 (scc), scj no. 54 (scc)
at para
12, the court held that a “floating stopcheck” similar to the “mobile
ride” in this case was lawful as a reasonable limit on a driver’s
charter
rights
even if the stop was truly random.

this stop was lawful and a reasonable limit
on the accused’s mobility right in this regulatory context.
reasonable suspicion for asd
demand – charter s 8

the officer did not need a reasonable
suspicion for his asd demand (s 320.27(2)) but he had one here. as soon as he
stood by the driver’s open window, he smelled an odour of alcohol coming from
the vehicle. constable godin had made other relevant observations, but even just
the odour of alcohol coming from the vehicle provided an objective basis for
his immediate demand.

the crown has proved the officer had a
reasonable suspicion for the asd demand.
reasonable grounds for the approved
instrument demand – charter s 8

pc godin explained at trial that he believed
the failure of the asd test provided him with objectively reasonable grounds
for the approved instrument (ai) demand. the defence submits that in explaining
the failure of that test to mr. tverberg the officer used the wrong wording,
showing that he did not understand the statutory requirements for the ai demand
which is a breach of s 8.

at the roadside, mr. tverberg asked about
the asd alcohol test, “tell me what i blew”. p.c. godin told him he blew a
“fail” which indicated that he was over the legal limit of 80. the officer
explained to the accused several times that he was arrested for having over
80mgs of alcohol “in his system”.

at trial p.c. godin was cross-examined on
the asd settings and he explained that the “fail” result indicates more than
100mgs of alcohol in 100ml of blood, a “pass” is less than 49mgs and an “alert”
is less than 100mgs.

the defence submits that the use of the
words “in his system” at the roadside does not repeat the statutory language of
s 320.28 which refers to a belief in a s 320.14(1)(b) offence involving a blood
alcohol concentration equal to or exceeding 80mgs in 100ml of blood. the use of
the phrase “in his system” shows that at the time the officer did not have
reasonable grounds for the approved instrument demand. his evidence at trial
showed he understands the results of the asd as expressed in mgs/100ml of blood
but that does not correct his misunderstanding at the roadside.

p.c. godin knew the approved screening
device test would determine whether there were grounds for an approved
instrument demand. the failure of that test reasonably provided him with
objective grounds for the ai demand he made. his explanation of the fail result
at the request of the accused was in informal terms appropriate to that
conversation. nothing in that conversation reasonably indicated that the
officer misunderstood the requirement for the approved instrument demand. the
expression “there are no magic words” (
r v grant,
2014 onsc 1479
)
also
applies in this context. the officer does not have to quote the precise
statutory language when explaining the asd result.
exclusion of evidence – s 24(2)

the defence submitted in strong terms that
the breach in this case is a serious one that must result in the exclusion of
the breath test evidence.

there was no s 8 or s 9 breach, but in the
alternative if the use of the term “in his system” amounted to a breach, it
could not reasonably result in the exclusion of evidence under s 24(2).

the breach described is a highly technical
one. it was not serious as the officer reasonably believed he had reasonable
grounds for the approved instrument demand and objectively he did in fact have
reasonable grounds based on the asd failure. there was no impact on the accused
when the failure result was explained as over the legal limit for alcohol “in
your system” as the essential message was conveyed. it’s not likely that adding
the statutory toxicology terms of mgs/100ml of blood would have been
meaningful. the exclusion of evidence in this context for a trivial breach
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
conclusion

the
charter
applications are
dismissed. i find the crown has proved the charge alleged beyond a reasonable
doubt.

as a postscript, i should add that this case
shows precisely why parliament and the legislature have given police wide
ranging powers to investigate drivers for sobriety. mr. tverberg is very lucky
the officer stopped him. his statements at the roadside indicated he was on his
way to pick up his daughter from school. mobile driver sobriety investigations
like this one carried out by p.c. godin save lives.
delivered: november 24, 2025.
justice joseph f. kenkel