source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj599/2025oncj599.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. mooroe, 2025 oncj 599
date: 
2025 11 12
court
file no.: 21-55000121
toronto
region
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
targe mooroe
before
justice c. faria
heard
on august 26, 27, and september 5, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on november 12, 2025
alex rourke......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
allison shields............................................ 
 counsel for the defendant targe mooroe
faria j.:
i.
introduction

targe mooroe is accused of assaulting joan
zapata, a maintenance worker on duty at 2777 kipling avenue, on january 13, 2021.
mr. mooroe was on a release order at the time, which forbade him from attending
a certain area which included this address. he was charged with assault and
fail to comply – release order contrary to
ss. 266
and
145(5)
(a) of the
criminal
code.

the crown called 3 witnesses, namely the
complainant, the complainant’s manager who observed part of the altercation,
and the officer who investigated the event and arrested mr. mooroe. ms. rourke filed
cctv surveillance video depicting the altercation, video of the scene, the
body-worn camera footage of the arresting officer, photos of the injuries mr.
zapata sustained. as well as the certified documents containing the conditions
mr. mooroe was to follow while on release at the time.

mr. mooroe testified in his own defence.

the crown submits the court should accept the
evidence of its witnesses, reject mr. mooroe’s evidence, and find the crown has
proven each element of both charges beyond a reasonable doubt.

the defence submits the court should accept mr.
mooroe’s evidence and find the physical altercation was a consensual fight, or
in the alternative, that he was acting in self-defence. the defence further submits
that the court should accept mr. mooroe’s evidence that he was unaware of the
condition not to be at 2777 kipling. ms. shields submits that the crown has not
disproven self-defence, nor the
mens rea
of the ftc-release count beyond
a reasonable doubt; mr. moore should, therefore, be found not guilty of both
charges.
ii.
issues

date, jurisdiction, identity, and the validity
of the certified documents are all conceded.

i summarize the issues to be decided briefly as
follows:
(i)
was the physical altercation between mr. mooroe
and mr. zapata an assault or a consensual fight?
(ii)
if the physical altercation was not a consensual
fight, was mr. mooroe acting in self-defence when he assaulted mr. zapata?
(iii)
has the crown proven the subjective
mens rea
of the ftc-release charge beyond a reasonable doubt
iii.
legal principles

as in every criminal case, the onus rests on the crown to prove guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, which is inextricably linked to the presumption of
innocence. the onus rests with the prosecution throughout the trial and never
shifts. reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense which must
be logically based upon the evidence or lack of evidence.


credibility relates to whether a witness is speaking the truth as
she/he/they believe it to be. reliability relates to the actual accuracy of the
testimony. a credible witness may give unreliable evidence.

accordingly, there is a distinction between a finding of credibility and proof
beyond a reasonable doubt.

the
credibility and reliability of a witness must be, “tested in the light of all
the other evidence presented.”


in
assessing competing evidence, i cannot compare each account and decide which
account i believe.

i can believe or disbelieve a witness, but still be left with a reasonable
doubt after considering all the evidence. moreover, i can accept some, all, or
none of a witness’ evidence. frailties and/or inconsistencies in a witness’
evidence does not necessarily mean their evidence should be rejected.


when the defendant testifies, as mr. mooroe did in this case, the leading
applicable case guiding my analysis is
w.(d.)
provides the following
test:

1.
if i accept mr.
mooroe’s evidence, i must acquit him.
2.
even if i do not
accept mr. mooroe’s testimony, if it leaves me with a reasonable doubt, i must
acquit him.
3.
even if mr.
mooroe‘s evidence does not raise a reasonable doubt, i must consider all the
evidence i accept to satisfy myself that the crown has met its high burden and
proven beyond a reasonable doubt all of the essential elements of the offences.

as mr. mooroe raised self-defence,
s. 34
of the
criminal
code
must be considered, which states:
34
(1)
a person is not
guilty of an offence if
(a)
they believe on reasonable grounds that force is
being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being
made against them or another person;
(b)
the act that constitutes the offence is
committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other
person from that use or threat of force; and
(c)
the act committed is reasonable in the
circumstances.

to determine whether the act committed is reasonable in the
circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the
person, the other parties, and the act, including, but not limited to, the factors
identified in s. 34(2).

the three inquires regarding the assault and
availability of self-defence are (1) the catalyst; (2) the motive; and (3) the
response. the onus is on the crown to disprove self-defence beyond a reasonable
doubt.


pursuant to
r. v. zora, the
supreme court of canada stated the subjective
mens
rea
elements
the crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt for the charge of fail to comply
with a release order are:
(1)
the accused had knowledge of the conditions of their
bail order,
or
they were
wilfully blind to those conditions;
and
(2)
the accused knowingly failed to act according to
their bail conditions, meaning they knew of the circumstances requiring them to
comply with the conditions of their order,
or
they were wilfully blind to these circumstances, and failed to
comply with their conditions despite that knowledge;
or
(3)
the accused recklessly failed to act according
to their bail conditions, meaning that the accused perceived a substantial and unjustified
risk that their conduct would likely fail to comply with their bail conditions
and persisted in this conduct. (emphasis added)
iv.
evidence

joan zapata testified he was 19 years old when
he worked at 2777 kipling as a cleaning superintendent. on january 13, 2021, he
was cleaning the garage with an older co-worker, mario silvero who was in his
60’s. everyone in the building has a specific parking spot. the superintendents
used a particular non-parking area to empty garbage bins for the compactor. it
was also a location people dropped garbage, and he had to clean the area.

that morning, a vehicle was parked in the
non-parking area. the occupants of the car were smoking. mr. zapata told the
driver twice he could not park there and to move the vehicle. the passenger
appeared annoyed. the car drove away.

the car then returned, and the passenger, mr.
mooroe exited the vehicle and confronted him and mr. silvero. he was angry his
driver had been told to leave. mr. mooroe aggressively approached the older mr.
silvero, and mr. zapata placed the broom in his hand between the two men to
create space because he concerned for mr. silvero’s safety.

mr. mooroe momentarily left the two workers, returned
to his car, then immediately turned around and began to punch mr. zapata.

mr. zapata was punched several times in the head
and face, his head hit concrete, he fell to the ground and he was pushed
against a wall. he tried to push mr. mooroe way and tried to strike back. his
co-worker tried to help. his supervisor then arrived, and mr. mooroe got into
the car and left.

mr. zapata testified he was mildly concussed. he
sustained injuries to the right side of his face, neck, and forehead. these
injuries were evident in the photo of mr. zapata taken by police shortly after
the altercation.

in cross-examination, mr. zapata conceded: there
was not a “no parking” sign; the pilon that was supposed to be in the spot had
been moved to the side; he waved the broom at the non-parking spot when
speaking to mr. mooroe; he, too, was annoyed with mr. mooroe; although mr. silvero
thought mr. mooroe had a gun, he did not think the same; he did not detail his
injuries to ems who arrived on scene. mr. zapata explained he was experiencing
a lot of adrenaline when he gave his statement to police within 10 minutes of
event.

mr. zapata was unshaken that he did not want to
fight mr. mooroe, and he did not strike mr. mooroe first.

nicholas di iacovo, mr. zapata’s supervisor at
the time, testified he was called down to the parking garage because, one of his
employees was being “assaulted.” he saw mr. zapata “grappling” and “tussling”
with a man who was holding mr. zapata up against a wall. mr. silvero, another
employee, was trying to break up the two men but was “not too involved” because
“he is older.” the man involved with mr. zapata got into a car that was
stationed close by and left.

police constable myles glazer was called to the
2777 kipling garage to investigate the event. while doing so, mr. mooroe
returned to the scene, was pointed out by mr. zapata as the perpetrator of the
assault and he was arrested. pc glazer did not see any injuries on mr. mooroe.
he watched the cctv footage of the event, was unable to download it, so he
filmed it on his body-worn camera. this was an exhibit at the trial.

mr. mooroe testified that on the morning of
january 13, 2021, he was a passenger in his own car, that he bought in someone
else’s name, as he had no licence, and could not drive. he was in the parking
garage of 2777 kipling waiting to meet someone to get a pay cheque. he
testified a worker at 2777 kipling had said he could park in a spot that
obstructed other cars.

mr. mooroe testified that he was on the phone
when a janitor, mr. zapata, spoke to the driver. when the driver left, he asked
the driver what the conversation was about. once he was informed of the
conversation, he instructed the driver return to area so he could “chat” with
the janitor.

mr. mooroe got out of his car and to speak to
both janitors when mr. zapata got “in his face” and was disrespectful to him.
mr. mooroe testified mr. zapata placed his hands on mr. mooroe’s chest., and mr.
mooroe brushed them off while continuing to speak to mr. silvero. he wanted an
explanation as to why he could not park where he had been parked.

mr. mooroe testified mr. zapata punched him in
the head. he thought, “this is it,” and so, they began fighting and grabbing
each other. he could not recall if he pushed mr. zapata against the wall, but
they struck each other, and mr. zapata tripped and hit the floor.

he testified he did not want to fight mr.
zapata, he did not want to hurt him, and that he did not remember how the
interaction ended. mr. mooroe’s friend dropped him off at 2677 kipling where he
lived close by. he returned to the underground parking garage shortly thereafter
and was arrested.

mr. mooroe testified he had been arrested in
march 2020 when he went to report to probation. he was charged with robbery. mr.
mooroe testified that he was driven to the police station, signed a paper, and
was subsequently released; he also testified he could not “really remember” the
police station interactions, whether he read the release, or if anyone
explained the conditions of his release.

when asked by his counsel if he knew he was not
supposed to be in the area of 2777 kipling, mr. mooroe testified he could not
“recall reading that part of the paper”, he “did not remember if he read it or
not”.

in cross-examination, mr. mooroe agreed that:
•
instead of letting the parking matter go, he
insisted his friend circle back to the janitor so he could speak to him.
•
he did not go to management to confirm he could
park in the no-parking spot.
•
he recognized mr. zapata was a janitor, and not
managerial staff.
•
he got out of the car to confront mr. zapata.
•
he got to within a foot of mr. silvero when he
confronted him.
•
mr. silvero was walking backward as mr. mooroe
approached him.
•
mr. mooroe returned to his car but decided to
turn around and re-engage with the janitors.
•
he became angry with mr. zapata.
•
mr. zapata was walking backwards as mr. mooroe
walked towards mr. zapata.
•
he did hit mr. zapata numerous times.

in cross-examination, mr. mooroe also confirmed:
•
he has a criminal record.
•
this was not the first time he was released on
bail with conditions.
•
he knew he had to follow conditions when
released.
•
he did sign the release order with the boundary
condition (f) “not to enter the area bounded by steeles avenue, islington
avenue, highway 27, and rexdale blvd.”
•
he “probably read” the boundary condition, but
“can’t remember”.
•
he knows that if he did not follow conditions,
he could be breaching the release order.
•
he needed to know what conditions to follow so
as not to breach those conditions.

in re-examination, mr. mooroe testified that he
provided his mother’s address, 2677 kipling, to the officers as to where he
lived. this address had been the one he was previously to live at on a previous
charge. the address is within the prohibited boundary.
v.
findings of fact

mr. zapata testified in a straight-forward,
consistent, coherent manner. any inconsistencies between his police statement
and his evidence, such as the specificity of his injuries, the colour of mr.
mooroe’s clothes, the number of people in the vehicle before it left and after
it returned, and whether there was a “no parking” sign, were peripheral to the
narrative of offence. i accept his evidence that mr. mooroe became
confrontational and aggressive, then physically attacked mr. zapata, as
credible and reliable.

the cctv surveillance video of the event depicts
the assault as mr. zapata described it:
•
the spot where mr. mooroe had his friend park
his car is not a designated parking spot.
•
mr. moore returned in the same vehicle, exited
it, and confronted the two janitors.
•
mr. mooroe is seen aggressively approaching mr.
silvero, and mr. zapata trying to intervene.
•
mr. moore rushes to his car, then returns, and
aggressively approaches mr. zapata as he walks backwards, retreating.
•
mr. mooroe repeatedly punches mr. zapata about
the face and head, pushes him down, and against a wall.
•
at one point mr. mooroe punches mr. zapata 7
consecutive times.
consensual fight

an assault is the intentional application of
force on another person, directly or indirectly without their consent.

i find there was no consensual fight because:
•
mr. di iacovo was not there when the dispute
between the two parties erupted, and his description of the interaction as a
“tussle” is not evidence that mr. zapata consented to a fight.
•
the video does not show mr. zapata touch mr.
mooroe’s chest with his hands, and mr. mooroe brushing them off.
•
mr. zapata did not strike mr. mooroe first.
•
i accept mr. zapata did not want to fight, and
did not consent to mr. mooroe assaulting him.
•
i reject mr. mooroe’s evidence and it does not
raise a reasonable doubt.
self-defence

mr. mooroe asserts he struck mr. zapata in
self-defence and so the crown must disprove that defence beyond a reasonable
doubt.

i consider ss. 34(1) and the factors enumerated
in
s. 34(2)
of the
criminal code.

i
accept mr. zapata’s evidence that he did not strike mr. mooroe first. the video
evidence shows mr. mooroe as the aggressor throughout in the following ways:
•
mr. mooroe returns to the scene to confront mr. zapata.
•
he aggressively approaches and confronts mr. silvero who is older
and vulnerable as described by both mr. zapata and mr. di iacovo.
•
mr. zapata intervened between mr. silvero and mr. mooroe who was
within a foot of mr. silvero.
•
mr. silvero is seen retreating from mr. mooroe.
•
mr. mooroe leaves his confrontation with the two janitors to go
to his car, but turns around rushes to mr. zapata.
•
mr. zapata is retreating from mr. mooroe as mr. mooroe moves
forward and swings at mr. zapata.
•
mr. zapata repeated punches mr. zapata, at one point with 7 consecutive
punches to the head and face.

mr.
mooroe was not facing imminent threat. mr. zapata did not strike him. if mr. mooroe
believed mr. zapata was going to use force, he had an available avenue of safe
retreat, his car. in fact, mr. mooroe did go to his car, then rejected that
option, and purposely re-engaged with mr. zapata.

mr.
zapata is clearly retreating when mr. mooroe attacks him. moreover, even if mr.
mooroe had felt threatened, in addition to not retreating to his car, his
response of numerous punches to the head, the throwing of mr. zapata to the
ground, and the consecutive 7 punches, were not a reasonable in the
circumstances.

the evidence of both mr. zapata and the video is
clear. i find the crown has disproven self-defence beyond a reasonable doubt.
mens rea of fail to comply –
release order

it is conceded mr. mooroe that:
i.
mr. mooroe was arrested and charged on march 2, 2020,
with an information charging him with the robbery of sharon roy on february 8,
2020, breaching a keep the peace condition of a probation order made july 30,
2019, and breaching a keep the peace condition of a probation order made on
november 27, 2018.
ii.
he was released on an undertaking dated that same day, march 2, 2020,
with four conditions:
a.
that he notify dc terzopoulos #9628 d233 mcu
within 24 hours of any change of his address or employment;
b.
that he not communicate directly or indirectly
with sharon roy;
c.
that he not enter the area bounded by steeles
ave, islington ave., hwy 27 and rexdale blvd; and
d.
that he not possess a firearm, crossbow,
prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited
ammunition or explosive substance, and surrender those that are in his
possession and also any authorization, licence, or registration certificate or
other documents enabling him to acquire or possess them.
iii.
the parking garage at 2777 kipling ave. is within the boundary mr.
mooroe was not to be in.

in addition to signing at the bottom of the
undertaking, mr. mooroe’s initials, “tm,” are by the undertaking section
“consequences for non-compliance,” which outline the consequences of not
complying with the conditions set out in the undertaking.

mr. mooroe was experienced with the concept of
release conditions in general, and acknowledged he specifically understood he
had been released on conditions in march 2020.

mr. mooroe’s attitude when cross-examined by the
crown about the specifics of his release in march 2020 was literally “whatever,”
the word he used to explain the situation. he was confident there was no merit
to the charge of robbery, and so, he was dismissive of both the process and
release order. he testified he was “unaware” of the boundary condition.

mr. mooroe’s cavalier attitude about his release
conditions was demonstrated by his equivocal responses to nearly every aspect
of the undertaking: whether he read his conditions, knew what the conditions
were, if they were explained to him, what it means to follow conditions, and
what it means to breach them. his indifference was also blatant about signing
the document and what it contained. these details appeared to simply not be
worth his time.

i therefore find the crown has proven mr. mooroe
was wilfully blind about the boundary condition on his undertaking.

i must determine if mr. mooroe recklessly failed
to not to follow the boundary condition because he perceived a substantial and
unjustified risk that his conduct would likely fail to comply with his bail
condition, and he persisted in this conduct.

the evidence on this point is:
•
mr. mooroe testified that he had lived with his
mother at 808- 2677 kipling ave. and gave the police that address which is
within the boundary.
•
that address is noted on the undertaking as his
address and where he is to be contacted.
•
there are no exceptions to the boundary
condition on the undertaking.
•
mr. mooroe went back to the scene of the
altercation, and when he saw the officers, he approached them.

given mr. mooroe’s approach to the officers in a
location that he was not to be in attendance, it is plausible that mr. mooroe,
though wilfully blind, did not perceive any substantial risk that he was
failing to comply with a condition of his release and persisted in his conduct.

mr. mooroe’s evidence raises a reasonable doubt
on the second prong of the
w. (d.)
analysis, and the second element of
the subjective
mens rea
that must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
vi.
conclusion

for the above reasons, i find the crown has proven
the assault charge beyond a reasonable doubt, but failed to do so on the fail
to comply with release order charge.

i find targe mooroe guilty of assaulting joan
zapata, and not guilty of failing to comply with his release order.
released: november 12, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

r. v. lifchus,
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 320 at para.
39.

r.
v.
morrissey,
1995 canlii 3498 (on ca), o.j. no. 639 (c.a.) at para.
33;
r.
v.
h.c.,
2009 onca 56 (canlii), o.j. no. 214 (c.a.) at para.
41

r.
v.
j.j.r.d.,
2006 canlii 40088 (on ca), o.j. no. 4749 (c.a.) at para.
47;
r.
v.
j.w.,
 o.j. no. 1979 (c.a.) at para. 26.

r.
v.
stewart,
1994 canlii 7208 (on ca), o.j. no. 811 (c.a.) at para.
27

r. v. esquivel-benitez,
2020
onca 160

r. v. j.j.r.d.
2006 canlii
40088 (on ca)
at paras.46-48, leave to appeal to scc. refused, s.c.c.a.
no. 69

r. v. w.(d.) (1991)
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 63 ccc (3d)
397 (s.c.c.) 1

r. v. khill,
2021 scc 37

r. v. zora,
2020 scc 14
at para.
109