source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj272/2025oncj272.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. gallie,
2025 oncj 272
date: 
2025 05 16
court file
no.: 22-70006831; 22-70006832
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ashley gallie
sentencing
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on may 9, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on may 16, 2025
i. erdei................................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
c. o’connor............................................................................................. counsel
for a. gallie
jones j.:
introduction

ashley gallie pleaded guilty to one count of possession of a prohibited firearm
knowing that possession was unlawful (
criminal code
section 92(1)); one
count of careless storage of the firearm and ammunition (
criminal code
section
86(1)); one count each of possession of a schedule i substance (cocaine and
fentanyl) for the purpose of trafficking (
cdsa
section 5(2)); and one
count of possession of proceeds of crime over $5000 (
criminal code
section 354(1)). the crown proceeded by indictment.

ms. gallie was a wholly productive member of society until an accident
plunged her life into a tragic spiral of addiction, desperation, and ultimately
criminal activity.

these are my reasons for imposing a sentence tailored to the unique
circumstances of ms. gallie’s life.
facts in support of the guilty pleas

on october 15, 2022, toronto police service officers executed a search
warrant at a motel room where ms. gallie was staying. they arrested her and
searched her purse, wherein they located crack cocaine, fentanyl, oxycontin, a
digital scale, and plastic baggies.

in the motel room, the officers located an unloaded.357 handgun in a
black handbag inside a shelf next to the bed. within that same handbag were six
rounds of ammunition for the handgun, alongside one round of.35 magnum
ammunition and a round of 7.62 x 39mm ammunition.

as they searched the rest of the room, the police officers located
124.92 g of crack cocaine, 16.92 g of fentanyl, and $10,180 in canadian
currency.
outstanding charges and subsequent finding of guilt

on november 24, 2020, ms. gallie was arrested for a variety of offences
relating to her abusing her position as an employee at two pharmacies. she was charged
with, and ultimately convicted of, possession of oxycontin for the purpose of
trafficking, and theft over $5000, concerning what occurred at one pharmacy.
she was found guilty of theft over $5000 and simple possession of oxycontin for
what happened at the second pharmacy.

on november 21, 2023, she was formally convicted of these offences. on
november 19, 2024, she began serving a global 4.5-year sentence imposed by
brown j. of the ontario court of justice.

ms. gallie was subject to a house-arrest bail for the current charges before
the court after her october 15, 2022, arrest. she remained on that release
order, without any allegation of breaching it, until she had to step into
custody to serve justice brown’s sentence.
background of the offender

ms. gallie was born on […], 1985. she has two adult children,
aged 22 and 20. she also has a very young daughter, approximately two years
old.

her
upbringing was difficult. she witnessed terrible domestic abuse by her father
towards her mother. there was also a history of alcoholism within her extended
family. her father, tragically, committed suicide when she was only 14.

at
15, she had her first child. once her baby was born, her mother kicked ms.
gallie and her child out of the home. the father of this child did not remain
to help her, and she was placed on social assistance and began living in
community housing.

at
18, she met her current partner, and they had her second child. her partner
became abusive early in their relationship. he was unable to work due to his
severe social anxiety. ms. gallie was the sole provider for her family as a
result.

her
most recent pregnancy experienced complications. she needed abdominal surgery
due to the nature of the birth. her daughter was born in the spring of 2023.
before beginning the sentence imposed by brown j., she had been the primary
caregiver for her youngest daughter while she remained in the community on
bail. while the child’s father currently provides for her, ms. gallie remains
concerned that the longer she stays in custody, the more likely it is that her
daughter could end up in foster care.

while
she was still pregnant with her youngest child, she contacted an agency serving
indigenous families to be proactive and obtain any support she anticipated she
would need.

ms.
gallie considers herself métis. she has mi’kmaq heritage from her maternal
family that stretches back generations, primarily from new brunswick, but is
regarded as métis due to her mixed european and indigenous ancestry. she did
not learn about her indigenous ancestry until her mid-20s. consequently, she
did not have significant cultural involvement with that part of her background
during her childhood or teenage years. her maternal grandfather informed her of
her mi’kmaq heritage before he passed away.

when
he was young, her grandfather lived in fear that others would discover his
family’s indigenous heritage. this could have led to him or one of his siblings
being taken to a residential school. unsurprisingly, their heritage was treated
as a family secret as a result.

ms.
gallie graduated from high school and earned a pharmacy technician diploma from
college in 2013. she worked at various pharmacies until 2020. in 2018, ms.
gallie was involved in a car accident that resulted in a serious back injury,
which required surgery. she was prescribed oxycontin and later became dependent
on it. as the prescription medication proved insufficient, she developed a
severe addiction. she has never experimented with any other type of drug. she
explains, but does not excuse, her criminal conduct as an unfortunate reaction
to her addiction. she chose to obtain drugs illegally.

ms.
gallie informed me during the sentencing hearing that she was deeply remorseful
for her actions. she recognizes the severity of her crimes and what she has
lost, including her professional career and access to her children. while in
custody, she received help to overcome her addiction and is now stable, no
longer taking oxycontin. she hopes to return to being a loving mother to her
children as soon as possible.
position of the parties

ms.
erdei submits that an appropriate sentence for these offences would have been
five years in prison. because ms. gallie is serving a 4.5 year sentence now,
she requests that i impose a global 3.5-year consecutive sentence to respect
the totality principle.

she
points to the particularly deadly nature of fentanyl and the significant value
of the drugs and cash found in ms. gallie’s possession. firearms are inherently
dangerous, and although this handgun was not loaded, it was found with readily
accessible ammunition. it is also somewhat aggravating that ms. gallie was
under an undertaking for other drug-related charges when she committed the
index offences.

ms.
erdei takes the position that ms. gallie has not made any meaningful strides
towards her rehabilitation since these offences occurred. furthermore, in
response to an argument made by mr. o’connor, ms. erdei submits that ms. gallie
also cannot point to her family circumstances as a relevant factor unless she
provides evidence of how increased jail time will adversely impact her children
and family, relying on the court of appeal’s decision in
r. v. brown,
2025 onca 164, at para.
11. in her view, that evidence is lacking here.

similarly,
ms. erdei argues that ms. gallie should not receive any mitigation as an
indigenous canadian for her offences. although aboriginal legal services of
toronto provided a letter detailing some of ms. gallie’s family history and
heritage, the author could not establish a strong enough connection between ms.
gallie and this heritage to prepare a formal
gladue
report.

mr.
o’connor submits that any sentence i impose should run concurrently with the
sentence ms. gallie is currently serving. she fell into criminal behaviour only
due to the terrible accident in 2018 that left her addicted to painkillers.
while this does not excuse her criminal offences, it does place them in
context. she turned to crime to sustain an addiction that she never sought or
desired. her story is just one more tragic example of the devastating effects
of opioid addiction on otherwise pro-social members of society.

in
his submission, ms. gallie is a loving mother who cares deeply for her
children. he asked me to place great weight on his client’s status as a
first-time offender at the time of the offences. she also pleaded guilty, which
is a significant mitigating factor given the potential complexity of a trial.

she was pregnant at the time of these offences.
following that high-risk pregnancy, she required considerable recovery time.
now, she is separated from her youngest child. while that remains an inevitable
consequence of being involved in crimes of this magnitude, mr. o’connor submits
that i should view the family separation concerns present in this case as a
significant collateral consequence.

his client may not have a strong attachment to her
indigenous heritage, but that is not due to disinterest. it is because it was
hidden from her due to the policies of this country, which historically
mistreated indigenous families and tore them apart. denying her the benefit of
gladue
principles in this hearing would only perpetuate that injustice.

finally, he submits that ms. gallie’s demonstrated
ability to comply with her bail conditions and refrain from reoffending after
her arrest proves that she will return to a crime-free life once she is
ultimately released. while the offences before justice brown are technically distinct
from those before me, they are best viewed as interconnected. they occurred due
to the poor judgment ms. gallie exhibited while suffering from her addiction.
this, in turn, requires this court to place significant weight on the totality
principle. had she resolved all her charges simultaneously, he submits that the
effective sentence sought by the crown (8 years between the two cases) would
never have been imposed, as it is excessive and crushing.
aggravating and mitigating factors

i have considered the following aggravating factors:
•
ms. gallie possessed a
prohibited firearm with readily accessible ammunition in a motel, where she
endangered the safety of every other occupant had the firearm been
intentionally or accidentally discharged;
•
she was bound by an
undertaking at the time for drug-related offences, albeit of a very different
nature;
•
she possessed a
significant quantity of cocaine and fentanyl for drug trafficking; and
•
she possessed over $10,000
in proceeds of crime.

the
mitigating factors include an early plea, which spared the courts the need for
a lengthy preliminary hearing and trial. additionally, ms. gallie’s difficult
life experiences and her indigenous heritage, as i will explain, also diminish
her moral culpability to some extent.
sentencing – firearms and drugs

sentencing
“is a highly individualized process” requiring “a delicate balancing of the
various sentencing principles and objectives”:
r. v. suter,
2018 scc 34,
at para.
4.
individualization requires the sentencing judge to
consider all of the relevant facts before the court, including the “status and
life experiences” of the offender:
r. v. parranto,
2021 scc 46
at para.
44.

proportionality
remains the cornerstone of all sentencing decisions. a sentence must be
“proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender”:
criminal code
section 718.1.

the
ontario court of appeal has emphasized that the “toxic combination of drugs and
guns poses a pernicious and persisting threat to public safety and the welfare
of the community”: see
r. v. wong,
2012 onca 767, at para.
11.

the
parties agree that ms. gallie’s possession of the handgun falls at the “true
crime” end of the spectrum identified by the supreme court of canada in
r.
v. nur,
2015 scc 15,
at para.
84.
handguns are associated
with all manner of evil, especially in large urban centres such as toronto. the
dangers and harm inflicted upon society by the illegal drug trade were described
by the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. lynch,
2022 onca 109,
at
para.
17.
these include the exploitation of the vulnerable, the spread
of addiction, adverse health consequences, and the crime and violence that
inevitably follow the distribution and consumption of hard drugs in particular.

the
harms associated with fentanyl can only be described as a unique form of evil.
justice barrett described them well in
r. v. ahmed,
2024 onsc 6664,
at para.
23:
trafficking in a deadly drug
such as fentanyl causes immeasurable harm to the community. as noted by the
court of appeal for ontario in
r. v. loor,
2017 onca 696, at
para.
33, “every day in our communities, fentanyl abuse claims the lives
of canadians.” indeed, given its deadly and addictive properties, fentanyl has
been described as “public enemy number one”:
r. v. parranto,
2021
scc 46, 3 s.c.r. 366, at para.
93;
r. v. mengesha,
2022
onca 654, 516 c.r.r. (2d) 31, at para.
16;
r. v. campbell,
2022
onca 666, 163 o.r. (3d) 355, at para.
83.

the
primary sentencing principles in this case must be general deterrence and
denunciation:
r. v. marshall,
2015 onca 692, at para.
49;
r. v. lawal,
2024 onsc 3621, at para.
27;
r. v. johnson,
2020 mbca 10, at para.
12.
however, while the firearms and drug offences are linked, they remain distinct.
i caution myself not to effectively punish ms. gallie twice by imposing a
sentence for one offence and then using the facts surrounding that offence as
an aggravating factor for the related offences: see
r. v. pitt,
2023
onsc 5470, at para.
32.

in
r. v. nguyen,
2019 onsc 6358, justice spies reviewed the authorities
regarding sentencing for
criminal code
section 92 offences, noting the
significant differences between these and more serious
section 95
offences
(which involve loaded prohibited or restricted firearms). a range of 1-3 years
in jail exists, depending on various aggravating and mitigating factors: see
paras. 34-37. i note as well that the maximum penalty for a
section 95
offence
was raised to 14 years on december 15, 2023, demonstrating parliament views
this offence as being objectively more serious: see
an act
to amend certain acts and to make certain consequential amendments (firearms)
(s.c. 2023, c. 32).

in
r. v. campbell,
2024 onsc 2220, justice boswell held that a sentence
between two and three years was generally appropriate for trafficking in less
than an ounce of fentanyl: see para. 46. in
r. v. ahmed,
2024 onsc
6664,
justice barrett held that even where an offender has “strong
rehabilitative prospects,” a penitentiary sentence is normally required for
fentanyl trafficking. in some cases, sentences as long as five years for this
offence alone can be justified to send a strong message regarding deterrence
and denunciation: see para. 34.

in
pitt,
the offender was 19 years old and had no prior criminal record. he
was found guilty of possession of a loaded restricted firearm and possession of
28.58 grams of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking. the sentence was four
years in prison.

ms.
erdei brought to my attention several additional authorities, including
r.
v. yogendran,
2021 oncj 125. in that case, a youthful first-time offender
was arrested for being in constructive possession of 16.38 grams of fentanyl
cut with caffeine and another agent, 19.91 grams of cocaine, approximately $14,000,
and a loaded semi-automatic handgun. despite his strong rehabilitative
potential, justice pringle imposed a global six-year sentence, consisting of
three years for the firearm offence and three consecutive years for possession
of fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking.
restraint, rehabilitation and totality

a
penitentiary sentence is required to meet these sentencing principles and reflect
the objective gravity of ms. gallie’s offences. yet, as mr. o’connor has
rightfully noted, ms. gallie was a first-time offender. i must not lose sight
of the principles of rehabilitation and restraint, even given the nature of her
crimes:
r. v. disher,
2020 onca 710,
at
para.
60;
r. v. desir,
2021
onca 486,
at
paras.
41-42.

i
must also consider the principle of totality, which is embedded in
s. 718.2
(c)
of the
criminal code. the totality principle requires a sentencing court
to ensure that an offender who receives consecutive sentences for multiple
offences is not subject to a sentence that exceeds her overall moral
culpability. the sentence imposed must also not be “crushing” and extinguish
nearly all hope of the offender’s rehabilitative potential.

in
r. v. johnson,
2012 onca 339, the ontario court of appeal addressed the
totality principle in the context of an offender who has been previously convicted
of prior offences and is serving a sentence for those offences, and who must then
be sentenced for new, additional offences. the court of appeal noted that the
totality principle applies in these situations but cautioned sentencing courts against
placing undue emphasis on it. the court wrote at para. 23:
the system must be seen to be
fair and rational – both to the offender and the community – and its integrity
must be preserved. just as a sentence cannot be unduly harsh and excessive,
neither can it be overly lenient or unresponsive to other purposes and
principles that underpin the sentencing regime – denunciation, deterrence, the
promotion of a sense of responsibility in offenders and acknowledgement of harm
done to victims and the community, and the protection of the public:
criminal
code, s. 718. in this sense, an offender such as the appellant ought not to be
seen to be reaping benefits from his previous serious criminal misconduct.

mr.
o’connor argues that the totality principle has unique salience in this case
due to his client’s status as a first-time offender. he cited
r. v. al-akhali,
2025 onca 229, where the court of appeal addressed the need for restraint concerning
youthful
first-time offenders with strong rehabilitative prospects. the importance
of general deterrence is reduced in these cases, and “the long-term interests
of society are better protected by ensuring that an offender’s underlying
problems, which prompted his deviant behaviour, are corrected”: see paras.
73-75, citing among other authorities,
r. v. wesslen,
2015 abca 74,
para.
41.

ms.
gallie was not a youthful first-time offender when she committed her offences,
at least not as that term is generally understood in the jurisprudence. i
nevertheless agree with mr. o’connor that this decision from the court of
appeal is highly informative, given that ms. gallie’s offending behaviour primarily
resulted from the terrible addiction she developed due to her accident, and she
still has strong rehabilitative potential. she is certainly not a hardened
criminal with a history of recidivism.

in
that regard, i must be cautious regarding how i approach the outstanding set of
charges ms. gallie was facing at the time she committed the current offences. while
ms. gallie was subject to a bail order because of those charges, she had not
been convicted of them when she committed the offences before this court. that
significantly diminishes the weight i should place on that factor. nor is she
alleged to have violated a term of that prior bail order. paciocco j.a.,
speaking for the court of appeal in
r. v. m.v.,
2023 onca 724, noted the
following at para. 65:
…prior criminal convictions are
ordinarily aggravating because it is contemptuous for offenders who have
already been convicted to disregard that experience and offend again. if an
offender has yet to be convicted of offence #1 that reasoning cannot apply.
similarly, a prior criminal record can be a predictor of the need for a harsher
sentence to specifically deter the offender since the last penalty was not
effective in doing so, given the subsequent offence. that inference is equally
unavailable where no prior sentence has been imposed. nor, in my view, can the
earlier criminal conduct enhance the need for denunciation of the later offence.

in
r. v. roshuk-finch,
2025 abca 85, the alberta court of appeal expressed
a similar sentiment in the context of how sentencing courts should apply the
“step-up principle.” at para. 25, the court of appeal wrote:
the general rule is that before
an increase in sentence can be imposed for a repeat offence, that offence must
have been committed after conviction and sentencing for the initial offence:
r
v skolnick,
1982 canlii 54 (scc), 2 scr 47 at 58-59, 138 dlr (3d) 193 [skolnick];
r v
mv,
2023 onca 724
at paras
63-64. the rationale for applying the step
concept is absent when the offender has not had the effect of the earlier
sentence to deter their conduct:
skolnick
at 54.
gladue
principles and family separation

in
r. v. f.h.l.,
2018 onca 83, the ontario court of appeal explained that before an aboriginal
offender’s background should influence the court’s sentencing decision, “the
systemic and background factors affecting aboriginal people in canadian society
must have impacted the offender’s life in a way that (1) bears on moral
blameworthiness, or (2) indicates which types of sentencing objectives should
be prioritized in the offender’s case.” however, there is no requirement for a
“causal connection” between the crimes and the offender’s indigenous heritage.

in
cases such as this one, where the offender has been severed from their heritage,
denying them consideration of
gladue
principles for that reason alone
remains an error of principle. for example, in
r. v. kreko,
2016 onca
367, the appellant was an aboriginal canadian who had been adopted at one year
of age by a non-aboriginal family and was raised without knowledge of his
aboriginal heritage. sometime after his 16th birthday, he learned of his
aboriginal background. the trial judge found that there was no clear causal
link between the appellant’s aboriginal heritage and his offences, and did not
incorporate this factor in the final sentencing decision.

the
ontario court of appeal held that this constituted an error. the court found
that the appellant’s dislocation from his identity affected his moral
culpability and that his aboriginal heritage, even if it had been unknown to
him for many years, was relevant to the sentencing process. the trial court
applied the incorrect approach. instead, the trial court should have considered
the intergenerational and systemic factors contributing to the appellant's
disconnection from his heritage: see para. 24.

in
r. v kehoe,
2023 bcca 2, the appellant was convicted of aggravated
assault. he was métis, 30 years old, and had a lengthy prior criminal record.
the crown's position at trial was that
gladue
principles should play a
limited role in his sentencing because many difficulties in his life could be
traced to his non-indigenous stepfather’s drug use and trafficking, rather than
to his mother’s status as a métis person. the appellant, as the trial crown
argued, was “not raised” with indigenous cultural practices, which also weighed
heavily against the incorporation of
gladue
principles.

the
b.c. court of appeal characterized the position taken by the crown, which was
adopted by the trial judge, as “deeply flawed”: see para. 51. at paras. 52-57,
the court of appeal explained why:
the overall thrust of the
crown’s submission was plain: because mr. kehoe and his mother were
disconnected from their métis heritage,
gladue
principles
should play essentially no role in determining a fit sentence for mr. kehoe.
mr.
kehoe’s difficulties were related primarily to his
non-indigenous step-father’s behaviours, not his heritage.
this position is highly
problematic for two reasons.
first, as the truth and
reconciliation commission noted at pp. 1–3 of its summary report, “honouring
the truth, reconciling for the future,” canada developed and implemented “a
coherent policy to eliminate aboriginal people as distinct peoples and to assimilate
them into the canadian mainstream against their will.” canada “pursued this
policy of cultural genocide because it wished to divest itself of its legal and
financial obligations to aboriginal people and gain control over their land and
resources.” residential schooling was one of many tools canada used to achieve
its assimilationist objectives.
as a consequence of canada’s
colonial history and assimilationist policies, many indigenous people have
become disconnected from their ancestral communities, cultures, and associated
positive social structures. this disconnection has contributed to the social
and economic marginalization of indigenous people in canada, including their
disproportionate interactions with the criminal justice system.
disconnection is one of the
very harms associated with canada’s colonial history and assimilationist
policies that
gladue
and
ipeelee
seek to
address. accordingly, the crown’s reasoning that
gladue
principles
should play a very limited role in this case because mr. kehoe was disconnected
from his indigenous culture, community and supports subverts the remedial
purpose of s. 718.2(e) of the
code
and penalizes mr. kehoe for
the success of canada’s destructive policies.
second, when determining
whether and how
gladue
principles applied to mr.
kehoe,
the issue was never whether he was disconnected from his métis community,
culture and supports. rather, the issues were: (1) the role canada’s colonial
history and post-colonial assimilationist policies played in causing that disconnection;
and (2) the role that disconnection played in his coming before the court.

therefore,
i reject ms. erdei's position that the evidence in this hearing precludes my
consideration of
gladue
principles for ms. gallie. i accept mr.
o’connor’s argument that sufficient evidence exists for me to infer that the
tragic legacy of the residential school system and canada’s historic
mistreatment of its indigenous peoples has played a role in bringing her before
the courts. in this case, as in many others, it is difficult to measure with
precision how canada’s assimilationist policies and the associated
intergenerational trauma affected ms. gallie’s life trajectory and family
history. that does not mean they are to be ignored.

while
the letter from aboriginal legal services of toronto indicates that the author
is unable to complete a formal
gladue
report, it does not question ms.
gallie’s indigenous heritage. her family’s connection to its métis background
is rooted in a deep history that she articulates and describes in considerable
detail. this includes her grandfather’s sharing of his personal experience of
having to hide his aboriginal identity. this decision stemmed from fear of the
consequences that might befall him or his siblings should their identity become
widely known. canada’s métis people, like many indigenous groups, have a proud
tradition of relying on oral histories to pass down their family stories,
legends, and knowledge. this was recognized by the royal commission on
aboriginal peoples: see
delgamuukw v. british columbia,
1997 canlii 302
(scc), at paras.
87 and 106-107.

that
ms. gallie’s connection to her culture was severed in the past is tragic, but
sadly, it is not uncommon. her recent efforts to reconnect with that culture
are meaningful and admirable. i note that the author of the letter from
aboriginal legal services states clearly that, despite the limits on the
assistance they were able to provide ms. gallie, nothing in the letter “should
be read in any way as stating that ms. gallie is not an indigenous person.”

i
also accept that there is more than enough evidence in this case to give the
family separation concerns identified by mr. o’connor significant weight. ms.
gallie was, and remains, a loving mother to all her children. she was the
primary caregiver for her youngest child before she was incarcerated. her
eldest daughter informed the author of the pre-sentence report that her mother
is a “good person” who has always been there for her children, and that she was
“the glue that keeps their family together.” i am absolutely satisfied that the
longer ms. gallie remains in custody, the greater the indirect impact this will
have on her entire family.

how
the sentence i impose will affect her youngest child warrants particular
consideration. while that child is currently in the care of her father, he has
not previously taken on the role of a primary long-term caregiver and has his
own internal struggles. his ability to be a stable, long-term parent is
uncertain. in
r. v. habib,
2024 onca 830, the ontario court of appeal
held that sentencing judges must give “serious and sufficient consideration to
family separation consequences” when determining an appropriate sentence: see
para. 44. these consequences may justify a sentence adjustment, even for “grave
offences” where the primary sentencing principles are deterrence and
denunciation: see para. 45. as explained by the court of appeal at para. 46:
this benefits society because
families are its foundational fabric. see
r. v. clayton
(1982),
1982
canlii 3860 (on ca), 69 c.c.c. (2d) 81 (ont. c.a.), at p. 83. our society
depends on families to raise and nurture children, transmit knowledge, skills,
and values from generation to generation, and provide love, care, emotional,
economic, and social support to their members. see
moge v. moge,
1992
canlii 25 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 813, at p. 848. courts thus try to minimize
the impact of sentencing on defendants’ families because, as spencer
recognized, interfering with this foundational social institution, even for
just reasons, can endanger community safety and society’s well-being.

these
factors demand even greater weight in cases involving indigenous families. i
take very seriously the risk that ms. gallie’s youngest daughter may find
herself in the child welfare system; a risk that is amplified by the duration
of ms. gallie’s prison sentence. this is anything but a speculative concern. in
reference re an act respecting first nations, inuit and métis children,
youth and families,
2024 scc 5, the supreme court of canada commented on
the historic over-use of the child welfare system to split apart indigenous
families. the supreme court acknowledged the harm and intergenerational trauma
that resulted from these policies and noted that the harm is still being felt
today.

courts
must acknowledge this tragic history and craft sentences, as much as possible,
to prevent the harm associated with it from being perpetuated. indigenous
children in the child welfare system experience higher rates of notoriously adverse
ill effects, such as mental health issues and lower educational achievements. they
are also more likely to experience depression and anxiety, largely attributable
to the trauma and disruption caused by separation from their families and communities,
along with the concomitant loss of cultural identity: see
congress of
aboriginal peoples, research department, child welfare and education fact
sheet, (march 19, 2024), available online: https://abo-peoples.org/.
conclusion

if
not for the sentence ms. gallie was already serving, i agree with ms. erdei
that a sentence as high as five years would have been appropriate for these
offences. however, imposing a consecutive sentence of anything approaching that
amount would be excessive and violate the totality principle. at the same time,
i cannot accede to mr. o’connor’s request for concurrent sentences. these were
separate offences, involving the possession of cocaine and fentanyl for the
purpose of trafficking, as well as the possession of a firearm with nearby
ammunition. the amount of money located and the value of the narcotics
themselves demonstrate that ms. gallie had fallen into the illegal drug trade
to a dangerous degree. they call for an increase in the total sentence ms.
gallie is serving.

i
impose an 18-month consecutive sentence. this will effectively create a
six-year global sentence for these offences and those before justice brown. for
a first-time indigenous offender, this remains a significant penalty. i will
reduce the 18 months by a credit of six months based on the agreement of the
parties regarding the impact that the onerous house arrest conditions on ms.
gallie’s release order had on her liberty interests: see
r. v. downes,
2006 canlii 3957
(ont. c.a.)

i
endorse the informations as follows: a three year sentence both counts of
possession of schedule i substances for the purpose of trafficking, to be
served concurrently to any sentence she is already serving; a concurrent one
year sentence for the careless storge of a firearm; a concurrent one year
sentence for the possession of proceedings of crime; and a consecutive one year
sentence to any sentence currently being served for the possession of restricted
or prohibited firearm knowing that possession was unauthorized.

there
will be a forfeiture and destruction order concerning the seized firearm and
ammunition pursuant to
criminal code
section 491(1). i order forfeiture
of the seized funds as proceeds of crime in accordance with
criminal code
section 462.38.

there
will be a
criminal code
section 109 order for ten years at the request
of the crown.

these
are secondary designated offences for dna purposes, and i find it is in the
best interests of the administration of justice to impose the orders:
criminal
code
section 487.051(3)(b).

the
victim fine surcharges are waived.
released: 
may 16,
2025
signed:
justice brock jones