source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj567/2025oncj567.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. sabourin, 2025 oncj 567
date: 
2025 10 20
court
file no.: cornwall 24-39101606
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
marcel sabourin
before
justice j.r. lalande
heard
on sept 10-11, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 20, 2025
b. underwood..................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
i. paul..................................................................... 
counsel for the accused mr. sabourin
lalande j.:
overview

mr. sabourin is charged with one count of assault, contrary to
s. 266
of
the
criminal code. the allegation stems from an incident in the complainant’s
home on june 9, 2023. the matter proceeded to trial on september 10 and 11,
2025. the central issues are credibility and whether the crown has proven an
intentional application of force.

the complainant, ms. linda lappan, was the sole witness for the
prosecution. photos of the injury to ms. lappan’s left breast were filed under
seal. the crown also filed an audio recording taken by the complainant a short
while after the alleged assault, which captures her arguing with the accused
about the events in question.

mr. sabourin testified in his own defence and submitted a photo of his
television remotes and cellular phone as an exhibit.

on october 1
st, 2025, i requested additional submissions from
counsel. the submissions were filed in writing and addressed two issues: (1)
whether the “intentional application of force” as defined in section 265(1)(a)
could be established on the basis of recklessness; and (2) mr. sabourin’s
apparent statement on the recording where he says, “i’m drunk” or “i’m a
drunk”. this statement had not been addressed by either party in evidence or
submissions. at trial, the complainant testified that the accused was drinking
at the time of the confrontation. mr. sabourin denied drinking. the parties agree
that the statement as to the accused being drunk ought not to be considered or
given “much weight” as it was not referred to or put to the accused.
facts

the complainant and accused were involved in a relationship for some
years. the accused moved in with her in the fall of 2019. by the spring of
2023, the relationship had deteriorated. mr. sabourin was expected to move out
of the residence but taking longer than planned. as he explained in evidence,
he had been to a funeral out of the country days before the incident in
question and was working to establish temporary accommodations while he shopped
for a house.

according to the complainant, a dispute occurred between the parties on
june 9, 2023. ms. lappan had arrived home from work around 7pm. she had an argument
with the accused and described him to be name-calling and verbally abusive. at
around 930pm, mr. sabourin was in bed in an upper-level bedroom and the parties
were arguing with one another from a distance. ms. lappan entered the bedroom.
she testified that she intended to grab the television remote to turn the
volume down so that she could tell mr. sabourin to leave the residence. during
the dispute, the accused is alleged to have lunged at the complainant while
attempting to retrieve the device in her hand. in doing so, he allegedly
grabbed and twisted her left breast, causing bruising. he is also alleged to
have pushed her into a nearby wall.

mr. sabourin claims that the complainant barged into the room and seized
his phone while he was in bed. he maintains that any physical contact between
them was incidental to his efforts at retrieving his phone which the
complainant had clutched to her chest. while mr. sabourin acknowledges that he
was involved in the altercation, he denies any intention to apply force to ms. lappan’s
person. instead, he testified that he was simply grabbing at the object in her
hand. mr. sabourin explained that his hand got caught in her top while he was
grabbing at his phone. he agreed in cross-examination that this may have caused
the bruising on her chest. he adamantly denied pushing her into the wall.
legal principles
generally

an accused person is presumed to be innocent. the onus is on the crown
to prove the charges against the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. that onus
never shifts. an accused person is not required to testify or to call any
evidence, nor is he obligated to explain anything.

to succeed in gaining a conviction, the crown must prove the specific
charges beyond a reasonable doubt. this is a heavy standard, designed to
prevent the conviction of innocent persons.

a
reasonable doubt has been defined as one that is not based on sympathy or
prejudice but logically connected to the evidence or absence of evidence. it
has also been described as not being an imaginary or frivolous doubt.

it
is not enough to convict, for a trial judge to conclude that accused persons
are probably guilty. nor is it necessary that their guilt be proved to an
absolute certainty:
r. v. lifchus
(1997),
1997 canlii 319 (scc), 9 cr (5th) 1 (scc). the
standard beyond a reasonable doubt is much closer to a certainty, however, than
it is to the balance of probabilities measure:
r v starr
2000 scc 40 (canlii), 2 scr
144.
evaluation of evidence

a
court may accept all, some or none of a witness’ evidence. in determining
which, if any portions, to accept, a trial judge must evaluate the credibility
and reliability of a witness’ evidence. of course, the same level of scrutiny
is to be applied to all accounts from evidence of defence and crown witnesses.
credibility

credibility relates to the honesty of a witness. there is no specific
formula to be applied when evaluating credibility. instead, courts are to take
a commonsense approach to the evidence. some examples of the factors considered
can include the plausibility of a witness’ account, or whether the evidence is
internally consistent or externally consistent with other reliable accounts.

some inconsistencies can be significant while others may relate
to peripheral details. often, witnesses provide explanations for
inconsistencies which are evaluated in determining the credibility of their
account. factors such as bias or an interest in the outcome of a matter may
also be important.

given that this case requires me to make
determinations on the credibility on the evidence of the accused, i must also consider
the analysis set out by the supreme court of canada in
r v wd, 1991 1
scr no 742. the wd framework is used by triers of fact in assessing the impact
of defence evidence on the ultimate question as to whether the crown has proven
the case against the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. the test is
generally articulated as follows:
(1)
if i believe the exculpatory evidence of the accused, he must be
acquitted;
(2)
if i do not accept the evidence of the accused but am left with a
reasonable doubt by it, he must be acquitted; and,
(3)
even if i reject the accused’s evidence and am not left with a
reasonable doubt by it, i must still go on to determine whether the crown has
proven the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt based on the evidence that
i do accept.

i note that when evaluating the two
accounts of the events, i am not doing so in a contest of credibility where i
must choose one version over the other as truth (
graham
2023 onsc 4300
).
if i am unable to decide which account to believe, the accused must be
acquitted (
jhs
2008 scc 30 (canlii), 2008 2 scr 152).
reliability

reliability refers to the accuracy of a witness’
account, including their ability to observe, recall and recount events. a
witness’ reliability is distinct from credibility. even a credible witness can
give unreliable evidence. of course, a witness who is not credible cannot
provide reliable evidence on the same point.

in evaluating the reliability of a witness’ ability
to observe, some important factors for a court to consider may include the
strength of a witness’ faculties, including hearing or vision. another example
is witness’ condition at the time of observation, including whether they are relaxed
or excited, sober or intoxicated. the general conditions surrounding the event,
including timing or lighting or weather may also be important.

other factors are important to a witness’
ability to recall and to recount events at the time of their testimony. examples
include whether the event in question was routine or exceptional, such that it
may stand out more in the person’s memory, or, whether the witness has issues
with their memory.
assault

the
nature of the assault in this case involves an application of force,
corresponding to
section 265(1)
(a) of the
criminal code.
that section defines
an assault in the following way:
265
(1
)
a person commits an assault when
(a)
without
the consent of another person, he applies force intentionally to that other
person, directly or indirectly;

i
will go into some detail as to the legal interpretation of this definition later
in the judgment.

the
law also recognizes that, to prove an assault, the accused must be aware or
reckless to the fact that the complainant does not consent to it. consent is
defined in section 265(3).
issue #1: credibility, reliability &
findings of fact

i
accept most of the evidence provided by the complainant and accused. the
narrative of events which they described in their testimony was generally
consistent with one another, except for some details of events which occurred before
and during the confrontation at issue.
complainant - credibility and
reliability

i
have considered the evidence of ms. lappan in this case. while i agree with
some of the concerns raised by defence, overall, i find ms. lappan to be a
credible and reliable witness.

defence
claim that ms. lappan’s allegations may have been motivated by some ongoing financial
disputes at the time that she reported the offences, many months after they
occurred. i accept ms. lappan’s evidence on this point. she explained that she
needed some time before she was ready to pursue the matter. i am also mindful in
drawing that conclusion that there is an emotionally charged audio recording of
the discussion that occurred between the parties moments after the alleged
assault. the conversation captured on the recording reflects essentially the
same positions taken by the parties at trial. this recording, combined with
the photographs of ms. lappan’s injury, satisfy me that, while there may have
been financial disputes ongoing at the time of her delayed reporting, the
events were not fabricated or exaggerated.

i
did have some concern with respect to the inconsistency that emerged in
cross-examination as to what the complainant grabbed when she entered the
bedroom. initially, in chief, she testified that she retrieved the remote for
the television. in cross-examination, she acknowledged that she may have
grabbed the accused’s cell phone. during the near-contemporaneous audio
recording, the complainant describes the accused’s assertion that she grabbed
his phone as “baloney”. however, during her interview with police, she
described the item as a cell phone, which she dropped after grabbing. the
complainant explained during her evidence that this information was essentially
drawn from her conversation with the accused on the recording. regardless of
which item she grabbed, ms. lappan maintained that she entered the bedroom to
retrieve the remote and not a phone. i accept her explanation on that point.

i
have reviewed and considered the photograph filed by defence which shows that
the remote and phone have different dimensions and are distinct in shape.
essentially, the remotes are longer and narrower compared to the phone. on this
issue, i accept the complainant’s evidence that, in the heat of the moment, she
may have been honestly mistaken and grabbed the wrong item.

i
also accept that she wished to retrieve the remote and do not accept the
suggestion in the accused’s evidence that the complainant may have wanted to
take his phone and inspect it as he had taken several calls. at the time, the
complainant wished to terminate their relationship and have the accused leave
her home. i simply do not find it plausible that she would barge into his
bedroom to forcefully seize and inspect his phone.

finally,
i accept that ms. lappan suffered a bruise to her left breast during the
confrontation, as depicted in the sealed exhibit. given that ms. lappan was
taking medication at the time that caused her blood to thin, this may have also
caused her to bruise more easily. therefore, while i recognize that the bruise appears
quite large and dark in the initial photograph, i do not place great weight on
the severity of the bruise when assessing the degree of force applied. i do
accept however that the complainant was caused significant pain and some
bruising.
accused – credibility and reliability

save
for some specific points outlined below, i generally accept the evidence of the
accused. mr. sabourin’s evidence was straightforward. there were few glaring
internal or external inconsistencies. generally, it also coincided with the
complainant’s account and other evidence at trial such as the photos or audio
recording.

in
particular, i accept that the accused had mixed feelings about the end of his
relationship with the complainant and that he was making efforts at obtaining
temporary accommodation as he described.

i
am skeptical, however, that mr. sabourin was not angry whatsoever over the
situation. i am equally skeptical of his claim that he was not angry despite
his view that the complainant owed him tens of thousands of dollars.

based
on what is heard on the recording, i also have significant concerns that the
accused was dishonest in his evidence about his consumption of alcohol on the
night in question. however, i refrain from using this fact against him in
determining his credibility, given the submissions of both counsel.

most
importantly, i do not accept the accused’s evidence that he was asleep when the
complainant entered the room, and that he could recall no conversation or argument
that occurred between them prior to the confrontation. the accused’s own
evidence was that there was tension in the home due to delays in his departure.
moreover, he was, according to his evidence, awake and taking calls in the
evening when the complainant returned home from work near or after 7pm. his
evidence was quite detailed on these points. this, coupled with the
complainant’s account of the argument preceding the confrontation, renders his
evidence on those points implausible in my view. lastly, as i pointed out
earlier, the idea that ms. lappan would arrive home, hear the accused’s phone
and, in the absence of any confrontation or argument, barge in to confiscate it
seems far-fetched and unrealistic.

despite
these issues, the accused’s account of the confrontation left me in doubt with
respect to whether he intentionally applied force to the complainant while attempting
to grab the item he thought to be his phone, including the grabbing or pushing
as described. i draw this conclusion based on his evidence alone and in
consideration of the overall body of evidence in accordance with stages 1 and 2
of
wd.
however, as i will go on to explain, this does not end the matter.
findings of fact

before
considering whether the crown as discharged its onus on the basis of the
evidence which i do accept, i find the following events as fact:
•
ms. lappan returned home from work on the night in question at or
shortly after 7pm. an argument occurred between her and the accused at some
point after her return home.
•
as the argument was ongoing, ms. lappan entered the accused’s
room intending to pick up and use the remote to turn down the volume on the
television. ms. lappan reached over the accused and, in her haste, picked up
his phone by mistake.
•
the accused immediately lunged at the complainant, reaching towards
her chest where she held the item. his hand became entangled in her shirt. in
the seconds that followed, the accused caused the bruise to the complainant’s
chest while trying to grab the item she had picked up. the force which he
applied caused her significant pain and resulted in the bruise shown in the
photographs.
•
the complainant dropped the item and left the room. it was
moments after her exit from the room that the recording began.
issue #2: recklessness

while
i have determined that the accused applied force and caused injury to the
complainant, as i concluded earlier, i am left in doubt as to whether he did so
intentionally. i will go on to determine whether he was reckless in his
application of force, such that he is guilty of the assault.
recklessness &
section 265(1)
(a)

for
the following reasons, my interpretation of the law is that recklessness can
establish the intention required to constitute an “intentional” application of
force.

assault
as defined in
section 265(1)
has three distinct modes of commission. this case
concerns the first mode, described in paragraph (a): a person commits an
assault when (a) without the consent of another person, he applies force
intentionally to that other person, directly or indirectly.

assault
is a general intent offence. the ‘intentional’ element of applying force described
in section 265(1)(a) has been defined by the supreme court as “not done by
accident or through honest mistake” (
r v george,
1960 canlii 45
at 890
(scc),
dawydiuk,
2010 bcca 162
at para
29,
djw,
2011 bcca 522 at
para 70).

the
legal concept of recklessness is defined as being found “in the attitude of one
who, aware that there is danger that his conduct could bring about the result
prohibited by the criminal law, nevertheless persists, despite the risk.” (
sansregret,
1985 canlii 79
at para
16
). recklessness is not the same as negligence. it is
not concerned with whether the accused ought to have seen the risk in
question, but whether he subjectively saw the risk and continued to act with
disregard of the risk. the extent of the risk, as well as the nature of
harm, the social value in the risk, and the ease with which the risk could be
avoided, are all relevant considerations. although the trial judge will assess
whether a risk is unjustified based on the above considerations, because
recklessness is a subjective standard, the focus must be on whether the accused
was aware of the substantial risk he took and any of the factors that
contribute to the risk being unjustified. (
zora,
2020 scc 14
at paras
117-8
).

there
is no dispute that recklessness can apply to the issue of consent as an element
of the offence of assault. however, i acknowledge that there appears to be some
uncertainty in recent caselaw as to whether or not recklessness can establish an
‘intentional’ application of force within the meaning of
section 265(1)
(a).

in
tyrell,
2021 onca 15, convictions for attempt murder and assaulting a
peace officer with intent to resist arrest were overturned. at trial, the
accused was found to have shot a man outside of a nightclub and charged at an
officer while attempting to escape. on appeal, the conviction for attempt
murder was overturned as the trial judge was held to have erroneously inferred
a specific intent to kill (
tyrell,
at paras
22-25
). with respect to the
charge of assaulting a peace officer with the intent to resist arrest, it
appears that both parties to the appeal accepted that the law required nothing
short of a specific intent to apply force for the assaultive element of the
charge to be made out (
tyrell,
at paras
34-7
). as a result, these legal
parameters were applied and the conviction based on recklessness overturned:
…the trial judge accepted the
appellant’s testimony that he tried to avoid contact with the officer. he
convicted the appellant on the basis of his “reckless disregard” as
to whether he would make contact with the officer. the trial judge’s
express finding that the appellant did not have the specific intent to assault
is a finding of fact. given this finding of fact, the conviction on this charge
cannot stand and must be set aside. as the trial judge’s finding is
determinative of this charge on its merits, an acquittal must be entered.
(
tyrell,
para
38
)

several
decisions have subsequently relied on
tyrell
for the general proposition
that recklessness cannot suffice to establish the intentional application of
force required for the offences of assault or assaulting a peace officer (
morell,
2022 oncj 371
at para
51,
mckinley,
2022 oncj 323
at para
112,
guillaume,
2022 oncj at para 8).

however,
there exists a wealth of caselaw from canadian appellate courts – including in
ontario - which explicitly and implicitly supports the notion that recklessness
can suffice to establish intention with respect to an application of force. see
for example:
r v park
2024 mbca 93
at paras
45 & 76,
nagle v r,
2023 nbca 35
at para
21,
r v purcell,
2007 onca 101
at para
7,
r v a.e.,
2000 canlii 16823
(onca) at paras
22-23,
r v w(dj)
2011 bcca 522
at para
70
(affirmed
2012 scc 63
),
r v zaworski,
2022 bcca 144,
r
c
s.h,

jq no 412 (qcca)
and
williams,
2003 scc 41
at para
22. trial courts have
followed suit, including for example
r v cunneen,
2024 onsc 4541
at para
41,
r c korchal,
2025 qccq 298
at para
82
or
r v lucchetto,
2017 oncj 30
at para
75.

with
great respect, i do not read
tyrell
to modify what i consider to be a long-established
principle that recklessness can suffice to establish an ‘intentional’
application of force. rather, it appears that the court of appeal in that case simply
determined an issue based on the legal parameters as agreed upon by the parties
and very specific factual findings. if the court intended to modify, clarify or
otherwise resolve the law on this point, it would have explicitly done so with
a full consideration of the authorities.

moreover,
the concept of recklessness serves to fill a necessary gap in the legal
landscape with respect to assaultive behaviour. it captures criminal conduct
that does not result from intentional actions, but from dangerous and risky
behaviour that rises above the level of mere negligence, where these actions
are not excused by defences such as accident or mistake. this is consistent
with the instructions from the supreme court in
george
some 65 years ago,
when it clarified that the word “intentional” in
section 265(1)
(a) simply means
not by accident or mistake.

i
also see it as consistent with the threshold in section 265(1)(a) as it has
developed. the law is now clear that an application of force does not
necessarily connote some minimum level of violence. it simply requires
interference with a person’s bodily integrity (
za,
2000 canlii 16976
(onca) at paras
6-8,
r v ra,
2024 bcca 283
at para
14
(affirmed at
2025
scc 7
)).

finally,
i recognize that assault is a general intent offence. in the absence of any
explicit language stating otherwise, recklessness can generally establish the
mens
rea
for this category of offence (
purcell,
at paras
13-20
). given
the prevailing caselaw and the supreme court’s interpretation of section
265(1)(a) in
george,
i am of the view that the word ‘intentional’ in
that section is not explicit language that precludes the application of the
doctrine of recklessness.
application

in
this case, i find that mr. sabourin’s actions show that he was clearly aware of
and proceeded in the face of a risk within the meaning of recklessness.

when
the complainant mistakenly picked up his phone, mr. sabourin immediately
engaged in physical confrontation. there was no discussion or rational attempt
to resolve the issue. it is obvious that by engaging in the way he did, lunging
at the complainant during an argument and reaching, with force, at her chest, there
was a clear risk that he would apply significant force to her person. there was
no social value to the risk, it was easily avoidable and it involved the
potential for harm to the complainant. i conclude that mr. sabourin disregarded
that risk and assaulted the complainant through his reckless behaviour while
trying to achieve his purpose of wrestling the phone from ms. lappan.

in
this context, i also emphasize my earlier finding that while i accept that ms.
lappan may bruise more easily than the average person given her medication, i
accept that the force applied caused her pain and that the force was not
insignificant.

finally,
to be sure, this is not a case where the accused has a valid claim of defence
of property. while it was pointed out in submissions that the phone was mr.
sabourin’s property, no serious argument was made in support of a claim of
defence of property – and rightfully so. the accused’s behaviour on that date,
to immediately engage in a physical confrontation to retrieve the phone with
significant force, fell far short of being “reasonable in the circumstances”.
this is a statutory requirement in
section 35(1)
of the
criminal code.
as
a result, it is clear that there is no air of reality to any claim of defence
of property.
conclusion

i
find that the crown has proven that mr. sabourin applied forced to ms. lappan
within the meaning of
section 265(1)
(a) and that she did not consent to that
force. once again, i cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused
was intentional in the application of that force in the literal sense of that
word. however, i conclude that his conduct was reckless, such that the
“intentional” requirement of the offence is made out. finally, mr. sabourin’s
actions were not justified by defence of property.

as
a result, mr. sabourin will be found guilty of assault.
released: october 20 2025
signed:
justice j.r. lalande