source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj385/2025oncj385.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. crawford, 2025 oncj 385
date: 
2025 07 17
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 48102871
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
charmare crawford
before
justice peter n. fraser
heard
on march 28 2025, may 2, 2025, june 12, 2025, july 3, 2025, july 10, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on july 17, 2025
scott arnold....................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
stephanie brown...................................... counsel
for the accused charmare crawford
fraser j.:

on march 28, 2025, charmare crawford plead
guilty to two counts of robbery with a firearm, contrary to
s. 344(1)
of the
criminal
code, and two counts of wearing a disguise with intent to commit an
indictable offence, contrary to
s. 351(2). he also admitted facts making out
two more robberies with a firearm and the possession of 29.53 grams of powder
cocaine, 8.88 grams of crack cocaine and 22.82 grams of fentanyl, pursuant to
s. 725(1)(1.b) of the
code.

the crown’s position on sentence was 6 years in
jail. the defence initially sought the mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years.
after i expressed my concerns that both proposed sentences were below the
acceptable range, counsel jointly asked to withdraw the facts relating to the drug
offences from my consideration. defence counsel then joined the crown in
recommending a sentence of 6 years on the robberies. on july 10, 2025, i agreed
to forego consideration of the drug offences and sentenced mr. crawford to 7
years in jail for the robbery charges, with reasons to follow. these are the
reasons.
the guilty plea

mr. crawford was arraigned on two counts of
robbery and two counts of wearing a disguise with intent on march 28, 2025. he
plead guilty and the following facts were admitted with respect to those four
charges.

on december 12, 2023, mr. crawford attended an ultramar
gas station at 909 wilson avenue in toronto, wearing a blue mask and black
gloves. he asked the clerk, balaketheeswaran sivasubramanim, for cigarettes.
when the clerk turned around, mr. crawford came around the counter and produced
a handgun. he demanded that mr. sivasubramanim open the till, pushed him to the
ground, and struck him on the head with the butt of the handgun causing a minor
injury. he took a quantity of coins, totalling $100.

on january 8, 2024, mr. crawford attended a
shell canada gas station at 920 albion road wearing a blue mask and black
gloves. he asked the store clerk, yash patel, for cigarettes and then came
around the counter with a handgun demanding cash from the till. he stole $475
and fled in a nissan rogue. he was followed by a police surveillance unit and
arrested. he was found in possession of the $475 in stolen money from the shell
canada gas station.

additional facts were admitted pursuant to s.
725(1)(b.1) of the
code
with the consent of both parties. they relate to
two more charges of robbery with a firearm that were contained in the same
information as the other two robberies, and to three charges of possession of a
schedule 1 substance for the purpose of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(3) of the
controlled drugs and substances act, which were contained in a separate
information. these additional facts are set out below.

on december 25, 2023, mr. crawford attended a
circle k convenience store at 2428 islington avenue in toronto wearing a blue
mask and black gloves. he asked for cigarettes and, when the clerk turned
around, he moved around the counter and produced a handgun. he demanded the
clerk open the till and took a quantity of cash totaling $95.

on december 28th 2023, mr. crawford attended the
albion variety store at 361 albion road in toronto wearing a blue mask and
black gloves. he again asked the clerk for cigarettes and came around the
counter brandishing a handgun. he demanded the till be opened and made off with
about $300 in cash. mr. crawford admitted that the handgun used in all four
robberies was an operative firearm.

on january 8, 2024, police executed a search
warrant at mr. crawford’s residence and located 29.53 grams of powder cocaine,
8.88 grams of crack cocaine, and 22.82 grams of fentanyl. mr. crawford admitted
to possessing these drugs.

the matter was adjourned in order for the
parties to prepare materials and submissions on sentence.
the sentencing hearing

the sentencing hearing began on may 2, 2025. the crown sought a
global sentence of 6 years in jail, less time spent in pre-sentence custody.
the defence invited me to impose the mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years,
less time served, principally on the basis of the guilty plea, some
particularly harsh conditions spent in pre-sentence custody, and in light of
the impact of race and culture as envisioned in
r. v. morris,
2021 onca
680.

mr.
crawford’s criminal record was filed as an exhibit on sentence. the record
contains 5 findings of guilt under the
youth criminal justice act
and 9
adult convictions. there are six prior sentences involving a custodial
component, including a conviction for possession of a schedule 1 substance for
the purpose of trafficking in 2020 and a penitentiary sentence for aggravated
assault in 2022.

the
defence filed records from the toronto east detention centre, where mr.
crawford has been held since his arrest. the records documented almost 200 days
spent under lockdowns of various lengths, almost all of which were attributed
to staff shortages. the defence filed two reports prepared for the federal department
of justice entitled,
canadian black justice system report — think 2wice,
and
black people in criminal courts in canada: an exploration using the
relative rate index. the defence also filed a report of the ontario human
rights commission entitled,
report on conditions of confinement at toronto
south detention centre.

mr.
crawford swore an affidavit, setting out some of the circumstances of his life
and upbringing. the affidavit also detailed the impact of the lockdowns on mr.
crawford personally and provided further details about the harsh conditions in
the jail. he was not cross-examined on his affidavit and the crown did not
otherwise dispute the assertions contained in it. in addition, the defence
filed three letters of support for mr. crawford.

after hearing the submissions of counsel, i expressed my
concern that the sentences proposed by both the crown and defence were well
below the appropriate range of sentence and failed to give effect to the
aggravating factors in this case. i noted that mr. crawford admitted facts
making out two additional robberies with a firearm, making four robberies in
total. he struck the victim of the first robbery, balaketheeswaran
sivasubramanim, with the handgun. mr. crawford had his
face masked. he had a significant criminal record with 9 adult convictions,
including a sentence of 3 years and 3 months for an aggravated assault in which
he stabbed a man seven times:
r. v. crawford,
2022 onsc 2280. he was on
parole for this offence when he committed the robberies before this court. he
was subject to a weapons prohibition. and he admitted to possessing significant
amounts of illegal drugs, including fentanyl, which were themselves capable of
attracting a significant penitentiary sentence.

in
view of the aggravating factors here, i advised counsel i had difficulty
understanding how a sentence of five years, or even six, could properly be
imposed in this case and that i was considering whether to exceed the crown’s
position on sentence.

in
r. v. blake-samuels,
2021 onca 77
at paras.
29-33, the
court of appeal confirmed
that a sentencing judge retains discretion to exceed the crown’s position on
sentence.
however, if a judge is considering
exercising this discretion, fundamental fairness requires that the parties be
permitted to make additional submissions and the accused be made aware of their
increased penal jeopardy. further, the sentencing judge must provide clear and
cogent reasons for imposing a sentence which exceeds the crown's position:
see,
also,
r. v. bagheri,
2022 onca 357
at para.
16.

in
r. v. nahanee,
2022 scc 37, the supreme court endorsed this methodology,
and affirmed the distinction between a judge who departs from a joint
submission and a judge who exceeds the crown’s position in the context of a
contested sentencing hearing.

the
test for departing from a joint submission was set out in
r. v. anthony-cook,
2016 scc 43. the supreme court held that judges are bound to accept a joint
submission, unless it would bring the administration of justice into disrepute
or is otherwise contrary to the public interest. the court remarked that such
submissions are not sacrosanct, and observed that s. 606(6)(1.1)(b)(iii) of the
criminal code
provides that judges are not required to accept them. nonetheless,
the court went on to articulate an extremely high test for departing from the
joint submissions of counsel, as evidenced by these remarks, at paragraph 31 of
the decision:
rejection
denotes a submission so unhinged from the circumstances of the offence and the
offender that its acceptance would lead reasonable and informed persons, aware
of all the relevant circumstances, including the importance of promoting
certainty in resolution discussions, to believe that the proper functioning of
the justice system had broken down. this is an undeniably high threshold…

in
r. v. nahanee,
supra, at para.
4, t
he
supreme court rejected the argument that the public interest
test set out in
anthony-cook
should apply where judges exceed the crown’s position in a contested sentencing
hearing:
[t]he
public interest test adopted by
this court in
anthony-cook
does
not, and should not, apply to contested sentencing hearings following a guilty
plea, regardless of the amount of prior negotiation between the parties
culminating in the plea. in such cases, however, if the sentencing judge is of
a mind to impose a harsher sentence, in any respect, than what the crown has
proposed, they should notify the parties and give them an opportunity to make
further submissions…

i
followed this procedure in the present case. the matter was adjourned to give
the parties the opportunity to make further submissions and provide additional
evidence or authority to support their positions. i also asked counsel for
caselaw concerning the range of sentence that would normally apply to the drug
offences.

in
addition, i expressed concern about the conditions of mr. crawford’s pre-trial
detention at that time. i asked counsel for further assistance in interpreting
the institutional records, in order to better understand how many days mr. crawford
had spent in lockdown and for how long. given how long this problem has existed
in ontario, i invited the crown to lead evidence to explain the state of
affairs at the toronto south detention centre, or the provinces remand facilities
more generally.
the sentencing hearing continued

on
june 12, 2025, the proceedings resumed and both counsel made further
submissions in support of their respective sentencing positions. the crown explained its sentencing position, in part, on the basis that
the complainants were scared and did not want to testify at a trial. i would
not expect those feelings to be particularly uncommon amongst victims of
violent gun crime. there is no suggestion any of the victims were recanting
their statements to police or were otherwise unavailable. this factor weighs somewhat
minimally in my analysis of the fit sentence.

the
crown also provided a chart, summarizing a series of sentencing decisions
involving fentanyl. based on those cases, the crown expressed the view that the
amount of drugs possessed by mr. crawford would, at minimum, have attracted a
sentence of 5 years had they been the subject of a stand-alone sentencing
proceeding. my review of the authorities suggests the sentence would be at
least that much and would most probably be higher.

defence
counsel filed a second affidavit from mr. crawford, detailing additional
lockdowns and continuing harsh conditions in the jail. counsel further argued
that the drug offences should be treated in a categorically different and
considerably more lenient way under s. 725(1)(b.1) than if the accused had been
arraigned and plead guilty to those charges.
the application of section 725(1)(b.1) of the
criminal
code

having
considered the further submissions of counsel and upon review of the additional
materials provided, i continued to be concerned that the positions of both the
crown and defence were far below what the principles of sentencing required. i found
the evidence of the drug offences to be particularly troubling in the circumstances
of this case.

there
is appellate authority setting the range of sentence for an ounce or less of cocaine
between 6 months and 2 years, less a day:
r. v. woolcock,
 o.j. no. 4927 (c.a.);
r. v. graham,
2018 onsc 6817
at paras.
47-48. had the
accused entered guilty pleas to the cocaine charges, the quantity in this case would
place this matter at the top of the
woolcock
range or above it.

while
the sentencing ranges for fentanyl are still being developed, the caselaw supports
a mid-single digit penitentiary term for the quantity possessed by mr. crawford.
see, for example,
r. v. campbell,
2022 onca 666, affirmed,
2024 scc 24;
r.
v. moore,
2025 onca 47;
r. v.
disher,
2020 onca 710;
r. v. loor,
2017 onca 696;
r. v.
margerison,
2022 onca 211;
r. v. llanos,
2025 onsc 3986;
r. v. jenkins,
2018 onsc 5078;
r. v.
moore,
2017 oncj 801;
r v cinelli,
2018 onsc 4983.


the
drug charges would normally be the subject of consecutive sentences, subject to
attenuation in accordance with the principle of totality. the comments of code
j. in
r. v. graham,
supra, at para.
43
are instructive on this
point:
the
conviction for possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking requires a
separate consecutive sentence. it is an entirely separate offence, based on
separate public policy interests, and it requires separate punishment.
i agree
with the reasons of
campbell
j. in
r. v. mark
 o.j. no. 270
at para 27 (s.c.j.)
in this regard. also
see
r. v. crevier,
supra
at
paras 128-9 where rouleau j.a. agreed with the trial judge in imposing "a
consecutive sentence for the cocaine conviction because it constituted a
different legally-protected interest from the gun offences".

on
july 3, 2025, the proceedings resumed and i expressed concern about the
propriety of dealing with the drug offences via s. 725(1)(b.1) of the
code
in the particular circumstances of this case. i read out the following
endorsement, which was later provided to counsel in writing:
 on
march 28, 2025, charmare crawford plead guilty to two counts of robbery with a
firearm, contrary to
s. 344(1)
of the
criminal code, and two counts of
wearing a disguise with intent to commit an indictable offence, contrary to
s.
351(2). he also admitted facts, pursuant to s. 725(1)(b.1), making out two more
robberies with a firearm and the possession of 29.53 grams of powder cocaine,
8.88 grams of crack cocaine and 22.82 grams of fentanyl.
 the
crown seeks a global sentence of 6 years in jail. the defence invites me to
impose the mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years. after hearing the submissions
of counsel, i expressed my concern that the sentences proposed by both
the crown and defence were below the appropriate range of sentence and failed
to give effect to the aggravating factors in this case. the matter was
adjourned to give the parties the opportunity to make further submissions and
provide additional evidence or authority to support their positions:
r. v. blake-samuels,
2021 onca 77
at
paras.
29-30;
r. v. bagheri,
2022 onca
357
at para.
16.
 one
of my principal concerns was the effect the drug charges would have on the
sentence. i asked counsel for caselaw setting out the range of sentence for
those offences. and i have sought the assistance of counsel in respect of how
those drug charges should affect the sentence, when admitted by way of s. 725(1)(b.1).
 having heard from
counsel, and having considered this matter at length, i consider the use of
this section to be problematic in the circumstances of this case. i view this
to be an unorthodox proceeding and a challenging sentencing issue.
 i have reached the
point where i am forced to consider whether i should decline to
admit the facts relating to mr. crawford’s possession of illegal drugs. the
drug offences are pleaded in a three-count information that is before me, but
on which the accused has not plead guilty. this information alleges that mr.
crawford possessed cocaine, crack cocaine and fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) of the
controlled drugs and substances act.

section
725(1)
(b.1) of the
criminal code
provides as follows:
in
determining the sentence, a court shall consider any outstanding
charges against the offender, unless the court is of the opinion that a
separate prosecution for one or more of the other offences is necessary in the
public interest, subject to the following conditions:
(i)
the
attorney general and the offender consent,
(ii)
the
court has jurisdiction to try each charge,
(iii)
each
charge has been described in open court,
(iv)
the
offender has agreed with the facts asserted in the description of each charge,
and
(v)
the
offender has acknowledged having committed the offence described in each
charge.
 the
conditions in subsections (i) through (v) are met here. however, the section
clearly affords the judge discretion to decline to consider the additional
facts where a separate prosecution for the drug offences is necessary in
the public interest. i would make the following observations in this regard.
 first,
the drug charges are very serious. the illegal drugs in question, most
particularly the fentanyl, are extremely dangerous substances that pose a risk
of widespread harm and death to the community. my review of the authorities
provided by counsel suggests that, if the accused had been arraigned on the
drug charges, the resulting sentence could well have been double what would
otherwise have been appropriate for the robbery charges alone, subject to
considerations for totality.
 second,
the drug charges are unrelated factually to the robbery charges. the drugs were
found in the accused’s residence pursuant to a search warrant after his arrest.
 third,
there is little clarity in the jurisprudence as to how facts admitted pursuant
to
s. 725(1)
(b.1) should be handled in the sentencing process. there are
compelling reasons to use the range of sentence for the additional offences as
guidance, and increase the sentence for the charge the accused plead guilty to
accordingly, subject again to concerns for totality. this approach would give
effect to well established sentencing principles, many of which have been
dictated to the courts by parliament. there are important similarities between
the offender who pleads guilty to an offence and one who admits the offence
under
s. 725(1)
(b.1). the moral culpability of the accused is the same. the
seriousness of the criminal conduct is the same. the harm to the community is
the same. and the procedural protections are essentially identical.
 there
are some differences too. for example, the accused who admits facts under
s.
725(1)
(b.1) obtains the benefit of fewer entries on his criminal record. and
the range of sentencing options would be limited to those sanctions made
available by the charges the accused actually plead guilty to. on its face, it
is difficult to see why these distinctions would lead to a markedly different
sentencing outcome. there may well be some qualitative difference between offences
read in under
s. 725(1)
(b.1) and offences an accused pleads guilty to, but i
have been provided no authority for that.
 counsel
for mr. crawford submitted that
s. 725(1)
(b.1) represents a kind of middle
ground, where an accused should be sentenced in a considerably more lenient
fashion than if he was arraigned and plead guilty to the charge, but i do not
read the cases provided to stand for that proposition. the crown has not
proposed a clear methodology for the consideration of these facts.

 it is
implicit in the positions taken by the crown and the defence that neither
counsel is of the view the drug charges should meaningfully affect the length
of sentence i impose on the robbery charges. i consider the dissonance between
their proposed treatment of
s. 725(1)
(b.1) and my own observations as set out
above to weigh against admitting the facts of the drug charges in this case.
 in
short, i question whether the drug charges can be appropriately dealt
with as aggravating factors in the particular circumstances of this case. the
facts underlying these drug charges are so serious in their own right, and the
potential harm to the community so great, there is a real potential for these
additional offences to skew the sentencing process and interfere with the
court’s ability to affix a proportionate sentence for the robberies.
 i
have not been presented with a clear methodology through which to give effect
to the drug offences pursuant to s. 725(1)(b.1).
 i am
inviting counsel to make submissions as to whether i should exercise my
discretion to decline to receive the facts of the drug charges. if i do, mr.
crawford would potentially be subject to a separate prosecution for those
charges. if the crown was inclined to prosecute him on that information, that
might give rise to an application to strike the plea before me, as the accused
clearly anticipated all these charges being dealt with together.
 if it
comes to pass that i do decline to admit the facts of the drug charges, the
defence would be entitled to know what the crown intends to do with the
cdsa
information before proceeding with the sentencing in this matter.
 i
will adjourn the case to permit counsel to consider their positions. it may be
they are able to jointly propose a solution to this problem. either way, i will
receive submissions on whether to decline to admit the drug charges on a future
date.

the
matter was adjourned for counsel to consider their positions in light of this
endorsement.

i
would add that counsel did not seek to withdraw the facts pertaining to the two
additional robberies from consideration in this case, nor did i raise that as
an issue. in my view, those facts are properly receivable under
s. 725(1)
(b.1)
in the circumstances of this case, and they can be rationally addressed as
aggravating factors on sentence. the additional robbery offences are factually
similar to the offences mr. crawford plead guilty to and they occurred in and
around the same time period. all four robberies occurred within the span of
four weeks leading up to mr. crawford’s arrest on january 8, 2024. these
offences can properly be viewed as part of a related course of conduct or
“spree.” multiple offences that fit into this kind of pattern are often dealt
with by way of concurrent sentences, though in general the sentences ought to be
increased to account for the aggravating factor of multiple delicts:
r. v. johnson,
supra, at para. 43;
r. v. kozussek,
2013 mbca 52
at paras.
8-10;
r.
v. lagimodiere,
2008 mbca 137
at para.
26;
r. v. mcewan,
2018 oncj
541
at paras.
25-27;
r. v. watts,
2024 onsc 4501
at para.
44.
modified positions of the parties

when
the proceedings continued on july 12, 2025, the crown and defence jointly
withdrew their request for me to consider the
cdsa
offences pursuant to
s. 725(1)(b.1) of the
code. i accepted this request and declined to
consider the drug offences in connection with this sentencing. in so doing, it
fell to the crown to deal with the drug charges separate and apart from this
proceeding in whatever manner it saw fit. defence counsel was satisfied that no
prejudice would befall the accused, as no further prosecution of those charges
was anticipated.


at
that point counsel for mr. crawford changed course and joined the crown in
seeking a sentence of six years on the remaining
criminal code
matters
before me. counsel candidly acknowledged this was not akin to a joint
submission at first instance, which could only be departed from according to
the “public interest test” set out by the supreme court in
r. v.
anthony-cook,
supra. the accused did not plead guilty in exchange
for a joint submission and, instead, went in open and sought a lesser sentence:
r. v. omoragbon,
2025 onca 481.

i
proceeded to sentence mr. crawford on the july 12, 2025 for the four charges he
plead guilty to, taking into account the two additional robberies that were properly
admitted pursuant to s. 725(1)(b.1) of the
code.
principles of sentencing

sentencing
is a highly individualized process:
r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
at para.
58. the judge must give effect to a number of different and often competing sentencing
objectives.
section 718
of the
criminal code
directs that the
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and, more specifically,
to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful
and safe society. according to s. 718.1, the fundamental principle of sentencing
is proportionality. the sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. parity of sentence is
a corollary to proportionality. it requires that similar sentences be imposed upon
similar offences committed in similar circumstances:
r. v. lacasse,
supra,
at para.
2.

where
sentences are imposed for multiple offences, the court must consider the
principle of totality.
where consecutive
sentences are imposed, the court must ensure the combined sentence is not
unduly long or harsh and that the global sentence does not exceed the
offender's overall culpability:
r. v. c.a.m.,
1996 canlii 230 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 500.

crimes involving firearms represent a grave
danger to our society:
r. v.
nur,
2015 scc 15
at paras.
1, 6. the primary principles of sentencing in these cases
are denunciation and deterrence:
r. v. morris,
supra, at para.
71.
illegal handguns are particularly dangerous given how easily they can be
concealed and transported into public places where innocent people are
imperiled:
r. v. hilbach,
2023 scc 3
at para.
53. the only purpose for
these weapons is to intimidate, injure and kill.

illegal firearms have been correctly described at all levels of
court as a scourge on our society and the city of toronto in particular:
r.
v. danvers,
2005 canlii 30044 (on ca), o.j. no. 3532 (c.a.) at paras.
77-78;
r. v. thavakularatnam,
2018 onsc 2380
at
para.
21. in
r. v. lacasse,
supra, at para.
89, the
supreme court recognized
the frequency of a type
of offence in a particular region is a relevant factor on sentence.

the
courts must demonstrate in clear terms that our society will not tolerate the use
of firearms in our streets and communities. exemplary sentences are required to
deter those who would engage in this kind of conduct and to protect the lives
of law-abiding people:
r. v. doucette,
2015 onca 583
at paras.
59-60;
r.
v. danvers,
supra, at paras.
77-78;
r. v. jones,
2012 onca
609
at para.
12.

the
use of a restricted or prohibited firearm in a robbery poses grave risk to
public safety. the risk of violence and psychological trauma from
any
robbery involving a firearm is acute:
r. v. hilbach,
supra, at
paras.
6 & 71. i consider that clerks of convenience stores and gas
stations are vulnerable members of our communities, who often work alone or
late at night, have cash on hand, and are all too often the victims of robberies:
r. v. lewis,
2009 onca 792
at para.
3;
r. v. asif,
2020 onsc 1403
at
para.
40.

i
consider the need to separate mr. crawford from society in order to protect the
public and the need to promote in him a sense of responsibility for the harm he
has done. i consider the principle of restraint, which is codified in s.
718.2(d) and (e) of the
code. i also consider the principle of
rehabilitation. while this sentencing principle occupies a less prominent
position in the circumstances of this case, i must consider mr. crawford’s potential
to change and become a contributing member of society.
impact of race and culture

in
r. v. morris,
supra, the ontario court of appeal brought the
implications of race and social context to the forefront of the sentencing
process. that decision requires sentencing judges to consider background
factors, and specifically the impacts of systemic racism, which may have
contributed to the offender being before the court. mr. crawford is a black man
who grew up in a low-income housing complex in the markham and eglinton area of
toronto. at paragraph 1 of the
morris
decision, the court of appeal held
as follows:
it
is beyond doubt that anti-black racism, including both overt and systemic
anti-black racism, has been, and continues to be, a reality in canadian
society, and in particular in the greater toronto area. that reality is
reflected in many social institutions, most notably the criminal justice
system. it is equally clear that anti-black racism can have a profound and
insidious impact on those who must endure it on a daily basis.

in
this case, the evidence touching on social context is somewhat limited. counsel
for mr. crawford expressly declined to seek an impact of race and cultural
assessment (irca) report, which have begun to appear in courts in the wake of
morris.
counsel also declined to seek a pre-sentence report, but did supply the court
with information regarding mr. crawford’s background and upbringing.

mr.
crawford swore an affidavit in which he provided evidence of economic
disadvantage, negative peer influences, and some general reference to his own
experiences with systemic racism. these are some of the same kinds of personal
circumstances the court of appeal was considering in
morris
and that
would potentially appear in an irca report. mr. crawford was raised by his
mother, as his father was not involved in his life. he described his family as
being very poor and living in social housing units that were in serious states
of disrepair. he described being exposed to violence and to the drug trade in
the building he grew up in. this information was confirmed in part by the
letters of support written by his sister, charlene crawford, and a family
friend named deidre jeffers. later in life, mr. crawford described struggling
to find work and resorting to selling drugs to make money. he did find steady
work beginning in 2019 in commercial construction, where he worked until he was
incarcerated in 2022 for a previous offence. regarding his experiences with
systemic racism, he wrote the following:
starting around age 14, i would
be stopped and searched by police when they were either in the area of my
apartment or in the building itself. i remember being asked for id and knowing
other people who were beat up by the police. i grew distrustful of the police
and felt angry and as though i was being targeted unfairly by the police based
on my race and where i lived.

i
am further aided in this inquiry by the report tendered in the
morris
case, entitled, expert report on crime, criminal justice and
the experience of black canadians
in toronto, ontario. as the court of appeal observed, “
the report bears reading and re-reading by those
called upon to prosecute, defend and sentence black offenders, particularly
young black offenders.”
with the assistance of this report, and the case-specific
information before me, it is not hard to draw a line between mr. crawford’s
challenging background and his criminal history.

as
to
how
that experience informs the sentence, i consider the guidance
provided by the court of appeal in
morris, and more specifically these
remarks at paragraph 18 of the decision:
--
social context evidence relating to the offender's life experiences may be used
where relevant to mitigate the offender's degree of responsibility for the
offence and/or to assist in the blending of the principles and objectives of
sentencing to achieve a sentence which best serves the purposes of sentencing
as described in s. 718;
--
the gravity or seriousness of an offence is determined by its normative
wrongfulness and the harm posed or caused by that conduct in the circumstances
in which the conduct occurred. accordingly, unlike when assessing the
offender's degree of personal responsibility, an offender's experience with
anti-black racism does not impact on the seriousness or gravity of the offence;

in
accordance with these remarks, the social context evidence does not affect my view
of the seriousness of the offences. i am, however, prepared to accept that mr.
crawford’s experiences with community violence, economic disadvantage, and
systemic racism bear on his level of moral responsibility for these offences.
aggravating factors

first,
mr. crawford has a criminal record, containing 9 convictions as an adult and 5
findings of guilt under the
youth criminal justice act. the youth
entries are dated and have a negligible impact on the sentence i impose here.
the adult convictions, however, are significant. there are six prior sentences
involving a custodial component. on january 3, 2020, mr. crawford was sentenced
to 225 days of time served for dangerous operation of a motor vehicle and 30
days of time served for possession of a schedule i substance for the purpose of
trafficking. on may 10, 2022, he received a sentence of 3 years and 3 months
for an aggravated assault in which he stabbed a man seven times. this matter is
the subject of a reported decision: see
r. v. crawford, supra.

second,
mr. crawford was on parole for the aggravated assault conviction when he
committed the robberies before this court. he was granted early release on november
23, 2023 and committed the first of four robberies less than 3 weeks later on
december 12, 2023. the warrant expiry date was september 4, 2024. this is a
statutory aggravating factor, according to s.718.2(a)(vi) of the
code.

third,
the accused struck the victim, rob balaketheeswaran with the handgun during the
course of the robbery on december 12, 2023. this factor is tempered somewhat by
the fact the injury was described as being minor.

fourth,
mr. crawford was subject to a weapons prohibition. he did not
plead guilty to this offence, but his criminal record establishes that he was
prohibited from possessing any firearms under section 109 of the
code
at
the time he committed these offences.

fifth, mr. crawford had his face masked when he committed the
robberies. i have chosen to treat these facts as aggravating factors on
sentence regarding the robbery charges, and to impose concurrent sentences on
the two counts of this offence the accused plead guilty to.

sixth,
mr. crawford has admitted to multiple robberies with a firearm. each one of
these robberies is a serious crime, involving a separate victim, and constituting
a separate affront to the community. i have chosen to treat the fact there were
two robberies mr. crawford plead guilty to as an aggravating factor and to
impose concurrent sentences on both in order to give effect to the principle of
totality:
r. v. johnson,
supra, at para. 43;
r. v. kozussek,
supra, at paras.
8-10;
r. v. lagimodiere,
surpra, at para.
26;
r. v. mcewan,
supra, at paras.
25-27;
r.
v. watts,
supra, at para.
44. i treat
the two
uncharged
robberies that were admitted pursuant to s.
725(1)(b.1) as further aggravating factors on sentence, but i consider them
part of the same course of conduct or spree, which spanned four weeks leading
up to the accused’s arrest.
mitigating factors

i
consider the following mitigating factors on sentence. first, mr. crawford
plead guilty. he has accepted responsibility for these offences. he has spared
the court the time and expense of conducting a trial and he has spared the
victims from having to testify. i accept that the plea is a genuine expression
of remorse, as evidenced by his allocution before the court and through letters
of support filed on his behalf.

second,
as set out above, i find the evidence of race and social context goes some
distance toward explaining mr. crawford’s conduct and mitigates his moral
culpability to some extent.

third,
mr. crawford has the support of family members and friends in the community and
some prosocial history of work in the community. these are favourable
indicators with respect to his long-term rehabilitative potential.

fourth,
mr. crawford has deposed that he was motivated by economic pressure and
committed the offenses at a time when he was dealing with post-traumatic stress
disorder, and was consuming alcohol, on a daily basis. these features are not
well delineated in the evidence. there is no formal diagnosis before me from a
medical professional regarding the ptsd or any substance abuse disorder. i am
prepared to treat these circumstances as mitigating to a point, but the extent
to which i can find they had a direct bearing on the commission of the offences
or lessened the accused’s moral culpability is limited on this record.

fifth,
mr. crawford has spent time under particularly harsh conditions in pre-sentence
custody. i return to this point later in these reasons.
contextual factors

counsel
for mr. crawford submits the robberies were unsophisticated, the value of the stolen
money was low, and the firearm was not discharged. i do not consider these
factors to be mitigating in law. these are relevant considerations, but i view
each of these circumstances as representing the absence of an aggravating
factor. in other words, these are areas in which the crimes could have been
worse.

defence
counsel also points out there is no evidence before the court that the firearm
was loaded. i consider this again as the absence of an aggravating factor. and
i would observe this point was addressed by the supreme court in
r. v.
hilbach,
supra, at para.
55, in the following terms:
the
use of an unloaded prohibited firearm does not substantially reduce the
offence's gravity. the presence of a firearm, even an unloaded one, "
in and of
itself
creates a highly volatile and dangerous situation.”
***
moreover,
an unloaded firearm is used for the same reason as a loaded firearm: to instill
"the ultimate threat of death to those in its presence." [
citations
omitted.]
impact of the offences

the
victims were afforded the opportunity to provide victim impact statements, but
declined to do so. that being said, the circumstances of these robberies are
objectively terrifying. and i would note the supreme court opined in
r. v.
hilbach,
supra, at para.
54
that, “
it
can be expected that store clerks who are victims of offences like the one
perpetrated by mr. hilbach will suffer psychological harm.”
the range of sentence

the maximum sentence for the offence of robbery
is life in prison. where a restricted or prohibited firearm is used in the
commission of the offence, there is a mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years.
this mandatory minimum has been found to be constitutional:
r. v. hilbach,
supra. the maximum sentence for having one’s face masked with intent to
commit an indictable offence is 10 years where the crown proceeds by
indictment.

since proportionality is the fundamental
principle of sentencing, i am guided by sentences handed down in other cases.

in
r. v. watts,
supra, at para.
44, charney j. surveyed several recent cases and identified the range of
sentence for multiple armed robberies as 7-15 years in jail:
the
range of sentences for multiple armed robberies appears to be in the 7 - 15
year range. the higher double digit range applies in cases where the
aggravating factors include the use of a real loaded gun, prior criminal
record, and where the victims were physically harmed or the gun was fired
during the robbery. the greater the number of armed robberies, the higher the
sentence, especially where one or more of these aggravating factors is present.
see
for example:
r. v. dilleon,
2008 oncj 401, at para.
40;
r. v. codner,
2013 onca 138;
r. v.
davies,
2017 onca 467;
r. v. henry,
2019 onca 229;
r. v.
johnson,
2016 onca 935;
r. v. lira,
2021 onsc 8294, at
paras.
99 - 115;
r. v. osman,
2016 onca 64;
r. v. shuman,
2021 onca 638.

in
r. v. clarke,
2024 onsc 436
at para.
27, schrek j. described the
range of sentence in the following terms:
robbery
with a firearm is an exceptionally serious crime which usually results in a
significant penitentiary sentence in the high single digits:
r. v.
sithravel,
2023 onca 748;
r. v. treleaven,
2019 onca 593,
varying
2018 onsc
1707;
r. v. kreko,
2016 onca 367,
131 o.r. (3d) 694;
r. v. hayes,
2016 onca 47;
r. v. wolynec,
2015 onca 656,
330 c.c.c. (3d) 541;
r. v.
taylor
(2006),
2006 canlii 26571 (on ca),
214 o.a.c. 27
(c.a.);
r. v. asif,
2020 onsc 1403;
r. v.
pink,
2020 onsc 814;
r. v. charley,
2019 onsc 6490;
r. v.
taylor,
 o.j. no. 139
(s.c.j.);
r. v. s.a.,
2011 onsc 4165.

i have considered the cases provided to me by
the defence, which are distinguishable from the present case in significant
ways. for example, in
r. v. mcintyre,
2016 onsc 7498, the accused
was just over 18 when he committed a single robbery and had no criminal record.
in
r. v. gokool-clark,
2024 onsc 5927, the accused was convicted of
robbery and possession of a firearm, but the gun was not used in the commission
of the robbery. the case of
r. v. auld,
2024 onsc 689, did not involve a
firearm at all. and in
r. v. tchintcharashvili,
2025 oncj 204, the
accused received a sentence below the mandatory minimum of 5 years.
respectfully, i do not believe the sentence imposed in that case was available
in law.

sentencing ranges instructive but they are not
hard and fast rules. they are
summaries
of the minimum and maximum sentences imposed in the past, which serve in any
given case as guides for the application of all the relevant principles and
objectives:
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9
at para.
36;
r. v. nasogaluak,
2010 scc 6, at para
44. there will be situations that call for a
sentence outside the existing range.
exceeding the crown’s position on sentence

even with the drug offences removed from my consideration, i
consider the six-year sentence now jointly proposed by the crown and defence to
be below the acceptable range. in my view, that sentence fails to take into
account the number of robberies, or to give effect to the serious aggravating
factors in this case.

i
do not approach the recommended sentence in the same way i would a joint
submission at first instance:
r. v. omoragbon,
supra. a departure
from the parties’ recommendation in this scenario is not governed by the “public
interest test” set out by the supreme court in
r. v. anthony-cook,
supra.
instead, i continue to be guided by the caselaw concerning exceeding the
crown’s position in the context of a contested sentencing hearing:
r. v.
nahanee,
supra;
r. v. blake-samuels,
supra,
r. v. baghieri,
supra.

the
mandatory minimum sentence for one robbery with a prohibited or restricted
firearm is 5 years.
a minimum sentence is an inflationary floor, applicable to the
so-called “best” offender whose conduct is caught by the provisions, and from
which all other sentences are to be scaled up:
r. v. morrissey,
2000 scc
39
at paras.
75-76;
r. v. hilbach,
supra, at para.
57.
and, according to
s. 718.2(a), “a sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any
relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the
offender.”

the
“best” offender in respect of the offence of robbery with a firearm might
notionally be compared to the reasonable hypothetical scenarios considered by
the supreme court in
r. v. hilbach,
supra, at paras.
85-90, in
the course of deciding whether the 5 year minimum sentence could amount to
cruel and unusual punishment under
s. 13
of the
canadian charter of rights
and freedoms. these hypotheticals represent some of the least serious
iterations of the offence of robbery with a firearm that could reasonably be
expected to occur. as an example, these included the following, at para. 85:
[a]
21-year-old indigenous man, suffers from alcoholism and fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder, is extremely intoxicated and face down in a snowbank when a good
samaritan stops to help him. he grabs the woman, reaches into his waistband,
flashes a bb gun, and snatches her purse. the bb gun is operable and capable of
taking an eyeball out, but it is unloaded.

the
supreme court also referred to two scenarios drawn from reported decisions
involving youthful offenders who committed convenience store robberies. one was
an 18-year-old indigenous woman, who pled guilty as a party to the robbery
where the principal used an imitation firearm. the other was an 18-year-old
youthful offender who used a bb gun in the commission of a robbery and pled
guilty. none of these scenarios were found to render the mandatory minimum
sentence unconstitutional.

these
are useful points of reference, as they highlight just how far away from the
bottom of the range mr. crawford is. in my view, the circumstances of this case
would make a sentence of either 5 or 6 years unfit.
the fit sentence

i have carefully considered the applicable
sentencing principles. i have weighed the aggravating and mitigating factors
and evaluated them according to the guiding principle of proportionality. i
find that a just sentence in this case would be a global sentence of 7.5 years
in jail. a clear message must be sent that criminals who arm themselves with
illegal firearms and use them in public will face severe consequences.

this sentence is subject to reduction for time
spent in pre-sentence custody. mr. crawford has served 309 days in
pre-sentence custody, which is not otherwise attributable to the sentence he
was serving for the aggravated assault conviction. pursuant to the supreme
court’s decision in
r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26, i award him credit at
the rate of 1.5 to 1 and will reduce his sentence by 464 days.

the sentence will be further mitigated, over and above the
summers
credit, on account of particularly harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody,
pursuant to
r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754.
harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody

the
degree of civilization in a society can be judged by entering its prisons.


what
happens inside our prisons matters. the conditions inside our penal
institutions reflect upon our society at large. they demonstrate, for better or
worse, our collective commitment to the most fundamental of human rights. our
prisons are a statement, rendered in concrete and steel, of the dignity we
afford to every person, no matter how marginalized, misguided, or lost.

in
this case, the defence seeks credit for the harsh conditions mr. crawford has
endured at the toronto south detention centre (tsdc) where he has been held
since his arrest. counsel filed records from the institution detailing
extensive lockdowns. based on these records and the evidence of mr. crawford, i
conclude he was held in lockdown for most or all of the day on 168 days. he was
locked down for part of the day on 43 more occasions. he was triple-bunked, which
is to say he was held in a cell with two other people, for 8 days.

during
lockdowns prisoners are confined to their cells, with no access to common areas,
outdoor spaces, or programming. they have limited or no access to showers and
telephones. the information sheet attached to the institutional records states
that, “during lockdowns inmates are given 30 minutes to complete phone / shower
and in some cases yard. (the superintendent may cancel phone and shower program
based on institutional needs and security concerns).” mr. crawford has described
the impact of these conditions on him personally in his affidavit, at para. 16:
during
lockdowns, depending on the length of the lockdown, i would not be permitted to
leave my cell to use the phone, to shower, or to get any fresh air. when there
were full lockdowns, occasionally there was a “shower program” where i would be
let out of my cell for up to 30 minutes to either use the phone or take a
shower. there was not enough time to do both, so i would have to choose between
taking a shower and using the phone to contact loved ones. the shower program
was not always available during lockdowns, and i would sometimes go days
without access to a shower or phone.

mr.
crawford also described some of the broader impacts of lockdowns and overcrowding
at the tsdc. he explained that tensions would run high in these circumstances and
violence would often result. mr. crawford was himself assaulted by another
inmate on march 15, 2024 while speaking on the phone. this incident was
witnessed by corrections officers and documented in a use of force occurrence
report filed in these proceedings.

in
r. v. nsiah,
2017 onsc 769
at para.
19,
goldstein j. characterized detention under lockdown in bleak terms:
in
other words, the lockdowns represent a modern form of the harsh dickensian
conditions that motivated the victorian movement towards prison reform. the
lockdowns are a regressive form of punishment that is [
sic
] represents
the opposite of an enlightened penal regime.

historically,
jails (or
gaols
as they were known in britain and upper canda prior to
confederation) were used to house accused persons pending trial. as goldstein
j. observes, conditions were notoriously poor. time in jail was not typically a
sentence that could be imposed within the common law jurisdictions. instead, punishments
for crimes tended to take the form of fines, physical inflictions of pain,
executions, and banishment (or
transportation
as it was known). prison
as a punishment is a relatively new development in the history of crime and
punishment. transformative penal reforms of the late 18
th
and early 19
th
centuries brought with them the creation of the penitentiary. these represented
the first uses of incarceration itself as a sentence. this was meant to be a
more humane and rehabilitative response to criminality than what had come
before. in 1835, kingston penitentiary became the first penitentiary in what
would later become canada. i refer to this history in order to emphasize that
inhumane forms of pre-trial detention are the unfortunate remnants of centuries
past.

today,
incarceration as a punishment continues to be carried out in federal
penitentiaries, where the sentence is two years or more. where the sentence is
less than two years, sentences are served in provincial reformatories. by
contrast, provincially run
remand centres
are primarily designed to hold
accused persons awaiting trial. there is no question that some accused people must
be detained pending trial. however, it must be remembered that these people are
entitled to the legal presumption of innocence, and that time spent in remand facilities
is not intended to be a punishment. it is a painful irony then that conditions
in these facilities are worse than in the penitentiaries and reformatories which
are
intended to punish:
r. v. summers,
supra, at para.
2;
r. v. charley,
2019 onsc 6490
paras.
14-22.

in
r. v. duncan,
supra, the court of appeal held that additional credit
may be given, over and above
summers
credit, to account for particularly
harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody: see, also,
r. v. nasogaluak,
supra,
at paras.
5 & 49;
r. v. charley,
supra, at para.
36. it is
important to appreciate and maintain the clear
distinction between "
summers
" credit and “
duncan
” credit.
as the court of appeal clarified in
r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344
at
para.
50:
a
“
duncan
” credit is given on account of particularly difficult and
punitive presentence custody conditions. it must be borne in mind the 1.5:1
"
summers
" credit already takes into account the
difficult and restrictive circumstances offenders often encounter during pretrial
custody:
summers, at paras.
28-29. the “
duncan
”
credit addresses exceptionally punitive conditions which go well beyond the
normal restrictions associated with pretrial custody.

from
the time of his arrest on january 8, 2024 until his warrant expiry date of september
4, 2025, mr. crawford was serving the remainder of his sentence for aggravated
assault. he was, however, housed at the tsdc on account of the outstanding
charges, rather than collins bay penitentiary where he had otherwise been
serving sentence. i am aware that this is not pre-sentence custody that can be
credited against the sentence i impose here. the fact mr. crawford was on
parole when he committed these offences is an aggravating factor, and the
consequence of him being recommitted to jail to serve the remainder of his
previous sentence is not generally a mitigating factor:
r. v. lavalee,
2006 abca 324
at para.
7;
r. v. jenkins,
supra, at para.
63. that
being said, mr. crawford served out his sentence at a provincial remand
facility rather than being returned to a federal penitentiary. i am prepared to
accept that the conditions in the former are markedly worse than what would be
expected in the latter:
r. v. charley,
supra, paras.
14-22.
i consider it
appropriate to take into account the harsh conditions at the tsdc, as those
conditions resulted directly from the charges before me, and there is no other
practical forum in which to address this concern: see
r. v. jama,
2021 onsc 4871
at para.
52.

from
january 8, 2024 to september 4, 2025, while serving his prior sentence, mr.
crawford was subjected to lockdowns for most or all of the day on 59 days. he
was subjected to lockdowns for part of the day on 4 more occasions. the reason
given in each case was “staff shortage.”

from
september 4, 2024 to may 1, 2025, while awaiting trial on this matter and not
subject to any prior sentence, mr. crawford was locked down for all or most of the
day on 95 days. he was locked down for part of the day on 27 more occasions. the
reason given in all cases was “staff shortage.”

as
the sentencing was adjourned in order for counsel to address the concerns raise
by the court, mr. crawford kept his own records of additional lockdowns, which
he filed as an exhibit to a further affidavit. from may 1, 2025 to june 10,
2025, he recorded 14 lockdowns which lasted all day and 12 more lasting part of
the day. i accept this evidence. the defence was not challenged on these
representations and they are entirely consistent with the documented history of
lockdowns provided by the institution for the many months preceding this time
period.

in
total, of the 549 days mr. crawford spent at the toronto south detention
centre, he was locked down for most or all of the day on 168 days. he was
locked down for part of the day on 43 more occasions. he was locked down for
three or more consecutive days on nine separate occasions. and he was
triple-bunked for 8 days.

the
conditions in ontario’s remand centres have long been condemned by judges of
this province. in 2020, stribopoulos j. reviewed five years of jurisprudence
touching on this issue in
r. v. asif,
supra, at paras.
65-67:
65
periodic
lockdowns are somewhat unavoidable in any detention facility -- for example,
those resulting from security incidents or where inclement weather causes an
unexpected staff shortage. in recent years, the courts have repeatedly raised
concerns about prisoners held in remand facilities in this province being
subject to lockdown in their cells due to persistent staffing shortages.
lockdowns resulting from chronic understaffing are concerning because they are
preventable.
66
the
government must devote adequate resources to the operation of remand centres.
it is required to ensure that the conditions in these facilities comport with
those basic standards expected in a modern constitutional democracy like
canada. anyone subject to incarceration is entitled to humane treatment,
especially so in remand facilities where prisoners are mostly awaiting trial
and are presumed to be innocent.
67
judges have described the
continued prevalence of this problem in increasingly alarming terms. they have
characterized the situation as "shocking":
r. v. oksem,
2019 onsc 6283, at para.
28; "unacceptable":
r. v.
sanchez,
2019 onsc 5272, at para.
53;
r. v. elmi,
2017 oncj 830, at para.
38; a form of "degradation":
r. v. charley,
2019 onsc 6490, at para.
67; "close to
unconscionable":
r. v. nguyen,
2017 oncj 442, at para.
39; "regressive":
r. v. nsiah,
2017 onsc 769, at para.
19; contrary to "minimum standards
established by the united nations":
r. v. inniss,
2017 onsc 2779, at para.
38; "inexcusable":
r. v.
hussain-marca,
2017 onsc 4033, at para.
43; and "oppressive":
r. v.
doyle,
2015 oncj 492, at para.
53.
68
recently, after a careful survey of the
many judicial pronouncements calling out this problem, schreck j. concluded
that its persistence, despite repeated condemnation by the judiciary, compels
the inescapable conclusion that these "inhumane conditions" are
"a form of deliberate state misconduct":
r. v. persad,
2020 onsc 188, at para.
34

the
evidence in this case suggests no meaningful progress has been made since then.
in fact,
all
of the stated reasons for the lockdowns in this case were “staff
shortage.”

a
number of decisions which have been released over the last five years also show
that nothing has changed: see, for example,
r. v. brown,
2020 onca 196
at paras.
6-12;
r. v. baldwin,
2021 onsc 7025
at paras.
62-74;
r. v. jama,
supra, at paras.
51-53;
r.
v. clarke
-brown,
2021 oncj 378, at paras.
41-50;
r. v. lee,
2021 onsc 7672
at paras.
50-51;
r. v. kalongo,
2022 onsc 3891
at paras.
77-84;
r.
v. hassan,
2023 onsc 5040
at paras.
25-30 &
45-48;
r. v. raja,
2024 oncj 456
at paras.
55-63;
r. v.
gorgievski,
2024 onsc 5899
at paras.
31-35;
r. v. shaikh,
2024
onsc 774
at paras.
16-31;
r. v. pintyi,
2025 onsc 3371
at paras.
53-56.

as
a practical matter, this makes no sense. if the government of ontario seeks to
protect the public through the use of incarceration and pre-trial detention, it
undermines its own objectives by failing to properly staff and maintain its
jails. substandard conditions in pre-trial detention are routinely reducing the
sentences offenders receive, exposing the public to increased risk of
re-offence.

beyond
any utilitarian concern, however, the state has a moral imperative to care for
its citizens, even those accused of crimes.

i
gave the crown the opportunity to call evidence to explain what has long been
an unacceptable state of affairs. no evidence was presented. it is abundantly clear
by now that the state has failed, through mismanagement or simple lack of
funding, to fulfill its fundamental obligations to prisoners who are detained
in the remand facilities of ontario.

in
r. v. marshall,
supra, at paras.
51-52, the court of appeal emphasized
that
duncan
credit is a mitigating factor on sentence and need not take
the form of a specific deduction in terms of days or months. the court
confirmed there is no error in apportioning a specific deduction, so long as it
does not take on unwarranted significance and skew the
calculation of the ultimate sentence:
see, also,
r. v.
ramjoolie,
2020 onca 791
at paras.
63-65.

i
have chosen to identify a specific reduction in sentence for the deplorable
conditions in pre-trial detention, in order that the public see clearly why the
sentence is shorter than it should be and understand why it is so: see
r. v.
sheikh,
supra, at paras. 21-31. i will reduce the sentence i would
otherwise have imposed by 6 months.

to all of the
judicial condemnations that have come before, i would add my own: the state of
remand facilities in ontario, specifically the toronto south detention centre,
is unworthy of us as a society and diminishes all the people of this province.
conclusion

i accept the invitation of the crown and defence to disregard the
facts relating to the drug offences. essentially they jointly withdraw their
request that i consider these facts pursuant to s. 725(1)(b.1).

in that circumstance i find that a fit and proper sentence in this
case would have been a global sentence of 7.5 years in jail. in order to account
for particularly harsh conditions in pre-sentence custody, i will reduce the
sentence i impose by 6 months and impose a sentence of 7 years. this is not a
deduction for pre-sentence custody, but rather the result of my consideration
of a mitigating factor on sentence that i have chosen to quantify, pursuant to
r.
v. duncan,
supra.

the sentence will be subject to a formal reduction for time spent in
pre-sentence custody. i will note 309 days on the record in connection with
count 1. credit will be given at the rate of 1.5 to 1 for 464 days,
pursuant to
r. v.
summers,
supra.

the
resulting sentence is 5 years, and 9 months as of today, concurrent on each of the
robbery charges set out in counts 1 and 8. i will impose sentences of 1 year on
each of the charges of wearing a disguise with intent to commit an indictable
offence contained in counts 2 and 9, concurrent to each other, and concurrent
to the sentence for the robberies.

the
victim surcharge will be waived, given the lengthy period of time mr. crawford
has spent in custody and will spend serving his sentence. there will be a dna
order in connection with the two primary designated offences of robbery. there
will be a s. 109 weapons prohibition for life.
released: july
17, 2025
signed:
justice peter n. fraser

my review of the recording of the
guilty plea proceeding revealed that the crown had inverted the drug amounts
when reading the facts into the record. t
he agreed statement of facts refers to
22.82 grams of fentanyl, 29.53 grams of powder cocaine and 8.88 grams of crack
cocaine. the crown read in the following: “just under 9 grams of fentanyl, just
under 23 grams of powder cocaine and just under 30 grams of crack cocaine.”
i did not detect this variance until the
later stages of these proceedings. when i raised this with counsel on july 3,
2025, the crown advised that i should proceed on the basis of what was read out
in court.

the cases provided by counsel included
r.
v. johnson,
2015 onsc 80
and
r. v. greene,
2024 onsc 5155. i do not
believe these cases stand for the proposition that offences considered under
this section should be treated in a categorically more lenient way than if they
had been the subject of a guilty plea. i reviewed other cases dealing with s.
725(1)(b.1) but, ultimately, i was not able to discern a clear methodology
through which to consider these offences:
see,
r. v. edwards,
2001 canlii 24105 (on ca),

o.j. no. 2582 (c.a.);
r. v. howlett,
2002 canlii 45068 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 3525;
r. v.
barrett,
2012 onsc 82;
r. v. cedros,
2007 oncj 556.

the crown later withdrew the
cdsa
information, which was also before me, after sentence had been imposed on the
criminal
code
charges.

these
words have frequently, and perhaps wrongly, been attributed to the
nineteenth-century russian writer fyodor dostoevsky. the apocryphal nature of
the quotation itself changes nothing. for, in my respectful view, the power of
the statement derives not from its provenance, but from the self-evident truth
it expresses.