source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj676/2025oncj676.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. yousaf, 2025 oncj 676
date: 
2025 12 17
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 48105003
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
kashif yousaf
before
justice r. wright
heard
on december 3, 2025
reasons
for decision released on december 17, 2025
k. garrett.............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
a. shah and t. mauti................................................................... 
counsel for the accused
r. wright j.:

on january 31, 2024, an information was sworn charging kashif
yousaf with two counts of intimate-partner assault. a four-day trial was
scheduled for september 2-5, 2025, which was adjourned on consent in august of
2025. mr. yousaf has explicitly waived the delay from that trial date to the
next scheduled trial date, which is scheduled to conclude april 1, 2026. the
parties therefore agree that the time for consideration on this motion runs
from the date the information was sworn to the first day of the first scheduled
trial, september 2, 2025.

mr. yousaf applies for a stay of proceedings under s. 24(1) of
the
charter of rights and freedoms
(“
charter
”) on the basis that
his right to be tried within a reasonable time, as guaranteed by
s. 11(b)
of
the
charter, has been violated.

in
r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27, the supreme court of canada
set a ceiling of 18 months for trials in the ontario court of justice (“ocj”),
not
including delay attributable to the defence, beyond which delay is
presumptively unreasonable. it is helpful to refer to the ceiling and the periods
in my analysis by days rather than months. that means that there is a ceiling
of 547 days, excepting any time that is appropriately deducted due to defence
delay.

the total delay in this case to the anticipated last date of
trial is 792 days. accepting the concession that the period after september 2,
2025, is defence delay due to the explicit waiver, the total period remaining for
consideration amounts to 581 days (34 days above the presumptive ceiling).

this case turns entirely on whether any additional portions of
time are deducted as defence delay. the parties disagree over three periods:
(1)
50 days when the crown submits the defence should have set a
crown pre-trial (“cpt”);
(2)
73 days when the crown submits the defence should have set the
matter down for trial; and,
(3)
21 days after the matter was set for trial, at which time first
notice was given to the crown that delay was in issue.
the chronology of events

the total delay from the date the information was sworn to the
anticipated end of trial is 792 days.

the applicant’s first court appearance after bail was march 14,
2024. he was self-represented. he requested disclosure.

when he returned to court on april 18 and may 23,
2024, the crown still had not provided disclosure. the crown’s disclosure
management documents show that disclosure was shared by email directly to the
accused on may 29, 2024. this is considerably longer than it should have taken
for initial disclosure to be provided in this case.

at his next appearance, june 21, 2024, he
indicated he had not received disclosure by email. he was advised to follow up
with the office in person. he was asked if he had retained counsel and advised
that he had not yet done so.

on the next appearance, july 26, 2024, counsel
appeared for the applicant and indicated that he had been recently retained and
was awaiting further disclosure. a designation of counsel dated july 6, 2024,
is attached to the information, indicating that counsel was retained as of that
date.

further disclosure was shared with counsel on
july 31, 2024. this included the body worn camera (“bwc”) statement of the
complainant (the primary witness for the crown), a second bwc video, the 911
audio, and the booking video of the accused.

on the next appearance, august 30, 2024, counsel
indicated that he was waiting on a piece of disclosure, a bwc video, in which
the officer had been alone for a period of time with “the client.” the crown
took the position that sufficient disclosure had been provided for a cpt and
asked the court to require a cpt. counsel agreed that a cpt would be held and
indicated his intention to conduct both a cpt and a judicial pre-trial (“jpt”) prior
to the next appearance. he requested a slightly longer adjournment in order to
accomplish both. his request was granted, and the matter was adjourned to
october 18, 2024.

on october 18, 2024, counsel appeared and
advised that he now had full disclosure and that a cpt was scheduled for the
following week. he also advised the court that it was his intention to hold a
jpt or another cpt before the next date.

on november 29, 2024, counsel appeared and
advised that there was a need to wait for movement on the matter due to a
related pre-enquête and further outstanding disclosure. the matter was further
adjourned.

the matter was next addressed on january 24,
2025. a jpt date had been scheduled for the following monday, january 27. the matter
was adjourned to a date in february for the express purpose of allowing the
parties to obtain trial dates after the jpt.

the matter was next addressed on february 24,
2025. counsel appeared and advised the court that he had not yet secured dates
for a four-day trial. no reason for this was put on the record. he asked for a
lengthy adjournment into april to allow the separately running private
information time for preparation. the crown suggested a shorter remand, but
ultimately agreed to an adjournment into april anticipating that trial dates
would be arranged in the interim.

on april 14, 2025, when the matter returned to
court, trial dates had not been secured. counsel advised that a trial
scheduling conference was set for april 25, 2025. it appears from the
correspondence record filed that this trial scheduling conference was only
arranged after the assigned crown emailed counsel on april 9, 2025.

on may 15, 2025, the september 2-5, 2025, trial
dates were noted on record (the transcript for this proceeding was not filed,
but the information confirms the appearance and trial dates being set). it
appears from the correspondence record that this is also the date on which the
crown was first put on notice of the applicant’s intent to seek a stay for
delay.

the remaining appearances up to the adjournment
of the september trial dates relate to the adjournment request and a dispute between
the crown and the applicant about a specific piece of potential disclosure that
remains unresolved. given the explicit waiver from september 2, these
appearances do not require further consideration in my analysis.
the analytical framework

the primary purpose of
s.11(b)
of the
charter
is to
protect the individual rights of accused persons, namely:
the right to security of the
person, which is protected by seeking to minimize the anxiety, concern and
stigma of exposure to criminal charges;
the right to liberty, which is
protected by trying to minimize restrictions on liberty that result from
pre-trial incarceration and restrictive bail conditions; and
the right to a fair trial,
which is protected by attempting to ensure that trials occur while evidence is
available and fresh.

the secondary purpose of s. 11(b) is to protect the interests of
society. this includes seeing that citizens who are accused of crime are
treated fairly, and the public interest in having those who break the law dealt
with quickly on the merits of their cases. as the seriousness of the offence
increases, so does the societal demand that an accused person be brought to
trial.

a decision as to whether s.11(b) has been violated “is not to be
made by the application of a mathematical or administrative formula, but by a
judicial determination” that takes a “bird’s eye view” of the proceedings.

in
r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27, the supreme court provided
the framework for assessing an application under s. 11(b):
the total delay from the laying of the charge to the anticipated
 end of the trial must be calculated.
once that period is determined, any delay attributable to the
 defence must be subtracted to determine the net delay. delay will be
 attributed to the defence where there has been an explicit waiver of s.
 11(b) or where delay is caused solely or directly by the conduct of the
 defence. the defence cannot benefit from its own delay-making conduct.
 however, defence actions taken to legitimately respond to the charges do
 not constitute defence delay.
where the net delay in the provincial court is greater than the
 18-month presumptive ceiling, the burden shifts to the crown to establish
 that there were exceptional circumstances justifying the delay. in order
 to be exceptional, the circumstances must have been reasonably unforeseen
 or reasonably unavoidable. in general, exceptional circumstances fall into
 two broad categories: (1) discrete and exceptional events, or (2)
 particularly complex cases. however, the list of exceptional circumstances
 is not closed. in addition, the crown must show that it could not reasonably
 remedy or prevent the delays from those exceptional circumstances.
if the crown fails to establish both exceptional circumstances
 existed and that its/the system's response to the circumstances was
 reasonable, a stay must be entered. if the crown meets these two hurdles,
 the court must calculate the number of months of exceptional delay and
 subtract that from the remaining delay. if the result is above the 18-month
 ceiling, the delay is unreasonable, and a stay must be entered.
if the result is below the ceiling, the defence must meet the onus
 of showing that: (1) it took meaningful steps that demonstrated a
 sustained effort to expedite the proceedings, and (2) the case took
 markedly longer than it reasonably should have. if the defence succeeds in
 establishing both requirements, a stay must be granted. if not, there is
 no breach of s. 11(b) and the trial must proceed.
application
of the framework
a.
total delay from the laying of the charge to the anticipated end of trial

the
total delay in this case is 792 days.
b.
subtracting delay attributable to the defence

delay
will be attributed to the defence where there has been an explicit waiver of s.
11(b) or where delay is caused solely or directly by the conduct of the
defence.

there
is an explicit waiver of delay from september 2, 2025, to march 30, 2026.
subtracting this period of time leaves 582 days to be considered.

the
crown submitted that three further periods of time should be considered as
defence delay and result in deductions:
(1)
the time after which substantial disclosure had been provided to defence
until the first cpt was scheduled;
(2)
the time after the jpt had been conducted but before a trial scheduling
conference was set;
(3)
the time after trial dates had been secured but the crown and court were
not given notice of the stay application.

the
applicant submitted that none of this time amounts to defence delay as all of
the actions in this time were legitimately taken to respond to the charges and
outstanding disclosure issues.
analysis

the
defence cannot benefit from its own delay-making conduct. however, defence
actions taken to legitimately respond to the charges do not constitute defence
delay. in
r. v. jordan,
2016 scc 27, the supreme court noted at
para. 65:
to be clear, defence actions
legitimately taken to respond to the charges fall outside the ambit of defence
delay. for example, the defence must be allowed preparation time, even where
the court and the crown are ready to proceed. in addition, defence applications
and requests that are not frivolous will also generally not count against the
defence. we have already accounted for procedural requirements in setting the
ceiling. and such a deduction would run contrary to the accused’s right to make
full answer and defence. while this is by no means an exact science, first
instance judges are uniquely positioned to gauge the legitimacy of defence
actions.

there
was significant delay at the outset of this case in retaining counsel. the
information was sworn january 31, 2024. counsel was not retained until july 6,
2024. the applicant submitted that this delay in retaining counsel was
appropriate as the applicant was still awaiting his disclosure. the record
demonstrates that his disclosure had been available and shared to his email
address as of may 29, 2024. he did not secure it until he physically attended
the crown’s office at the end of june. appreciating that it is sometimes
difficult for persons to navigate the criminal justice system, there is no
reason to wait for disclosure before retaining counsel who would conceivably be
in a position to assist with some of the difficulty navigating the system.
appreciating also that some time is necessary to seek out and retain counsel, i
am of the view that the time in this case was more than is reasonable.

that
said, the provision of initial disclosure in this case also took markedly
longer than is appropriate. as such, the crown has rightfully not submitted
that any of this portion of time should be deducted from the total delay in
this case. however, i reference it as it appears to me that the applicant began
this matter with a certain approach to the passage of time and that approach
has continued throughout. that approach is not one of a sustained effort to
expedite the proceedings.
setting a cpt/jpt

as of july 31, 2024, the applicant’s counsel had substantial
disclosure in the matter, including the statement of the complainant. on august 30, 2024, counsel told the court that he was waiting on a
piece of disclosure, a bwc, in which the officer had been alone for a period of
time with “the client.” the crown took the position that sufficient disclosure
had been provided for a cpt and asked the court to require a cpt be conducted.
counsel agreed that he had enough disclosure for a cpt to be held and indicated
to the court his intention to conduct both a cpt and jpt prior to the next
appearance. he requested a longer adjournment in order to accomplish both.

when he returned to court on october 18, 2024, neither
a cpt nor a jpt had been conducted.

by october 24, 2024, a cpt had been conducted. it
turns out the missing bwc contained a period of time where an officer was alone
with the complainant, not with “the client.” counsel appears to have now taken
the position that this disclosure was necessary prior to a jpt, although the
court was never advised that this was his position. a jpt was not held until
january 27, 2025.

the adjournment from august 30 to october 18,
2024, was granted on the representation that both a cpt and jpt were to be held
in that time. the bwc disclosure that had remained outstanding was a second recording,
from a second officer, of the statement of the complainant that had already
been provided. it is difficult to understand how it was necessary disclosure in
order to determine the issues and estimate time for trial. in submissions
before me, counsel was unable to explain why this disclosure necessitated
delaying the setting of the cpt or jpt.

the crown was also not acting with any
expediency to move the matter forward through the fall. two set date appearances
occurred without the crown requiring a jpt be set and with the crown appearing
to agree, at least implicitly, that the disclosure should be provided prior. it
is no wonder that the presiding jurists agreed to the adjournments when the
crown was not opposing them.

when it comes to meaningful set date
appearances, counsel and the crown need to properly advise the court of the
state of disclosure so the court can determine whether to grant requested
adjournments. further outstanding disclosure often becomes apparent as a matter
moves through the system, but that does not appear to be what happened here. in
terms of the disclosure required to move the matter to a cpt and jpt, counsel had
advised the court on august 30 that he had sufficient disclosure to conduct
both of those steps prior to october 18. yet neither was conducted.

in my view, some of the delay that followed must
be properly considered as delay occasioned solely by the actions of the
defence. if an applicant chooses to delay case management steps in a matter
after having told the court that they have sufficient disclosure to conduct
those steps, then an applicant cannot benefit from that delay. to hold
otherwise would be to deny the court the proper oversight.

given my view that the crown was also not acting
to move the matter forward expeditiously, it would be inappropriate to deduct
the full period of time as defence delay. the crown submitted that the period
between august 14, 2024, two weeks after substantial disclosure had been provided,
and october 2, 2024, when counsel requested a cpt, should be deducted.

in my view, there is merit to deducting this
period of time. nothing changed from the perspective of disclosure between july
31, 2024, and when the cpt was conducted on october 24. it is unclear why there
was delay in setting the cpt. rather than an artificial date of two weeks after
receipt of disclosure, i would deduct the 33 days from the august 30 court date
to the october 2 request for cpt. it is this period of time that is truly entirely
within the actions of the defence and when the court had no oversight or
ability to order the parties to move forward.

deducting that amount leaves a further 549 days
to be considered.
setting a trial date

the matter was addressed on january 24, 2025, three
days prior to the jpt. the matter was adjourned to a date in february for the
express purpose of allowing the parties to obtain trial dates after the jpt.

on february 24, 2025, counsel appeared and
advised that he had not yet secured dates for a four-day trial. no reason for
this was put on the record. the applicant then argued for a lengthy adjournment
into april from this appearance date.

when the matter returned april 14, 2025, trial
dates remained unsecured. again, there was no reason for the delay offered.

the trial scheduling conference was held april
25, 2025, and the september trial dates were obtained.

the crown submits that this period of time
should be deducted as defence delay. the crown cites that it is counsel who
must confirm that their instructions are to proceed to trial and set a trial
scheduling conference.

i agree. the applicant had advised the court
that the matter was going to trial prior to the jpt being conducted. no steps
were taken to set a trial scheduling conference until the crown followed up in
april. it is counsel for the accused who controls the setting of a trial
scheduling conference.

in my view, it would have been reasonable to
have conducted the trial scheduling conference prior to the february 24, 2025,
appearance and to have put trial dates on the record at that appearance. at that
appearance, the crown suggested a remand of less than a month, but the
applicant requested the adjournment into april, then still returned to court
without having secured trial dates.

this is 60 days of unexplained and inexcusable delay from
february 24, 2025, to april 25, 2025, which is entirely attributable to the
defence. deducting this period leaves 489 days. this is below the
jordan
ceiling.
late notice of stay application

the crown submits that a further deduction is
appropriate to reflect that notice of the stay application was not provided
until three weeks after the trial dates had been secured.

while i agree that, in some cases, late notice
of such an application might be cause for a deduction of time, in this case
that lack of notice did not result in any delay. there is also no evidence
that, had the court and crown been put on earlier notice, earlier trial dates
could have been secured. nor is there any indication that the crown made any attempt
to get earlier dates once it was put on notice.

in these circumstances, it is not appropriate to
deduct any time for the lack of prior notice.
e. if the result is below the ceiling

in
order to justify a stay of proceedings where the net delay is below the
jordan
ceiling, the applicant must show (1) it took meaningful steps that demonstrated
a sustained effort to expedite the proceedings, and (2) the case took markedly
longer than it reasonably should have.

the
applicant fails on the first prong. in this case, the applicant:
(1)
waited approximately five months to retain counsel;
(2)
delayed the setting of a cpt for 33 days without explanation;
(3)
delayed the setting of a jpt for several months while awaiting a piece
of disclosure that would not impact estimating time for trial or motions;
(4)
delayed the setting of a trial scheduling conference for a further 60
days without explanation; and,
(5)
waited until after trial dates had been set to give notice of and file
an application for a stay of proceedings.

put
simply, that is not a sustained effort to expedite proceedings. rather, the
record in this case demonstrates that the applicant was more than content to
move the matter forward at the rate at which it progressed.

i
am also not satisfied that this is a case that took markedly longer than it
should have. there were several pieces of video disclosure. there is a separate
and related counter-charge. the parties continue to litigate a third-party
records issue due to a notebook in the possession of the complainant. the
applicant has not demonstrated that this is the type of case that should have
proceeded in a markedly shorter time.

the
applicant has failed to establish a breach of
s.11(b)
of the
charter
and
the application is dismissed.
released: december
17, 2025
signed:
justice r. wright