source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj662/2025oncj662.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. correia, 2025 oncj 662
date: 
2025 12 11
toronto
region
court
file no.: 4810 998 24-48109299
4810 998
25-50008313-02
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
jamie soares
correia
before
justice c. faria
heard
august 25, september 3, 9, october 1, 6, 30, november 12, and
december
4, 2025
reasons
for sentence released december 11, 2025
benjamin janzen................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
the accused jamie soares correia................................................. on
his own behalf
jessie dicecca............................................................................................. 
amicus counsel
faria j.:
i.
introduction

jamie correia pled guilty before me on august
25, 2025, to assaulting his intimate partner, amy baglole, and causing her
bodily harm while on a probation not to have any contact with her.

the crown proceeded by
indictment.

mr. correia represented himself. as the crown was
seeking a lengthy sentence, and mr. correia needed assistance to obtain
documents to file at his sentencing hearing, i adjourned the matter to obtain a
pre-sentence report (psr) and appoint
amicus.

when the sentencing was set to proceed on
october 30, 2025, mr. correia decided to plead guilty to a charge of threatening
death

which he acquired while in-custody awaiting sentencing. documents
amicus
had obtained for the court were also incomplete. this required another
adjournment.

submissions were heard on december 4, 2025.
these are my reasons for sentence.
facts

on march 11, 2024, jamie correia was inside amy
baglole’s apartment in the city of toronto while on a probation that prohibited
him from having contact with her.

just before midnight, a neighbour heard
screaming and fighting from ms. baglole’s apartment. the neighbour continued watching
a movie for more than 30 minutes while this disturbance continued. concerned, the
neighbour turned the movie off and went to his apartment door. he looked
through the peephole and saw ms. baglole in the hallway crawling away from her
apartment. he saw mr. correia go behind her, grab her by the hair, and pull her
back into her apartment.

he saw ms. baglole try to crawl out of her apartment
a second time. he saw mr. correia drag her back into the apartment and stomp on
ms. baglole’s head no less than 3 times. he called 911.

police attended and found ms. baglole with a
gash to her forehead. mr. correia had left but called her while police were
still in the apartment.

ms. baglole was taken to hospital. the gash to
her forehead required stitches. she sustained bruising to her face and left
eye.

a warrant was issued for mr. correia’s arrest,
and he was located two days later.

on april 18, 2025, while mr. correia was in pre-trial
custody at the toronto south detention center (tsdc) on these charges, he had a
conversation with fellow inmate krzysztof ryn. mr. correia informed mr. ryn
that the unit had “voted” that he had to “leave” the unit. if he did not do so,
mr. correia said “i’m going to get my minions to come kill you and your
family.” mr. ryn was beaten by 3 inmates shortly thereafter.
ii.
jamie correia

mr. correia’s psr

contains only all self-reported information. he is 52 years old and was born
and raised in toronto by immigrant parents who were abusive to each other, to his
two siblings and to him. he disclosed during his allocution that he was
sexually abused between the ages of 5 and 12 by a family friend who lived down
the street.

both his parents, who are now elderly, are
experiencing deteriorating health including recent hospitalizations. he has no
contact with his brother and sister because of his regular drug use and
imprisonment. he was married for a year in 2000 and has no contact with either
his ex-wife or his 24-year-old son.

mr. correia has been on a disability pension
since 2007 after falling off a roof and sustaining a spinal injury. he
completed his high school diploma the last time he was incarcerated in 2023. he
is currently enrolled in a college program and doing very well academically.

he began drinking and using drugs at the age of
14, and then became addicted to crack cocaine, and crystal meth.

his criminal record, one with over 125
convictions spans 36 years from 1989 when he was 16 years old to last year.

it reflects a life of drug
addiction and violence. mr. correia states he has ptsd, anxiety, depression,
adhd, and an impulse disorder although there is no verification of these
diagnoses.

mr. correia has made excellent use of his time
while incarcerated. during his last incarceration in late december 2022, to september
2023, he completed 16 programs at the tsdc. these included programing on
substance use, anger management, relationship building, understanding feelings,
and life skills.


during his current incarceration he has again
availed himself of programing. he completed 5 programs including for mental
health and substance abuse. he filed 10 certificates of completion in counselling
areas such as recognizing healthy relationships, problem solving and changing
habits.

iii.
victim impact

ms. baglole’s victim impact statement is moving
in its simplicity and directness. she is traumatized. she is terrified mr.
correia will kill her. she lives in fear and anguish. she has lost sleep, and experiences
anxiety and despair. she now has a dog for comfort and protection.


ms. baglole is of financially limited means and
the property damage mr. correia caused was significant. she is humiliated that
people saw this damage to her apartment and saw her distress. the permanent
scar on her face remind her of mr. correia daily. she is petrified of him.
iv.
position of the parties

the crown submits the appropriate sentence is 4
years; however, considering the harsh conditions of incarceration and mr. correia’s
rehabilitative efforts, he recommends a total sentence of 3 years and 7months
(44 months): 3.5 years for the assault bodily harm and breach, and 2 months
consecutive for the threat.

mr. correia, on his own behalf, submits that the
appropriate sentence is one time served, which is tantamount to 31.5 months, a
suspended sentence and probation with terms to continue his rehabilitation
efforts.

mr. dicecca, as
amicus, submitted that
both the crown and mr. correia’s recommendations are within the range of
sentence for these offences. he provided case law in support of the range to be
considered.


mr. dicecca pointed out the updated lockdown
summaries provided to the court

demonstrate mr. correia was both on lockdown and triple-bunked on 33 occasions.
he also noted that mr. correia’s participation in programing while in custody is
remarkable and factors in his favour and rehabilitation potential.
v.
sentencing principles

every
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender.

the
sanction that i impose should have one or more of the following objectives:
to deter the
 offender and other persons from committing offences;
to separate
 offenders from society, where necessary;
to assist in
 rehabilitating offenders;
to provide
 reparations for harm done to victims or to the community;
to denounce
 unlawful conduct; and
to promote a
 sense of responsibility in offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done
 to victims and to the community.

in
addition, i must also consider the aggravating and mitigating factors 
including the context of the intimate violence context, the harsh conditions of
incarceration and the principles of rehabilitation, parity and totality.
vi.
analysis

i
have reviewed all the caselaw provided by all parties.
i.
aggravating factors

the aggravating factors in this case are
numerous and serious. they include:
i.
intimate partner violence is statutorily
aggravating (s.718.2(a)(ii)).
ii.
this violence is a breach of ms. baglole’s
trust.
iii.
the assault lasted over 30 minutes. it was loud
enough to disturb the neighbour watching television.
iv.
the assault was persistent. ms. baglole was crawling
to try to escape her abuser, only to be dragged back into the apartment by her
hair. twice.
v.
the violence had features of degradation.
pulling ms. baglole by the hair as she is crawling away and stomping on her
head are actions of domination and dehumanization. mr. correia’s conduct was in
total disregard for her human dignity and integrity.
vi.
the beating was in ms. baglole’s own home where she
is entitled to feel the safest.
vii.
the photos of the injuries depict serious
injuries.

the gash to her forehead required stitches. the bruising to the left side of
her face was extensive. if one looks closely, the shoe print of mr. correia can
be made out on her face.
viii.
the impact of the assault is long-lasting,
physically, emotionally, psychologically and financially.
ix.
mr. correia was previously convicted of assault
and assault with a weapon on ms. baglole. those offences put ms. baglole in
hospital.
x.
mr. correia breached that probation not only by
contacting her, but beating her in her home, and then calling her after he beat
her.
xi.
mr. correia was on 2 additional probations at
the time he committed these offences.

regarding the threat to a fellow inmate, mr.
correia’s conduct further exacerbates an already tense environment where inmates
with limited options are easily triggered and violence easily erupts. his
threat is indicative of the informal, but powerful, jail hierarchy that further
victimizes people inside jails.

finally, also aggravating is mr. correia’s
extensive 8-page criminal record. his crimes are wide-ranging. he has committed
property offences. he has possessed and trafficked drugs. he has been violent many
times. he regularly breaches his releases and probations throughout the years.
ii.
mitigating factors

a guilty plea reflects accountability. mr.
correia pled guilty. however, mr. correia’s plea to the assault bodily harm
and breach of probation was on the first day of his second trial date. the
witnesses attended both times. the crown’s case was very strong with an
independent witness, police observations, and photos of the injuries. this
context attenuates the weight of the mitigation of the guilty plea. nonetheless,
mr. correia’s guilty plea did save trial resources.

during his allocution, mr. correia read a letter
apologizing to ms. baglole and stating that he understands and regrets that he
caused her long-lasting harm.

mr. correia’s guilty plea to threatening a
fellow inmate is more meaningful in that it would be difficult for that victim to
testify given the carceral environment where the offence took place.

a significant mitigating factor is mr. correia’s
consistent efforts to rehabilitate himself while in custody. his engagement
with institutional programming demonstrates an effort to get at the cause of
his violence and gain insight into his long-standing maladaptive criminal
behaviour.

further, mr. correia’s strong academic
performance in his college courses while incarcerated illustrate he is capable
of discipline and achievement which speaks to his rehabilitation potential.
iii.
duncan
credit

the harsh conditions of incarceration must be
considered.

mr. correia experienced 242 days of lockdowns of the 638 days he was
incarcerated. that means he was in lockdown about 38% of the time.

during these lockdowns, mr. correia must decide
what he needs most: have a shower; go to the yard; or make a phone call. he can
only do one in the 30 minutes he is allowed out of his cell.

the reason provided for 215 lockdowns is “staff
shortage”.

therefore, 88% of the time mr. correia was in lockdown, was because of resource
decisions made by the institution.

to further exacerbate these unacceptable conditions,
the tsdc is now over- crowded. a cell made for 2 men, with only 2 beds and 1
toilet houses 3 men. this was the case for 38% of the time mr. correia was incarcerated.

there is a persistent institutional disregard for
the resource requirements of managing this jail. these operational decisions
deprive inmates of liberty and dignity contrary to the
institution’s own expectations and standards. these deprivations, imposed on a
regular basis, negatively impact the physical and mental health of those
awaiting trial and those serving their sentence. mr. correia is but one example.

courts have consistently admonished the tsdc and
other facilities for the abhorrent conditions they impose on human beings—to no
avail it appears.

the court may take into consideration these
harsh conditions as a mitigating factor pursuant to
marshall
or take the
more recent approach in
r. v. shaikh,
2024, onsc 774,
r. v.
ahmed,
2021, onsc 8157,
r. v. hassan,
2023 onsc 5040
and quantify the
mitigation. i will do the latter.
iv.
principles

during these sentencing proceedings, mr. correia
has been an engaged and articulate litigant. he is aware of the objectives of
sentencing and the principles the court must apply. he explained the history of
challenges that underlies his criminal record. he apologized. he demonstrated his
commitment to rehabilitation via his programming and education.

i commend mr. correia’s efforts at
self-improvement while in-custody. he is most likely a better person because of
those efforts. however, he is still unable to be crime- free, even while in
jail and participating in the programming he spoke about.

the fact is mr. correia had already completed 16
programs while incarcerated before he was released and viciously beat ms. baglole.
he was on probation and had the opportunity to continue that counselling
trajectory when, instead, he breached his probation and assaulted ms. baglole
in her home causing her bodily harm.

mr. correia’s previous counselling and academic achievements
while incarcerated did not protect ms. baglole from his violence when he was
released.

intimate partner violence is an epidemic. it is a
gendered crime that multi-pronged legislative and judicial efforts over decades
have failed to ameliorate, much less eliminate. mr. correia is an example of a
perpetrator who says and does all the right things but is a repeat offender. he
assaulted ms. baglole. he hurt her. he was sentenced. he was released. then, he
did it again.

this sentence must proportionally reflect the gravity
of these offences and mr. correia’s high blameworthiness. the community’s condemnation
of mr. correia’s violence against his intimate partner must be clear. incarceration
is our society’s strongest communication of denunciation, and so it must be the
primary and guiding principle in this case, even when attenuated by
rehabilitation, totality and parity.
vii.
sentence

the appropriate sentence for the assault bodily
harm and breach of probation is 4 years and the appropriate sentence for the
threat is 2 months consecutive. however, the total sentence will be reduced to
3.5 years to account for the harsh conditions of incarceration, the principle
of totality, and the commendable rehabilitative efforts of mr. correia.

mr. correia’s pre-sentence custody of 21 months will
be enhanced to 32 months pursuant to
summers

credit
and deducted from the 3.5-year sentence. he will serve an additional approximate
10 months.


mr. correia will be on probation for 2 years. the
terms will be subject to submissions by the parties.

there will be a dna order, and a s. 109 weapons
prohibition for life.
released: december 11, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria

sections 267
(b) and
733.1
of the
criminal code of canada.

section 264.1(1)
(a) of the
criminal code of canada.

exhibit 1: pre-sentence report, jamie correia, october 20, 2025.

exhibit 4: criminal record, jamie correia

exhibits 3a to 3o: certificates and transcripts and labelled.

exhibit 8: solgen list of completed programs at the tsdc from december 2022 to
may 2025, dated november 18, 2025

exhibit 6: victim impact statement, amy baglole.

r. v. j.d.
2018 onsc 1198,
r. v. forde,
 o.j. 6348,
r.
v. gervais,
2021 onca 404,
r. v. seerattan,
2019 onsc 4340,
r. v.
louangrath,
2016 onca 550.
r. v. allen-brown,
2022 oncj 238.

exhibit 7: toronto south detention centre, lockdown summary, march 13, 2024 to
november 30, 2025.

exhibits 5a, 5b, and 5c: photos of amy baglole’s face, forehead, and left
cheek.

r. v. marshall,
2021 onca 344

the reasons for the other 27 lockdowns are redacted.

r. v. summers,
2014 scc 26

the exact calculation will be made by corrections as psc is 638 days enhanced
to 957 days.