source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj347/2025oncj347.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. yoell, 2025 oncj 347
date: 2025 06 23
court file no.: windsor
22-8110766
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
jacob
yoell
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 5
november 2024, 7 january, 17 april 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 23 june 2025
zachary battiston.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
jessica grbevski............................................................................ 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

on
5 november 2024, the offender jacob yoell pleaded guilty to robbery and
aggravated assault. i ordered a pre-sentence report and submissions were heard
on 17 april 2025. these are my reasons for sentence.
facts

the
facts of this case are, quite simply, awful. the offender, together with
others, violently attacked two random strangers in downtown windsor. in the
early morning hours of 27 august 2022, this group found their first victim,
jesse martin. he was beaten and his jaw was broken in the attack. less than
an hour later, they found their second victim, hezron habimana. he too was
beaten and robbed. his injuries are unknown as he left hospital before being
treated.

as
is so often the case now, both incidents were filmed and posted to social
media. it was people who saw the attacks on snapchat who first called the
windsor police service to identify the perpetrators. but for them, the group
would likely have gotten away with their crimes.

the
videos were played in court and filed as exhibits. detailed descriptions are necessary
to impart the true gravity of these offences.
the first video

this
video is 56 seconds long. it shows the drive-thru area of a property i was
told was a kfc outlet. it opens with a group following the victim martin. he
is clearly trying to walk away from them. the group surrounds him, and the
attack begins.

the
victim is quickly knocked to the ground. he is punched and kicked by the
entire group. the offender, in a red shirt, is heard saying, “give me
everything you got, nigger, what you got in your fucking pockets, nigger”. i
pause to note this victim is black. the offender is seen going through the
pants pockets of the victim before punching him in the face two more times.

the
offender then addresses the group: “get everything off this nigger right now”.

the
victim seems to try to stand, which causes the offender to say “stay on the
fucking ground, nigger”. the other attacker, bravely covering his face with a
white mask, viciously stomps the victim in the face and kicks him in the head.

at
that point, after again going into the victim’s pocket, the offender says,
“stay the fuck down, nigger, before i kill your motherfucking ass”. he then
punches and kicks the victim in the face again. the white masked attacker does
the same. the offender then says, “swing on me, nigger? what’s wrong with
you?” followed by two more kicks to the victim’s head. with the victim now
motionless on the ground, the offender turns from him and says, “we out”.
the second video

this
video is 1 minute, 7 seconds long. it shows the area behind the windsor
aquatic centre. it opens with two males facing each other as if they were in a
boxing match. one is in a red shirt and the other is in a dark hoodie. it is
admitted the person in the red shirt is the offender and the other person is
the victim habimana. they face each other briefly, with the offender moving
closer and the victim backing up. at the 00:15 mark in the video, the offender
runs at the victim. the offender is joined by the person wearing a white mask
over his face. the offender strikes the victim with his left fist, knocking
him to the ground. both attackers then set upon the fallen victim.

at
the 00:22 mark, at the urging of the person taking the video, two more
attackers join in. it is now a four-on-one beating. one can be heard saying,
“who the fuck do you think you are, nigger?” i pause to note this victim is also
black.

the
group continues to rain punches and kicks on the victim as he tries to stand
up. the person filming takes the time to pick up all the victim’s belongings,
which have fallen to the ground.

the
assault continues, with the offender at one point straddling the victim and
punching him in the head with both fists. at 00:48 the person filming says
“jacob, behind you.” he appears to be referring to an unrelated person who
happens to be walking by and is behind the offender. at 00:52 a voice i
attribute to this passerby can be heard saying for the first time “he’s had
enough”. this statement has no effect on the offender. the speaker repeats
over and over that the victim has had enough but the beating continues. the
offender throws him to the ground again and at the 1:00 mark, stomps his head
with his right foot. another attacker stomps the victim’s head several more
times. as the passerby says, “you’re knocking the guy’s fucking head in”, the
victim, now defenceless and lying on the ground, is stomped one final time in
the face by the offender.
positions of the parties

crown
counsel seeks a sentence of 15-18 months jail, followed by three years of
probation. the crown also seeks dna samples as both counts are primary dna
offences, and a s. 109 weapons prohibition for ten years. for the offender,
counsel seeks a conditional sentence of 12-18 months, followed by two years of
probation. counsel did not argue against the ancillary orders.
the principles of sentencing

parliament
has set out several directives a sentencing court must follow. these are found
beginning at
s. 718
of the
criminal code. that section states:
718
the fundamental purpose of
sentencing is to protect society and to contribute, along with crime prevention
initiatives, to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and
safe society by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following
objectives:
(a)
to denounce unlawful conduct and
the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful
conduct;
(b)
to deter the offender and other
persons from committing offences;
(c)
to separate offenders from
society, where necessary;
(d)
to assist in rehabilitating
offenders;
(e)
to provide reparations for harm
done to victims or to the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or
to the community.

the
fundamental purposes of sentencing, as noted, are to protect society,
contribute to respect for the law, and to maintain a just, peaceful, and safe
society. all other sentencing objectives must be viewed through that lens. 
the list that follows this declaration sets out the objectives that individual
sentences should pursue.

section
718.04 states that when the victim of an offence is a vulnerable person on
account of their personal circumstances, a sentencing court must prioritize
denunciation and deterrence in determining a fit sentence. in the present
case, i have been told that both victims were homeless at the time of the
attacks. with nowhere to stay, it is not surprising they were walking the
streets alone in the wee hours of the morning. i find as a fact that both were
vulnerable victims as a result of their personal circumstances.

section
718.2 sets out several factors parliament has deemed to be aggravating. two of
those factors are relevant to this case. paragraph (a)(i) of that section
makes any offence “motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race” more
serious. in the present case, the offender can be clearly heard using a racial
slur repeatedly against his victims, both of whom are black. can i find that
the victims’ race was the sole motivating factor for these attacks? no, but
that is not what the section requires. parliament could have said, “motivated
exclusively
by bias, prejudice or hate”. they did not. if the offences were at least in
part motivated by the race of the victim, the paragraph will apply. based on
the offender’s own words, repeated
ad nauseum, and the selection of the
victims, it is clear to me that race played at least a part in these offences.

the
second statutorily aggravating factor present in this case is from paragraph
(a)(iii.1). where an offence has had a significant impact on the victim “
considering their
age and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation”,
sentences should be increased. while i have no victim impact statements in
this case, i was told that the victim martin suffered a broken jaw. both
victims clearly lost property that was scooped up by the assailants. there is
no question that these offences have had a significant impact on the victims,
even without written statements from them.

section
718.2(b) reminds courts that sentences should be similar to those given to
offenders in similar circumstances, and s. 718.2(d) directs that an offender
should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate.

finally,
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender, pursuant to s. 718.1.
the pre-sentence report

i
received a pre-sentence report (psr) authored by darin reybroek. it is
detailed and helpful. it discloses a positive history, with strong family
support. the offender has not completed high school but is interested in doing
so. he has been employed, but is not currently. understandably, he is holding
off looking for work until these matters are concluded.

the
offender told the psr author that alcohol consumption played a role in the
offences. since then, he has reduced his drinking and does not seem to see it
as problematic. while he had experimented with drugs in the past, that is now
limited to regular marijuana use.

the
offender described the offences as “a dumb mistake, he wished he could take
back.” he acknowledged that he knew what he was doing was wrong. he expressed
hope for the victims to make full recoveries and understood the impact his
actions had on them. he was remorseful. his plans for the future include
finding work and buying a house with his partner.

overall
i find the psr to be positive. it shows a person with a loving and supportive
family, and who is very different from the person he was in 2022. the offender
took responsibility for his actions and seems to understand their impact.
caselaw

the
crown relies on three cases in seeking a 15-18 month jail sentence.

the
first is
r.
v.
archibald
2024 oncj 241. the crown does not rely
on the case for its factual similarity but rather on its summary of the law
related to aggravated assault. justice wright referred to the well-known
decision of justice code in
r.
v.
tourville
2011 onsc 1677. that
decision set out three levels of aggravated assault at paragraphs 27, 28 and
30. i do not include paragraph 29 below as it related to case-specific facts
before justice code:
 the
parties have helpfully provided me with a large number of sentencing cases,
dealing with the offence of aggravated assault. that offence, contrary to
s.
268
of the
criminal code, carries a maximum sentence of fourteen years
imprisonment. the cases disclose a wide range of sentences. at the bottom end
is an exceptional case like r. v. peters
(2010),
2010 onca 30 (canlii),
250
c.c.c. (3d) 277 (ont. c.a.)
where an aboriginal offender received a suspended
sentence and three years probation on her guilty plea to aggravated assault. 
she was twenty-six years old with no prior adult record. she had used a broken
beer bottle in the assault, during a bar room dispute, causing serious facial
lacerations to the victim. the “gladue report” disclosed a very difficult
upbringing in a violent and abusive home, leading to alcoholism and drug
abuse. by the time of sentencing, she had obtained employment and was making
real progress in counseling for her substance abuse problems. some of these
features are not dissimilar to the case at bar.
 in the
mid-range are cases where high reformatory sentences have been imposed of
between eighteen months and two years less a day. these cases generally
involve first offenders and generally contain some elements suggestive of
consent fights but where the accused has resorted to excessive force. see: r.
v. chickekoo
(2008),
79 w.c.b. (2d) 66 (ont. c.a.); r. v. moreira,
2006 canlii
9709 (on sc),
 o.j. no. 1248 (s.c.j.); r. v. basilio
(2003),
2003 canlii
15531 (on ca),
175 c.c.c. (3d) 440 (ont. c.a.).
* * *
 at the
high end of the range are cases where four to six years imprisonment have been
imposed. these cases generally involve recidivists, with serious prior
criminal records, or they involve “unprovoked” or “premeditated” assaults with
no suggestion of any elements of consent or self-defence. see: r. v. scott,
 o.j. no. 1210 (c.a.); r. v. thompson,
 o.j. no. 1033 (c.a.); r. v.
vickerson
(2005),
2005 canlii 23678 (on ca),
199 c.c.c. (3d) 165 (ont. c.a.);
r. v. pakul,
 o.j. no. 1198 (c.a).

the
crown argues that the offender falls in the mid-range
described in
tourville.

in
the case of r. v. morrisseau
2010 abpc 404, the offender, together with two
others, attacked the victim on a city bus. while all punched the victim, the
offender admitted to stabbing him in the chest and cutting his face with the
knife. the bus had several passengers on it at the time. it was acknowledged
by the crown that there was no evidence the offender was the ringleader, and it
did not pursue a finding that the attack was racially motivated despite one of
the group using a racial slur. the offender told the author of an faos report
(which was not defined but appears to be a psychiatric report) that the reason
for the offence was that he was intoxicated and believed the victim to have
sexually assaulted his girlfriend the year prior. he expressed remorse for his
actions and had no prior record. the court imposed a sentence of 21 months
jail after a guilty plea.

finally,
the case of
r.
v.
t.f.b.
2004 canlii 23634 (nl pc)
dealt with charges
of robbery and possession of burglary tools. the offender assaulted and robbed
two victims, one of whom was a sleeping homeless person. when they saw he had
no money, the two assailants punched and kicked him. the other robbery was
akin to a home invasion. a significant distinguishing factor in this case is
that the offender had a prior record for aggravated assault and was on parole
for that offence at the time of the offence for which he was being sentenced. 
in the result, the offender received an 18-month sentence for the robbery of
the homeless victim and six months consecutive for having his face masked while
committing the offence.

counsel
for the defendant did not file any caselaw but did rely on the sentences
imposed on others in the offender’s group. one received a 9-month jail
sentence for his participation in only one of the two attacks. another was
deemed an “exceptional case” by the sentencing judge and received a 9-month
conditional sentence. i was not provided a copy of either sentencing decision,
but was told by crown counsel that the offender who received a conditional
sentence had “relatively minimal involvement”. this characterization was not
disputed by counsel for the offender.

i
find the most useful case cited to be the
tourville
decision.
despite
it being from 2011, it continues to provide valuable instruction in sentencing
for aggravated assault. as
noted by justice wright in
archibald,
supra,
the levels set out by justice code have been upheld several times by the court
of appeal for ontario and remain good law.
mitigating
and aggravating factors

the
offender has several mitigating factors working in his favour.

chief
among them are his guilty plea and remorse. while the guilty plea was not
entered at an early opportunity, and while this matter had initially been set
for trial, the plea is still meaningful. i note that in sentencing submissions
the crown conceded that it was having difficulty maintaining contact with the
victims. this could have made proving the charges more difficult. that said,
the offences were entirely caught on video. there was no hint of a consensual
fight or of self-defence. the plea is meaningful but there is also, in my
view, an element of acknowledging the inevitable.

to
the psr author and to me the offender has expressed remorse for his actions. i
believe that remorse to be sincere. i accept that he understands the impact of
what he did, both on his victims and on himself, though calling it a dumb
mistake doesn’t come close to reflecting the gravity of his actions. he told
me he can be someone in society who makes a difference. i agree. the offender
strikes me as an intelligent young man with the ability to succeed. i can’t
lose sight of his rehabilitative prospects in determining a fit sentence.

i
asked the offender why he did what he did. he said he thought the people he
was with were cool and he wanted to fit in. as i believe i pointed out to him
at the time, the people he wanted to impress are not in court supporting him. 
they’ve scattered. it is his family who stands behind him. the letter from
his mother, filed as an exhibit, shows the support the offender has and will
continue to have. i have also received a letter from his football coach, who
extolled the offender’s hard work, commitment, and compassion.

the
offender is also youthful. while he is an adult, and must be sentenced as an
adult, he was 18 at the time of these offences. he was 20 at the time of his
pleas, and is now 21. he is a young man with many years ahead of him.

he
also comes before the court with no prior criminal record. unlike the
offenders in some of the cases cited by counsel, he does not have a history of
violence or other criminal behaviour. there is every reason to think
rehabilitation will be effective in keeping the offender out of trouble in the
future. i do not see specific deterrence as a pressing objective in this case.

finally,
the offender gave an inculpatory statement to police. he identified himself as
the person in the red shirt. i was told, however, that in the course of that
statement, he also attempted to claim he was only defending himself from the
victim habimana. that is obviously false and could only have been an attempt
to avoid responsibility for what really happened. i remind myself, though,
that at the time of the statement, he was 18 years old and likely in a police
interview room for the first time in his life. given the context, i do not put
undue weight on this manufactured defence.

just
as there are mitigating factors that work in the offender’s favour, there are
aggravating factors that weigh against him.

as
i always do when determining sentence, i caution myself not to use an element
of an offence as an aggravating factor. regarding the victim martin, for
example, i cannot use the injury caused as an aggravating factor as wounding is
part of the charged offence. likewise, i cannot use the taking of habimana’s
wallet as aggravating as the offender has pleaded to the offence of robbery,
which includes the theft as a constituent element.

each
offence, however, involved both an assault and a theft. the victim martin was
assaulted, but there was also at least the attempt to steal from him, as
evidenced by the offender going through his pockets and urging the others to
“get everything off this nigger right now.”

the
victim habimana was clearly robbed, but he was also assaulted far beyond what
was necessary to carry out the theft.
section 343
of the
criminal code
states:
343
every one commits robbery who
(a)
steals, and for the purpose of
extorting whatever is stolen or to prevent or overcome resistance to the
stealing, uses violence or threats of violence to a person or property;
(b)
steals from any person and, at the
time he steals or immediately before or immediately thereafter, wounds, beats,
strikes or uses any personal violence to that person;
(c)
assaults any person with intent to
steal from him; or
(d)
steals from any person while armed
with an offensive weapon or imitation thereof.

the
offender is charged under paragraph (c), that he did assault the victim with
intent to steal from him. the assault and the theft are assumed to be
connected. in the video it is clear that the assault was well in excess of
supporting any intent to steal from the victim. the victim’s wallet and
belongings are gathered up long before the end of the assault. i can view the
prolonged, violent attack on the victim that continued unabated after the theft
as an aggravating feature on the charge of robbery.

as
i have already indicated, the vulnerability of the victims is a statutorily
aggravating factor. people enduring homelessness are of necessity living on
the street. they have no shelter to keep them safe. they are thereby exposed
to the risk of crossing paths with the wrong people. that is exactly what
happened to both victims in this case.

the
use of racial epithets against black victims is aggravating. as heinous as
these random, violent attacks are, they are made even worse by the offender
repeatedly using a hateful, revolting slur against both victims.

the
impact on the victims is clear on the face of these events. unfortunately, the
true extent of that impact is unknown as the transience of the victims has
prevented the crown from staying in contact with them.

finally,
the way in which these offences were committed is itself extremely aggravating. 
counsel for the offender disputed the crown’s use of the term “gang violence”,
saying that carried a negative connotation and that it should be considered
“group violence”. in my view, gang violence is exactly what this was. a gang
of like-minded individuals moved around downtown windsor looking for victims. 
habimana and martin were complete strangers to them. their only crime was
being in the wrong place at the wrong time. when the gang, led by the
offender, saw them, they were attacked with ruthless violence. having watched
the videos several times, i am surprised the worst injury inflicted was a
broken jaw to martin. the attackers are vicious and unrelenting, even as the
victims lay prone and defenceless. the chief attacker throughout both
incidents is the offender.

it
is clear from the videos that the offender was the leader of this group. he is
the one who first squares off with habimana, and he is the one who does nearly
all the talking to both victims. he directs the actions of the other
assailants. i agree with his counsel that the others were certainly involved,
but there is no other inference to be drawn from the video but that the
offender was the ringleader.
analysis

counsel
for the offender seeks a conditional sentence of 12-18 months. to impose a
conditional sentence, i must be persuaded of several things. section 742.1 sets
out the prerequisites. in the present case, the relevant factors are:
(1)
the
sentence must be less than two years;
(2)
a
conditional sentence must not endanger the safety of the community;
(3)
a
conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing as set out in ss. 718 to 718.2.

in
this case, i agree that a fit sentence would be less than two years. a
conditional sentence is therefore a possibility. i must consider if such a
sentence would meet the second and third requirements set out above.

at
first blush, it would seem that a conditional sentence on these facts would
indeed endanger the safety of the community. these were random, violent
attacks on strangers. they are the sort of stories that strike fear in the
hearts of citizens. without question, on that night, the offender and his gang
posed a grave danger to the community.

in
assessing this point, however, i must consider both the offender’s actions at
the time of the offences and where the offender is today. it is clear from the
psr that he has made significant changes in his life. he no longer associates
with any of the people he did that night. he is focused on his future, and on
living a successful life with his family and partner. in determining if a
conditional sentence would endanger public safety i must consider the potential
consequences of him being in the community. does the offender currently pose a
danger to others? taking all the evidence into account, i find he does not. 
his sincere remorse and insight into what he did shows he is unlikely to engage
in further violent conduct.

the
sentence i impose turns on the third point: would a conditional sentence be
consistent with the purpose and principles of sentencing?

i
have set those purposes and principles out in these reasons. i have considered
parliament’s direction regarding aggravating features and the care that should
be taken before depriving someone of their liberty. i also take into account
the sentences imposed on other offenders from that night.

in
addition, i have also considered the punitive effect a conditional sentence
would have on the offender. while the caselaw is clear that a conditional
sentence can be punitive, the degree to which it is will vary from case to
case. in the offender’s case, a conditional sentence would not noticeably
change his day-to-day life. he would still live at home with his family. he
would still see his parents and partner. he would still watch sports on
television with his father. in these circumstances, a conditional sentence of
imprisonment would not have the punitive impact it would need to have to be an
appropriate sentence.

after
careful consideration, i find a conditional sentence for multiple, prolonged,
violent attacks on random strangers would not be consistent with the purpose
and principles of sentencing. a jail sentence is required in this case. 
further, given the offender’s leading role in the assaults, a sentence above
what the other offenders received is called for.

i
do not say that lightly. i recognize the strides the offender has made since
that night, and i commend him for them. they will set him up for a bright and
productive future. he is sentenced today not for who he is, but for what he
did.

bearing
in mind that a first sentence of custody should be as short as reasonably
possible, the offender will be sentenced as follows:
(1)
he
will be imprisoned for a period of 12 months, concurrent on each count;
(2)
on
release from custody he will be bound by a probation order for two years
concurrent on each count. in addition to the statutory conditions, the terms
of probation will be as follows:
(a)
you
will report in person to a probation officer within two working days of your
release from custody, and after that at all times and places as directed by the
probation officer or any person authorized by a probation officer to assist in
your supervision;
(b)
you
are to cooperate with your probation officer. you must sign any releases
necessary to permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance and you
must provide proof of compliance with any condition of this order to your
probation officer on request;
(c)
do
not contact or communicate, in any way, either directly or indirectly, by any physical,
electronic, or other means with hezron habimana or jesse martin;
(d)
do
not be within 100m of any place where you know any of those persons to live,
work, go to school, or anywhere you know them to be except for required court attendances;
(e)
do
not associate or communicate, by any physical, electronic, or other means, or
be in the company of tyler ducharme, tyrell patterson, quinn davis-ducharme, or
john maceldowney-turbin;
(f)
do
not possess any weapons as defined by the
criminal code; and
(g)
attend
and actively participate in all assessment, counselling, or rehabilitative
programs as directed by your probation officer, and complete them to the
satisfaction of your probation officer, specifically for but not limited to
alcohol abuse, anger management, and psychiatric or psychological issues.
(3)
he
will be ordered on each count to provide a sample of his dna to the windsor
police service for inclusion in the national dna databank, forthwith; and
(4)
he
will be prohibited on each count from possessing weapons pursuant to
s. 109
of
the
criminal code
for ten years;

i
will waive the victim surcharges given the custodial sentence.

i
do not ignore the tremendous impact this sentence will have on the offender. my
sincere hope is that this ends a dark chapter in your life and that you go on
to accomplish your goals. this sentence reflects what you did. it does not
define you as a person. i wish you and your family the best.
released: 
23 june 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt