source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj661/2025oncj661.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. medow, 2025 oncj 661
date: 
2025 december 11
court
file: toronto #24-48103731
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
alexander medow
judgment
before
justice brock jones
heard
on december 16 and 17, 2024
january
17, june 10, july 4, november 10, and december 9, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on december 11, 2025
j. rinaldi............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
d. molloy............................................................................................................... 486.3
counsel
a. stastny……………………………………………………………………..…amicus
curiae
jones j.:
introduction and procedural history

on january 17, 2024, pc elliot lee conducted a
routine traffic stop at queen street west and york street in toronto. while
speaking to the motorist he had pulled over, alexander medow approached him on
foot and patted him on the back. the two men had never met before. this
seemingly innocuous interaction triggered a chain of events that culminated in
a violent confrontation involving mr. medow, pc lee, and several other police
officers. mr. medow was arrested and charged with various offences as a result,
including obstructing pc lee in the course of his duties (
criminal code
section 129(a)), impersonating a police officer (
criminal code
section
130(1)(b)), and assaulting a peace officer causing bodily harm (
criminal
code
section 270.01(1)(b)).

the entire interaction between pc lee and mr.
medow was captured on two separate video recording devices: pc lee’s body-worn
camera footage (“bwc”) and the in-car camera of his police squad car (“icc”).
at the start of the trial, there appeared to be little dispute between the
crown and mr. medow regarding what factually occurred. the issues in the trial were
to centre around mr. medow’s intent, the reasonableness (or lack thereof) of
the police officers’ response to his conduct, and whether he lawfully acted in
self-defence once the officers used force against him.

as the trial progressed, mr. medow clarified
that he disputed the authenticity of the video evidence presented by the crown.
he asserted that it had been digitally altered to distort what truly occurred
between him and pc lee. he also asked me to consider the possibility that this
central video evidence might be a “deepfake.” he believed he had been the
victim of a harassment campaign by the toronto police service (“tps”) for over
four years. according to his narrative, they had a motive to frame him.

throughout the trial, i repeatedly heard him
explain why he held these beliefs. during the first two days of the trial, he
explained that he lacked the resources to properly advance his defence and felt
that his previous counsel, who was appointed under a legal aid certificate, was
unable to effectively represent him. that lawyer had to be removed from the
record on a prior occasion by a different judge. he could not secure a new
lawyer through a change of solicitor application with legal aid and was left to
challenge the prosecution’s case on his own, from jail, with limited resources.

while mr. medow had mr. molloy's assistance as
486.3 counsel and mr. stastny was present as
amicus, the crown raised
questions about the lawfulness of mr. molloy’s appointment at the start of the
trial.

additionally, mr. medow indicated that he wanted to challenge the crown’s
witnesses himself, in addition to any questioning conducted by mr. molloy. he
held strong beliefs regarding the
charter of rights and freedoms, the
proper role of the police, and the lawful exercise of state authority in a
democratic society. he felt that i would not understand his perspective unless
he could articulate those views personally, both through cross-examination and
submissions. this included his steadfast belief that the video evidence
presented by the crown had been manipulated to misrepresent his actions on the
day of the incident.

i ordered that he would be permitted to ask
questions of the crown witnesses himself, in addition to any questioning done
by 486.3 counsel and/or amicus. this would ensure mr. medow’s
right to defend himself as he saw fit was respected. since all the crown witnesses were police officers, mr. rinaldi did
not object. an accused’s right to cross-examination is a
fundamental part of making a full answer and defence to the charges he is
facing: see
r. v. samaniego,
2022 scc 9, at para.
77.

the trial did not finish on schedule, and
obtaining continuation dates was challenging. on january 17, 2025, i released
mr. medow on bail, as continuing his detention would have been unjustified in
these circumstances.

on june 10, 2025, mr. medow failed to appear in
person, despite having been ordered to do so.

he appeared on zoom. he claimed he was not aware of the trial’s continuation
date and was unable to attend in person, regardless, due to his personal
financial situation. after a lengthy discussion with him, mr. stastny and mr.
rinaldi, i granted an adjournment of the trial to july 4, 2025, and ordered mr.
medow to appear in person, with the expectation that he would be prepared to
testify in his own defence if he chose to do so. mr. medow again raised his
concern that the crown’s video evidence had been manipulated and was a
“deepfake.” he asserted that he would conduct his own forensic examination of
the video in support of this claim, despite having limited funds available.

on july 4, 2025, mr. medow attended. mr. stastny,
as
amicus,
brought a directed verdict application on mr. medow’s behalf for
three of the counts. i granted it with respect to only one, the charge of
impersonating an officer. on a review of all the evidence in this case, i
concluded there was no evidence that any objective observer of mr. medow’s
conduct could reasonably conclude he was genuinely attempting to impersonate a
police officer.

mr. medow indicated he wanted to testify on the
remaining charges, but insisted he was entitled to an adjournment. he needed
more time as he had too many other legal cases ongoing. he also spoke about
physical and mental health concerns.

mr. medow had over six months after being
released from custody to prepare for the continuation of the trial, with the
assistance of
amicus. he was very knowledgeable about the court process,
despite not being a lawyer. as a self-represented person, he was responsible
for advancing his defence as he desired, including bringing appropriate
applications. mr. medow cast aspersions on the integrity of the justice system
on several of his court appearances and on mr. rinaldi as crown counsel. he reiterated
that he had been treated unfairly and that not a single lawyer who had worked
on his case, either as his counsel or as an
amicus,
had truly helped him.

i did not accede to the request for another
adjournment. i was satisfied that he had been given more than enough
opportunity to present his defence as he wished, and that he was exaggerating
his health concerns. he had plenty of time to prepare and knew that july 4 was
the scheduled completion date of the trial. his accusations directed at the
crown and mr. stastny were unfounded. an accused person is entitled to a fair
trial, not a perfect one:
samaniego,
at
para.
76. while i made
every reasonable effort to assist him, there is a limit to the extent to which
a court can provide assistance to a self-represented accused person. a court
must at all times remain neutral and can never cross the line into becoming
counsel for the accused: see
r. v. breton,
2018 onca 753, at paras.
13-14.

on july 4, 2025, mr. medow testified and
provided his version of events. submissions were adjourned to november 10, 2025.
on that date, the crown sought an adjournment. mr. rinaldi was in the midst of
a murder trial at the superior court of justice that had gone past its
anticipated completion date. mr. stastny sent an agent who requested that he be
removed as
amicus.
he could no longer continue in that role. i granted
his request and ordered that the trial proceed to final arguments on december 9.
mr. medow appeared on zoom and was loud, disrespectful, and could not be
reasoned with. i informed him to be prepared for the next court date. he did
not require further assistance from an
amicus
to complete the trial.

finally, on december 9, the parties appeared
before me. i attempted to provide mr. medow with a typed memorandum on the
applicable law in this case approximately two weeks prior to this date. my
intention was to assist him with making final submissions. i sent a copy to his
surety, who informed my office he would send it to mr. medow. unfortunately,
mr. medow found himself back in custody on new charges on a date in november.
on december 9, we reviewed the legal principles applicable to this case
together in open court and he was able to review a copy of the memorandum.

mr. medow requested yet another adjournment. he
argued that he was being denied the opportunity to present evidence showing
that the videos the crown relies on were deepfakes, medical evidence that could
potentially cast doubt on some of the other charges, and written materials that
would help him make informed submissions about his case. i denied the request
for a further adjournment. over the past year, mr. medow claimed he would call witnesses
regarding the authenticity of the video. however, he never provided anything to
the court to support his claim, and each time i inquired about this proposed
evidence, he was unable to supply any details. the other types of evidence mr.
medow mentioned were of questionable relevance, even on his theory of the case,
and he never demonstrated that he took any reasonable steps to obtain that
evidence for trial. specifically, mr. medow never served a subpoena on any of
the alleged witnesses he asserted would assist him.

court resources are not unlimited, and mr. medow
was not entitled to unlimited process: see
r. v. reyes,
2025 onca 840,
at para.
9. at a certain point, a trial must end. this case is not unusually
complex, either on its facts or on the applicable law. after a year of trial
proceedings, i ruled that mr rinaldi would make submissions and that mr medow
would be given an opportunity to respond with his own submissions. however,
there would not be any further adjournments. mr. medow was quite adept at
claiming procedural unfairness and demanding more and more time to make a full
answer and defence. i concluded that nothing would ever end these requests.
there is a requirement of some degree of due diligence, even from a
self-represented person. mr. medow’s claims that other forms of evidence
existed that would bolster his defence were unfounded. he simply wanted to
delay the conclusion of the trial as long as possible.

after hearing from the parties, and after nearly
a year of litigation, i ruled that the matter would be set for a judgment on
december 11, 2025.
overview of the crown’s case
(i)
pc
lee

pc
lee had 15 years’ experience with the tps. on january 17, 2024, he was working
in full uniform with a marked police car near queen st. west and york st.

at
12:56 p.m., he stopped a driver who was using his cellphone while operating his
motor vehicle. he was speaking to the driver when, at 1:02 p.m., a man
approached and tapped him on the back to get his attention. he did not
recognize this man and told him he was busy, and asked him to wait on the
sidewalk. the man referred to him as “bruce lee”, a well-known martial artist
and actor.

the
man, later identified as mr. medow, then asked pc lee, “are you helping people
or are you fucking people?” he raised his voice significantly and yelled this exact
phrase again. next, he placed his hand on pc lee’s police radio, which was
attached to his vest. this was unusual and concerned pc lee, as it indicated
that the man might be unstable and could escalate his behaviour.

pc
lee pushed mr. medow’s hand away and activated the emergency button on his
radio. this would notify other officers in the area that he needed assistance. mr.
medow advanced toward him and shouted, displaying what appeared to be a badge
under his jacket. as pc lee stepped back, the man careened over to queen street
and slammed his hand down on the hood of pc lee’s squad car.

mr.
medow refused to follow pc lee’s commands to stop. pc lee believed he needed to
restrain mr. medow and that he had reasonable and probable grounds to arrest
him for assaulting a peace officer. he deployed his taser, causing mr. medow to
fall to the ground. another officer, pc scheffer, assisted in placing handcuffs
on mr. medow to gain control over him. however, the taser malfunctioned, and mr.
medow resisted. mr. medow formed closed fists and struck pc lee on the nose.

by
this time, many officers had arrived on the scene and assisted in arresting mr.
medow. pc lee was taken to a local hospital for treatment of his injuries.

pc
lee identified his bwc video and his car’s icc video as accurately depicting
the events that occurred between him and mr. medow. everything unfolded very
quickly. between the time mr. medow first approached him and when he decided to
deploy his taser, less than two minutes elapsed.
(ii)
pc
sheffer

pc
scheffer was working at osgoode hall when he became aware that pc lee required
assistance after the emergency alarm was activated. he promptly went to help.

he
heard a police taser being deployed and saw pc lee bleeding from his face. he
placed a handcuff on mr. medow’s left hand. mr. medow tried to stand up, and pc
scheffer struggled to get his other hand behind his back as he was resisting.
mr. medow was yelling.

pc
lee told mr. medow to “stop resisting.” mr. medow attempted to grab pc
scheffer’s face but never made contact. eventually, he and the other officers
managed to place handcuffs on mr. medow and gain control of him. he reviewed
the video of his involvement with mr. medow and did not raise any concerns
about its accuracy.
(iii)
pc kell

pc
kell was working at 52 division when he received a radio call to assist another
officer. upon arriving on queen st., he found pcs lee and scheffer struggling
with mr. medow.

after
mr. medow was handcuffed, he was placed in the back of pc kell’s squad car.
once seated, he told pc kell, “if you see me walking down the street, you
better turn around and find god.”

pc kell asked mr. medow, “are you threatening to kill me?” mr. medow denied that
he meant the words as a threat. nevertheless, pc kell arrested him for uttering
a threat.

pc
kell identified audio-video footage from another officer’s bwc as an accurate recording
of what mr. medow said to him. he also identified icc footage that provided
another audio recording of what was said by mr. medow.
testimony of mr. medow

mr. medow described a series of tragic events
that occurred in his life beginning in 2019. i will not repeat them in this
written judgment. in summary, he testified that he had been mistreated by the
police on several occasions and believed he was being unfairly targeted now due
to his ongoing efforts to hold the authorities accountable for their past behaviour.

some of his prior legal disputes involved the
manipulation of audio-visual recordings. for example, following several freedom
of information requests, he has been provided with footage from a government
body that had certain portions of the audio redacted. he believed this was done
to cover up the actions of the police and to help them avoid embarrassment. he
was adamant he had been falsely charged more than once. these events were presented
to provide context for why he believed he was unlawfully arrested and charged
for the current charges.

on january 17, 2024, mr. medow understood he was
subject to a release order with terms that restricted his liberty. he was
permitted to attend court. he testified that he was on queen street because he
was attending court to seek a bail variation. on the way, he encountered pc
lee.

when mr. medow located pc lee, he was standing
facing the sky. he did not appear to be engaged in a traffic stop. he felt that
he could forgive the police for what they had done to him in the past, and had
a pleasant conversation with the officer at first. the video evidence
introduced by the crown was evidently manipulated, as it did not align with his
memory of what occurred.

he denied touching the officer’s radio. he
pushed the officer’s hand away to protect himself. he felt he had a right to
defend himself as pc lee was being aggressive. following a brief confrontation,
he walked away, trying to disengage from the situation. afterwards, pc lee
assaulted him from behind, and any actions he took thereafter were to defend
himself. pc lee did not tell him he was under arrest, and therefore, the
officer had no right to use force against him. as he put it, a police officer
is not “above the law.”

regarding what he told pc kell, it was not a threat. he was attempting
to inform the officer that he would have to seek redemption for his role in what
had just transpired (that being his unlawful arrest and confinement), and that
god was watching him, too.
positions of the parties

mr.
rinaldi argues that mr. medow was bound by a release order with a “house
arrest” term. while going to a courthouse might provide a hypothetical
reasonable excuse for the charge of failing to comply with the terms of the release
order, i should reject mr. medow’s testimony in this regard. at a minimum, mr.
medow intentionally interfered with an officer’s duties, which would place his
conduct outside the parameters of any possible defence. he did not travel
directly to a courthouse, on his own version of events.

mr.
medow’s conduct also establishes the offence of obstructing an officer. mr.
rinaldi argues that i should accept the police video evidence and pc lee’s
testimony. from that evidence, it is clear that mr. medow launched a “verbal
and physical onslaught” against pc lee, which was done intentionally to
interfere with his duties. his conduct was so frightening that it amounted to
an assault, even if the physical contact was very minor. pc lee reasonably
feared for his safety. this constituted the first charge of assaulting an
officer.

pc
lee was therefore lawfully entitled to arrest mr. medow and deploy his taser. pc
lee was reasonably concerned that mr. medow was acting erratically, violently
and dangerously, and he could not just let him wander off into a highly
populated area. mr. medow, by contrast, was not permitted to use force legally
to resist the arrest. he struck pc lee and caused bodily harm to him, without
justification. mr. rinaldi thus submits that i should find mr. medow guilty of the
second charge of assaulting pc lee and causing bodily harm to him.

finally,
mr. rinaldi argues that mr. medow’s behaviour during the arrest was enough to
show he was actively resisting the officers assisting pc lee. he is therefore
also guilty of resisting those officers’ lawful demands.

the
threats made to pc kell should be viewed as what they are – clear threats to pc
kell’s safety at least. telling the officer that he would “see you in hell” and
he would “find god” was meant to intimidate him. mr. rinaldi submits that proves
the final count of threatening on the information.

regarding
the defence evidence, mr. rinadli asked me to reject mr. medow’s testimony. it
was illogical, filled with inconsistencies and implausible elements, and
generally entirely at odds with the reliable video evidence. it should not
raise any reasonable doubt in my mind.

mr.
medow argued that he was the victim of a malicious prosecution and was entirely
innocent. the trial process was unfair. he could access evidence that would
prove his innocence, because i had denied him that right. mr. stastny, as
amicus,
also failed him. he was a victim of abuse from everyone who had a role to
play in the court process.

when
asked to make submissions on the offences, mr. medow instead chose to tell me
new things about the case, as if he were testifying again. he went on
irrelevant tangents that had nothing to do with what i needed to decide,
despite clear legal instructions to assist him, and the opportunity to consider
mr. rinaldi’s comprehensive submissions. he did not make many coherent submissions
based on the applicable law and the evidence that was presented in the case. he
repeated multiple times that god favoured him, that he understood the world in
a way that i did not, and that mr. rinaldi would face justice for what he had
done in this case.

however,
during the trial, i was able to understand, with the assistance of an
amicus,
what mr. medow’s perspective was on the crown’s allegations, and how his
testimony, if accepted, would exonerate him.

as well, mr. medow did make some relevant submissions during the opportunity i
provided him to address the court on december 9, 2025. i have also considered
what he told me as well, when he was able to focus, however briefly, on the
requirements of the specific charges before the court.
the authenticity of the crown’s video evidence

the party seeking to introduce digital evidence
bears the burden of persuading the trial court through some evidence that the
“electronic document is that which it is purported to be”:
canada evidence act
(“cea”) section 31.1;
r. v. c.b.,
2019 onca 380, at para.
66;
richardson
v. r.,
2020 nbca 35, at para.
27. the standard is not onerous: see
r. v.
martin,
2021 nlca 1, at para.
49. once admitted, the trier of fact must
assess the evidence’s ultimate reliability at the conclusion of the trial and
determine what weight it should be afforded.

the finding of a trial court that digital
evidence has been “authenticated” and is therefore admissible does not prevent
an accused person from disputing the evidence's trustworthiness and questioning
whether it is sufficient to prove the case against him. as explained by the
newfoundland court of appeal in
martin,
…authentication
does not mean the document is genuine. if the “evidence capable of supporting”
a finding had to actually determine that the electronic document is in fact
what it purports to be, a court would always be required to subject individual
pieces of electronic evidence to the standard of beyond a reasonable doubt or
the balance of probabilities at the admissibility stage. such a requirement
conflicts with general evidentiary principles respecting the admissibility of
evidence.
…

…authentication of electronic evidence does not prove that the electronic
evidence is what it appears to be. electronic evidence, once admitted, is
simply evidence, no more no less. it is able to be used in the same way any
other piece of admissible evidence can be used. the weight given to it is a
matter for a trial court to determine in its consideration of the totality of
the evidence when coming to a final conclusion on a case.

thus, if the proposed digital evidence meets the
requirements for admissibility under the
cea, the trier of fact must
still determine its ultimate reliability. in a case like this one, that will
depend, in part, on my assessment of the credibility and reliability of the
witness(es) who authenticated it, as well as any who challenge its accuracy:
r.
v. ball,
2019 bcca 32, at para.
70;
r. v. hirsch,
2017 skca 14, at
para.
18.

before the proliferation of deepfakes,
in
r. v.
aslami,
2021 onca 249, the ontario court of appeal cautioned against trial
courts placing blind faith in digital evidence that had seemingly been
“authenticated” by a witness.
in
aslami,
the appellant was convicted of
multiple charges related to the firebombing of a home in ottawa. he had recently
separated from his wife, who had sent him photographs of herself and another
man, s.f., in bed together. shortly thereafter, the home of s.f.’s wife was
firebombed.

the case against mr. aslami was largely
circumstantial. the crown introduced electronic messages sent to the
appellant’s ex-wife and s.f. that suggested the sender's involvement in the
incident. the crown alleged that mr. aslami was the author. the defence
theorized that someone else, such as his ex-wife or s.f., had fabricated the
messages to implicate him.

the court allowed the appeal. the trial judge had not
conducted a proper
voir dire
on the authenticity of the messages.
justice nordheimer noted the ease with which digital evidence can be
manipulated and suggested that expert evidence might be necessary to meet the
authentication standard in certain circumstances:
 this case demonstrates the
risks associated with not paying adequate heed to the dangers that are
associated with relying on text and other messages, absent expert evidence
explaining how various pieces of software, or "apps", can be used to
generate these messages, and how reliable the resulting messages are in
different respects. put simply, it is too easy to use various pieces of
software to create, or manipulate, messages such that they can appear to be
from someone when, in fact, they emanate from an entirely different person.
similarly, the timing of the messages can be altered to suit a particular
purpose.
[…]
 as i said at the outset,
trial judges need to be rigorous in their evaluation of such evidence, when it
is presented, both in terms of its reliability and its probative value. the
trial judge did not engage in that rigorous analysis in this case. in fairness,
the trial judge was not assisted by the prosecution in this task. the
prosecution ought to have called expert evidence to address the issues that the
evidence posed, but they did not.

just as it is easy to manipulate electronic messages,
mr. medow asks me to take judicial notice that it has become all too easy to
create or manipulate video evidence through generative artificial intelligence
(“ai”) technology. he referenced a documentary he watched about elon musk,
deepfakes and ai software. he submits that these programs or apps are readily
available online. a cursory google search for information about deepfakes lends
support to his argument, and i note that canada is hardly immune from what has
become a global concern.


justice rowe explained the concept of
taking judicial notice in his
reasons in
r. v. kruk,
2024 scc 7,
at para.
144:
judicial
notice” is the acceptance by a court of the truth of a particular fact without
“proof” (lederman, fuerst and stewart, at ¶19.25). the threshold for taking
judicial notice of fact is strict — “a court may properly take judicial notice
of facts that are either: (1) so notorious or generally accepted as not to be
the subject of debate among reasonable persons; or (2) capable of immediate and
accurate demonstration by resort to readily accessible sources of indisputable
accuracy” (r. v. find,
2001 scc 32,
 1 s.c.r. 863, at para.
48
).

i agree with mr. medow that the existence and widespread proliferation
of ai technology capable of producing realistic deepfake videos are matters
properly subject to judicial notice: see
r. v. cheng,
2025 oncj 252,
at
para.
7. anyone who spends time online has likely encountered well-known
deepfake videos, particularly those featuring celebrities or politicians. these
can be highly deceptive, making it challenging to discern what is authentic and
what is fiction. applications that help users create these videos are heavily
marketed and promoted on various social media platforms, including twitter/x
and tiktok. many more can be purchased and downloaded from various websites.
recently, the supreme court of canada noted that the production of deepfakes through
artificial intelligence for criminal purposes, such as the creation of child
sexual abuse and exploitation material, is a “present and growing danger”: see
quebec
(attorney general) v. senneville,
2025 scc 33, at para.
32.

i also agree that even if a court diligently evaluates
digital evidence, a deepfake video could be “authenticated” by a witness who
might honestly but mistakenly believe it to be an accurate depiction of the
events it purports to represent. alternatively, a witness could intentionally
deceive a court by claiming a video was authentic when, in fact, they knew it
was not. i agree that the existence of deepfakes presents a potentially serious
concern to the integrity of our justice system. however, the
admission
of digital evidence does not mean that its ultimate reliability should be
presumed. by contrast, a rigorous analysis of the ultimate reliability of any
type of digital evidence is always required. the admissibility standard
associated with the authentication of digital evidence must never be confused
with the crown’s heavy burden to prove its case against an accused person
beyond a reasonable doubt. furthermore, a trial court must consider not only any
disputed digital evidence when determining if the crown has met its burden, but
the totality of the evidence presented at the conclusion of the trial: see
s.j.
v. r.,
2024 qcca 253, at paras.
91-93;
c.b.
at para.
61.

pc lee testified that the video evidence from his bwc
and the icc video accurately depicted his interactions with mr. medow. pc
scheffer and pc kell verified the segments of these videos in which they appeared
but were unable to confirm the authenticity of the remaining footage. each
officer testified that they did not alter the video evidence. pc lee explained
that after he uploaded his bwc footage through a tps docking station, he lost
control over it. the crown did not call any witnesses to clarify what occurs
with bwc footage after it is uploaded in this manner, who has access to it, and
how it is ultimately provided to the accused in disclosure or to the court at
trial. additionally, no evidence was presented regarding the process by which
the icc video was retrieved, prepared, and supplied to mr. medow.

notably, the crown did not dispute that a portion of
the video had been intentionally manipulated. in the bwc footage, the face of
the motorist detained by pc lee was blurred out. i heard no evidence regarding
how this was done or who was responsible, although mr. rinaldi explained that
it was likely done by the police service to protect that person’s privacy
interests.

mr. medow’s argument that it is not only possible to manipulate the police
video evidence but also that some degree of manipulation actually occurred in
this case is, therefore, not entirely without merit.

additionally, mr. medow asked pc lee during
cross-examination if it was possible that the video footage did not accurately
represent how their confrontation began and suggested an alternative version of
events. pc lee could only say he “did not remember” matters occurring in the
alternative manner suggested by mr. medow, but he did not emphatically rule
them out. he was uncertain.

however, while the onus lies with the
crown to authenticate the video evidence it presented, the collective testimony
of the officers is sufficient to meet that requirement in this case. mr. medow
did not present or point to any evidence suggesting that the videos had been
manipulated, aside from the blurring of the motorist’s face. this was a benign
change to the video that did not impact mr. medow’s right to a fair trial. i
acknowledge that mr. medow does not face any burden in this trial, and it was
the crown that tendered the video evidence. nevertheless, mere speculation by
an accused person that digital evidence has been falsified to deceive the
viewer is insufficient to preclude its admissibility or to diminish its weight.
for example,
in
c.b., the ontario court of appeal held that “rank
speculation” that text messages were not authored by the accused, in the face
of circumstantial evidence suggesting he was the author, was an insufficient
basis upon which the trial judge could assign them no weight: see para. 72.

an interesting, reported case that addressed
an argument similar to mr. medow’s is
r. v. md,
2024 abkb 104.
in
md,
the accused was the complainant’s uncle. he
was charged with historical sexual interference charges. 17 years after the
events allegedly occurred, the complainant surreptitiously recorded a
conversation she had with him. in this conversation, he made inculpatory
statements. while the accused admitted at trial that the conversation occurred,
he denied making the inculpatory statements contained within it. he took the
position that the complainant had somehow cloned his voice and the recording
had been tampered with. the trial judge rejected this argument as speculative
and found that there was no evidence to suggest the complainant had any
familiarity with ai technology. furthermore, there were no obvious signs of
tampering, and no forensic evidence was presented to suggest that the recording
was not authentic: see paras.
16
and
46-53.

with respect to the bwc footage at the centre of this
case, i cannot infer that the video was intentionally altered to falsely
incriminate mr. medow, simply given the measures taken to protect the unknown motorist’s
identity.

nor does mr. medow’s firmly held belief that the police in general have a
motive to frame him provide the court a reason to disregard the content of the
videos. the specific officers who testified provided credible and reliable
testimony, demonstrating a strong, independent recollection of the offences
they witnessed and confirming each other’s accounts regarding mr. medow’s acts
of violence. pc lee’s uncertainty about how mr. medow first approached him
holds little significance in this case. none of the officers’ testimony was
undermined by impeachment on prior inconsistent statements, and their notes did
not contain significant inaccuracies. furthermore, pc lee’s testimony was
substantiated by the photographs taken of his injuries as well.

mr. medow asked me to consider the existence of a larger
police conspiracy, but there was no evidence that pcs scheffer and kell had met
each other or pc lee before january 17, 2024. nor was there evidence that they
were somehow connected to the other officers mr. medow had negative experiences
with in the past. although mr. medow’s testimony that the events in the video
are inaccurate does provide a basis for rejecting the ultimate reliability of
the video evidence, as i will explain, i do not accept his testimony, and it
does not raise any reasonable doubt in my mind. the officers testified that
they had no prior history with mr. medow, and i accept that they had no
animus
towards him. the video evidence was not novel but was relatively standard
toronto police service bwc and icc footage. furthermore, it was not suggested
that the officers could have personally affected the video evidence after it
was uploaded or that they possessed the technical knowledge to do so. i accept
their testimony on each of these points.

mr. medow’s testimony was riddled with inconsistencies and
evolved in unpredictable ways. he often lost focus and gave speeches about
entirely peripheral matters. he often did not answer mr. rinaldi’s questions
directly in cross-examination and was openly hostile to him. he resorted to
insulting and demeaning language that was completely unwarranted when
confronted with questions or suggestions he did not want to answer.

a few examples are enough to explain why his testimony was incredible
and completely unreliable. he could not plausibly explain why he deliberately approached
pc lee, since his bail conditions required him to go straight to court if he
was outside his residence. he had no reason to speak to the officer and could
not give a satisfactory explanation for his actions, despite mr. rinaldi asking
him multiple times. he also did not convincingly explain why he called the
officer "bruce lee." he admitted that he did not know the officer
before seeing him on queen street.

when he finally explained that he was working to reform
police actions, which apparently explained why he needed to approach pc lee, he
was asked why he had used profanity when he first spoke to the officer. he did
not answer this question convincingly and tried to deflect when pressed by mr.
rinaldi. he went on a tangent about recording a music album and a campaign to
expose corruption. he also seemed to agree that this part of the video was an
accurate recording, despite having previously claimed that his initial
interactions with pc lee were misrepresented in the video. he was inconsistent.

when asked why he had a fake badge that he showed to pc
lee, he initially responded that mr. rinaldi should not assume it was a fake.
he later changed his testimony, saying it was a fake badge. once again, this
was internally inconsistent.

mr. rinaldi asked mr. medow if the footage on the icc video
was authentic, even though mr. medow believed the bwc footage of pc lee was a
deepfake. he initially refused to answer, asserting that he did not have to
submit to questioning. mr. rinaldi persistently questioned him, and he
fluctuated between stating that if one video was manipulated, then none could
be trusted, and selectively relying on parts of the videos to support his
testimony when he believed those parts favoured him.

phrased
differently, during his testimony, he seemed to choose on a whim which parts of
the video he wanted to claim were real, while also simultaneously claiming that
entire portions of the video could not be trusted. at times, he referred to the
video evidence as entirely untrustworthy deepfakes; other times, as “the
evidence” that confirmed his version of events. there was little to no logical
consistency.

of
course, i understand that a video might be manipulated in some parts while the
rest remains authentic. however, mr. medow’s testimony was meandering. there
was no clear dividing line in his account between what he claimed was a falsified
video and what he acknowledged as genuine. his stance on the accuracy of
different forms of video evidence kept changing.

having accepted the officers' testimony
that the videos are authentic, i therefore find that the digital evidence
satisfies the test for admissibility required by section 31.1 of the
cea.
although the crown did not provide evidence regarding the continuity of the
police videos following mr. medow's arrest, i do not believe that the weight to
be given to the videos is affected by the absence of that evidence in this
case.

before concluding on this matter, i wish to make a few
additional observations. mr. medow fairly voiced concerns about having limited
resources, which affected his ability to effectively challenge the
admissibility of the digital evidence. he suggested that the videos’ metadata
might indicate manipulation and that an expert examination was necessary before
i should trust them. although i have ruled that the officers' testimony
sufficiently authenticated the videos in this case, justice nordheimer’s
warning in
aslmani
that some forms of digital evidence may require the
crown to present expert evidence for authentication should be taken very
seriously. in that case, the crown witnesses had a motive to falsely implicate
the appellant. they could have altered the incriminating text messages, as they
were familiar with the textnow app from which those messages were sent and
received. this is different from the current case, which involves impartial
police witnesses who had no control over the video evidence after the events in
question.

courts
must seriously consider how to assist an economically disadvantaged
self-represented accused person who disputes the authenticity of digital evidence
to ensure a fair trial, without compromising their independence. while there
are ongoing efforts in the scientific community to develop tools for courts to identify
deepfakes, they have not yet come to fruition, to the best of my knowledge.

in this case, mr. medow challenged the crown witnesses through questioning that
i assisted with, and he had the benefit of mr. molloy’s role as 486.3 counsel,
and mr. stastny's role as
amicus. i am satisfied his position was
adequately addressed and fairly presented. however, there is no doubt that when
he was detained for the first part of the trial, he was significantly
disadvantaged in conducting his defence. while he was out of custody for the latter
half of the trial, until his recent arrest, he maintained that he still lacked
the resources to meaningfully challenge the video evidence as he desired.

as
generative ai technology continues to advance and the ease with which viewers
can be deceived by falsified digital evidence increases, courts must ensure
that the authentication
voir dire
required for digital evidence is not
rendered meaningless. this presents a potentially serious access-to-justice
issue, as the vast majority of self-represented litigants, such as mr. medow,
will lack the means to retain an expert of their own.

nothing in this ruling should be interpreted as a decision that the crown is
never required to present more comprehensive evidence than was done in this trial
to ensure that its digital evidence can be safely relied upon. each case must
be assessed independently, and the law may soon need to adapt given the stark
realities of these ever-changing technologies and their capacity to negatively impact
on the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process:
r. v. tessling,
2004 scc 67, at para.
55;
r. v. vermeer,
2023 bcca 206, at para.
8.

analysis – the offences

with
the video evidence presented by the crown determined to be reliable, very
little is factually unclear about what transpired between mr. medow and pc lee.
whether or not the offences have been established, however, raises questions of
mixed fact and law, and there were conflicting views of how i should interpret
the video recordings. where necessary, i will comment on the testimony of the
officers and mr. medow.

mr.
medow is presumed innocent. the crown must prove the essential elements of each
offence beyond a reasonable doubt. if i accept mr. medow’s testimony, he must
be acquitted. even if i do not fully accept it, if it leaves a reasonable doubt
in my mind, i must also enter an acquittal. finally, even if i fully reject his
testimony, i must consider all of the evidence i do accept to determine whether
the crown has proven its case against him beyond a reasonable doubt. every
charge must be examined carefully, taking into account the applicable evidence regarding
the essential elements of the offence’s
actus reus
and
mens rea
components.

mr.
medow was charged with obstructing pc lee contrary to
section 129
(a), assault
peace officer and assault peace officer causing bodily harm contrary to
section
270(1)
(a) and
section 270.01
(b) of the
criminal code.

an
essential element of the offence of assaulting an officer is that the target of
the assault was a peace officer
engaged in the
execution of his duty at the time the assault occurred:
see
r. v. beseiso,
2018
onsc 5042,
at para.
39. the accused must also have known
that the person assaulted was a police officer:
see r. v. hashi,
2021 onsc 5617, at para.
69. pc lee
was in full uniform and easily identified himself as a police officer while lawfully
investigating a motorist for a driving offence.

regarding the charge of obstructing pc lee in the course
of his duties,
in
r. v. blackman,
2024 onsc 3595, justice phillips
summarized the essential elements of the offence at para. 8:
•
first, there must be a peace officer who is engaged in the
execution of a lawful duty.
•
second, the accused person must know or be wilfully blind to the
fact that this person is a police officer and must know or be wilfully blind to
the act that the officer is executing.
•
third, the alleged obstructive conduct must be an intentional act
by the accused person.
•
fourth, that act must make it more difficult for a peace officer
to carry out their duties.
•
finally, the accused person must intend to make it more difficult
for the police to execute their duty.

the
video evidence recorded mr. medow approaching pc lee while he was speaking with
a detained motorist. he tapped pc lee on the shoulder and shortly thereafter
begins screaming at him aggressively, questioning whether he was acting
appropriately as an officer. i accept pc lee’s testimony that mr. medow touched
his radio, which was attached to his vest, and came extremely close to pc lee
while yelling at him. mr. medow made a racist remark to pc lee, calling him
“bruce lee.”

he ignored pc lee’s orders to step aside. understandably, pc lee had to end his
traffic investigation, turn his attention to mr. medow, and take steps to
detain him for public safety reasons. mr. medow’s conduct was volatile, intimidating,
and somewhat violent.

the
crown has proven all the requirements beyond a reasonable doubt. mr. medow’s
intentional conduct hindered pc lee in performing his duties and ultimately
compelled the officer to abandon his investigation under the
highway traffic
act
altogether. mr. medow’s testimony about his actions was illogical and
inconsistent with the video evidence. it does not raise any reasonable doubt in
my mind. he is found guilty of obstructing pc lee, count 2.

when mr. medow first approached pc lee, he patted him on his upper back
to get his attention. pc lee did not consider this an assault, and i will not
decide the charge of assaulting an officer on that basis, as mr. rinaldi,
honourably, did not ask me to do so.

but
mr. rinaldi did point me to another theory about how the assault happened. to
reiterate some of the evidence, mr. medow quickly started asking pc lee whether
he was helping people or “fucking people.” he raised his voice, was standing
just a short distance away, and refused to stop his behaviour despite being told
to stand on the sidewalk. he repeated himself and touched pc lee’s radio. mr.
medow was taller and larger than pc lee. he was very close to pc lee. in an
attempt to gain control, pc lee pushed mr. medow away and then ordered him to
stop moving. mr. medow slammed his hand down on the hood of pc lee’s squad car
and began walking down queen street, which was filled with civilians. to regain
control of mr. medow, who was highly agitated and ignoring the commands given
to him, pc lee deployed his taser, causing mr. medow to fall to the curb.

i
accept pc lee’s testimony that this happened as he described, even if it is not
entirely clear in the videos, as some of what occurred was outside his bwc’s
scope of vision. nevertheless, the video confirms his testimony to a
significant degree. for example, at 6:52, the viewer can see pc lee move mr.
medow’s hand away from his torso, confirming pc lee’s testimony that mr. medow
placed his hand upon his radio.

i
agree with mr. rinaldi’s submission that mr. medow’s language, tone, body
language, and overall actions towards pc lee should not be viewed in isolation.
looking at the entire video, mr. medow displayed very aggressive behaviour and
language. he had just interfered with pc lee’s duties and appeared to be seeking
a confrontation with the officer. it is unquestionably dangerous for any member
of the public to approach a uniformed officer on duty, raise their voice at
them, use profanity, and touch their body or equipment. this naturally raises
questions in the officer’s mind about the person’s true intentions and what
might be causing such behaviour. pc lee was genuinely worried about his safety
and the safety of others nearby.

pc
lee found himself in a strange and rapidly escalating situation. he had been
physically and verbally accosted by mr. medow, who was obviously very
emotionally disturbed.
criminal code
section 265(1)(b) states that an
assault occurs if a person attempts or threatens, by an act or gesture, to
apply force to another person, and if he causes that other person to believe on
reasonable grounds that he has the present ability to effect that purpose. i accept
mr. rinaldi’s submissions regarding this charge. pc lee had reasonable grounds
to believe that mr. medow was in the process of assaulting him. mr. medow knew
what he was doing and that he was causing pc lee to fear for his safety. the
point of his conduct was to intimidate pc lee. i therefore find the crown has
proven the essential elements of this offence beyond a reasonable doubt and
find him guilty of count 4.

furthermore,
i find that pc lee had reasonable and probable grounds to arrest mr. medow
based on the totality of mr. medow’s conduct, for either obstruction or
assault. he subjectively viewed mr. medow’s actions and comments as providing a
basis to make an arrest, and i find that decision to be objectively reasonable.

after
mr. medow attempted to leave the scene, he was struck with a conducted energy
weapon (taser), and then lay on the ground briefly. pcs lee and scheffer arrived
and tried to put handcuffs on him and arrest him. mr. medow then attempted to
stand up, accused the officers of excessive force and assault, and refused to
comply with their demands. the taser was no longer effective. as they
struggled, mr. medow lashed out and intentionally struck pc lee in the face,
causing him to suffer a bloody nose and soreness.

officers
are entitled to use reasonable force when effecting an arrest:
criminal code
section 25. i find that the officers’ decisions were justified. mr. medow was
highly agitated, had verbally and physically accosted pc lee, and would not
comply with repeated demands to stop moving. when pc lee attempted to place a
hand on mr. medow, it was met with physical resistance. pc lee was unable to
gain control of him and could not allow him to continue into a highly populated
civilian area. he posed a danger to himself and other members of the public.
his decision to deploy the taser was unfortunate, but defensible.

however,
pc lee did not inform mr. medow that he was “under arrest” before deploying the
taser.
criminal code
section 29(2) states that “it is the duty of
everyone who arrests a person… to give notice to that person, where it is
feasible to do so… (b) of the reason for the arrest.” pc lee initially disputed
failing to inform mr. medow he was under arrest before using force, but upon
reviewing the video footage in court, he agreed it was not until after he had
him on the ground with pc scheffer.

that
being said, given the rapidly escalating nature of this incident, i find it is
understandable that pc lee did not follow a flawless procedure. he had to
prioritize taking control of a dangerous and unpredictable person within
seconds. human beings, including professional actors like police officers, will
sometimes make errors in highly stressful situations.

criminal
code
section 29
(2)
mirrors the requirements
of section 10(a) of the
charter of rights and freedoms,
which requires
that a person be informed of the reason for their arrest or detention. in
r.
v. roberts,
2018 onca 411, the court of appeal described what this
charter
right protects at para. 78:
section 10(a) does not require that
detainees be told of the technical charges they may ultimately face. a person
will be properly advised of the reason for their detention if they are given
information that is sufficiently clear and simple to enable them to understand
the reason for their detention and the extent of their jeopardy…put more
purposively: “the issue is whether what the accused was told, viewed reasonably
in all the circumstances, was sufficient to permit [her] to make a reasonable
decision to decline or submit to arrest”

while
pc lee did not articulate that mr. medow was “under arrest,” he did indicate
that mr. medow was to cease his behaviour and remain in place. he was also told
to get on the ground. there could be no doubt in his mind that he was to be
placed in police custody for his prior conduct towards the officer. this entire
series of events happened in a very short time, lasting no more than one to two
minutes. pc lee’s error was regrettable, but it does not undermine the
lawfulness of the arrest. he had to take control of someone who posed a threat
to public safety very quickly. i find as a fact that mr. medow knew the reason
for his detention; he simply did not want to submit to it. and if there was any
doubt in his mind, pc lee told him he was “under arrest” as he and pc scheffer
were attempting to place handcuffs on him.

mr.
medow further argued that he was acting in self-defence and that the officers
used excessive force, justifying his acts of resistance. mr. medow’s subjective
belief that the use of the taser was excessive or that the officer was acting
unlawfully does not determine this issue. while an honest, mistaken belief by
the accused can be a factor to consider in a claim of self-defence, the
accused’s conduct must still be reasonable and proportionate.

the
fundamental problem with mr. medow’s position is that where an officer is
acting lawfully in the course of their duties, an accused person is denied the
defence of self-defence:
r. v evanshen,
2020 bcsc 1626;
r. v. plummer,
2006 canlii 38165
(ont. c.a.). as i have concluded that pc lee had
reasonable and probable grounds to arrest mr. medow for both obstruction and
assault, and that his use of force was reasonable in all the circumstances, mr.
medow could not respond to the use of police force by assaulting the officers.

mr.
medow’s actions were dangerous and violent. he lashed out at pc lee, striking
him in the face, which resulted in injury and bleeding. this constituted an
intentional assault, regardless of his subjective belief about the legitimacy
of his actions. the injury was more than merely transient or trifling. pc lee
required over a week to recover, both physically and emotionally. he suffered a
visible injury and was bleeding. this constitutes bodily harm: see
r. v.
chahal,
2024 abca 218, at paras.
32-48.
the
mens rea
required
for assault causing bodily harm includes both the intent for assault and an
objective foresight of bodily harm. mr. medow was aware that his actions could likely
lead to bodily harm. i find him guilty of assaulting a peace officer and
causing bodily harm, count 5.

mr.
medow is charged with two counts of resisting pcs lee and scheffer while they
were performing their duties, contrary to
criminal code
section 129(a).
along with what i have previously described, both officers testified that mr.
medow resisted arrest through his physical actions and fought back against
them. he refused to comply with their demands to place his hands behind his
back. even after being handcuffed and placed against a police vehicle, he
jumped up and down or gyrated his body as the officers attempted to put him in
the squad car.

this
offence requires more than being uncooperative. it requires the crown to prove
the accused engaged in active physical resistance to lawful police demands: see
r. v. kennedy,
2016 onca 879, at para.
36. i find that mr. medow was
actively resisting the officers beyond a reasonable doubt, and did so
intentionally. he is therefore guilty of counts 6 and 7.

when
mr. meadow was finally seated in the back of the squad car for transport to the
division, he told another officer, pc kell, “if you see me walking down the
street, you better turn around and find god.” the interaction was recorded on
pc kell’s bwc. pc kell interpreted this as a threat to his life.

the
crown presented additional bwc footage showing pc kell asking mr. medow whether
he had just threatened him. mr. medow responded that he was not threatening the
officer. at this point in the video, mr. medow appeared relatively subdued. he
testified that he was not threatening the officer, but essentially, asking if
he understood god would be judging him for his conduct.

pc kell’s subjective assessment of these words is understandable. i
am left to determine whether this was actually intended as a threat. the crown
introduced mr. medow’s spontaneous exculpatory statement alongside the alleged
threat, and i must consider this as well as mr. medow’s testimony when
determining if the crown has met its burden: see
r. v. bagherzadeh,
2023
onca 706, at para.
29. i caution myself against double-counting these different
sources of exculpatory evidence, but they must both be considered: see para.
36.

i find the statement ambiguous and open to multiple interpretations.
i agree with mr. rinaldi that immediately before the purported threat, mr.
medow stated that the officers should “go to hell”, which adds important
context. but i am left with reasonable doubt regarding whether he intended to truly
threaten the officer’s life. an alternative interpretation of mr. medow’s words
was that he meant to convey the officer would regret his conduct and find
redemption when he realized his error. i find him not guilty of count 8.

finally, mr. medow was bound by a release order on january 17, 2024.
a term of that order placed him under house arrest, with limited exceptions.
one of those exceptions permitted him to attend court. he was located on queen
street west, just a short distance from each of toronto’s criminal courts. he
testified that he was going to court to seek a bail variation, which would
provide him with a lawful excuse under the terms of his bail.

in
r. v. zora,
2020 scc 14, the supreme court of canada held that failure to comply with a
condition of a release order is subject to the defence of “lawful excuse”: see
para. 37. if the evidence establishes an “air of reality” to the defence, the
crown bears the persuasive burden of disproving it beyond a reasonable doubt:
see
r. v. refaeh,
2024 onsc 755, at paras.
55-71. if mr. medow’s
testimony raises a reasonable doubt in my mind that he had been travelling to
court, i accept that this would require an acquittal.

even if mr. medow
was initially walking towards one of the downtown courthouses, he chose to
confront pc lee. he deliberately went out of his way to do so and could have
easily avoided him on his way to court. the exception to his house arrest did
not grant him the freedom to take unnecessary detours, let alone commit further
criminal acts. moreover, none of the unknown evidence that mr. medow claimed he
could produce on december 9, 2025, if granted an adjournment, would have been
relevant to this charge. his decision to interfere with pc lee’s duties as an
officer was his alone, and he must bear responsibility for it. i find him
guilty of count 1, violating his release order.
final remarks

mr. rinaldi and
mr. stastny deserve praise for their patience and professionalism throughout
this proceeding. they ensured the case advanced as efficiently as possible and
that mr. medow’s rights were respected, regardless of mr. medow’s personal
views on the matter. in particular, mr. rinaldi exemplified the role of a minister
of justice during this trial, despite being subjected to repeated and entirely
unjustified attacks on his character by mr. medow.

from this point
forward, mr. medow is on notice that i will not tolerate any further remarks towards
mr. rinaldi that call into question his personal integrity or that could be
reasonably construed as a threat. if he engages in this conduct again, i will
cite him in contempt.
released: december
11, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones
criminal code section
charge
verdict
145(5)
ftc release
 order
guilty
129(a)
obstruct peace
 officer lee
guilty
130(1)(b)
impersonating peace officer
dismissed – directed verdict
270(1)(a)
assault peace
 officer lee
guilty
270.01(1)(b)
assault peace officer lee –
cause bodily harm
guilty
129(a)
wilfully resist
 pc lee
guilty
129(a)
wilfully resist
 pc scheffer
guilty
264.1(1)(a)
threatening
 death – pc kell
not guilty

mr. molloy was appointed 486.3 counsel by a case
management judge.

the information was before a justice of the peace in a case management court,
who set the trial continuation dates. while an agent for
amicus
appeared
on that date, mr. medow did not. however, i was informed by mr. stastny that
mr. medow was subsequently told about the june 10
th
trial date and
that he was to appear in person.

pc kell initially testified to a different version of the
alleged threat. however, after reviewing the bwc footage, he agreed these were
the words mr. medow spoke.

mr. rinaldi did not dispute that if i accepted mr. medow’s testimony, it would
entitle him to an acquittal.

for example: “can you spot the deepfake?”, from cbc
news online, january 17, 2024: https://www.cbc.ca/player/play/video/1.7087086;
“this article is real – but deepfakes look damn close”, cbc news, february 4,
2024:
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/deepfake-ai-scam-ads-1.7104225; videos from google’s new ai video generator stir awe
and alarm, ctv news, may 22, 2025:
https://www.ctvnews.ca/sci-tech/article/videos-from-googles-new-ai-video-generator-stir-awe-and-alarm/

while i have no doubt mr. rinaldi was acting as an officer of
the court when he made these representations, they did not constitute evidence.
i was informed that the identity of the driver was provided in the disclosure
materials and neither side sought to call him as a witness. nevertheless, i am
prepared to accept, based on my judicial experience, that it is common for the
tps to blur third-party faces in videos of this nature for privacy reasons.

to be clear, nor does mr. medow’s suggestion, unsupported by
any other source of evidence, raise a reasonable doubt in my mind regarding the
video’s authenticity.

for
example,
an inaugural research initiative
funded through the canadian institute for advanced research’s canadian ai
safety institute program intends “to spend the next two years creating an
open-source, free and easy to use tool that courts, people navigating the
justice system and others can use to help detect ai-generated content”:
real
or fake? researchers to develop tool that would help courts spot ai evidence,
toronto star, december 5, 2025.

whether an expert witness would be able to provide reliable testimony
about the likelihood a video or image is inauthentic is the subject of much
debate: see fakhar abbas, and araz taeihagh:
unmasking deepfakes: a
systematic review of deepfake detection and generation techniques using
artificial intelligence, expert systems with applications, volume 252, part
b, 2024, 124260, issn 0957-4174. a
voir dire
to assess
each proposed expert witness’s qualifications will be necessary to avoid “junk
science” from infiltrating the courts.

in 2025, the ontario civil rules committee’s
subcommittee on artificial intelligence, chaired by ontario court of appeal
justice peter lauwers, sought feedback on four proposed changed to the
rules of civil procedure around ai-generated evidence. one of the proposed
rules would give parties the power to challenge the authenticity of
ai-generated or modified evidence: see
https://www.lawtimesnews.com/news/general/toronto-lawyers-org-questions-need-for-proposed-ontario-civil-rules-changes-on-ai-evidence/392994.
in the united states, on may 2, 2025, the u.s. judicial conference’s advisory
committee on evidence rules considered proposals to amend the federal rules of
evidence to address the challenges posed by ai-generated evidence: see
https://natlawreview.com/article/ai-generated-deepfakes-court-emerging-threat-evidence-authenticity.

indeed, during cross-examination, he referred to the officer as bruce lee again
when responding to one of mr. rinaldi’s questions: “bruce lee comes behind me
and starts striking at me like he’s some ninja...” – see the transcript from
july 4, 2025, in courtroom 802, at page. 79.