source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj351/2025oncj351.html

citation:
r. v. osorio, 2025
oncj 351
date: june 25, 2025
ontario
 court of justice
toronto
between:
his
 majesty the king
— 
 and —
francisco osorio
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
for
 the crown
e.
 brosh
for
 the defendant
t. dhaliwal
heard: december 16 – 17,
 2024, may 5, 2025
reasons for
judgment
russell
silverstein, j.:
a.
introduction

mr. osorio is charged with having a blood
alcohol concentration equal to or exceeding 80 mg in 100 ml of blood within two
hours of ceasing to operate a conveyance. he is also charged with impaired
operation of a conveyance.

the charges arise out of a march 4, 2023, minor
rear-end collision involving mr. osorio and carlos ferreira.

police arrived shortly after the minor
collision. p.c. annouza (the officer) performed a standard field sobriety test
(sfst) on the defendant following which he arrested the defendant and made a
demand for a breath sample into an approved instrument. the officer drove the
defendant to the police station where he provided two samples of his breath, the
first registering 140 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood, the second registering
130 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood.

mr. dhaliwal, on behalf of mr. osorio, has
brought a
charter
application alleging that:
(1)
the
officer’s demand that the defendant participate in the sfst was not timely, resulting
in a breach of the defendant’s s.8
charter
rights.
(2)
the
officer lacked reasonable grounds to arrest the defendant and lacked reasonable
grounds to demand a breath sample into an approved instrument. the seizure of
that breath sample thus constituted a s.8 breach.
(3)
the
police breached the defendant’s s. 10(b)
charter
rights by not securing
an interpreter for him before reading him his rights to counsel.
(4)
the
police breached the defendant’s s. 9
charter
rights by holding him in
custody too long after the investigation was over.

mr. dhaliwal further argues that the
numerous
charter
violations support the exclusion of the breath sample readings
pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter. he also argues that the crown has
failed to prove impairment beyond a reasonable doubt.

ms. brosh argues that mr. osorio’s
charter
rights were not violated, but if they were, the violations do not support the
exclusion of the breath sample readings. she seeks findings of guilt on both
counts.
b.
the
evidence
(a)
introduction

the trial proceeded in a blended fashion. the
evidence relevant to the
charter
issues consists of police video and
audio of their interaction with mr. osorio, the testimony of p.c. annouza, and the
testimony of mr. osorio who testified on the
charter
application but did
not testify nor call any evidence on the trial proper. mr. ferreira testified
for the crown. his evidence was relevant to both the trial issues, and the
defendant’s
charter
application. p.c. annouza’s testimony also applies
to the trial proper.

i will summarize the evidence that is
relevant to the issues. a complete transcript of the evidence is available.
(b)
mr. ferreira’s testimony

on march 4, 2023, mr. ferreira was driving
south on black creek when he saw a van behind him swerving from side to side. just
after he had passed eglinton avenue the van struck the back of his vehicle as
he was stopped.

mr. ferreira got out of his truck and
approached the driver of the van (the defendant) who did not respond verbally.
mr. ferreira could smell the odour of alcohol through the open window of the
van. mr. ferreira called 911 when the defendant refused to provide mr. ferreira
with his particulars. it appeared to mr. ferriera that the defendant was
preparing to flee the scene.

while waiting for the police, mr. ferreira
saw the defendant eating some snow that had accumulated at the side of the
road.

it was apparent to mr. ferreira that the
defendant was not fluent in english, although the defendant seemed to
understand what mr. ferreira was saying to him.
(c)
the salient details of mr. osorio’s interaction
with police

almost all of mr. osorio’s interactions with
police are clearly captured on video or audio, making fact finding relatively
straight forward.

p.c. annouza arrived on scene at 13:49. the
defendant was standing outside his van. the officer asked the defendant for his
“information” and the defendant immediately went to his van, sat in it, and began
looking for something. at 13:51:47 he handed his driver’s licence to the
officer who was standing at the open window of the driver’s side of the
defendant’s van. at 13:52 the officer told the defendant that he was
investigating the accident and a “potential impaired situation”, and he then cautioned
the defendant. when asked for more documents the defendant looked further and
produced his insurance pink slip. the officer then asked for his permit and the
defendant handed over his registration document. up until this point, the
defendant had understood all the officer’s requests for documents and had not
expressed any difficulty in understanding english.

at 13:53 the officer walked towards mr.
ferreira and continued to examine the defendant’s documents while making notes
in his memo book until 13:55:50.

the officer then returned to his cruiser
after telling the defendant to remain in his car. the officer then interacted
with his in-car computer until 13:57:11, immediately after which he went into
the trunk of his cruiser and began gathering the necessary materials to conduct
an sfst on the defendant.

at 14:00 the officer walked back to the
defendant’s van and at 14:01:00 he demanded of the defendant that he participate
in the sfst. when asked if he understood the demand the defendant said “yes”.

between 14:01:27 and 14:21:39 the officer
performed the sfst. during the test the officer asked the defendant several
questions and gave certain directions, all of which the defendant seemed to
understand, although the defendant’s english was accented and broken when he
said anything to the officer.

during the test, at approximately 14:07, the
defendant, in response to a question from the officer as to whether the
defendant had any balance problems, gave the officer a piece of paper with the
words “benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (bppv)” written on it.

at 14:23:52 the officer arrested the
defendant, handcuffed him, and took him to his police car.

at 14:25:43 the officer told the defendant
what he was charged with impaired operation and read him his rights to counsel
from the back of his memo book. when asked if he understood, the defendant said
“yes, yes”. the officer then cautioned him and made a breath demand from the back
of his memo book.

at 14:40 the officer began the drive to the
police station. they arrived there at approximately 15:02. the defendant was
removed from the car at 15:15 and taken into the station. the defendant entered
the booking hall at 15:32 after a brief bathroom break.

at 15:38:32 the officer asked the defendant
for the first time what language he speaks and if he would like an interpreter
while speaking to duty counsel.
(d)
p.c. annouza’s testimony

as he drove to the scene the officer knew
that mr. ferreira had told police dispatch that there had been a rear-end
accident and that mr. ferreira had smelled alcohol on the other driver.

upon his first dealings with the defendant
the officer noted the smell of alcohol and that he had bloodshot and glossy
eyes.

when the defendant showed the officer the
doctor’s note the defendant told the officer that the syndrome (bppv) caused
vertigo. the officer was not familiar with the diagnosis.
the officer asked the defendant if the bppv would stand in
the way of him preforming the sfst and the defendant said that it would not.

the defendant’s performance on the sfst led
the officer, who had undergone training in the area, to believe that the
defendant’s ability to drive was impaired.

on cross-examination the officer recalled
that the defendant said “i’m not sure” when asked if he wanted to contact a
lawyer.

at no time did the defendant ask for an
interpreter or request that any of the officer’s instructions be given in a
language other than english. he followed all english instructions quite
accurately. it was not until 15:38 that the officer turned his mind to whether
there might be a language problem.

because the defendant did not name a lawyer
he wanted to speak to, out of an abundance of caution and for the defendant’s
benefit, the officer called duty counsel for the defendant.

the defendant never expressed any
dissatisfaction with his consultation with duty counsel.

the officer was instructed by a superior
officer not to release the defendant immediately after the breath tests were
completed. he understood that this was because of the defendant’s level of
intoxication and the fact that there was no one readily available to care for
him if he were to be released immediately. the officer had no knowledge of when
the defendant was in fact released. the officer left the station at 18:34.

during the officer’s dealings with the
defendant at the roadside he did not detect an accent.
(e)
the agreed statement of fact

the agreed statement of fact reads as
follows:
1.
mr.
osorio’s medical doctor diagnosed him with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
(bppv) on december 21, 2022.
2.
on
march 4, 2023, mr. osorio was investigated and arrested for impaired driving.
3.
mr.
osorio attended his physician’s office on november 20, 2024 and received a
medical note from dr. calvin tai (license number 120331).
4.
dr.
calvin tai wrote and signed a medical note on behalf of mr. osorio on november
20, 2024, indicating the following:
“to whom it
may concern,
this is to
confirm that francisco osorio had previously been diagnosed with benign
paroxysmal positional vertigo (bppv) on 21/dec/2022.
symptoms
include dizziness, vertigo, impaired coordination and nystagmus.
in my
medical opinion, a person with bppv will likely have impaired performance on
the standardized field sobriety test.
sincerely,
dr. calvin
tai”
5.
dr.
calvin tai specializes in family medicine, was certified by the college of
family physicians of canada, and is in good standing with the college of
physicians and surgeons of ontario (cpso#: 120331).
6.
dr. calvin tai’s
medical diagnosis of mr. osorio’s bppv is not in dispute.
(f)
the defendant’s testimony

the defendant was a 56-year-old machine
operator on the day of the incident. he was born in mexico city and came to
canada in 1992. he is married to a woman who is also from mexico city. they
speak only spanish in the home. he speaks mostly spanish at work. he testified
through a spanish interpreter.

he described his bppv diagnosis as an “ear
balance” problem that sometimes causes him to be confused and off balance.

as concerns his understanding of the
officer’s english on the afternoon in question he said that he understood 50%
of what was said to him and relied on his interpretation of the officer’s body
language for the other 50%.

he tried to tell the police at the station
that he wanted to access his phone to call his daughter to help him get a
lawyer, but the police would not let him finish voicing his concern.

the defendant’s discussion with duty counsel
was in english.

he never told the officer or any of the
police he dealt with that he didn’t understand what they were telling him in
english because “he understood most of what was said”.
c.
the
alleged s. 8 violation
(a)
introduction

mr. dhaliwal argues that:
•
p.c. annouza waited too long to demand of the
defendant that he participate in the sfst, rendering its administration
unlawful. as a result, the test results could not supply reasonable grounds for
the arrest and breath demand.
•
alternatively, p.c. annouza did not perform the
tests according to accepted protocols and thus could not rely on the results to
form reasonable grounds for the arrest and breath demand.
•
given all the information available to p.c.
annouza, his reliance on the test results was unreasonable.

ms. brosh disagrees with those assertions.
(b)
the timeliness of the demand

the parties correctly agree that the
warrantless seizure of mr. osorio’s sfst results was presumptively unreasonable
and will only be
charter
compliant if the crown demonstrates, on a
balance of probability, that the search was authorized by law - in this case by
s. 320.27(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
which required the defendant to
perform physical coordination tests (the sfst) when demanded to do so by the
officer
immediately
after the officer suspected that the defendant had
alcohol in his body and that the defendant had, within the last three hours, operated
a conveyance.

a demand to perform the sfst is not lawful
if it does not come immediately after the development of the requisite suspicion.
r. v. woods,
2005 scc 42;
r. v. quansah,
2012 onca 123;
r. v.
haist,
2023 onca 465.

as ms. brosh says in her written materials,
immediately does not mean instantly. screening demands require a
prompt
demand
by the officer and whether the demand is in fact
prompt
requires a
textual analysis.
r. v. woods, supra
at para
44;
r. v. quansah, supra
at paras.
45-49.

assuming the officer developed his suspicion
within a minute of his arrival on scene, only 11 minutes went by before the
officer made his demand. during this period the officer had to ascertain who
was involved in the accident, make sure the roadway was safe for other
motorists, complete licence and record checks, make notes and gather his sfst
materials, all of which were necessary steps in the officer’s discharge of his
duties. in the circumstances of this case the officer’s demand was timely.
r.
v. quansah, supra, at paras.
45-49;
r. v. li,
2016 oncj 284
at para
20;
r. v. cheng,
2020 onsc 881 at para 19;
r. v. macmillan,
2013
onca 109
at para
39.
(c)
adherence to protocols

the officer was cross-examined at length
about how certain aspects of his administration of the sfst might have not been
in strict compliance with the police manual’s instructions. defence counsel
discovered, hours into his cross-examination that the manual referred to in
cross-examination was not the manual that governed the sfst administration on
the afternoon in question. nor was any evidence led as to how the alleged minor
protocol errors might have impacted the reliability of the results.

no s. 8 breach arises in the officer’s alleged
protocol shortcomings in the administration of the sfst.
(d)
was it unreasonable for the officer to rely on
the results of the sfst?

mr. dhaliwal argues that because the officer
knew that the defendant suffered from
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
(bppv) it was unreasonable for him to continue administering the sfst and to rely
on it. i disagree.

the officer is not a doctor, nor did he have
any other expertise that would have informed his understanding of the
diagnosis. the officer understood from the defendant that the bppv meant he
sometimes suffered from vertigo. he asked the defendant if the bppv would stand
in the way of him preforming the sfst and the defendant said that it would not.

even though it has been established
at
the trial
that symptoms of bppv include dizziness, vertigo, impaired coordination,
and nystagmus and that a person with bppv will likely have impaired performance
on the standardized field sobriety test, the officer did not know this at the
time. as the court of appeal explains in
r. v. bush,
2010 onca 554
at
para
66, “the important fact is not whether the officer’s belief was accurate.
it is whether it was reasonable at the time of the arrest…what must be assessed
are the facts as understood by the peace officer when the belief was formed.”
see too,
r. v. notaro,
2018 onca 449, at para
24.

the officer had ample and reasonable grounds
to believe that the defendant had driven while impaired. the arrest and
subsequent breath demand were constitutional.
d.
the
alleged s. 9 violation

mr. dhaliwal argues that the police
arbitrarily detained the defendant by not releasing him soon enough after the
completion of the breath tests.

ms. brosh disagrees.

i have searched the record for evidence as
to what time the defendant was released from the station. the defendant did not
testify to the time of his release and the officer did not know. yet, the
parties seem to implicitly agree that it was 21:19 when the defendant was
released from the station.

assuming this to be true, i nonetheless find
that the defendant has failed to make out a s. 9
charter
breach. there
is a convincing explanation for the delay. the defendant was too intoxicated to
release immediately and there was no one to take care of him if he were to be
released immediately. what’s more, after the final breath test at 17:05 the
police immediately began to prepare a fair amount of paperwork, which, ms.
brosh concedes in her materials, was not completed until 18:28. the release
process began at 21:01. the defendant’s release was only delayed for 2 ½ hours.
this delay does not support a finding of arbitrary detention without further
proof of police misbehaviour, of which none was offered.
r. v. ruscica,
2019 onsc 2442
at para
54;
r. v. cayer,
1988 canlii 9879 (on ca), o.j. no. 1120 (ca);
r.
v. chaly,
2020 onca 35
at para
5;
r. v. iseler,
2004 canlii 34583 (on ca), o.j. no. 4332
(ca) at paras
22-25;
r. v. jones,
 o.j. no. 4295 (ocj) at paras
5-18.
e.
the
alleged 10(b) violations

to reiterate, mr. dhaliwal alleges two s.
10(b)
charter
violations. he argues that:
•
the police breached the defendant’s s. 10(b)
charter
rights by not securing an interpreter for him before reading him his rights to
counsel.
•
the police breached the defendant’s 10(b) rights
by steering him to duty counsel.

ms. brosh disagrees.
(a)
the failure of the police to address the
circumstances of mr. osorio’s difficulty with the english language

i do not accept p.c. annouza’s testimony
that he did not detect an accent in his first dealings with the defendant, nor
do i accept his assertion that it did not occur to him that there might be a
language problem until he and the defendant were together in the booking hall.
it is readily apparent from the earliest body worn camera video, and the
testimony of mr. ferreira that the defendant spoke with a thick accent and that
his first language was not english.

that having been said, i find that the
defendant understood when he was told that he had the right to speak to a
lawyer. that is clear from the audio/video evidence and the defendant’s
admissions on cross-examination.

in my view, the police ought to have erred
on the side of caution and offered the defendant the services of an interpreter
at the roadside. no
charter
violation occurred however since,
notwithstanding their failure to do so the defendant understood his rights and
both of the officer’s demands. and, finally, the police in the booking hall did
offer the defendant the services of an interpreter for his call to duty counsel
and he refused the offer. see
r. v. nguyen,
2020 onsc 7783;
r. v.
nagalingam,
2020 onsc 4519;
r. v. vanstaceghem,
1987 canlii 6795 (on ca), o.j. no. 509
(ca).
(b)
the alleged steering to duty counsel.

the defendant has not met the onus upon him
of demonstrating that the police improperly steered him to duty counsel.

it is clear from his testimony that he
understood he had the right to contact counsel of choice. the police in the
booking hall clearly told him that he could use the phone to make calls to find
counsel. the defendant never told the police that he had private counsel, nor
did he ask to call his wife or daughter which he knew was an option.

where an accused does not tell the police
they have counsel of choice, and they accept the offer to speak to duty
counsel, there is no breach of 10(b). moreover, the police are not required to
inform the accused of the right to access resources to find a lawyer.
r. v.
ghotra,
2020 onca 373
at para
41;
r. v. ruscica,
2019 onsc 2442
at
paras
36-46;
r. v. persaud,
2020 onsc 3413
at paras
105-117;
r, v. mumtaz,
2019 onsc 468
at paras
41-49;
r. v. ferose,
2019 onsc 1052
at paras
72-75;
r. v. lombardi,
2020 onsc 4772
at paras
10-31;
r. v. hudson;
2016 onsc 5582
at para
76.

the
charter
application is dismissed.
the breath sample readings are admitted.
f.
the
impaired operation charge

although the crown need only prove some
degree of impairment by alcohol, there is scant and ambiguous evidence of
impairment in this case. while the agreed statement of fact concerning the
impact of the defendant’s bppv was not helpful to the defendant on the
charter
application, it does significantly undermine the strength of the sfst results
as evidence of impairment on the impaired charge. apart from that, there is
evidence of a minor rear-end collision, the odour of alcohol and red glossy
eyes.

i am left with a reasonable doubt on the
impaired charge.
g.
conclusion

mr. osorio is not guilty on count one. he is
guilty on count two.
released on june 25,
2025
justice russell
silverstein