source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj290/2025oncj290.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. kanagaratnam, 2025 oncj 290
date: 
2025 05 20
court
file no.: toronto 4810 998 24 48106357
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
pragash kanagaratnam
before
justice seth weinstein
heard
on april 7 and 8, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on may 20, 2025
keith garrett........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
ruaridh mccartney................................................ 
counsel for
pragash kanagaratnam
weinstein j.:

mr. kanagaratnam is
charged with failing or refusing to comply with a breath demand contrary to
section 320.15(1)
of the
criminal code
and careless driving contrary to
section 130 of the
highway traffic act.

at the outset of the trial, mr. kanagaratnam filed
a
charter
application that put the crown to its onus of establishing the
arresting officer’s grounds for the approved screening device demand. in the absence
of sufficient grounds, the warrantless searches would be presumptively
unreasonable and violate the accused’s s. 8 right against unreasonable search
and seizure as well as a violation of his s. 9 right against arbitrary
detention. counsel did not pursue either of these applications in oral submissions
at the end of the trial.

mr. kanagaratnam’s
charter
application
also alleged a violation of his s. 10(b) right to counsel. initially, the issue
raised was there had been a delay in the implementation of mr. kanagaratnam’s
right to counsel. however, the 10(b)-issue crystallized further during the
trial when it was revealed that when implementing rights to counsel, the
arresting officer inadvertently recorded the entirety of mr. kanagaratnam’s
call with duty counsel. it is because of this breach, mr. kanagaratnam seeks
exclusion of his refusal to provide a breath sample as the remedy under s.
24(2).

mr. kanagaratnam also put the crown to its onus
of proving the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. on
consent of the parties, the matter proceeded as a blended
voir dire
with
the evidence of the
charter
application applying to the trial.

the crown conceded that there had been a 10(b)
violation when the officer recorded mr. kanagaratnam’s call with counsel.
however, the crown submitted that a s.24(2) analysis demands the inclusion of
the evidence. moreover, the crown submits that it has proven the requisite elements
of the offences and, as such, mr. kanagaratnam ought to be found guilty.

in light of the crown’s concession that there
was a 10(b) violation, the issue i must determine is whether the evidence of
the refusal is nonetheless admissible under section 24(2). if it is not, the parties
agree that the
charter
application is dispositive of the
criminal
code
charge. however, if i find the evidence admissible, i must then go on
to consider whether the crown has proven mr. kanagaratnam’s guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.
overview of the relevant facts

at approximately 3:00 a.m. on january 16, 2024,
mr. kanagaratnam was driving his black tesla eastbound on highway 401 when he
struck the rear of truck driven by thushanthan shanmugarajah.

after hitting the truck, mr. kanagaratnam’s
vehicle crossed the lanes of traffic and struck the concrete median before it
came to a rest on the left shoulder of the highway.

pc tanguay from the toronto opp detachment
responded to a call to attend the accident scene. he spoke with mr.
kanagaratnam who identified himself as being the driver of the tesla. pc
tanguay testified that when he spoke to mr. kanagaratnam, he noted an odour of
alcohol on his breath and formed the suspicion that he might be impaired by
alcohol. he then made a demand that mr. kanagaratnam provide a sample of his
breath into an approved screening device.

mr. kanagaratnam complied with the demand and
registered a “fail”. he was then arrested for over 80. pc tanguay placed mr.
kanagaratnam in the back of his cruiser where he read him his rights to
counsel, the caution and made a breath demand. when placed in the cruiser, pc
tanguay told mr. kanagaratnam that the car was equipped with audio and video
recording equipment and that everything was being recorded.

mr. kanagaratnam said that he wanted to speak to
counsel. pc tanguay left a message for duty counsel and waited for a call back
before transporting mr. kanagaratnam to the detachment for the breath test. pc
tanguay testified that it is his practice to implement rights to counsel at the
scene because he knows the importance of immediately providing a detainee with
their rights to counsel.

when duty counsel called back, pc tanguay placed
his cell phone on speaker and left the cruiser so that mr. kanagaratnam could
speak in private. before doing so, pc tanguay said that he would be turning off
the recording equipment.

it turned out, however, that although pc tanguay
turned off one recording device, he left a second one running. consequently, the
entirety of mr. kanagaratnam’s eight-minute call with duty counsel was recorded.
pc tanguay stated that until seeing the video at trial, he had no idea that the
conversation had been recorded. he never listened to the conversation and, to
his knowledge, neither did any other officer. however, he did acknowledge that
this was not the first time he had left the in-car cameras recording while a
detainee was speaking with counsel. he stated that there were “a few” other
occasions where he made the same mistake.

mr. kanagaratnam was eventually taken to the opp
detachment to provide the breath sample. sergeant al-obaigi, the qualified
breath technician, testified that when he spoke with mr. kanagaratnam, he
detected a slight odour of alcohol on his breath. he also said that he was
unsteady on his feet and that his eyes appeared red and glossy. sergeant al-obaigi
testified that he gave mr. kanagaratnam four opportunities to provide a proper
sample. however, mr. kanagaratnam never gave a suitable sample and was
ultimately charged with failing to comply with a breath demand.
was there a breach of mr. kanagaratnam’s 10(b)
rights?

the right to retain and instruct counsel without
delay includes the right to consult a lawyer in private: see
r. v.
playford,
1987 canlii 125
(ont. c.a.). indeed, the protection of communication with
counsel from non-consensual disclosure, is inherent in the right to consult
counsel. as noted by the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. pileggi,
 o.j. no. 32 at para 77: “consultation in private is a vital component of
the 10(b) right.” if there is an invasion or prevention of privacy, then a
breach of section 10(b) is made out.

although there was no evidence that mr.
kanagaratnam was aware his communications were being recorded, the fact of the
matter is that the in-car video captured the entirety of mr. kanagaratnam’s privileged
communications. that breached his right to privacy in his communications with
counsel and violated his s. 10(b) rights.
should the evidence be excluded
under section 24(2)?

there are two components to determining whether
evidence must be excluded under s. 24(2) of the
charter. the threshold
requirement asks whether the evidence was “obtained in a manner” that infringed
or denied a
charter
right. if this threshold requirement is met, the
second component, the evaluative component, asks whether, having regard to all
the circumstances, admitting the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute:
r. v. beaver
2022 scc 54
at para
94.

the crown concedes, and i agree, that the
evidence of mr. kanagaratnam’s refusal meets the “obtained in a manner”
prerequisite. there was a temporal and contextual link between the 10(b) informational
breach and the refusal to provide the breath sample. both events occurred as
part of the investigation during the same transaction.

the crux of the analysis is thus whether the
admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. in
r. v.
grant,
2009 scc 32 (canlii),
 2 s.c.r. 353,
the supreme court of canada set out the test for whether the evidence obtained
in a manner which infringes
charter
rights should be admitted or
excluded under s. 24(2) of the
charter. a trial judge’s role is to
“assess and balance the effect of admitting the evidence on society’s
confidence in the justice system” having regard to: (1) the seriousness of
the
charter
-infringing state conduct; (2) the impact on the
charter
-protected
rights of the applicant; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits. i must balance these factors to determine whether the
evidence should be admitted.

section
24(2) is
not an
automatic exclusionary rule that requires the exclusion of evidence when police
act in an unconstitutional manner. the question is whether the admission of the
evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute:
r. v.
beaver, supra
at para
117
and
r. v.
whittaker,
2024 onca 182.

the objective is “not to assign blame, punish the police, or
deter future
charter
breaches, but to preserve public
confidence in the rule of law and its processes”. the s. 24(2) analysis must
focus on the “broad impact [the] admission of the evidence [would have] on the
long-term repute of the justice system:
r. v. whittaker, supra
at paras
28 and 29.
seriousness
of the
charter
infringing conduct

police misconduct exists on a spectrum from technical or
inadvertent errors committed in good faith to deliberate breaches. i must
situate the police conduct here on that spectrum. the more willful, reckless,
or deliberate the misconduct, the more the court will need to dissociate itself
from that conduct:
r. v. beaver, supra
at para
121.

good faith efforts by the police to comply with
the
charter
will reduce the need to dissociate from the conduct.
however, as the court noted in
grant,
ignorance
of
charter
standards will not be rewarded or encouraged, and
good faith will not be found where police conduct is negligent or willfully
blind: see
r. v. grant,
supra
at para
75.

although
pc tanguay did not set out to intentionally breach mr. kanagaratnam’s
charter
rights, he was grossly negligent when he failed to turn off the recording. the
fact that he left a recording running to enable the police to record private
communications and which resulted in the entirety of mr. kanagaratnam’s
solicitor client conversation to be recorded reflects a shocking lack
indifference to the sanctity of solicitor-client confidentiality.

what
makes the breach even more serious, and what distinguishes this case from the
cases relied upon by the crown, is that this was not the first time pc tanguay
has left the recording running while a detainee was speaking with counsel.
indeed, pc tanguay acknowledged that there have been multiple occasions where
this has occurred. this was not an isolated event or innocent mistake. this
reflects a pattern of conduct in which pc tanguay continually violates one of
the most sacrosanct protections in our law – solicitor-client privilege.

pc
tanguay should be commended for recognizing the importance of rights to counsel
and to making efforts to immediately implement those rights. however, if he is
going to undertake a general practice of implementing rights to counsel at the
roadside, it is imperative that he ensure it is a secure conversation. it is incumbent
on pc tanguay to understand the importance of the private nature of these
calls. his lackadaisical approach on this and other occasions to turning off
the equipment reflects a persistent pattern of failing to appreciate that privacy is inherent in the right to consult counsel in private.
his repeated failures to do so, in many ways, make his words about recognizing their
importance of rights to counsel ring hollow.

the
fact that the police did not listen to the recording does not minimize the
seriousness of the breach. solicitor-client communications are
only to be disclosed in exceptional circumstances. given the near absolute
protection of solicitor-client privilege caution must always be exercised
to ensure that it is always protected and not at risk, like it was here, of
being undermined.

having
regard to the sacrosanct nature of solicitor-client privilege in our law, the
serious nature of the violation pulls very strongly in favour of exclusion of
the evidence.
the impact of the breaches on mr. kanagaratnam’s
charter
-protected interests

the
second line of inquiry deals with the seriousness of the impact of the violation
on the
charter
-protected interests of the accused. this
line of inquiry considers the
impact of the breach on the accused's
charter
-protected interests
and asks whether the breach undermined the interests protected by the right
infringed:
r. v. tim,
2022 scc 12
at para
90.

i must identify the interests protected by the
relevant
charter
rights and evaluate how seriously the
breaches affected those interests. as with the first line of inquiry, i must
then “situate the impact on the accused's
charter
-protected
interests on a spectrum, ranging from impacts that are fleeting, technical,
transient, or trivial, to those that are profoundly intrusive or that seriously
compromise the interests underlying the rights infringed.” the greater the
impact on the
charter
protected interests, the greater the risk that the
admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute:
see
r. v. tim,
supra.

there is no evidence that
mr. kanagaratnam was aware that his conversation with counsel was recorded, and
so his ability to consult with counsel was not impaired by the police conduct. i
also accept that the police did not use the impugned information in any way. at
first blush, those facts might militate the seriousness of the breach. however,
the fact that mr. kanagaratnam’s communications were recorded still offends the
administration of justice and supports, on balance, the exclusion of the
evidence.

it is well settled that the
implementation of an accused’s right to counsel includes the requirement that
the call be in private. this recognises the inviolable position of the
solicitor client relationship in the context of our legal system.
in
r. v.
mcclure,
2001 scc 14, the supreme court of canada held that
solicitor-client privilege is part of, and fundamental to, the canadian legal
system which has evolved into a fundamental and substantive rule of law. solicitor-client
privilege “must be as close to absolute as possible to ensure public confidence
and retain relevance.” see also
goodis v. ontario
(ministry of
correctional services),
2006 scc 31
at paras.
20
‑
21,

mr. kanagaratnam had an
expectation of privacy when he was speaking to duty counsel. ancillary to that
expectation is the belief that the police would not intrude on his private
communication. mr. kanagaratnam spoke openly with duty counsel for approximately
eight minutes believing his conversation was in private. the police should not
have had access to any part of that communication. whether the audio recording
was inadvertently left on or whether the police listened to the recording is of
no consequence. mr. kanagaratnam’s consultation with counsel was recorded by a
system that was established, maintained, operated and controlled by the police.

solicitor-client privilege is regarded as having
quasi-constitutional importance to the administration of justice. pc tanguay,
through his negligence, interfered with this substantive rule of law and a
sacrosanct fundamental principle of justice. such an intrusion seriously
affects the interests it is designed to protect and pulls very strongly
in favour of exclusion of the evidence.
society’s interest in adjudication on the merits

the
third
grant
factor,
society’s interest in
adjudication on the merits, will typically pull towards inclusion of the
evidence.

the
third line of inquiry is concerned with society’s interest in an adjudication
on the merits. it asks whether the truth-seeking function of the criminal
process would be better served by the admission or exclusion of the evidence.
the reliability of the evidence and its importance to the prosecution’s case
are key factors. admitting unreliable evidence will not serve the accused’s
fair trial interests nor the public’s desire to uncover the truth. on the other
hand, excluding reliable evidence may undermine the truth-seeking function of
the justice system and render the trial unfair from the public’s perspective.

the
importance of the evidence to the crown’s case is corollary to the inquiry into
reliability. admitting evidence of questionable reliability is more likely to
bring the administration of justice into disrepute where it forms the whole of
the prosecution’s case, but excluding highly reliable evidence may more
negatively affect the truth-seeking function of the criminal law process where
the effect is to “gut” the prosecution’s case.

clearly,
the evidence sought to be excluded is highly reliable. there is no doubt
that drinking and driving offences are serious. society has a strong interest
in seeing this case tried on its merits. further, exclusion of the evidence
will result in the crown being unable to prove its case. exclusion of the evidence,
therefore, will more negatively affect the truth-seeking function of the trial
process than inclusion. this factor favours admission of the evidence.
conclusion on s. 24(2) of the
charter

it
is the cumulative effect of the first two lines of inquiry that the court must
consider and balance against the third line of inquiry. the third line of
inquiry will seldom tip the scale in favour of admissibility where the first
two lines of inquiry favour exclusion:
r. v. lafranc
e,
2022 scc 32
at para.
90.

in
this case, the first and second lines of inquiry favour exclusion. bearing in
mind all the circumstances, i am of the view that the reputation of the
administration of justice would be jeopardized if the court did not
significantly denounce pc tanguay’s gross negligence, the unacceptable lack of
attention to mr. kanagaratnam’s
charter
rights and the
breaches which flowed from that conduct. the evidence of mr. kanagaratnam’s
refusal must be excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.

with the evidence of the refusal excluded, the
crown is unable to prove the requisite elements of the offence and,
accordingly, mr. kanagaratnam is found not guilty of the
criminal code
charge of failing to comply with a breath demand.
careless driving

mr. kanagaratnam was never arraigned on the
careless driving information. however, i am satisfied that despite the
procedural irregularity, i have jurisdiction to consider the careless driving
count.

the jurisdiction to consider a count for which
there was no arraignment was endorsed by the ontario court of appeal in
r.
v. mitchell
1997 canlii 6321 (on ca), 36 o.r. (3d) 643 (c.a.). justice
doherty stated at p. 18:
arraignment
is intended to ensure that an accused is aware of the exact charges when he or
she elects and pleads. arraignment also ensures that all parties to the
proceeding have a common understanding of the charges which are to be the
subject-matter of the proceedings which follow. the appellant was told in
summary form of the charges against him on his first appearance. more
importantly, he made numerous appearances between his first appearance and his
purported election on february 28, 1995; and several more before his trial
started in august 1995. he was represented by the same counsel throughout.
disclosure had been made by the crown and in some of the appearances before
august 1995 there was reference to the substance of the charges. i have no
doubt that the appellant and his counsel were well aware of the exact charges
in february when counsel was asked to elect a mode of trial and in august when
the trial actually commenced. there is no reason to think that the proceedings
would have gone any differently had the charges been read to the appellant in
february or august. the failure to read the charges to the appellant as
required by s. 536(2) did not cause the appellant any prejudice and should not
vitiate the convictions.

in my view, the failure to arraign mr.
kanagaratnam on the careless driving count was an oversight that did not cause
any prejudice. mr. kanagaratnam was aware of the charge before the court.
moreover, it is clear from the way the trial proceeded that the crown and
defence believed that the trial included the careless driving information. indeed,
both counsel made submissions about whether mr. kanagaratnam’s conduct amounted
to careless driving. it was only when i questioned whether mr. kanagaratnam had
been arraigned did this issue arise. there is no reason to think that this
trial would have been conducted any differently had mr. kanagaratnam been
arraigned.
has the crown proven that mr.
kanagaratnam’s driving was careless?

careless
driving is a strict liability offence:
r. v. shergill
2016 oncj 163. there
is no obligation on the crown to establish a mens rea element on a careless
driving prosecution. rather, proof of the prohibited act is sufficient to
ground a conviction unless the accused demonstrates that they took reasonable
steps to avoid the event:
r. v. sault st. marie
1978 canlii 11 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 1299.

a
plain reading of section 130 of the
highway traffic act
makes clear
that there are two ways that a driver can drive carelessly. first, by failing
to drive with due care and attention. second, by failing to give reasonable
consideration for others using the highway.

the
fact of an accident is not sufficient on its own to establish the actus reus.
however, a finding of guilt will result where the prosecution has proven beyond
a reasonable doubt that the voluntary acts of the accused were such that but
for carelessness the collision would not likely have occurred:
r. v.
beauchamp,
1952 canlii 60 (on ca), o.r. 422 (c.a.);
r. v. mciver,
1965 canlii 26 (on ca), 4 c.c.c. 182 (ont. c.a.), aff’d
1966 canlii 6
(scc), s.c.r. 254 (s.c.c.).

mr.
kanagaratnam collided with the rear of a pick-up truck. there is no evidence to
suggest that there was anything in mr. shanmugarajah’s driving conduct that
contributed to the accident and no evidence that mr. kanagaratnam took any
steps to avoid the collision. further, the mto video from the portion of
highway 401 where the accident occurred revealed mr. kanagaratnam swerving and
driving aggressively in the moments prior to the accident. finally, mr.
kanagaratnam had alcohol in his system at the time of driving. he had obvious
indicia of impairment at the roadside. he failed the approved screening device
which means that he had anywhere from 50 to 100 ml of alcohol per 100 ml of
blood at the time of the accident. driving with this much alcohol in ones
system and driving with these indicia of impairment demonstrate that mr.
kanagaratnam was driving without due care and attention.

the only rational conclusion to be reached on the totality of the
evidence is that the collision was caused by mr. kanagaratnam driving without due
care and attention. accordingly, there will be a finding of guilt on the
careless driving count.
released: may 20, 2025
signed:
justice seth weinstein