source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj41/2025oncj41.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. kalina, 2025 oncj 41
date: 
2025 01 21
court
file no.: central west region - brampton – 23-31107643
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
joseph
kalina
before
justice andrew f. falls
heard
on september 11 and december 18, 2024
reasons
delivered on january 21, 2025
k. holmes............................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
e. white............................................................. counsel
for the defendant, joseph kalina
falls, j.:
reasons for sentence

on september 11, 2024, joseph kalina pleaded
guilty to one count of possession of child pornography. the sentencing hearing
was adjourned pending the preparation of a pre-sentence report.

the following are my reasons for sentencing mr. kalina to a
penitentiary carceral sentence.
the circumstances of the offence

an agreed statement of facts (“asf”) was filed
as a basis for the conviction. a summary of those facts, together with any relevant
findings of fact are as follows.

on may 11. 2023, the peel regional police,
internet child exploitation unit commenced an investigation into a report from
the national centre for missing and exploited children. the report outlined
that three images, believed to be child pornography, were uploaded to a peer to
peer sharing site called bingimage. as part of their investigation, the police
obtained a warrant to search the residential address linked to the ip address
used to upload the images. this was mr. kalina’s residence.

as a result of the search, the police located
four usb storage drives containing 7,308 images and 513 videos. the media was analyzed,
and it is admitted that the images and videos are child pornography.

the run-time of the videos is five hours and 45 minutes. 
the images and videos all contain the same type of content. 99 percent of the
images depict young girls under the age of ten being sexually exploited or
assaulted. the young girls are either posing with little to no clothing on or
they are being sexually assaulted by adult men. some of the girls are dressed
up in makeup or lingerie.

the nature of the depicted sexual assaults
include vaginal, anal, and oral sex. some of the girls were tied up or bound
to objects. an example was highlighted depicting a girl of less than 8 years
old who was tied face down to a table by her arms and legs. she was being sexually
assaulted by an adult male.

the asf does not specify the number of victims
included in the videos and images. i was asked by the crown to infer from the
asf that there were multiple girls included in the collection. i am prepared
to draw that inference and make a finding that there were multiple girls included
in the collection of videos and images. i make this finding based on the
pluralized language in the asf. it is also a reasonable inference based on the
number of videos and images.

it is admitted that mr. kalina was the ip
subscriber. the usb storage devices were found in various locations in the
residence, including one in the master bedroom and two plugged into a computer
tablet connected to a living room television.

mr. kalina resided alone. he had a second
bedroom with children’s toys. mr. kalina babysat his six-year-old great
granddaughter. it is not alleged, nor admitted that anything untoward occurred
with respect to mr. kalina’s great granddaughter. nor is she believed to be
included in the collection of material located at mr. kalina’s residence.
victim impact

neither a victim impact statement nor a
community victim impact statement were filed. i was advised the girls depicted
in the collection are unidentified.
the circumstances of the offender
a)
mr. kalina’s background

i was aided in understanding joseph kalina’s background
by his counsel’s submissions and a pre-sentence report (“psr”).

mr. kalina is now 81 years old. given his date
of birth, he was 79 years old at the time of this offence.

mr. kalina is college educated and had taken engineering
courses later in life. mr. kalina has maintained steady employment his entire
adult life. he began working parttime when he was 11 years old. collateral
sources described work as a central feature in mr. kalina’s life providing him with
purpose and fulfillment.

at the time of his guilty plea, he was employed
fulltime at a major home improvement retailer. he has been employed with this
retailer since 1999. as of the date of sentencing submissions, mr. kalina was
in a position to cease his employment, however, he continues to work to support
a child and grandchild.

mr. kalina was married in the 1970’s and has two
sons from that union. he is currently divorced. notwithstanding the
dissolution of their marriage, mr. kalina provided care for his ex-wife for 25
years when she became unwell. she is now deceased. after his marriage, mr.
kalina was involved in a relationship for 35 years with another partner. he is
now single.

mr. kalina maintains a relationship with both
his sons, though the relationship with his youngest son is strained. mr.
kalina has shared the existence of his criminal offence with his children and
grandchildren.

mr. kalina experienced physical abuse at the
hands of his stepfather during his early childhood years. though he lived with
his mother until his later adolescent years, mr. kalina did not have a strong
relationship with her. he did not have much contact with his biological
father. mr. kalina has three sisters, only one of which he has maintained a relationship.

collateral sources described mr. kalina as a
devoted father and believe that he has a positive relationship with his sons, grandchildren,
and great grandchildren. mr. kalina spoils his grandchildren and great
grandchildren and visits them three or more times a week.

mr. kalina has a dated criminal record from the
1960’s. he would have been in his late teens and twenty years old. i have
made note of the record, however, i do not consider the existence of this
record to be a significant factor in my determination of a fit sentence.
b)
mr. kalina’s explanation for the offence

in his psr, mr. kalina advised that he began
viewing pornographic material involving children approximately four years ago. 
he would have been 76 years old. while viewing age-appropriate material he
clicked on a popup and began to view child pornography out of boredom. he
stated it was not sexual. however, he did admit to sexually gratifying himself
while viewing the material – “sometimes.” mr. kalina saved the media to a usb
storage device and returned to the device to view the material. he admitted to
searching for child pornography on the internet within the last year.

mr. kalina stated that he takes full responsibility
for possessing the child pornography. he is “humiliated and embarrassed” by
his behaviour. as he noted, those responsible for the abuse and its viewer
should suffer the consequences of the law.

mr. kalina qualified his acceptance of responsibility
by explaining that he did not believe the videos/images were depicting real
children. it was only upon his arrest that he learned otherwise. while he was
viewing the material, he believed the victims to have been 15 to 16 years old.

there was undoubtedly a personal benefit to not
having viewed the material in this case. on the other hand, because i did not
view the material, i am unable to fully assess mr. kalina's assertion. the asf
suggests the videos/images depict real children. i have proceeded in my
sentencing as if they were real unidentified children as crown counsel argued. 
this was not disputed by the defence. however, i am left with less than
sufficient evidence to conclude that mr. kalina's claim is demonstrably false.

that noted, mr. kalina's explanation is cause
for concern. in my view, his claim that he did not realize the girls in the
videos/images were real children demonstrates an underappreciation for the
harmfulness of possessing sexually explicit media involving children. 
especially if that material includes the type of harm visited upon them as
described in this case. as noted by the ontario court of appeal in
pike,
possessing this material creates and fuels a demand for it. further, possession incites
“perpetrators to commit and facilitate the commission of other sexual offences
against children.

”

in my view, it is degrees of bad, the difference
between knowledge of real children being abused and the belief that the
videos/images were creations designed to mimic a real event. in either case, some
of the media was a depiction of young girls being sexually abused. as noted in
the asf, 99% of the girls were under the age of ten.

through his lawyer, mr. kalina expressed remorse
for his actions. i accept that there is some truth so this. as i noted mr.
kalina spoke of his embarrassment in the psr. he offered to donate $10,000 to
a local youth organization if i did not incarcerate him. his counsel argued
that this part of the psr, when read as a whole, demonstrates an acceptance of
his behaviour and the harm it caused.

respectfully, i do not agree. mr. kalina stated
his possession and viewing of the material “wasn’t sexual”. he continued
viewing 7,308 images and 513 videos of child pornographic media out of boredom. 
mr. kalina continues to not appreciate that every time he viewed a child
pornographic image or video, he revictimized the child. his possession
contributed to the harm visited on the child. as noted in
pike, mr.
kalina shares that responsibility with the producer of the video/image. mr.
kalina fails to appreciate that possession of this material is a deliberate

and continuous choice. “people who possess child
pornography exploit real child victims callously, deliberately, and repeatedly.

” for offenders who continue
to engage in distorted and minimized thinking, less weigh is attached to their
expression of remorse.

the mitigating effects of mr. kalina’s remorse
are attenuated by his continued lack of appreciation for the seriousness of his
offence.
c)
mr. kalina’s age & health

at the time of sentencing mr. kalina is 81 years
old. his 81
st
birthday was on december 20, 2024.

defence counsel argued that mr. kalina’s age is
a significant mitigating factor. counsel pointed to data from the world health
organization that says the average life expectancy of a canadian male is 79.4
years of age.

in addition, mr. kalina has some health
concerns. as noted in the psr, mr. kalina is experiencing sciatica in his
lower back and into his left leg which causes him mobility issues. he is
waiting an appointment with a neurosurgeon. in 2018, he underwent a triple
bypass surgery. he takes daily medication and visits a cardiologist annually. 
finally, mr. kalina has type-2 diabetes for which he takes five different oral
medications for daily. mr. kalina currently uses a cane to assist in his
mobility.

defence counsel conceded that custodial
facilities could accommodate mr. kalina’s health concerns.

mr. kalina’s age and health are the major
factors driving the defence submission for a conditional sentence.
d)
other considerations

to my knowledge, mr. kalina has not undergone
any counselling.

there was no risk assessment or expert report
filed to aid me in evaluating any risk posed by mr. kalina.

though it was submitted by counsel that mr.
kalina does not present a danger to society. this submission was based on the
fact that mr. kalina has only been convicted of the actions that are the
foundation for this offence.

collateral sources in the psr regard mr. kalina
as kind, generous, strong-willed, and the perfect gentleman. they expressed
surprise regarding the offence and expressed that it was inconsistent with
their understanding of who mr. kalina is as a person. collateral sources believe
jail would be a “death sentence” for mr. kalina. the basis for this belief was
not shared for two of the collateral sources. mr. kalina’s son expressed the
same belief because his father would lose his job, home, and health.
sentencing legal principles

the
criminal code
instructs
that the goal of any criminal sentence is to protect society, contribute to
respect for the law and help maintain a just, peaceful, and safe
society." (see s.
718
).

sentencing judges attempt to achieve this goal
by imposing just sanctions that address one or more of the traditional
sentencing principles that are also contained in the
criminal code. these
include denunciation, general and specific deterrence, rehabilitation, making
reparation to victims of crime, and promoting a sense of responsibility in
offenders and an acknowledgment of the harm they have caused the community, and
specific victims in our community. (see s. 718(a) – (f))

ultimately, the fundamental principle of
sentencing is to impose a sanction that is proportionate to the gravity of the
offence committed, and the degree of responsibility of the person who committed
it. (see s. 718.1) this means that, for the sentence i impose to be
appropriate, it must be tailored to mr. kalina’s circumstances, and the circumstances of the offence he committed.

section 718.1 of the
code
ensures that
proportionality is the fundamental principle of sentencing. however,
proportionality is not the sole principle to be considered. a sentence should
be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances.


as a sentencing tool, imprisonment is to be used
only as a last resort when required by the circumstances of the crime and the
background of the perpetrator.

the principle of restraint requires that the shortest period of incarceration
that will meet the penological aims in a given case is the appropriate length
for a prison sentence.

as noted by the scc in nasogaluak

at paragraph 44,
[i]t must be remembered that, while courts
should pay heed to these ranges, they are guidelines rather than hard and fast
rules. a judge can order a sentence outside that range as long as it is in
accordance with the principles and objectives of sentencing. thus, a sentence
falling outside the regular range of appropriate sentences is not necessarily
unfit. regard must be had to all the circumstances of the offence and the
offender, and to the needs of the community in which the offence occurred.

in lacasse

at paragraphs 57 and 58, the scc stated that,
sentencing ranges are nothing more than summaries of the
minimum and maximum sentences imposed in the past, which serve in any given
case as guides for the application of all the relevant principles and objectives.
however, they should not be considered “averages”, let alone straitjackets, but
should instead be seen as historical portraits for the use of sentencing
judges, who must still exercise their discretion in each case …
there will always be situations that call for a sentence
outside a particular range:
although ensuring parity in sentencing is in itself a desirable objective, the
fact that each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a
unique profile cannot be disregarded. the determination of a just and
appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a
purely mathematical calculation. it involves a variety of factors that are
difficult to define with precision.

as noted in proulx at paragraphs 21 and 22,
the
conditional sentence was specifically enacted as a new sanction designed to
achieve both of parliament's objectives. the conditional sentence is a
meaningful alternative to incarceration for less serious and non-dangerous
offenders. the offenders who meet the criteria of s. 742.1 will serve a
sentence under strict surveillance in the community instead of going to prison.
these offenders' liberty will be constrained by conditions to be attached to
the sentence, as set out in s. 742.3 of the code. in case of breach of
conditions, the offender will be brought back before a judge, pursuant to s.
742.6. if an offender cannot provide a reasonable excuse for breaching the
conditions of his or her sentence, the judge may order him or her to serve the
remainder of the sentence in jail, as it was intended by parliament that there
be a real threat of incarceration to increase compliance with the conditions of
the sentence.
the
conditional sentence incorporates some elements of non-custodial measures and
some others of incarceration. because it is served in the community, it will
generally be more effective than incarceration at achieving the restorative
objectives of rehabilitation, reparations to the victim and community, and the
promotion of a sense of responsibility in the offender. however, it is also a
[page83] punitive sanction capable of achieving the objectives of denunciation
and deterrence…

a conditional sentence can only be imposed if
the accused receives a sentence of less than 2 years and only when the sentence
"would not endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent
with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections
718 to 718.2.
sentencing for child pornography possession

in
pike, the ontario court of appeal
outlined a sentencing framework for child pornography offences. the court of
appeal reemphasized that i should apply the child centered approach from
r.
v. freisen

when engaging in a sentencing analysis for this offence.

the court of appeal recognized and expanded on six
distinct wrongs and harms associated with the possession of child pornography. 
perpetrators of this offence “violate children's dignity, invade their privacy,
inflict severe emotional harm, instigate producers to abuse children to meet
the demand for child pornography, risk inciting and facilitating other offences
against children, and perpetuate pernicious messages that undermine children's
humanity and equality”.

as noted by the court of appeal:
possession is
a grave offence because it causes these wrongs and harms. "[c]ourts do not
see [possession as] a minor, or victimless crime" (
kwok (2007), at
para. 52) or one that merely seeks to prevent future risks to children that
have not yet materialized: smolen, at p. 60. rather, "
possession of child pornography is itself child sexual abuse
":
inksetter, at para. 22 (quotation omitted).
people who possess child pornography participate in the producer's initial
sexual abuse of children through the market that their demand creates, and
drive demand for even more abuse.
they also
independently abuse those children by violating their dignity and privacy,
which causes them severe emotional harm.
[emphasis
added]

sentencing in these cases must emphasize the
principles of denunciation and deterrence.

the ontario court of appeal explained these
terms in
r. v. t.j.,
as follows:
a sentence
expresses denunciation by condemning "the offender for encroaching on our
society's basic code of values"; it expresses deterrence by
"discouraging the offender and others from engaging in criminal
conduct". considerations of general deterrence lead to an offender being punished
more severely than he or she might otherwise deserve in order to send a message
to others: lis, at para. 55.

as noted in
pike, “prioritizing
denunciation communicates that perpetrators’ sexual exploitation of children is
intolerable and combats their attempts to minimize their conduct as harmless or
victimless.

”

as stated by the court of appeal in r. v. m.m.,
2022 onca 441, at para.
15:
the supreme
court's instructions from friesen could not be clearer: sentences for sexual
offences against children must increase. there are no qualifications here.
sentences have been too low for too long. denunciation and deterrence are of
primary importance: r. v. inksetter,
2018 onca 474, 141 o.r. (3d) 161, at para.
3. those who commit sexual offences against children must understand that
carceral sentences will ordinarily follow.

section 718.01
of the
criminal code
states that
when dealing with offences against children a court shall give primary
consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence of such conduct.

in
pike, the court increased the upper
end of the sentence range to five years in recognition of the seriousness of
this offence. 
the court declined to set a lower end for the possession range.

when sentencing for this offence, a judge should
place the case along this range comparing the case to other post
friesen
cases and taking into consideration a non-exhaustive list of relevant
aggravating and mitigating factors.
positions of parties

pointing to the circumstances and seriousness of
the offence, the crown submits that a custodial sentence is appropriate. the
crown asked me to impose:
1)
a custodial sentence of 3 years.
2)
a soira order for 20 years.
3)
a dna order, and
4)
a s.161 order for 20 years.

counsel for mr. kalina submits that it would be
more appropriate for me to impose a conditional sentence of 2 years less a day
followed by three years probation. this sentence would allow the maximum
amount of community supervision over mr. kalina. the defence does not oppose
the ancillary orders sought by the crown.

the goal of defence counsel’s submissions was to
achieve a sentence that allows mr. kalina to continue his employment, provide
support for his family, and maintain his health. defence counsel points to mr.
kalina’s guilty plea and no danger to the community as reasons for me to
consider this sentence. counsel also highlights that mr. kalina deserves
significant mitigation for his age and health concerns.
aggravating & mitigating factors

in determining an appropriate sentence, it is
helpful to consider any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances that
are presently at play. (see s. 718.2(a)) this would include features of mr. kalina’s background, features of the
crime he has committed, the timing of his guilty plea, and any other evidence i
have received during this sentence hearing. it would also include any legal
direction, whether found in the
criminal code, for example section 718.2(a), or
provided by higher courts, with regard to particular aspects of this case that
i must consider.

listing the applicable aggravating and
mitigating features assists me in evaluating this case properly and imposing a
sentence that is just and appropriate. i note the following aggravating and mitigating
features of this case.

i find the following to be aggravating facts:
1)
the circumstances of the offence
(i)
this offence involved the abuse and exploitation
of children.
(ii)
the age of the children in the child pornography
is young, with all being under the age of 10 years old.
(iii)
the degree of depravity of the images and videos
possessed by mr. kalina.
(iv)
the collection size is large, including 7,308
images and 513 videos.
(v)
this offence was not a spontaneous or "one
off" event but occurred on a number of occasions over a period of time and
the collection and manner of storage of the images suggest signs of curating.
2)
mr. kalina continues to show a lack of
appreciation for the seriousness of his offence.
3)
mr. kalina has a criminal record. i do not
consider this to be a significant aggravating factor.

in a sense, the list of aggravating
circumstances i have outlined does little more than describe the evils being
addressed by these provisions of the
criminal code. however, within the bounds
of the criminal conduct described in
s. 163.1
of the
criminal code
there
are gradations of seriousness. i view mr. kalina's conduct in committing the
offence as falling near the more serious end of that spectrum.

i have no psychiatric or assessment evidence
that would help me assess mr. kalina’s risk to children. i do note the
comments of the collateral sources in the psr. in particular, mr. kalina’s son
stated that there has never been an issue with mr. kalina’s children, grandchildren,
and great grandchildren.

i find the following to be mitigating factors:
1)
mr. kalina pleaded guilty.
2)
his guilty plea is a public acceptance of
responsibility. he has not denied responsibility for this offence.
3)
mr. kalina has expressed remorse and
embarrassment for committing the offence. i am told that mr. kalina understands
his actions. as i already noted, the mitigating effect of his remorse is diminished
by his continued minimization of the offence.
4)
mr. kalina is 81 years old. i must consider
whether a fixed-term sentence of imprisonment would exceed any reasonable
estimation of mr. kalina’s remaining natural life span.
5)
mr. kalina is educated and has been gainfully
employed for his entire adult life.
6)
mr. kalina has strong support from some of his
family and his close friends.
7)
finally, this guilty plea is meaningful given
the covid-19 backlog our jurisdiction is still experiencing. this guilty plea
made room for other matters to proceed to trial.
what is a fit & appropriate sentence

i now want to turn to my analysis and
determination of a fit sentence.

this was a challenging sentencing exercise. strong
competing interests exist. i must turn my mind to deterrence and impose a
sentence that sends a message to the community and mr.
kalina that this behaviour will not be tolerated.

as instructed in
pike
i have considered
the aggravating and mitigating factors in this case.

i cannot ignore the seriousness of mr. kalina’s criminal offence. his possession of a significant
quantity of child pornography contributed to the ongoing victimization of the
most vulnerable members of our community. mr. kalina does not appear to have a true appreciation of the
significance and impact of his crime. perhaps my decision in some way will assist
in that regard.

on the other hand, mr. kalina is 81 years old
and essentially does not have a criminal record. he is hardworking, gainfully
employed and otherwise a good contributing member of our community. candidly,
i do not want to sentence an 81-year-old person to a significant jail sentence.

i have considered the defence submission for a
conditional sentence. as noted at paragraph 179 in
pike, before
considering whether a cso is appropriate, i must determine the appropriate
quantum of the sentence.

in support of their argument, the crown relied
solely on the court of appeal’s decision of
pike. in
pike, the court
reasoned that a penitentiary sentence was appropriate for cases similar to this
case. as i previously noted, the court raised the upper limit of the
sentencing range to five years. with respect to the appropriateness of conditional
sentences, the court noted that the severe wrongs and harms that possessors of
child pornography cause, their moral blameworthiness and parliament’s
prioritization of deterrence and denunciation will usually result in a
custodial sentence.

the defence provided helpful written submissions
arguing that an appropriate range of sentence is a reformatory sentence. in
particular, mr. kalina’s mitigating circumstances,
especially his age, bring the appropriate sentence below a penitentiary
sentence.

counsel relied on two primary cases to support
this position. the first is a post
friesen
case. the second is a post
friesen
and post
pike
case. in both cases, the court found the appropriate
sentence to be a reformatory sentence – thereafter imposing a conditional
sentence.

the first is a case from justice latimer, as he was, sitting in the
ontario court of justice. in that case, his honour took particular note of the
offender’s indigenous status and a significant history riddled with physical
and sexual abuse. the crown in that case sought a sentence of two years less a
day.

the second case in also from the ontario court
of justice. in o.a.,
justice mainville found that an appropriate sentence ranged between one to two
years. her honour considered a history of sexual abuse that continued to
affect the offender. the offender was assessed and found to have a very low
risk of re-offending. he had undertaken rehabilitative and counselling
efforts. a significant factor for her honour was the collateral immigration
consequences and the resulting risk to the offender’s life if he was deported.

neither case is binding on me.

i am of the view that both cases are
distinguishable from the present case. in both cases, there were exceptional
personal circumstances that helped the court conclude that a reformatory sentence
was appropriate.
o.a.
is arguably the most similar of the two cases. i
note that the collection size in
o.a. was much smaller than mr.
kalina’s collection.

these personal circumstances are not present for
mr. kalina. it is valid to point to mr. kalina’s age as a mitigating
factor. as i noted, the notion of sentencing an 81-year-old person to a
custodial sentence could be argued as objectionable and gives me no pleasure.

however, mr. kalina is not a frail 81-year-old. he still
maintains fulltime employment. as his son noted, he is a frontline worker and
one of the company’s best employees. he does have health issues, however, none
that could not be accommodated in an institution.

i note mr. kalina commenced his commission of these offences when
he was 76 years old.

our courts are also not without precedent in sentencing elderly
accused. in
premji, the ontario court of appeal reduced a 13-year
sentence to nine years in recognition of the elderly age of a 77-year-old
offender. if that offender served his complete sentence, he would be 86 – two
and a half years shy of the sentence i find is appropriate for mr. kalina. in
the
pike/scott
decision, mr. scott was 77 years old in 2020 at the time
of the offence. in 2024, the court of appeal found a three-year penitentiary
sentence to be appropriate.

i remind myself that
section 718.2
of the
criminal code of canada
directs me to consider the least onerous sentence
consistent with the purposes and principles of sentencing. the principles of
proportionality and restraint require that any sentence imposed should not be
unduly long or harsh. while sufficient punishment is required, no more than
what is necessary is to be ordered.

balancing all these factors, i am of the view
that an appropriate sentence is two- and one-half years
or 30 months in a penitentiary jail.

this sentence considers and balances the
circumstances of mr. kalina’s offence and his personal circumstances. it
most appropriately reflects the gravity of the offence, and mr.
kalina’s degree of responsibility. i
have considered in particular:
a)
the range applied in similar recent cases. in particular, the
recent guidance provided by the ontario court of appeal in
pike. 
justice mainville’s summary of recent sentencing cases at paragraphs 182-191
was of assistance.
b)
the size of mr. kalina’s collection.
c)
the aggravating nature of the collection.
d)
mr.
kalina’s limited appreciation and diminished remorse for his offence.
e)
the mitigating factors of mr. kalina's age, the likely loss of
employment and residence to be incurred by reason of my sentence.

given my finding regarding the appropriate
sentence, a conditional sentence is not available.

i note that if mr. kalina was a younger
man, i would have sentenced him to a three-year carceral sentence. i have
reduced that amount in consideration of his age and health. i have also taken
note of eight days pre-sentence custody.

accordingly, i sentence mr.
kalina to a custodial sentence for 2.5 years or 30 months in jail.
ancillary orders

on consent of the parties, the ancillary orders
will be imposed as requested by the crown. there will be a dna order, this
being a primary designated offence. i will further impose an order pursuant to
s. 161
and
a sex offender registry or soira
order under
s. 490.012
of the
criminal
code. both orders will
issue for 20 years.
released: january
21, 2025
signed: justice andrew f. falls
note:
as noted in court, on the record, this written decision is to be considered
the official version of the reasons for sentence and takes precedence over the
oral reasons read into the record in the event of any discrepancies between the
oral and written versions.

r v pike & scott,
2024 onca 608
at para
167.

ibid.
at paras 151 and 162.

ibid.
at para 152.

ibid.
at para 151.

ibid.
at para 164.

ibid.
at para 165.

ibid.
at para 161.

ibid.
at para 173.

not considering mr. kalina’s dated criminal record.

subsection 718.2(b) of the code.

subsections 718.2 (d) and (e) of the code.

r.
v.
hamilton,
2004 canlii 5549 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 3252
(c.a.) at para
96.

r. v. nasogaluak,
2010 scc 6
at para
44.

r. v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64, at paras
57-58.

r v friesen,
2020 scc 9.

pike, supra. at paras 143 and 160.

ibid.
at para 146.

ibid.
at para 158.

ibid.
at para 159.

r v j (t)],
2021 onca 392
at para
26.

pike, supra. at para 159.

ibid.
at para 176.

ibid.
at para 178.

r v premji,
2021 onca 721
at paras
1 and 2.

pike, supra. at para 179.

r v sb,
2022 oncj 536.

r v oa,
2024 oncj 541.

ibid.
at paras 182-191.