source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj20/2025oncj20.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. wood,
2025 oncj 20
date: 
2025 01 14
court
file no.: sudbury 24-40102978
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ryan wood
before
justice g. jenner
heard
on january 13, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on january 14, 2025
kevin ludgate, alayna jay......................................... counsel
for the provincial crown
serge treherne.................................................................... counsel
for the federal crown
jessica belisle..................................................... 
counsel for the defendant ryan wood
jenner j.:
reasons for sentence
i.
introduction

the offender, ryan wood, pleaded guilty to
possessing a prohibited firearm with ammunition readily accessible
and without authorization or license contrary to
s. 95(1)
of the
criminal
code, and to possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking
contrary to s. 5(2) of the
controlled drugs and substances act.

the facts were presented in an agreed statement
of fact and are uncomplicated. on december 21, 2023, the greater sudbury police
service executed a search warrant at the upper unit of 516 melvin street,
sudbury, ontario. they found:
•
a glock 9mm semi-automatic handgun, a prohibited
firearm;
•
loaded within the handgun, a glock detachable
box magazine, itself a prohibited device, loaded to capacity with 15 cartridges
of centre fire ammunition;
•
an sgm tactical detachable box magazine capable
of holding 31 cartridges of 9 mm centre fire ammunition, another prohibited
device;
•
32 cartridges of blazer 9mm luger centre fire ammunition,
in a sock; and
•
23.1 g of cocaine valued at approximately
$2,340.00.

the handgun was located on the floor of a closet
with the glock detachable box loaded in it. the remaining detachable box and
other ammunition was also in the closet, but within a backpack. the cocaine was
found in a lunch bag in the kitchen of the residence. also found within the
residence: mr. wood’s identification and correspondence, three bb guns, two bb
gun magazines, $405.00 in canadian currency, and a digital scale.

mr. wood acknowledges his possession of the cocaine
for the purpose of trafficking as well as possession of the handgun, ammunition,
and prohibited accessories.

on the firearm count, the crown seeks an effective
sentence of four years’ imprisonment. on the
cdsa
count, the crown seeks
two years’ imprisonment, to be served concurrently. the parties agree that as
of today, mr. wood has been in custody for 390 days, and that he should be
credited on a 1.5:1 basis for 585 days. the crown therefore seeks a further 875
days’ custody.

mr. wood asks the court to sentence him on both
counts to time-served, and in the alternative, to impose any further custodial
sentence as a conditional sentence order (cso), to be served in the community.
ii.
statutory sentencing considerations

when the crown proceeds indictably, as it must here,
the firearm offence under
s. 95(1)
is punishable by up to 14 years’
imprisonment. possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking has a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment.

pursuant to
s. 718
of the
criminal code,
the fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and contribute to
the respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful, and safe
community by imposing just sanctions that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to denounce lawful conduct and the harm done to
victims or the community;
(b)
to deter the offender and others from committing
offences;
(c)
to separate offenders from society where
necessary;
(d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to provide reparation for harm done to victims
or to the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders, and acknowledge the harm done to victims or the community.

several other general principles apply:
•
proportionality:
a
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender: s. 718.1.
•
aggravating and mitigating factors:
a sentence should be increased or decreased to account for relevant
aggravating or mitigating circumstances, including but not limited to those
statutory factors set out in s. 718.2(a).
•
parity:
a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances: s. 718.2(b).
•
restraint:
an
offender should not be deprived of liberty if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate: s. 718.2(d). all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the
circumstances and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community
should be considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the
circumstances of aboriginal offenders: s. 718.2(e).

section 742.1
of the
criminal code
permits me to order an
offender to serve a sentence of less than two years’ imprisonment in the
community under the conditions of a cso in certain circumstances. neither offence
in this case is specifically excluded under
ss. 742.1
(b)-(d), so the operative
question is whether i can be satisfied that permitting mr. wood to serve a
sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community and
would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
iii.
analysis
3.1 circumstances
of the offender

mr. wood is 31 years old. he grew up in the
bahamas. his early life was very challenging. his father was murdered. mr.
wood’s mother raised him and his sisters. his neighbourhood was rife with
gang-related violence. mr. wood was bullied and isolated. he graduated high
school and attended but did not complete trade school. he held jobs as a store
clerk and then water delivery person.

at age 23 mr. wood moved to canada and
successfully applied for refugee status. he settled in sudbury. he describes
experiencing significant racism here. he had trouble finding stable housing and
employment. he says he then got mixed up with the wrong crowd and became
addicted to drugs.

mr. wood has a criminal record. it is not
lengthy, but it is both serious and related to his current offences. in 2022,
in sudbury, he was convicted of the following:
•
careless use of a firearm, weapon, prohibited
device or ammunition (s. 86(1));
•
two counts of failing to comply with a release
order (s. 145(5)(a);
•
possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm
with ammunition (
s. 95(1);
•
two counts of assault (s. 266);
•
failing to comply with an undertaking (s.
145(4)(a)); and
•
breaking and entering (s. 348(1)(b)).

globally, mr. wood was credited for 690 days of
presentence custody and was sentenced to a further 405 days’ imprisonment, an
effective three-year sentence. he was placed on probation for two years to follow
and was prohibited from possessing firearms for ten years pursuant to
s. 109
of
the
criminal code.

mr. wood was bound by both the probation order
and the
s. 109
order at the time of these new offences.

mr. wood has taken positive steps during his
time in custody, completing nearly 40 educational programmes. he addressed the
court during the sentencing hearing, and apologized for his acts, emphasizing
his irresponsibility, selfishness, and shame. it was clear that mr. wood spent
considerable time and effort reflecting on this matter, and i thank him for
sharing his own insights.
3.2 appellate
guidance with respect to
s. 95(1)
offences

the parties focused their submissions on the
firearm count. both the crown and the defence consider it to be to more serious
offence. without discounting to severity of drug trafficking, i agree.

with respect to firearm possession of this
nature, the court of appeal for ontario has provided considerable sentencing guidance.

in
r. v. smickle,
2014 onca 49, at para.
19, the court emphasized that “most s. 95 offences will attract a penitentiary
term even for first offenders” and noted that even atypical s. 95 offences on
the less serious end will generally demand sentences at or very near the
maximum reformatory sentence.

in
r. v. nur,
2013 onca 677, the court
struck down as unconstitutional the then-minimum sentence of three years’
custody (which determination was later upheld by the supreme court of canada;
see
2015 scc 15
) but observed as follows at para. 206:
individuals who have loaded restricted or
prohibited firearms that they have no business possessing anywhere or at any
time, and who are engaged in criminal conduct or conduct that poses a danger to
others should continue to receive exemplary sentences that will emphasize
deterrence and denunciation. thus, as outlined earlier, and regardless of the
three-year minimum penalty, this appellant, despite the mitigating factors,
could well have received a sentence of three years.

in
r. v. marshall,
2015 onca 692, the
court of appeal, now post-
nur, upheld a 3.5-year sentence for a youthful
23-year-old first time offender who was in possession of a prohibited loaded
handgun in conjunction with cocaine trafficking activity. the court held as
follows at para. 49:
there can be no doubt that this type of
crime, in the circumstances described above, is an offence at the “true crime”
end of the s. 95 spectrum of offences described by this court in
nur.
denunciation, deterrence and protection of the public are unquestionably the
paramount principles of sentencing implicated for such a crime.

these principles have been re-emphasized more
recently in
r. v. mohiadin,
2021 onca 122, resulting in a three-year
sentence for a youthful first offender.

in parallel, the ontario court of appeal has offered
guidance with respect to the relevance and impact of systemic anti-black racism
in sentencing. in
r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680, the court emphasized the
profound and insidious impact that overt and systemic anti-black racism has
within our society and justice system and summarized its conclusions at para.
13:
• the trial judge’s task in sentencing is to impose a
just sentence tailored to the individual offender and the specific offence in
accordance with the principles and objectives laid out in part xxiii of
the
criminal code;
•
social context evidence relating to the offender’s life
experiences may be used where relevant to mitigate the offender’s degree of
responsibility for the offence and/or to assist in the blending of the
principles and objectives of sentencing to achieve a sentence which best serves
the purposes of sentencing as described in
s. 718;
•
the gravity or seriousness of an offence is determined by
its normative wrongfulness and the harm posed or caused by that conduct in the
circumstances in which the conduct occurred. accordingly, unlike when assessing
the offender’s degree of personal responsibility, an offender’s experience with
anti-black racism does not impact on the seriousness or gravity of the offence;
•
courts may acquire relevant social context evidence through
the proper application of judicial notice or as social context evidence
describing the existence, causes and impact of anti-black racism in canadian
society, and the specific effect of anti-black racism on the offender;
•
consistent with the rules of admissibility, a generous
gateway for the admission of objective and balanced social context evidence
should be provided;
•
the
gladue
methodology does not apply to
black offenders. however, that jurisprudence can, in some respects, inform the
approach to be taken when assessing the impact of anti-black racism on sentencing.

the court also cautioned as follows at para. 97:
there must, however, be some connection
between the overt and systemic racism identified in the community and the
circumstances or events that are said to explain or mitigate the criminal
conduct in issue. racism may have impacted on the offender in a way that bears
on the offender’s moral culpability for the crime, or it may be relevant in
some other way to a determination of the appropriate sentence. absent some
connection, mitigation of sentence based simply on the existence of overt or
institutional racism in the community becomes a discount based on the
offender’s colour. everyone agrees there can be no such discount:

in a second decision of the same name, but
involving a different offender,
r. v. morris,
2023 onca 816, the court
of appeal examined both the impact of the first
morris
decision and had
occasion to review the sentencing principles applicable to s. 95 offenders, and
in particular repeat ones. the court reduced a sentence of 6 years and 9 months
by one year to account for the effects of anti-black racism on the offender. like
mr. wood, the offender had two years earlier been handed a penitentiary
sentence (though of 2.5 years) for possession of a loaded prohibited or
restricted firearm.

in a concurring opinion in
r. v. morris,
2023 onca 816, at para.
87, roberts j.a. observed that “[f]or s. 95 recidivists
who have breached a
s. 109
prohibition order, the caselaw supports a
penitentiary sentence in the range of four to nine years of imprisonment.” this
is supported by reference to
r. v. graham,
2018 onsc 6817, at paras.
39-42, aff’d
2020 onca 692;
r. v. khalid,
2022 onca 501, at para.
33;
r.
v. charles,
2013 onca 681, aff’d
2015 scc 15;
r. v. slack,
2015 onca
94, at paras.
23-24 and 27-29.
3.3 mitigating
and aggravating factors

i identify the following aggravating factors in
this case:
•
mr. wood’s recent and related criminal record;
•
that the offences were committed while mr. wood
was on probation, and while mr. wood was bound by a
s. 109
prohibition order;
•
that the firearm offence was committed in
conjunction with the possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking; and
•
the presence of additional prohibited firearm
accessories, and significant ammunition.

mitigating factors in this case include:
•
mr. wood’s plea of guilt;
•
mr. wood’s expression of remorse, which i accept
as considered and sincere;
•
mr. wood’s prospects of rehabilitation. he is
still a young man at 31 years of age, and has demonstrated a capacity to work
to better himself;
•
mr. wood’s difficult personal circumstances,
which include his troubled youth, and his experience as a refugee struggling to
stabilize in northern ontario, including his exposure to substance abuse and to
anti-black racism.

both the crown and defence addressed the issue
of whether the handgun found was “used” by mr. wood. “use” can be an equivocal
term. i agree there is no evidence that mr. wood brandished or discharged the
firearm. there is an absence, then, of what would be a significant aggravating
feature, if not a further delict to attract its own sentencing. but the
possession of a handgun in conjunction with drugs to be trafficked is not coincidental.
and simply because a handgun was not wielded or discharged does not mean it was
not “used” to further the criminal enterprise. the handgun, the other devices,
and the significant volume of ammunition was there to deter and to be wielded
if needed, either to threaten and intimidate, or worse.
3.4 application

when i consider the circumstances of the offence
and offender, including the mitigating and aggravating factors, i find the
defence position would be insufficient to balance and satisfy the principles of
sentencing. an effective sentence of 590 days (or approximately 19.5 months), even
with an additional cso of up to 24 months, would not sufficiently meet the
demands of deterrence, both specific and general, and denunciation. indeed, it
is difficult to fathom how a sentence that is less severe than that previously
imposed could be seen to sufficiently deter mr. wood from such future conduct.

nor would the sentence proposed by the defence respect
parity between mr. wood and like offenders with his similar and aggravating
criminal record, as demonstrated by the range examined in
r. v. morris,
2023
onca 816, for recidivists.

i am also concerned, given the exceptional
dangerousness of the firearm and other prohibited devices found, and mr. wood’s
demonstrated history of non-compliance with court orders, that the defence
proposal would not adequately separate mr. wood from society, and would pose a
risk to public safety.

i am mindful of the caselaw provided by the
defendant indicating the imposition of csos for s. 95 offences, specifically
r.
v. izaz,
2024 onsc 6460,
r. v. mclarty-mathieu,
2022 oncj 498,
r.
v. mesinele,
2023 oncj 28, and
r. v. orin moses,
2022 onsc 332. i
agree, however, with the crown submission that these cases are demonstrative of
exceptional circumstances considered in the context of youthful first-time
offenders. they are of limited assistance in sentencing a repeat offender who
has already served the equivalent of a three-year penitentiary sentence for
similar conduct.

i do accept that mr. wood has experienced significant racism. i
take that factor into account as mitigating, to an extent, his own moral
blameworthiness. his struggles to achieve stability in terms of housing,
employment, and his vulnerability to addiction were likely impacted by
anti-black racism. the weight of this factor is attenuated, however, by the
paucity of evidence i have establishing a clearer nexus to the specific
offences committed.

when i turn my mind to the crown position of
four years, i find that it is at the extreme low end of the range suitable to
the circumstances. the inescapable reality for mr. wood is that in 2022 he was
sentenced for an array of serious offences which included the possession of a
prohibited or restricted firearm either loaded or with ammunition readily
accessible. he was given an effective three-year sentence. he was placed on
probation and prohibited from possessing firearms. based on his criminal record
he would have finished serving the jail portion of that sentence in the spring
of 2023. and, by year’s end, he was in possession of another handgun, loaded
with a prohibited detachable box, and another prohibited detachable box with—it
bears emphasizing—a capacity to house 31 rounds. these items were possessed in
conjunction with a drug trafficking scheme.

in those circumstances, an increase from the
previous sentence of three years to only four years approaches, in my view, the
absolute minimum appropriate sentence, even accounting for the impact of the
mitigating features in this case, including mr. wood’s personal circumstances. the
crown position more than accounts for the principle of restraint, including the
need to consider the principle of restraint in conjunction with the well-established
over-incarceration of black offenders: see
r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680,
at para.
123;
r. v. morris,
2023 onca 816, at para.
44. the criminal
record, extant orders, presence of drugs for trafficking, and the presence of dangerous
prohibited accessories could well justify a sentence closer to the upper end of
the recidivist range.

on that basis, should the sentence be more than
four years?

this was not a joint submission. i am not,
therefore, bound by the principles and procedures set out by the supreme court
of canada in
r. v. anthony-cook,
2016 scc 43. i have the discretion to
depart upwards from the crown position, though i would be obligated to invite
submissions on that issue in advance:
r. v. blake-samuels,
2021 onca 77.
i have not done so. i recognize this was a situation in which the crown agreed
to cap its sentencing position in consideration of a guilty plea. i recognize
as well that there appear to have been triable issues in this case, including
but not necessarily limited to the legal components of possession: knowledge
and control. i consider that the crown is in a unique position to assess its
case, mindful of prosecutorial and court resources, and to craft appropriate
resolution positions. though this is a case where i might have imposed a
sentence further along the range discussed
morris
(2023), the crown’s
position falls just within that range, and i will not disturb their assessment.
iv.
conclusion

on the s. 95(1) firearm count, mr. wood will be
sentenced to an effective four years’ imprisonment. he will be credited for presentence
custody of 390 days on a 1.5:1 basis for 585 days. her will be sentenced
therefore to 875 days’ custody going forward.

on the
cdsa
count,
he will be sentenced to 548 days, reflective of approximately 18 months, to be
served concurrently.

the parties agree that mr. wood should be
prohibited from possessing firearms for life pursuant to
s. 109
of the
criminal
code, that he should be ordered to provide a sample of his dna for the
national dna databank, and that there should be a forfeiture order for all
items seized but for mr. wood’s mobile phone. those orders shall issue.

i will waive the victim fine surcharges given
mr. wood’s pretrial incarceration and prison sentence remaining.

the remaining counts will be marked withdrawn at
the crown’s request.

i thank counsel for their organization and focused
submissions in this matter.
released: january 14, 2025
signed:
justice g. jenner