source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj366/2025oncj366.html

ontario youth court of justice
warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the
following notice be attached to the file:
this is a case under
the
youth criminal justice act
and is subject to subsections
110(1) and 111(1) and section 129 of the act. these provisions read as
follows:
110. identity of offender not to be published —
(1) subject to this section, no person
shall publish the name of a young person, or any other information related to a
young person, if it would identify the young person as a young person dealt
with under this act....
111. identity of victim or witness not to be
published —
(1) 
subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a child or young
person, or any other information related to a child or a young person, if it
would identify the child or young person as having been a victim of, or as
having appeared as a witness in connection with, an offence committed or
alleged to have been committed by a young person....
129. no subsequent disclosure —
no person who is given access to a record
or to whom information is disclosed under this act shall disclose that
information to any person unless the disclosure is authorized under this act.
subsection 138(1) of the
youth criminal justice act,
which
deals with the consequences of failure to comply with these provisions, states
as follows:
138. offences —
every person who contravenes subsection 110(1)
(identity of offender not to be published), 111(1) (identity of victim or
witness not to be published)... or section 129 (no
subsequent disclosure)...
(
a
) is guilty of
an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years; or
(
b
) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
citation:
r. v. x.c.,
2025 oncj 366
date: 
2025 07 07
court
file no.: toronto #4810 998 25 y4810762-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
x.c. (a young person)
application
for the appointment of counsel
youth
criminal justice act
section 25(4)
before
justice brock jones
heard
and granted on july 3, 2025
written
reasons released on july 7, 2025
m. di sabatino……………………………………….………………counsel for the crown
m. zaffina / i. l. dallas………………………….………………………….counsel for x.c.
jones j.:
i.
introduction

most young people involved with the youth criminal justice system come
from difficult backgrounds. they are socio-economically deprived and,
regrettably, often lack a stable home environment. many have current or past
ties to the child welfare system. nearly all are underprivileged. other
inequities appear tragically inescapable. racialized and indigenous youth
“disproportionately interact with the criminal justice system for a complex
variety of reasons, which include both direct and systemic racial
discrimination within the system”: see
r. v. c.p.,
2021 scc 19, at para.
88.

in recognition of their vulnerable status and the financial constraints
faced by provincial legal aid programs, parliament included a provision in the
youth
criminal justice act
(“ycja”) that grants a youth justice court jurisdiction
to order state-funded counsel for a young person when certain criteria are met.
ycja
section 25(4) orders serve as the final safeguard of fairness and
equal protection for disadvantaged young persons who are charged with a
criminal offence.

yet surprisingly, at what stage of the proceedings a young person can
lawfully apply for a
ycja
section 25(4) order remains somewhat uncertain.
this has led to a debate among youth justice courts, resulting in inconsistent procedures
and outcomes. the lack of a uniform approach appears to stem from different
interpretations of the statutory requirement that a young person must be “at
trial” before a youth justice court has jurisdiction to grant the order. in my
view, several reported decisions have unnecessarily restricted the scope of
this critical remedial provision.

on july 3, 2025, x.c. applied for an order appointing mr. zaffina and mr.
i. loui dallas as his counsel under
ycja
section 25(4). he was charged
with one count of breaking and entering. he had been denied a legal aid
certificate. the application was brought in open court, as is standard practice
at present. no one questioned my jurisdiction to make the order, and the crown
did not oppose it being granted. x.c., like any accused person, is presumed
innocent, and through mr. zaffina indicated his intention to have a trial.

at this early juncture, x.c. had not yet been arraigned. his case remained
in the case management phase, where counsel generally obtains and reviews
disclosure materials provided by the crown. his case was one of eleven
ycja
section
25(4) applications i heard that day. in each case, had i denied the
application, the young person would have been left without a lawyer.

in these reasons, i explain why i made the order. i also aim to clarify
why
ycja
section 25(4) should be given a broad, generous interpretation,
consistent with both parliament’s intent and the values underlying the canadian
youth criminal justice system. simply put: a young person is considered “at
trial” from the moment they decide to contest the allegations against them, in
accordance with their constitutionally guaranteed presumption of innocence.

furthermore, i offer some guidance as to how these applications should
be processed in the future. there is no requirement that an uncontested
application for a
ycja
section 25(4) order be heard in open court. that demands
the attendance of the young person and their intended counsel, as well as the
use of limited court time, which is both unnecessary and costly. that time is
precious and should be reserved for cases that require detailed attention and
consideration. these applications can be handled far more efficiently by filing
them electronically with the youth justice court, along with notice to the
crown, and appropriate supporting documentation. where the crown does not
oppose the application, it can be decided without a formal hearing, thereby
obviating the need for an additional, unnecessary court appearance by the young
person.
ii.
ycja
section 25

section 25 of the
ycja
creates a
statutory right to counsel for young persons. it has no analogue in the
criminal
code. to determine what parliament meant by requiring that a young person
be “at trial” for an order appointing publicly funded counsel under section
25(4), various parts of section 25 of the
ycja
must be carefully
considered. i reproduce the relevant portions below, with my emphasis added.
25 (1) a young person
has
the right to retain and instruct counsel without delay, and to
exercise that right personally,
at any stage of proceedings against the
young person
and before and during any consideration of whether, instead of
starting or continuing judicial proceedings against the young person under this
act, to use an extrajudicial sanction to deal with the young person.
(2) every young person who
is arrested or detained shall, on being arrested or detained, be advised
without delay by the arresting officer of the right to retain and instruct
counsel, and be given an opportunity to obtain counsel.
(3) when a young person is
not represented by counsel
(a) at a hearing at which
it will be determined whether to release the young person or detain the young
person in custody,
(a.1) at a hearing held
in relation to an order referred to in subsection 14(2) or 20(2),
(b) at a
hearing held under section 71 (hearing — adult sentences),
(c)
at
trial,
(d) at any proceedings
held under subsection 98(3) (continuation of custody), 103(1) (review by youth
justice court), 104(1) (continuation of custody), 105(1) (conditional
supervision) or 109(1) (review of decision),
(e) at a review of a
youth sentence held before a youth justice court under this act, or
(f) at a
review of the level of custody under section 87,
the justice or youth justice
court before which the hearing, trial or review is held, or the review board
before which the review is held,
shall advise the young person of the right
to retain and instruct counsel and shall give the young person a reasonable
opportunity to obtain counsel.
(4) when a young person
at
trial
or at a hearing or review referred to in subsection (3)
wishes to
obtain counsel but is unable to do so,
the youth justice court before which
the hearing, trial or review is held or the review board before which the
review is held
(a) shall, if there is a
legal aid program or an assistance program available in the province where the
hearing, trial or review is held, refer the young person to that program for
the appointment of counsel; or
(b)
if no legal aid
program or assistance program is available or the young person is unable to
obtain counsel through the program, may, and on the request of the young person
shall, direct that the young person be represented by counsel.
(5) when a direction is
made under paragraph (4)(b) in respect of a young person, the attorney general
shall appoint counsel, or cause counsel to be appointed, to represent the young
person.
(6) when a young person, at a
hearing referred to in paragraph (3)(a) or (a.1) that is held before a justice
who is not a youth justice court judge, wishes to obtain counsel but is unable
to do so, the justice shall
(a) if there is a legal aid
program or an assistance program available in the province where the hearing is
held,
(i) refer the young person to
that program for the appointment of counsel, or
(ii) refer the matter to a
youth justice court to be dealt with in accordance with paragraph (4)(a) or
(b); or
(b) if no legal aid program or
assistance program is available or the young person is unable to obtain counsel
through the program, refer the matter without delay to a youth justice court to
be dealt with in accordance with paragraph (4)(b).
(7) when a young person is not
represented by counsel at trial or at a hearing or review referred to in
subsection (3), the justice before whom or the youth justice court or review
board before which the proceedings are held may, on the request of the young
person, allow the young person to be assisted by an adult whom the justice,
court or review board considers to be suitable.
(8) if it appears to a youth
justice court judge or a justice that the interests of a young person and the
interests of a parent are in conflict or that it would be in the best interests
of the young person to be represented by his or her own counsel, the judge or
justice shall ensure that the young person is represented by counsel
independent of the parent.
(9) a statement that a young
person has the right to be represented by counsel shall be included in
(a) any
appearance notice or summons issued to the young person;
(b) any
warrant to arrest the young person;
(c) any
undertaking entered into before a peace officer by the young person;
(d) [repealed,
2019, c. 25, s. 364]
(e) any notice given to the
young person in relation to any proceedings held under subsection 98(3)
(continuation of custody), 103(1) (review by youth justice court), 104(1)
(continuation of custody), 105(1) (conditional supervision) or 109(1) (review
of decision); or
(f) any notice
of a review of a youth sentence given to the young person.
iii.
positions of the parties

when applying for the order, mr. zaffina highlighted several factors for
my consideration. firstly, his client is presumed innocent and plans to take
the case to trial. secondly, he argued that, as a young person, x.c. cannot be
expected to navigate the complex modern criminal justice system alone. the
disclosure materials in the case are extensive and include multiple videos, one
of which features lengthy surveillance footage. the frequent court appearances
during the case management phase have caused difficulties for his client, who
has been unrepresented thus far. once full disclosure is provided and the case
is ready to move to the next stage in the fall, his client should be able to
focus on school while he handles the trial preparations.

mr.
zaffina noted as well that his client is a marginalized young person, without
the level of financial support necessary to afford a lawyer. having been denied
a legal aid certificate, a
ycja
section 25(4) order was the only means
by which he could obtain counsel and properly defend himself.

ms.
di sabatino consented to the order. she did not dispute any of the submissions
made by mr. zaffina.
iv.
the process of applying for a legal aid certificate

after
being charged with an offence, a young person may speak with duty counsel at or
before their first court appearance. they are screened to determine if they
qualify for duty counsel services or a legal aid certificate, which they can
use to retain a private lawyer. however, this typically requires the crown’s
office to provide the young person with a screening form and at least an
initial disclosure package. this process can take weeks or even months. in
toronto, it is common for at least three months to pass before basic disclosure
is provided to an accused person. i have often seen it take six months or more
to happen.

legal
aid ontario (lao) uses its criteria to decide which young people qualify for
coverage. these include an evaluation of the young person’s family’s financial
situation and the nature of the charges, as well as the likely penalty if they
are found guilty. if they do not qualify, they will not be able to access complete
duty counsel services or receive a certificate to hire a lawyer. the financial
criteria may change, but currently, if the family income exceeds $45,440, they
will be rejected.


a
young person may appeal that decision internally within lao, which often takes
several more weeks or even months to process. during this period, the young
person is usually required to make multiple court appearances. it is not
uncommon for our youth case management courts in toronto to sit until well
after 5 p.m., forcing unrepresented youth to miss entire days of school for
what have become routine court appearances while this process unfolds.
concerned parents who wish to attend with their child will need to take time
off work, resulting in lost income. understandably, this time-consuming process
can be frustrating.
v.
the limited scope of duty counsel services

young
persons may choose to forgo hiring a lawyer and instead rely on the assistance
of duty counsel if they qualify for those services. when the crown offers
extra-judicial sanctions (“ejs”) to resolve a case, this may be adequate to
address the young person’s needs. ejs constitute community-based measures that
hold young people accountable for their actions through a process that diverts
them from the formal court system. a young person willing to accept
responsibility for their actions and complete the required programming may
conclude they have received sufficient legal advice and assistance from duty
counsel. after completing ejs, the charges against them are withdrawn. however,
the youth records associated with ejs are retained for two years, as per
ycja
section 119(2)(a).

while
duty counsel may help young persons make some initial decisions about their
charges and how to proceed, they cannot replace a fully retained lawyer. duty
counsel cannot review the entire crown’s disclosure package in every case,
which is often a monumental task. this review is crucial for thoroughly
assessing the strength of the crown’s case and any potential defences. at most,
duty counsel can review a synopsis provided by the crown and some initial
disclosure material, such as officers’ notes. however, that will typically only
be the tip of the iceberg. criminal cases in toronto now involve enormous
amounts of material, including multiple videos in nearly every case. indeed,
the “exponential increase in demand for video disclosure” has contributed to
most
jordan
applications over the past few years: see, for example,
r.
v. kulasingam,
2025 onsc 3619, at para.
41.

importantly,
duty counsel cannot represent a young person at trial, as this exceeds their
mandate. for any young person who wishes to contest their charges, retaining a
lawyer is the only available option. the law society of ontario does not permit
licensed paralegals to represent young persons, recognizing their unique need
for representation by a lawyer: see also
r. v. k.p.d.,
2015 oncj 88.

i
want to acknowledge the commendable efforts of the duty counsel in this
courthouse to assist every young person who relies on their services. their
valiant efforts deserve to be praised. they care and want to help the youth who
come before the courts. duty counsel routinely go above and beyond what is generally
expected of their office to fulfill their obligations to the youth justice
court. however, there is only so much they can do.
vi.
the importance of counsel for young persons

any
self-represented accused person must familiarize themselves with the substantive
law applicable to their case and also comply with complex procedural and
evidentiary rules. prior courts and legal commentators have written much about
the enormous difficulties this presents, some of which are glaring and obvious.
i need not repeat those remarks here.

but i emphasize that for young persons, these concerns are greatly amplified. in
r.
v. d.b.,
2008 scc 25, justice abella of the supreme court quoted professor
bala of queen’s university, who explained that "…adolescents generally
lack the judgment and knowledge to participate effectively in the court process
and may be more vulnerable than adults”: see para. 64.

additionally,
distinct legal issues will be present in nearly every youth case, beyond those
which arise regularly in adult criminal cases. like adults, young people will
need to understand which defences might be available at trial and how to
challenge the admissibility of the crown’s evidence. in youth court, this
requires fluency in the
ycja
’s unique statutory provisions, which have
no equivalent in the
criminal code.
for example,
ycja
section 146
imposes additional burdens on the crown to establish the admissibility of a
statement made by a young person to a person in authority. a young person will
also need to know how to challenge the credibility of the crown’s witnesses,
some of whom will be youth or young adults who have their own histories with
the youth criminal justice system. to rely upon that information lawfully
requires an understanding of the
ycja
’s privacy and records
provisions—something that can be quite daunting, even for experienced lawyers.
finally, applying the
charter of rights and freedoms
in a youth criminal
trial may necessitate different legal strategies when a young person’s rights
are violated compared to those of an adult: see, for example,
r. v. k.j.m.,
2019 scc 55.

if
a young person is offered a plea deal, they must understand not only the
immediate implications of the sentence proposed by the crown’s office but also
the long-term consequences of a youth finding of guilt. this requires both being
able to comprehend the record retention periods outlined in part vi of the
ycja
and having an understanding of how the collateral effects of a youth record
may impact the young person’s ability to access social services, educational
opportunities, or housing.

these
are just a few examples of the significant obstacles that any self-represented
young person would encounter. they emphasize the crucial importance of ensuring
that a lawyer represents every young person facing a criminal charge. indeed, ensuring
that young persons have access to counsel when they become entangled in the
criminal justice system has been described as nothing less than the “essence of
justice”: see
kent v. united states, 383 u.s. 541 (1966), at 561.

the
vast majority of young persons will be unable to obtain financial assistance
from a parent or guardian to retain a lawyer. even for those young persons
whose caregivers are willing to support them, hiring a private lawyer
represents a substantial financial burden. the option of doing so is often more
illusory than real.

to
that end, i observe that the ontario court of appeal has held that
sections 7
and
11(d)
of the
charter
may require the appointment of counsel for an
adult accused person who cannot obtain representation by a provincial legal aid
plan, if that appointment is necessary for a fair trial: see
r. v. rowbotham,
1988 canlii 147 (on ca), o.j. no. 271, 41 c.c.c. (3d) 1 (c.a.), at p. 66 c.c.c.;
r. v. p.c.,
2014
onca 577, at para.
20. that concern is profoundly greater for a young person
than for an adult, and the constitutional values that animate these decisions must
also, in my view, breathe life into
ycja
section 25(4).
vii.
the existing jurisprudence interpreting
ycja
section 25(4)

if
a young person finds that duty counsel services do not meet their needs and is
denied a legal aid certificate, they can apply for a
ycja
section 25(4)
order. only a youth justice court judge has the authority to grant the order.

in
r. v. l. s.,
2006 canlii 40609
(ont. c.a.), a 13-year-old young person
charged with uttering a threat applied for a
ycja
section 25(4) order.
the youth justice court denied him the order, referring him instead to duty
counsel. the young person was offered ejs, and the court viewed the
consequences for the young person as “minimal.”

the
ontario court of appeal held that a young person can only apply for publicly
funded counsel when they are at a “certain stage of proceedings and unable to
obtain legal counsel through legal aid,” as stated in para. 9. the court noted
that although a young person can apply for such an order while “at trial,” l.s.
had not yet decided if they were going to trial when the application was first
submitted to the youth justice court judge. based on this timeline, the youth
court judge’s decision to refuse appointment of counsel was considered appropriate:
see paras. 9-11.

l.s.
stands for a straightforward proposition – that a young person should first
decide whether they wish to dispute their charges at a trial before submitting
an application pursuant to
ycja
section 25(4) to a youth justice court
judge.

however, the case does not otherwise affect the jurisdiction of a youth justice
court to make an order appointing state-funded counsel under section 25(4). nor
did it directly address when a young person was “at trial” for the purposes of
this subsection, beyond the very narrow factual situation presented on the
appeal.

subsequent
decisions have relied on
l.s. and debated when a young person is “at
trial” for this section. in
r. v. j.n.,
 o.j. no. 920, justice
jennis stated that a young person cannot be considered “at trial” simply
because they express a desire to have one. this would be “impractical”: see
para. 13. in
r. v. r.k.s.,
 o.j. no. 1255, justice kukurin noted
that the phrase "at trial" indicates a later stage of a criminal
case, although identifying the exact start of that stage is difficult: see
para. 24. the court in that case rejected an application for a 25(4) order
during the case management phase.

in
r. v. j.b.,
2019 oncj 997, justice bentley reviewed these authorities
and concluded that a young person is not “at trial” simply because the crown
denies an offer of ejs. such an interpretation was “not logical” and would
make the provision “meaningless”: see para. 19. instead, it is only when the
young person is arraigned and enters a plea that they can be considered “at
trial,” and an order appointing counsel can be lawfully issued.

i
respectfully disagree with these previous decisions. i believe they have
mistakenly imposed undue limitations on the authority of youth justice courts
to issue
ycja
section 25(4) orders. they did not engage with the entire
statutory scheme of the
ycja
or canada’s international law commitments. additionally,
there have been significant developments in the supreme court’s jurisprudence
since these decisions were rendered. as a result, i do not find that they
should be followed on the principle of horizontal
stare decisis
as they
were decided
per incuriam:
see
r. v. sullivan,
2022 scc 19, at
paras.
73-9.
viii.
when is a young person “at trial”?

when
deciding what is meant by the young person being “at trial” for
ycja
s.
25(4), certain principles of statutory interpretation must be taken into
account. the meaning of a statutory provision is determined by reference to its
text, context, and purpose:
piekut v. canada,
2025 scc 13, at para.
43. in
r. v. kim,
2025 onca 478, the ontario court of appeal explained the
correct approach at paras. 32-33:
statutory
interpretation is centred on the intent of the legislature at the time of
enactment and courts are bound to give effect to that intent”:
telus
communications inc. v. federation of canadian municipalities,
2025 scc 15,
36 admin. l.r. (7th) 173, at para.
32. thus, the text of the provision under
consideration is always the starting point and the anchor of the analysis:
“just as the text must be considered in light of the context and object, the
object of a statute and that of a provision must be considered with close
attention always being paid to the text of the statute, which remains the
anchor of the interpretive exercise”:
commission des droits de la
personne et des droits de la jeunesse v. directrice de la protection de la
jeunesse du ciss a,
2024 scc 43, at para.
24. furthermore, statutory
interpretation requires attending not only to the ends the legislature sought
to achieve, but the specific means the legislature chose to achieve that
purpose: “the text specifies, among other things, the means chosen by the
legislature to achieve its purposes. these means ‘may disclose qualifications
to primary purposes, and this is why the text remains the focus of
interpretation’”:
québec (commission des droits de la personne et des
droits de la jeunesse),
at para. 24, citing m. mancini, “the
purpose error in the modern approach to statutory interpretation” (2022)
59
alta. l. rev.
919, at p. 927.
sometimes the
meaning of a word or a sentence is ambiguous, potentially leaving the reader
uncertain as to which of two or more meanings was intended. most semantic
ambiguity is easily resolved by reference to the immediate context in which the
words are used. where ambiguity appears irresolvable, extraneous evidence of
intent can be permitted. unlike other forms of textual indeterminacy – such as
vagueness – irresolvable ambiguity in legislative drafting is never intentional
and is extremely rare:
pong marketing and promotions inc. v. ontario
media development corporation,
2018 onca 555, 142 o.r. (3d) 542, at paras.
44-47.

as
a starting point, the words “at trial” contained in the text of
ycja
section
25 could be construed to mean literally the commencement of the young person’s
trial following their arraignment. but this cannot be correct. being “at trial”
cannot mean that a young person’s chosen lawyer can only be appointed via
ycja
section 25(4) on the morning of trial, following the arraignment. that
would mean counsel couldn't obtain disclosure, provide advice, or receive
instructions prior to the arraignment if such a strict interpretation of
"at trial" were to govern. the order appointing counsel must
therefore be available at a point prior to the formal commencement of the
trial. the question, therefore, is when? by considering the context of some of
the remaining provisions of section 25 and analyzing the purpose of the
ycja,
the answer can be found.

ycja
section 25(1) states that a young person has the “right to retain and instruct
counsel without delay, and to exercise that right personally,
at any stage
of proceedings
against the young person…”

this section thus establishes a broad statutory right to counsel that applies
throughout an entire case. it helps inform what is meant by the term “at trial”
in the subsequent sections 25(3) and 25(4).

parliament
included several different types of hearings for young persons in
ycja
section
25(3), which are referenced in 25(4) as being eligible for the appointment of
counsel. these are intended to be considered as entirely separate from a trial.
they include, for example, bail hearings and hearings for various types of
peace bonds. they also include applications for an adult sentence by the crown
and sentence review hearings. noticeably absent is that parliament did not
include a sentencing hearing (absent an adult sentence application by the
crown) as a distinct type of hearing under 25(3). that is because a standard
sentencing hearing was meant to be encapsulated in the definition of being “at
trial.” that provides contextual support that the definition of being “at
trial” was meant to be more expansive than what the words by themselves might
appear to mean at first instance if interpreted narrowly. a young person facing
jeopardy with respect to their liberty interests, including possibly a
custodial disposition, following a sentencing hearing, must be entitled to
counsel even if they are impecunious.

further
assistance is found in the original intention and purposes of the
ycja,
which are reflected in the preamble and the core principles of the act. the
preamble states that
young persons have “
special
guarantees of
their rights and freedoms.”

these are not merely empty words. a preamble provides some social context to
the policy concerns that parliament has chosen to address with the legislation
in question. as noted by the ontario court of appeal in
r. v. clarke,
2013
onca 7, “the words of a statute take their colour and their meaning from their
context and the act’s purpose”: see para. 21. furthermore, section 13 of the
interpretation
act
states that “the preamble of an enactment shall be read as part of the
enactment intended to assist in explaining its purport and object.”

ycja
section 3(1)(b)(iii) forms part of its declaration of principle. it states that
the youth criminal justice system must emphasize the existence of “
enhanced
procedural protections
to ensure that young persons are treated fairly, and
that their rights… are protected”. section 3(2) states that the act “shall be
liberally
construed
to ensure that young persons are dealt with in accordance with
the principles set out in subsection (1).” in
r. v. t.j.m,
2021 scc 6,
the supreme court of canada held that parliament’s intention when enacting the
ycja
was “to provide young persons with enhanced procedural protections
throughout
the criminal process
in recognition of their age, and to create less formal
and more expeditious proceedings…”: see para. 26.


parliament’s
intention is also reflected in the
ycja
’s explicit reference to canada’s
international law commitments. the preamble to the act refers to the
united
nations convention on the rights of the child, can. t.s. 1992 no. 3. in
society
of composers, authors and music publishers of canada v. entertainment software
association,
2022 scc 30, the supreme court held that “[a] treaty should be
considered when interpreting statutes that purport to implement the treaty, in
whole or in part. the treaty is relevant at the context stage of the statutory
interpretation exercise”: see para. 44. the values and principles of the uncrc
“recognize the importance of being attentive to the rights and best interest of
children when decisions are made that relate to and affect their future”: see
baker
v. canada (minister of citizenship and immigration),
1999 canlii 699, at
para.
70. the uncrc has been relied upon by the supreme court of canada in
several decisions interpreting the provisions of the
ycja: see
r. v.
r.c.,
2005 scc 61, at para.
41;
r. v. c.d. and c.d.k.,
2005 scc 78,
at para.
35;
d.b.,
supra, at para.
60.

section
40(2)(b)(ii) of the uncrc is relevant for determining the scope of
ycja
section 25(4). it states that every child accused of having infringed the penal
law has the guarantee “to have legal or other appropriate assistance in the
preparation
and presentation of his or her defence.
”


the
united nations standard minimum rules for the administration of juvenile
justice (“the beijing rules”)

were adopted by the general assembly on november 29, 1985. the rules have also
been referenced by the supreme court of canada when interpreting provisions of
the
ycja: see
d.b. at para.
85. rule 7.1 requires that member
states ensure that every juvenile accused of a criminal offence has the right
to counsel at “
all stages of proceedings.”


in
my view, these provisions of both the uncrc and the
beijing rules
strongly support a broad interpretation of what it means for a young person to
be “at trial” for the purposes of
ycja
sections 25(3) and (4).
furthermore, the supreme court of canada has consistently adopted an expansive
view of children’s rights in its modern jurisprudence, across all areas of law.
in
d.b.
s. v. s.r.g,
2006 scc 37, bastarache j. held for the majority
that “courts are not to be discouraged from defending the rights of children
when they have the opportunity to do so”: see para. 60. in
michel v. graydon,
2020 scc 24, wagner c.j. and martin j. wrote that children are to be seen as
“full rights bearers” who are “made vulnerable by dependency, age, and need”,
thus deserving “society’s full protection”: see para. 77. in
r. v. jarvis,
2019 scc 10, all judges of the supreme court approved an interpretation of a
criminal
code
provision (the offence of voyeurism) that recognized a broader scope
of privacy rights for children than for similarly situated adults, emphasizing
their unique need for protection: see para. 86.

i
conclude that a key objective of the
ycja
is to ensure that young
persons are represented by counsel, in one form or another, throughout all
stages of the criminal justice process. while duty counsel may effectively
serve that role for many young persons, retaining defence counsel will be
necessary for others. a strict and inflexible approach to interpreting section
25 must be rejected. in
t.j.m, the supreme court noted that certain
provisions of the
ycja
aim to provide a “measure of flexibility” for
young persons that is not always available to adult accused persons: see para.
26. properly interpreting what it means to be “at trial,” based on these prior
authorities, means ensuring the broadest possible application of the values
underlying the act, in line with parliament’s intent: see
ycja
section
3(2).

moreover,
a fundamental principle of statutory interpretation is that interpretations
should avoid absurd results: see
r. v. penunsi,
2019 scc 39, at para.
41. an absurd result "defeats the purpose of a statute or renders some
aspect of it pointless or futile”: see
keatley surveying ltd. v. teranet inc.,
2019 scc 43, at para.
96. refusing to order the appointment of counsel during
the case management phase of the proceedings and before a formal arraignment,
despite the young person’s expressed desire to have a trial in the future,
would undermine parliament’s clear intention to safeguard the fair trial
interests of inherently vulnerable youth: see
a. b. v. bragg communications,
2012 scc 46, at para.
17.

i
note as well that requiring a young person to be arraigned and enter a plea
before being considered "at trial", as held in
j.b., creates
various difficulties. first, once a young person expresses a desire to
challenge the case against them, it is not for a youth justice court to impose
barriers to a trial. it is the constitutional right of any accused person to
put the crown to its proof and to rest on the presumption of innocence:
charter
section 11(d). effectively denying a young person their right to legal
representation once they express that desire may unduly pressure them into
abandoning their right to a trial. they cannot be certain that a future court
will grant the order appointing counsel, leaving them in a state of uncertainty
regarding their ability to be represented by a lawyer. many may reluctantly
choose to plead guilty, against their true wishes, to bring matters to a
conclusion.

another
practical issue arises if a young person is not considered “at trial” during
the case management phase of the proceedings. suppose a young person has chosen
a preferred lawyer who is tentatively prepared to accept an offer of
representation. in that case, that lawyer should not be expected to work on the
young person's behalf for an indefinite period without a guarantee of
compensation. as previously noted, reviewing the disclosure materials alone in
most youth cases will require a considerable amount of time and effort. a narrow
interpretation of
ycja
section 25(4) could discourage lawyers from being
willing to represent vulnerable youth, leading to long-term harm to the justice
system. it would also place any lawyer in a difficult, possibly impossible,
ethical dilemma—having to decide whether they can advise a young person on how
to respond to the arraignment without being properly retained. that step should
only be taken after counsel has had the opportunity to review the disclosure
materials and receive instructions from their client. it is impossible to genuinely
separate the pre-trial phase of a case from the trial phase in this context,
and attempting to do so would draw an artificial and unhelpful boundary in what
is one fluid process.

by
requiring that a young person be “at trial” before a
ycja
section 25(4)
order may be granted, parliament simply intended that the youth justice court
be satisfied that the young person has decided they wish to contest the charges
and will not be accepting any form of resolution that duty counsel could assist
them with.
ix.
a preferable procedure

traditionally,
applications for a
ycja
section 25(4) order have been made in open court
with an oral hearing. these proceedings take time, even if they are
uncontested. potential counsel must attend and wait to be called on busy court
lists. the young person must also be in attendance. in toronto, youth case
management court lists are often quite lengthy, with hundreds of cases
scheduled for the day. currently, after appearing in one of these courts, which
is presided over by a justice of the peace, the young person and counsel must
be adjourned or transferred to a different courtroom, before a youth court
judge, for the application to be heard. it is unfortunate that the young
person, their family, and counsel must go through this complicated process
before the application can be considered on its merits.

in
rare cases, court time may be required to adjudicate these applications
properly. for example, if the crown’s office opposes the application, a youth
court judge will need to hold a hearing. however, in the vast majority of these
applications, where the crown’s office does not oppose the application or takes
no position on whether it should be granted, there is no reason to allocate
valuable court time for a formal hearing.

when
i heard x.c.’s application for a
ycja
section 25(4) order, i was
presiding in 607y. that court does not usually have duty counsel present. while
many of the applications before me involved private criminal defence counsel
assisting their potential clients, a considerable number involved entirely
self-represented young persons. they appeared before me, unsure of what to do
or how to even explain that legal aid had denied them a certificate. some had a
parent with them, while others were alone. each had to advocate before a court
as a teenager. it took hours before all of the applications could be addressed,
given the volume of cases. one lawyer chose to adjourn a scheduled application
to yet another date, as he could not wait around to be heard due to his other
commitments. this was not an efficient use of judicial resources.

the
same day i heard these applications, i also heard several guilty pleas
involving young persons in custody. the time required to complete each of those
cases was significant. the young persons had complicated backgrounds, and
understanding their personal histories and what led them into conflict with the
law was essential to arriving at a just disposition. the parents who attended
were actively involved in their children’s lives and were given the opportunity
to address the court. in one case, a lengthy section 34 assessment was
presented for my consideration. the time required to adjudicate matters of this
nature properly must be given priority.

ycja
section 25(4) applications should be submitted in writing, preferably
electronically, along with appropriate supporting documentation to the youth
justice court.

as officers of the court, counsel assisting the young person with the
application must ensure that all necessary materials are included, such as a
refusal letter from legal aid ontario, and a written statement confirming the
young person has refused ejs (or it was never offered) and will instead go to
trial, but is unable to afford private counsel. if the judge reviewing the
application is satisfied that the criteria in
ycja
section 25(4) are
met, the order can be granted, and a signed endorsement confirming this should
be provided to counsel.

nothing
in the
ycja
mandates a specific procedure for these applications or
requires them to be heard in open court. youth justice courts are free to
develop procedures that they consider appropriate: see
r. v. samaniego,
2022 scc 9, at para.
20. the supreme court of canada has encouraged trial
courts to explore more efficient methods for handling routine or even complex
applications. for instance, in
r. v. j.j.,
2022 scc 28, the supreme
court observed that, regarding the procedure mandated by
sections 278.92
to
278.94
of the
criminal code
for an application to introduce other sexual
history evidence or private records of a complainant, the legislation “does not
specify how the stage 1 inquiry is to be conducted.” the court determined that
the inquiry could proceed “as an application in writing, an oral hearing, or
both, as the judge sees fit”: see para. 27.


there
are clear advantages to youth justice courts encouraging written applications,
which can be decided outside of regular court hours. youth cases, more so than
adult cases, require careful attention from all involved parties. how a case is
resolved could greatly influence a young person’s entire life path. court time
is limited. by managing applications in writing rather than through oral
hearings, more focus can be given to cases that need meaningful judicial
oversight. moreover, every unnecessary court appearance for case management
purposes is costly and may further entrench a young person in the criminal
justice system. it is far better for the young person to spend that time in
school, with their family, or linked to community services. this approach helps
the young person develop positive social connections, which significantly
lowers the chance of re-engagement with the justice system later.

youth
justice courts should not default to traditional procedures that frustrate,
rather than promote, a young person’s rehabilitation. we must be innovative.
indeed, in
jordan,
the supreme court noted that its concerns about the
“culture of complacency towards delay” that had emerged in the criminal justice
system stemmed, in part, from the long-standing acceptance of unnecessary
procedures and inefficient practices: see paras. 40-41.

to
that end, youth justice courts must also be mindful of the supreme court’s
admonition in
k.j.m.
that it remains the responsibility of all justice
system participants to ensure that youth criminal cases “proceed
expeditiously”, recognizing the “enhanced need for timeliness in youth matters:
see paras. 52 and 149.
ycja
section 3(1)(b)(v) explicitly states that
the youth criminal justice system must emphasize “the promptness and speed with
which persons responsible for enforcing this act must act, given young persons’
perception of time”. the sooner young persons can retain a lawyer, the sooner
their cases will conclude, to the benefit of everyone involved in the case.
x.
conclusion

parliament
chose to provide young persons with “enhanced procedural protections” and “special
guarantees of their rights and freedoms.” section 25 of the
ycja
reflects a fundamental, incontrovertible belief that our most vulnerable members
of society are deserving of unique care and assistance when faced with criminal
jeopardy. youth justice courts must interpret the provisions of the legislation
designed to promote the rights of young persons in a manner consistent with
that intent. we must ensure these provisions are applied with an understanding
that the youth criminal justice system was designed to be different from the
adult system and appreciate the values behind that decision.

a
young person is considered "at trial” for
ycja
sections 25(3) and (4)
once they indicate they do not want to resolve the case through ejs or any
other proposed form of diversion and choose to contest the charges. this
includes the pre-trial or case management stage, during which young persons
have the right to review the crown’s evidence against them and make strategic
decisions with the advice of counsel. it does not necessitate an arraignment,
and insisting on one before counsel represents the young person is
inappropriate.

these
applications should be submitted electronically, through the appropriate
judicial office, along with supporting materials. the ontario court of
justice’s directive, “serving and filing criminal court documents”, must be
complied with, along with the requirements found in rule 3 of the criminal
rules of the ontario court of justice.

if either party requests an oral hearing or if an issue in the application materials
concerns the reviewing judge, one can be scheduled.
released: july 7, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

https://www.legalaid.on.ca/in-briefs/financial-eligibility-for-duty-counsel-services-increases-march-3

for example:
the
honourable madam justice m. fuerst, “the self represented accused: the trial
judge’s perspective”, july 2007, unpublished, at p. 2 as quoted by the hon.
patrick j. lesage and michael code, report of the review of large and complex
criminal cases, november 2008.

the charge against l.s. was subsequently withdrawn by the crown.

my emphasis added.

my emphasis added.

my emphasis added in italics each time.

my emphasis added.

united nations standard minimum rules for the administration of juvenile
justice, a/res/40/33, november 29, 1985

my emphasis added.

where the young person has not yet located a private lawyer
willing to prepare the application and support materials for them, duty
counsel should assist the young person.

during submissions, ms. di sabatino noted that many criminal court orders can
already be obtained “over the counter” when they are on consent, such as a bail
variation.

in particular, see rule 3.3.