source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj241/2025oncj241.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. havasova, 2025 oncj 241
date: 
2025 04 24
court
file no.: newmarket 24-91107396
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
lydia havasova
before
justice s. bergman
heard
on april 7 and 8, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on april 24, 2025
r. taher................................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
k. doyle....................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant lydia havasova
bergman j.:
overview

lydia havasova is charged with having a having a
blood alcohol concentration over 80mg/100ml of blood within two hours after
operating a conveyance on july 15, 2024, contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(b) of the
criminal
code.

the charge stems from a motor vehicle collision
that occurred on july 15, 2024 on highway 404 (northbound lanes) just south of the
highway 407 overpass. at approximately 1:15 a.m., there was a report about a
three-car collision. there were a number of people standing on the highway (in
live lanes of traffic). officers attended the scene and it became clear that a
white mercedes had rear ended another vehicle. at the conclusion of the
evidence, there was no dispute that ms. havasova was the driver of the white
mercedes and that she had rear ended the car in front of her that had come to a
complete stop due to construction related congestion.

prior to arriving at the scene, attending
officers received information about the accident, including that the female
driving the mercedes might be impaired. the first officer who attended the
scene was pc gemmiti. he spoke with ms. havasova to ask if she was okay. when
she responded, the officer immediately smelled an odour of alcohol coming from
her breath. the officer then went to check on the other people milling about. 
there were six or seven people from two other involved vehicles. after
confirming the other people were not injured, pc gemmiti returned to ms.
havasova and asked her where she was coming from and if she had anything to
drink. ms. havasova told the officer that she was going home from a friend’s
party and that she had consumed some alcohol, but a long time ago.

based upon the strong odour of alcohol and
confirmation that ms. havasova had drank alcohol that evening, pc gemmiti
suspected she was impaired and made a roadside screening demand. ms. havasova
provided a sample of her breath into the asd device and it registered a fail. 
she was promptly placed under arrest for “over 80” and advised of her right to
counsel, which she acknowledged and affirmed. ms. havasova was transported to
the aurora opp detachment. she spoke with duty counsel and ultimately provided
two suitable samples of her breath which were 100mg/100ml of blood and
90mg/100ml of blood. ms. havasova was charged with the over 80 offence that is
the subject of this trial.

ms. havasova plead not guilty and a trial was
conducted over the course of two days. at the commencement of the trial, ms.
havasova brought a
charter
application seeking the exclusion of her
breath readings – which were 100mg/100ml and 90 mg/100ml respectively – under
section 24(2) of the
charter. the original
charter
motion alleged
violations of ms. havasova’s s. 7, 8, 9, 10(a) and 10(b) rights. the trial
proceeded in a blended manner with the evidence from the trial proper being
applied to the
charter
motions.

at the completion of the evidence, ms. havasova
acknowledged that if no
charter
violations were found, the crown would
have proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt. in other words, ms. havasova
admits that the crown has proven that she was the driver of a motor vehicle on
the date, time and place in question and that she was over the legal limit at
the time she was operating her motor vehicle.

crown and defence counsel therefore agree that
my determination of the
charter
issues will be determinative at this
trial. in order to assess the
charter
motion, it is necessary to
provide a brief summary of the evidence, none of which is in dispute.
summary of the evidence

three witnesses, all for the crown, testified on
the blended
voir dire
and trial. they were opp constables gemmiti,
calderone and baksh. the defence did not call any witnesses on the trial proper
or the
charter
motions.

pc gemmiti arrived at the scene of the collision
at 1:27 a.m. he immediately approached ms. havasova because it looked like she
had been in a collision and that she was the driver of the mercedes. he wanted
to see if she was okay. pc gemmiti acknowledged that as he arrived at the scene
he had some reason to believe a criminal offence had been committed. he
testified that at any motor vehicle collision he considers the possibility of
there being an impaired driver.

when pc gemmiti spoke with ms. havasova he asked
if she was okay. she responded and he immediately smelled alcohol coming from
her breath. there were three vehicles in live lanes of traffic on a major 400
series highway and he wanted to ensure everyone was safe. he left ms. havasova
to check on the other people on the highway.

while he was speaking with the driver of the
vehicle that was rear ended, pc gemmiti also had the opportunity to observe ms.
havasova walking around. she did not seem to exhibit any other signs of
impairment. when he went back to ms. havasova, he asked where she had been
coming from and if she had consumed alcohol. she said she was returning from a
party and acknowledged consuming alcohol that evening but a long time ago.

at 1:32 a.m., still while in the middle of highway
404 in live lanes of traffic, pc gemmiti made the demand for ms. havasova to
provide a sample of her breath in the roadside device that he had with him at
the scene. pc gemmiti testified that his grounds for the demand came from the
smell of alcohol coming from ms. havasova’s breath as well as her responses to
questions. according to pc gemmiti, the fact that ms. havasova had consumed
alcohol at the party added to his grounds to make the roadside demand. he
agreed that what she told him formed part of his grounds. what solidified his grounds
was the fact that when he was standing close to her he smelled a strong odour
of alcohol.

pc gemmiti was cross-examined about the fact
that he was not conducting a motor vehicle collision investigation when he was
speaking with ms. havasova. he testified that what happened was relevant to
both criminal and motor vehicle collision investigations. he testified that he
also asked questions about, and noted things like ms. havasova’s insurer as
well as the make and model of her vehicle.

ms. havasova failed the roadside screening test
at 1:34 a.m. and was arrested. her rights to counsel were provided at 1:36
a.m. she was read the breath demand at 1:37 a.m.

pc calderone attended at the scene of the
accident as well. he did not interact with ms. havasova. he completed the
motor vehicle collision report and took statements from others at the scene.

pc baksh also attended the scene. he is a
qualified breath technician. at 1:41 a.m., pc baksh was advised that he would
have to set up the breath test room at the opp detachment. he returned to the
detachment at 1:58 a.m. at 3:05 a.m., pc gemmiti relayed the grounds for
making the breath demand to pc baksh. pc baksh took custody of ms. havasova at
3:09 a.m. she was read the breath demand by pc baksh at 3:10 a.m. ms.
havasova’s first breath sample was taken at 3:14 a.m. the second sample was
taken at 3:36 a.m. the results came back at 100mg/100ml and 90mg/100ml
respectively.
charter
issues
(1)
defence argument

ms. havasova initially alleged an infringement
of her sections 7, 8, 9, 10(a) and 10(b)
charter
rights. ms. havasova
argues that pc gemmiti was conducting a
de facto
criminal investigation when
he arrived at the scene. she further argues that when pc gemmiti asked ms.
havasova about where she was coming from and if she had consumed alcohol, ms.
havasova was detained within the meaning of the
charter, her s. 10(a)
and 10(b) rights to counsel were immediately engaged, and she ought to have
been advised of the reasons for her detention and her right to counsel.

ms. havasova argues that the breach of her s. 10
rights resulted in her being arbitrarily detained in contravention of her s. 9
charter
rights. she further argues that this arbitrary detention continued through to
the point where her breath samples were provided at the detachment and that the
samples themselves were taken without lawful authority and in violation of her
s. 8
charter
rights. as a result of these cascading breaches, ms.
havasova argues that her breath readings ought to be excluded from this trial
pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.

ms. havasova initially took the position that
her breath samples were not taken “as soon as practicable” and this was fatal
to the crown’s case. upon further reflection, counsel for ms. havasova
acknowledged that the “as soon as practicable” requirement from the former
criminal
code
provisions had been replaced with the current
s. 320.28(1). on this
basis, counsel argued that failure to obtain the samples “as soon as
practicable” constitutes a violation of s. 8 of the
charter.

i inquired about the current state of
jurisprudence on this issue and asked counsel if i was bound by the summary
conviction appeal decisions in
r. v. ridley
2023 onsc 5967
and
r. v.
ridge
2024 onsc 2231. in
ridley, at paragraph
38, justice akhtar held
that failure to obtain samples as soon as practicable does not constitute a s.
8 breach:
having
found that
s. 320.28
of the
criminal code
does not impose a requirement
that the police are required to take breath samples as soon as practicable or
that failure to do constitutes a
charter
breach, i would allow the
appeal and order a new trial on this ground alone.

justice de sa in
ridge
followed the
ridley
finding. ms. havasova ultimately abandoned this s. 8
charter
argument, conceding that i am bound to follow the
ridley
/
ridge
line of authority. as such, there is no s. 8
charter
breach with respect
to the timing of when the breath samples were taken.

counsel for ms. havasova also did not pursue any
s. 7
charter
arguments in submissions and as such, effectively abandoned
any such ground.

it became clear during submissions that the
primary issue to be determined is whether ms. havasova’s s. 10
charter
rights were engaged prior to pc gemmiti making the asd demand in the middle of
highway.

ms. havasova argues that pc gemmiti was
conducting a criminal investigation when he arrived on scene. she argues that
when pc gemmiti was asking about the consumption of alcohol, she was detained
within the meaning of the
charter. ms. havasova relies upon the
decision in
r. v. hogervorst,
 oj no 6121
where the court found
that the applicant was not a “driver” within the meaning of the
highway
traffic act. section 1 of the
hta
defines driver as “a person who
drives a vehicle on a highway.” in
hogervorst, the arresting officer did
not see the applicant getting out of the car. the court found that the
applicant was not a “driver” at the time the officer detained him. although she
had a suspicion that he was a driver, she detained him, in part, for the
purpose of ascertaining if he was the person she suspected of driving while
disqualified.

hogervorst
was a
situation in which a person was being investigated for the offence of drive
while disqualified. other than the accused’s statements to the investigating
officer, the trial judge was unable to conclude that the accused before the
court was the driver of the vehicle in question. the officer testified that she
was conducting a
criminal code
investigation into driving while
disqualified. there was no
highway traffic act
investigation.
in
that case, the trial judge found that the accused had been detained and his s.
10 rights were triggered. as a result, anything he said afterward,
particularly his admission as to being the driver, was excluded from the
trial. absent this admission, there was no evidence that mr. hogervorst was
the driver and he was acquitted.

the crown correctly points out that the
hogervorst
case is entirely distinguishable from ms. havasova’s circumstances. ms. havasova
was involved in a motor vehicle collision. she was not being investigated for
drive while disqualified. there does not appear to have been any significant
issue or concern about her being the driver of the mercedes. in other words,
the issues that were at play in
hogervorst
are not relevant to the
investigation involving ms. havasova.
(2)
crown’s argument

the crown takes the position that there was no
s. 10(a) or s. 10(b)
charter
breach. officer gemmiti was engaged in a
motor vehicle collision investigation alongside a criminal investigation. the
crown argues that prior to the breath demand being made, ms. havasova was not
detained within the meaning of the
charter
and her s. 10
charter
rights were not engaged. as a result, there was no s. 10 breach, nor were there
any s. 9 or s. 8 violations.
analysis

pc gemmiti was dispatched to a motor vehicle
collision that occurred at 1:15 a.m. on highway 404. there were cars in live
lanes of traffic. there were six or seven people out of their cars on the
highway. it was evident that the driver of the white mercedes rear ended the
car in front. it was acknowledged that ms. havasova was the driver of the
mercedes. at the scene, pc gemmiti confirmed that the registered owner of the
white mercedes matched the name on ms. havasova’s driver’s licence. the
officer had ample grounds to believe that ms. havasova was the driver of the
white mercedes.

when he spoke with ms. havasova initially, he
was trying to assess if there were any injured parties. while he clearly had
some information that a female at the scene might be impaired, pc gemmiti was conducting
motor vehicle collision and criminal investigations at the same time. when he
spoke to ms. havasova to see if she was injured, he immediately smelled
alcohol. however, he left her to check on other parties, to continue his collision
investigation. ms. havasova was walking around freely. there were no physical
or psychological restrictions on her liberty.

when pc gemmiti returned to speak with ms.
havasova, he asked if she had been drinking, she told him she had. prior to
asking that question, pc gemmiti never told ms. havasova she was detained.
he did not take any steps to physically impede or restrain ms. havasova. there
is nothing in the record before me to conclude that ms. havasova was facing
any significant physical or psychologically restraint prior to the breath
demand being made.

in
r. v. guenter,
2016 onca 57, the court
of appeal addressed a situation in which police arrived at the scene of an
accident and the accused made spontaneous utterances about his consumption of
alcohol and marijuana. the court found that the statements were made at a time
when he was not detained. at paragraphs 40 and following, the court of appeal reiterated
the following principles emanating from
r. v. grant,
2009 scc 32
and
r.
v. suberu, 20089 scc 33:
40 
not every interaction between the police and members of the public, even for
investigative purposes, constitutes a detention within the meaning of the
charter:
suberu, at para. 3. even when an encounter clearly results in a detention,
such as when a person ultimately is arrested and taken into police custody, it
cannot simply be assumed that there was a detention from the beginning of the
interaction:
suberu, at para. 5. deference is owed to the trial judge's
finding as to whether an accused was detained:
grant, at para.
43.
41 
in the present case, the encounter between the appellant and the police took
place during the initial stages of an accident investigation by officers who
had just arrived on the scene and were trying to sort things out. in
grant,
the court observed, at para. 38:
in the context
of investigating an accident or a crime, the police, unbeknownst to them at
that point in time, may find themselves asking questions of a person who is
implicated in the occurrence and, consequently, is at risk of
self-incrimination. this does not preclude the police from continuing to
question the person in the pursuit of their investigation.
42 
the facts in
suberu
illustrate how interactions between an individual
and the police move along a spectrum before reaching the point of detention. in
suberu, officers had been called to an lcbo to investigate possible
credit card fraud. as an officer entered the lcbo, he was passed by mr. suberu
leaving the store who said words to the effect of, "[he] did this, not me,
so i guess i can go." the officer followed mr. suberu to his van, started
some questioning, asked for mr. suberu's id and the van's vehicle documentation
and, upon seeing some lcbo bags in the van, arrested mr. suberu.…
43
the supreme court of canada held that mr. suberu was not detained until the
moment of his arrest. the court viewed the encounter with the police officer
prior to mr. suberu's arrest as "of a preliminary or exploratory
nature," where the officer was attempting "to orient himself to the
situation [that] was unfolding in front of him," was in the "process
of sorting out the situation," and was "engaged in a general inquiry
and had not yet zeroed in on the individual as someone whose movements must be
controlled" (
suberu, at paras. 31-32).

there is no basis to find that ms. havasova was
detained within the meaning of s. 10 of the
charter. officer gemmiti was
engaged in an investigation at a very dynamic and potentially dangerous motor
vehicle collision scene. the evidence is that ms. havasova was walking around
freely and there is no indication that she ever felt restrained in any manner. 
as a result, i find that ms. havasova was not detained within the meaning of
the
charter
and her s. 10 rights were not engaged at the time pc gemmiti
asked her questions about alcohol consumption.

even if i am wrong and ms. havasova was detained
within the meaning of the
charter, the crown argues that rulings in
r.
v. orbanski,
2005 scc 37,
r. v. milne
(1996),
1996 canlii 508 (on ca), 28 o.r. (3d) 577
(c.a.) and
r. v. coutts
(1999),
1999 canlii 3742 (on ca), 45 o.r. (3d) 288 (c.a.) apply in so far
as ms. havasova’s statements about drinking are admissible, not for proving the
offence at trial, but simply for the grounds relied upon to make the roadside
demand.

in
coutts,
justice moldaver (as he then
was) stated that “crown counsel points to where motorists are compelled to
submit to sobriety and roadside testing without being advised of their s.10(b)
charter
rights, the crown cannot use the test results at trial to incriminate the
motorist on a charge of impaired driving or driving over 80":
coutts,
at para.
17.
the use of the test results is limited to justifying a demand
for a breath sample.

at paragraph 50 of
guenter, the court of
appeal characterized the supreme court’s decision in
orbanski
as
follows:
in
orbanski,
the supreme court of canada upheld, under s. 1 of the
charter, the
limitations on a person's s. 10(b) right to counsel resulting from the use of
roadside sobriety screening measures. the court held the evidence obtained as a
result of the motorist's participation in the screening measures without access
to counsel
could only be used as an investigative tool to confirm or reject
the officer's suspicion that the driver might be impaired; it could not be used
as direct evidence to incriminate the driver: at paras. 58-60. the court
described the evidence subject to such limited use at para. 58 of its reasons:
"as stated in
milne, this limitation applies only to evidence
obtained from the compelled direct participation by the motorist in roadside
tests
and, in our case, police questioning about alcohol consumption
"
(emphasis added).

following the
orbanski,
milne
and
guenter
line of decisions, if ms. havasova was detained prior to the roadside breath
demand, her answers emanating from police questions about alcohol consumption
are admissible only for the purpose of establishing the grounds for the demand
and not as direct evidence to incriminate ms. havasova at trial. if there was
any s. 10(a) or 10(b) breach in the circumstances, it is justified by s. 1 and
her statements about consumption are admissible only for the purpose of
establishing the grounds for pc gemmiti’s roadside demand.

having found that the roadside demand was
lawful, there were grounds to arrest ms. havasova for the offence of “over
80.” given the very fair concession that everything that occurred after ms.
havasova’s arrest at the roadside was otherwise
charter
compliant, including
the manner in which ms. havasova’s breath readings at the detachment were
obtained, the crown has proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
s. 24(2) assessment

however, in the event that i am incorrect and
there was a breach of ms. havasova’s s. 10 rights prior to the roadside
demand being made, i would not exclude her breath readings from trial under s.
24(2) of the
charter. any such breach would have been momentary. as counsel
for ms. havasova acknowledged, the situation was extremely dynamic and the
attending officers would not have been required to afford ms. havasova a
call to counsel while standing in live lanes of traffic on highway 404.

the starting point for any s. 24(2) analysis is
the analysis set out in
r. v. grant,
2009
scc 32. it has been
clearly established that i must weigh three separate issues in accordance with
grant.

a s. 24(2) inquiry examines the impact of
admitting evidence obtained in breach of the
charter
on public
confidence in the justice system over the long term, based on:
(1)
the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
state conduct;
(2)
the impact of the breach on the accused's
charter
-protected
interests; and
(3)
society's interest in the adjudication of the
case on the merits.

the court's task is to balance the assessments
under these three inquiries "to determine whether, considering all the
circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute":
r. v. grant, at para.
71;
r. v. le,
2019 scc 32
at paras.
139-141; and
mcsweeney, onca 349 at para. 76.

the evidence can be excluded even if the first
two inquiries do not both support exclusion, such as in a case of a serious
charter
breach coupled with a weak impact on a
charter
-protected interest (
le.
at para. 141). the third inquiry, while not a rubber stamp deeming all evidence
reliable, typically points to admission. when, however, the first two inquiries
taken together make a strong case for exclusion, the third inquiry "will
seldom if ever tip the balance in favour of admissibility":
r. v.
thompson,
2020 onca 264 (canlii), o.j. no. 1757;
r. v. le, at para.
142;
(1)
seriousness of the
charter
infringing conduct

ms. havasova argues that the purported s. 10(a)
and 10(b) violations prior to the roadside breath demand are serious given the
virtual absence of impaired driving investigation training undertaken by pc
gemmiti. this is a point of concern that ought to be noted. pc gemmiti is a
relatively new opp frontline officer. as such, he and many others like him,
are responsible for patrolling the 400 series highways in the gta region.

given the overwhelming amount of impaired and
over 80 charges that are dealt with in the newmarket courthouse alone, it is
inconceivable that new opp recruits in the region do not receive targeted,
detailed and ongoing training with respect to the conduct of drinking and
driving investigations. the legal issues surrounding these investigations are
complex and numerous. the
charter
issues arising from these
investigations frequently risk having factually guilty individuals acquitted when
evidence is excluded as a result of constitutional infringements.

indeed, when one considers the various
amendments to the
criminal code
over the last decade, it is clear that
most legal defences to impaired or over 80 charges focus solely on alleged
charter
breaches and arguments surrounding the exclusion of breath readings. in other
words, if officers conducting these investigations are comprehensively trained
in
charter
compliant conduct, their investigations and the reliable
evidence flowing from those investigations would not be at risk of exclusion at
trial.

had i found there to be a s. 10 breach of ms.
havasova’s
charter
rights, i would have found it to be quite serious
given the absence of training provided to pc gemmiti by the opp. this is not a
criticism of pc gemmiti or anything he did during his investigation. in fact,
his investigation was remarkably professional and entirely proper, despite his
relative lack of targeted training.

he testified that he may have received “some”
training during his basic training at police college. he did not recall
anything that was targeted specifically toward drinking and driving
investigations. nor had he received any specific drinking and driving training
since graduating from police college. this is particularly concerning in light
of the fact that the primary function of most opp officers in the gta would be
the patrol and enforcement of the 400 series highways in the region. general
police duties in the region fall squarely within the jurisdiction of the
regional police forces.
(2)
impact of the breach on ms. havasova’s
charter
protected interests

any breach of ms. havasova’s s. 10
charter
rights would have been momentary and, with respect, inconsequential. whether
she had been advised of her right to counsel at the roadside or not, the
observations of pc gemmiti nevertheless would have provided him with the
necessary grounds to made a roadside demand. she would not have had the right
to contact a lawyer prior to the roadside sample being provided. nor would she
have had the right to refuse to provide the sample.

in the circumstances, even if there had been a
s. 10 breach, i would not have found that ms. havasova was arbitrarily
detained. moreover, i would not have found that there was no basis for her
arrest after the failed roadside test. the breath demand and her rights to
counsel after arrest were not the subject of any purportedly independent
charter
offending conduct. the argument from counsel for ms. havasova was that the
initial s. 10 breaches prior to the roadside test resulted in “cascading”
breaches. i disagree.

if there were s. 10(a) and (b) breaches, they
had minimal impact on ms. havasova’s
charter
protected interests
and the second line of the
grant
inquiry pulls strongly in favour of
inclusion.
(3)
society’s interest in adjudication on the
merits

the last line of inquiry considers factors such
as the reliability of the evidence and its importance to the crown's case. it
typically supports finding that admission of the evidence would not bring the
administration of justice into disrepute:
grant, at paras.
79-84;
harrison,
at para. 33; and
le, at para. 142.

had i found there to be the minimally intrusive
s. 10(a) and 10(b) breaches prior to the failed roadside demand, i would nevertheless
still find the evidence of the breath samples to be highly reliable and crucial
to the crown’s case. the third
grant
line of inquiry pulls strongly in
favour of admission.
(4)
balancing

on balance, had there been the purported s. 10
breaches prior to the roadside breath demand, inclusion of the breath samples at
trial would not have brought the administration of justice into disrepute.
despite the purported breach falling on the more serious end of the spectrum
due to inadequate officer training, the infringements themselves had little, if
any, impact upon the
charter
protected interests of ms. havasova, and
the breath samples are highly reliable and essential evidence at trial. even
if the purported breaches had been found, the breath samples would still be
admissible at trial.
conclusion

having found there to be no s. 10(a) or 10(b)
breach, and there being no dispute that the demand itself and everything
flowing from the demand thereafter was otherwise
charter
compliant, the
evidence of the breath tests is admissible at trial. as a result, with the
breath test results being 100mg/100ml and 90mg/100ml respectively, the crown
has proven ms. havasova guilty of the over 80 offence beyond a reasonable
doubt.

a finding of guilt will be entered.
released: april 24, 2025
signed:
justice s bergman