source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj494/2025oncj494.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. oyenuga,
2025 oncj 494
date: 
2025 09 25
court
file no.: 21-2017
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
ifeoluwa
oyenuga
before
justice m.t. poland
heard
on march 27, 2024, 29 april 2025, 5 september 2025
reasons
for judgment released on september 25, 2025
m. jones............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
k. marley................................................... 
 counsel for the defendant ifeoluwa oyenuga
application
for a finding under s.16 of the criminal code of canada
poland j.:
introduction

on march 27, 2024, ifeoluwa oyenuga was before the court facing a
two-count information that alleged offences of sexual assault and forcible
confinement. mr. oyenuga was arraigned and pleaded not guilty.

a statement of facts was then placed before the court. mr. oyenuga either
agreed with, or alternatively agreed that he was not able to contest the facts
established in the statement of facts.

that statement of facts was made exhibit 1 in these proceedings.

in the first stage of a two-part court process, the court found that on
the dates alleged in the information, mr. oyenuga committed the act portion of
the offences that he is charged with.

mr. oyenuga applies in this second phase of the proceedings, for a
verdict that he was, at the time of the commission of the offences charged, not
criminally responsible by reason of a mental disorder (ncrmd), in accordance
with the provisions of
s.16(1)
of the
criminal code.

mr. oyenuga is presumed to be criminally responsible unless he can
shoulder the burden of proving that he was ncrmd to the balance of
probabilities standard.
background

in the fall of 2021, ifeoluwa oyenuga was a student at lambton college.

on november 3, 2021, he agreed to rent a room within an apartment that
was occupied by ms. l.m. he moved into the apartment on november 5, 2021.

on november 7, 2021, mr. oyenuga sexually assaulted his roommate l.m. by
bending her over a couch, thrusting his groin at her, and pulling her pants
down. she had previously and unequivocally rejected the sexual advances that
mr. oyenuga made towards her on november 6, 2021.

the
sexual assault was forceful, and forcefully rejected by l.m. she ultimately
got away by fighting back and running to a neighbour’s apartment.

police
were called and mr. oyenuga was arrested.

he
gave a police statement the morning after he had been arrested. in that
statement, he told the police a non-culpable version of the events based on
accidental contact between the parties. he also stated that l.m. had falsely accused
him of trying to rape her.

later
in his statement, mr. oyenuga indicated that prior to the event leading to his
arrest, l.m. had repeatedly told him that she was not interested in a sexual
relationship with him. whenever he asked for sexual consent, she said no.

mr.
oyenuga was released by the police. he attended hospital in windsor in the
next days and remained hospitalized for 16 days under the care of a
psychiatrist.
the mental health proceedings

on
his own motion, mr. oyenuga was assessed under the provisions of
s.672(1)
(b) of
the
criminal code. the assessment was carried out by dr. william komer who met
with mr. oyenuga on several occasions. dr. komer produced three comprehensive
assessment reports dated june 27, 2023, march 20, 2024, and july 7, 2024. each
of these reports addressed mr. oyenuga’s criminal responsibility.

dr.
komer believed mr. oyenuga was suffering from a mental condition that rendered
him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his actions and their
wrongfulness. in his initial report from june 27, 2023, he concluded:
“in my opinion, mr. oyenuga lacked rational perception
and hence rational choice about the wrongfulness of his actions. his actions
were, in my opinion, in response to command hallucinations of his mother’s
voice and a delusional belief that the complainant wanted to have a sexual
relationship with him.”

dr.
komer was of the view that mr. oyenuga suffered from a schizophrenia-related
psychiatric disorder that was exacerbated by a drug-induced psychosis related
to his consumption of crystal methamphetamine shortly before the time of the
offence.
the position of the parties

mr.
marley, on behalf of mr. oyenuga, takes the position that dr. komer’s opinion
provides the foundation for a verdict that mr. oyenuga was ncrmd at the time of
these offences. mr. marley asserts that mr. oyenuga was “suffering from a
mental disorder” and was both incapable of appreciating the nature and quality
of his actions and that he did not know that his actions were wrong.

ms.
jones, on behalf of the crown takes a different approach. after providing
helpful submissions on the issue, based on an analysis of
r v.
bouchard-lebrun,
2011 scc 58
(“bouchard”), ms. jones conceded that the defence
would be able to bear the onus to demonstrate that mr. oyenuga was suffering
from a disease of the mind in spite of the fact that his condition at the time
of the offence was likely associated at least in part with drug use.

ms.
jones parts ways with the assessment made by dr. komer as it pertains to the
second part of the s.16 test. she asserts that the defence cannot demonstrate
to a balance of probabilities that mr. oyenuga was incapable of appreciating
the nature and quality of his actions, or of knowing that they were wrong.
the law
a two-part analysis

section
16
of the
criminal code
states the following:
defence of mental disorder
16 (1) no person is criminally responsible
for an act committed or an omission made while suffering from a mental disorder
that rendered the person incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of
the act or omission or of knowing that it was wrong.
presumption
(2) every person is presumed not to suffer from a
mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal responsibility by virtue of
subsection (1), until the contrary is proved on the balance of probabilities.
burden of proof
(3) the burden of proof that an accused was
suffering from a mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal
responsibility is on the party that raises the issue.

section
16 requires a two-part analysis. under the first part of the analysis, the
court must examine whether the accused party suffered from a qualifying disease
of the mind.

here,
i agree with the first part of ms. jones’ analysis, and with dr. komer’s
conclusions.
bouchard
is instructive in this regard, particularly at
paragraphs 71, 73, and 75.

there
is a basis for a finding that mr. oyenuga suffered from a qualifying disease of
the mind, notwithstanding that his pre-existing mental health issues were
likely also negatively impacted by his drug use at or shortly before the time
of the offence.
legal recognition of the effects of a qualifying disease of the
mind

an
accused person may be found ncrmd where their mental disorder rendered them either:
•
incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of their act; or
•
incapable of knowing that their act was wrong.

to
be deemed incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the act, an
accused person must be unable to appreciate the nature of the act and the
natural consequences that follow from it.
cooper v. r,
1979 canlii 63 (scc),
 1 scr 1149
at
120.

the
capability assessment requires a moral and not just a legal analysis. the case
of
r v. dobson,
2018 onca 589
[“dobson”]
provides strong direction on
the test to be applied.

in
dobson, the accused suffered from a mental disorder when he killed his
girlfriend and a friend in a murder-suicide pact. the exact nature of mr.
dobson’s illness was unascertained, but it had schizophrenic features.

in
determining what is required when assessing whether an accused person knows
their act is wrong, the court of appeal looked to
r v. oommen
1994 canlii 101 (scc),
 2 scr
507
and concluded as follows:
[a]n accused who has the capacity to know that society
regards his actions as morally wrong and proceeds to commit those acts cannot
be said to lack the capacity to know right from wrong. he is not ncr, even if
he believed that he had no choice but to act, or that his acts were justified. 
however, an accused who, through the distorted lens of his mental illness, sees
his conduct as justified, not only according to his own view, but also
according to the norms of society, lacks the capacity to know that his act is
wrong.
dobson
at para 24.

when
this direction is applied to a factual context where the accused’s act is obviously
and
per se
wrong, such as a circumstance involving the killing of
another, the analysis may be factually complex, but the law is straightforward. 
the present case admits of additional complexity.
the factual foundation

for
this analysis, the acts being examined involved mr. oyenuga forcefully pushing
his roommate l.m. against a couch, bending her over, placing his groin against
her buttocks and pulling down her pants. l.m. fought back against mr. oyenuga
successfully, pulled up her pants, threatened mr. oyenuga with violence and
then extracted herself from the room.

when
she thought an opportunity had arisen, she attempted to flee the apartment. mr.
oyenuga intercepted her as she did so. he placed her in what is described as a
“bearhug” as he attempted to drag her back into the shared dwelling. l.m.
again prevailed and got away from mr. oyenuga.

these
acts exist in a context that includes the fact that mr. oyenuga and l.m. had no
relationship history. they were new roommates, and barely knew each other. 
prior to the described acts, mr. oyenuga had made prior advances upon l.m. she
had rebuffed him and told mr. oyenuga that she was not interested in him.

the
factual context also includes at least four further and important components.

first,
based on his own self-reporting, mr. oyenuga had consumed crystal
methamphetamine in the past, and at a time that was proximate to his actions on
november 7, 2021.

second,
mr. oyenuga’s mental health challenges appeared to pre-date his engagement with
l.m. in the time leading up to these events, there had been family conflict. 
he had reported auditory hallucinations involving directions to make sexual
advances towards women.

third,
and importantly, mr. oyenuga provided a statement to the police the morning
after he was arrested. parts of this statement are contained within the
factual agreement contained in exhibit 1 in this proceeding. mr. oyenuga made
the following utterances during his police interview:
•
he denied sexually assaulting l.m. and described that any
physical contact between he and l.m. occurred first as a result of her tripping
and falling into him.
•
l.m. reacted to accidentally falling into him by alleging that he
had tried to rape her and by threatening to kill him.
•
he did not recall if the interaction with l.m. continued into the
hallway of the apartment.
•
l.m. had previously told him that she was not interested in
having an intimate relationship with him, and that he needed to ask for
permission to have physical contact with her.

notwithstanding
this, he told the police that l.m. was interested in having a sexual
relationship with him and that she had sent flirtatious messages to him in
which she told him she loved him and offered to meet him late at night.

mr.
oyenuga described that l.m.’s actions in the apartment, including bending over in
his presence, were designed to draw his sexual attention and to inspire his
advances, but that she continued to deny him consent to sexual contact.

fourth,
two days after the assault on l.m., mr. oyenuga returned to windsor and was
admitted to hospital for a psychiatric assessment. he remained in hospital for
17 days under the care of a psychiatrist. the information provided from this
hospital attendance formed a very significant portion of the body of
information that dr. komer relied upon in his opinion.
dr.
komer’s opinion and conclusions

dr.
komer’s opinion was that mr. oyenuga was both incapable of appreciating the
nature and quality of his acts, and of knowing that they were wrong. he based
this conclusion on his acceptance of two theories drawn from the information in
his possession.

first,
he suggested that mr. oyenuga was acting on a command hallucination in which
his mother directed him to “rape” l.m. and that “she was evil.”

dr.
komer also indicated that at the time of the offence, mr. oyenuga was possessed
of a delusional belief that the complainant wanted to have sexual relations
with him.

the
propositions cited by dr. komer are contradictory. as the crown pointed out
during submissions, the essence of a “rape” is a sexual interaction that
proceeds without the consent of the victim. such an action is unlawful
per
se, much like an intentional killing of another human being. a delusion
based on a command direction to rape is obviously inconsistent with a delusion
in which a person believes another wants to, and thus is consenting to have
sexual relations.
challenges with the evidence relied upon

the
distinction between these two propositions underscores a key reality of the
evidentiary record that is before the court on this application. dr. komer
considered two broad categories of information. first, he considered
background information, including from third party sources, about mr. oyenuga’s
mental health challenges and background. these sources included mr. oyenuga’s
mother and mental health professionals who treated mr. oyenuga at the time of
his first admission to hospital immediately after november 7, 2021, and
thereafter.

for
the most part, the third-party sources provided only limited information about
the content of mr. oyenuga’s delusional thinking at the time of the offence.

dr.
komer’s primary source of information about the actual contents of the
delusional thinking was, unsurprisingly, mr. oyenuga himself. mr. oyenuga did
not testify in this proceeding. to the extent that it is relied upon for the
truth of its contents, the information that mr. oyenuga provided to dr. komer
is largely hearsay.
r v. dobson,
2015 onsc 2865
at paras 127-129. the
evidence found in dr. komer’s report, in this context, is receivable by the
court, but it is necessarily subject to further assessment.

mr.
oyenuga was a profoundly unreliable declarant. dr. komer repeatedly referenced
mr. oyenuga’s inconsistency in reporting both during his testimony, and in the
three reports that are filed as exhibits in this proceeding. in dr. komer’s
words, mr. oyenuga was “a very poor historian” and was “not a reliable
informant”.

parsing
out the full extent of the contradictions and indications of mr. oyenuga’s lack
of reliability as presented in the reports and the testimony of dr. komer would
be unhelpful and unnecessary. both the reports and the
viva voce
testimony of dr. komer were rife with examples of mr. oyenuga saying different
things at different times about what had occurred on november 7, 2021. the
information also presented major inconsistencies about why mr. oyenuga acted or
did not act the way he did.
the
command direction to rape and the requirement to know the act was wrong

at
times mr. oyenuga referenced the “command direction” to rape in his discussions
with dr. komer, but the explanations on this subject were not detailed or
fulsome. there was, for example, no reason provided by mr. oyenuga as to why
he thought he should follow a purported command to rape l.m. there was no
information provided that mr. oyenuga believed that his failure to follow the
command would result in an adverse consequence.

the
high point of the evidence, from the defence perspective, was mr. oyenuga’s
assertion to dr. komer that he associated his mother’s voice, and therefore the
command to rape l.m. with something that was “good”. associating his mother’s
voice with something “good” falls well short of presenting evidence of a
delusion that encompasses a justification to rape according to the norms of
society. it may also be important to note that at some points during his discussions
with dr. komer, mr. oyenuga also specifically denied being commanded by the
voices in his head to rape l.m.

this
situation is quite different from many cases where an ncr finding is made based
on an understanding that the commission of an unlawful act, like a homicide for
example, is necessary because the victim of the offence presents a threat to
the accused, to people that he or she loves, or even to the community more
generally. the only relevant evidence of that type in this case is that mr. oyenuga
inconsistently referenced a component of the command direction in which his
mother described the complainant as “evil”.

of
course, it nearly goes without saying that even if mr. oyenuga did hold a real,
consistent, and offence-concurrent belief that l.m. was “evil”, such a belief
on its own would not provide either a legal or a moral justification to rape
her. one can imagine any number of people that society generally might condemn
as “evil”. no one would countenance a leap from such a conclusion to the
existence of a community-accepted belief that it would be acceptable to rape
them.

it
is possible to generate a hypothetical albeit diabolical delusion in which a
command to rape, much like a command to kill, might be understood by a person
suffering from the delusion to be both personally justifiable and societally
countenanced. there is no evidence in this case of such a belief being present
in the mind of mr. oyenuga at any point.

on
the evidence that has been presented, there is an insufficient basis to make a
finding that mr. oyenuga believed that sexually assaulting l.m. was justified
both in his own view, and according to the norms of society. therefore, there
is an insufficient evidentiary basis to conclude that mr. oyenuga lacked the
capacity to understand that his actions were wrong.
dobson
at para. 24.
the
nature and quality of the acts

although
dr. komer also provides an opinion that mr. oyenuga was incapable of
appreciating the nature and quality of his acts, the evidence that supports this
conclusion was either unstated or tied to the same body of evidence that
resulted in dr. komer’s conclusion that mr. oyenuga was not capable of knowing
that his acts were wrong. the three reports authored by dr. komer that were
filed as exhibits were not of significant assistance in distinguishing the two
branches of the
s.16
inquiry.

during
his testimony, dr. komer did address mr. oyenuga’s ability to appreciate the
nature and quality of his acts. in doing so, although he noted that his
conclusion was based on the existence of mr. oyenuga’s mental illness, he did
not identify the sources of information that led him to believe that mr.
oyenuga was irrational to the point of not appreciating the nature of his act,
or the natural consequences that would flow from it. see
cooper
at 120.

instead,
dr. komer appropriately pointed out that mr. oyenuga’s account of what had
transpired in the apartment was markedly inconsistent. the events reported by
mr. oyenuga included a version where he said he took no culpable actions
towards l.m., instead blaming any physical contact on an accident. mr. oyenuga
presented an alternate version where he claimed that he did not remember what
had occurred. at one point mr. oyenuga also reported that he had attended back
at the apartment after leaving in an effort to try to reason with l.m. and to
“…. apologize if i did anything wrong”. such an action seems incongruent with mr.
oyenuga’s otherwise asserted description of animus and irrationality on the
part of l.m. who he said slipped and fell into him, and thereafter accused him
of rape and threatened to kill him.

it
is possible, as dr. komer averts to, that mr. oyenuga’s inconsistency, and
perhaps also his more recently asserted lack of memory was related to an after-the-fact
realization on his part that his actions towards l.m. were wrong. in that
event,, such an explanation might represent an effort at what dr. komer
referred to as “perception management”. perception management involves the presentation
of a deliberately false account. this occurred long after the events, and at a
time where mr. oyenuga was described as stable. a lie like this necessarily makes
mr. oyenuga’s self-reporting suspect. it is also hard to distinguish from the
possibility that mr. oyenuga knew that his actions were wrong from the outset.

an
ex post facto
realization on mr. oyenuga’s part might be understandable
if the evidence showed that he was unwell at the time of the events but gained
insight later. the challenge here is that, at least in part, mr. oyenuga’s
explanation to dr. komer bears very close similarities to the explanation that
mr. oyenuga gave to the police and that are captured at paragraph 18 of the
agreed statement of facts. this explanation was given less than a day after
the events, and even before mr. oyenuga attended at the hospital in windsor.
the
consent theory

although
he told the police that his contact with l.m. had been accidental, mr. oyenuga also
advanced elements of the “consent theory” to the police during his interactions
with them. in so doing, however, mr. oyenga also acknowledged that other sexual
advances that he had made towards l.m. in the days or hours before the
culminating interaction had been rebuffed. he described that she had plainly
communicated her absence of consent to any intimate interactions with him. it
is clear that mr. oyenuga was capable of understanding consent and lack of
consent and of understanding that l.m. had, before the ultimate engagement,
expressed her wish to be left alone. mr. oyenuga’s expression to the police
about his belief that l.m. was attracted to him, notwithstanding her earlier
denial of his advances is not necessarily evidence of delusional thinking. it
might be aberrant, but it is also commonly encountered in cases of sexual
assault that bear no requirement for an assessment under
s.16
of the
criminal
code.

the
“consent theory” advanced by dr. komer was based on mr. oyenuga explaining a
belief that the complainant welcomed his sexual advances. dr. komer quite
properly described mr. oyenuga’s description that l.m. consented to his actions
as “delusional”. to some extent, dr. komer relied on mr. oyenuga’s assertions
about l.m. text messaging him. it is difficult to conclude, based the evidence
presented, whether mr. oyenuga’s assertions about the text messages were true,
misapprehended, based on delusional thinking, or were simply a lie that he told
to support his position that l.m. was attracted to him.
consent
is defined narrowly at law

if
mr. oyenuga was in fact suffering from a delusional belief about l.m.’s consent
it might be possible to conclude that he was incapable of understanding the
nature and quality of his acts. such a belief, however, would necessarily
occur only in a very narrow set of circumstances. in my view, there is no
evidence to support the existence of these circumstances in this case.

the
consent of another to a sexual interaction is both and legal and a moral
concept. it is a legal concept insofar as it distinguishes that which is
culpable from that which is not. it is a moral concept because it defines the
difference between an entirely normal interaction and a morally repugnant
interference with the bodily integrity of another.

the
law defines consent narrowly. among other things, consent at law must be
unequivocal, communicated and continuing. the absence of consent is defined as
existing within the
actus reus
of the offence, and it is decided in
reference to the state of mind of the complainant.
r v. ewanchuk,
1999 canlii 711 (scc),
 1
s.c.r. 330
at para. 25. here, there was clearly no consent.

the
central question to be answered is this: was mr. oyenuga’s belief in l.m.’s
consent affected by the operation of his delusional thinking? accepting for
the moment that mr. oyenuga was possessed of delusional thinking about l.m.’s
attraction to him, it is still the case that the propriety of a belief in
consent is not an all or nothing proposition. it depends on the facts that are
presented.

here,
the agreed facts include the proposition that l.m. previously asserted her lack
of consent to sexual interactions with mr. oyenuga, perhaps repeatedly. more
importantly for our purposes, however, the facts also demonstrate no actual communication
of consent by l.m. towards mr. oyenuga. furthermore, when mr. oyenuga made the
impugned advance that resulted in him bending her over on the couch and
pressing his groin against her buttocks, and then pulling her pants down, l.m.
actively resisted and in fact fought back against him.

in
short, on the facts agreed, mr. oyenuga must have been aware that there was no
communication of consent, and that his application of force had been met with
resistance. no evidence in this case suggests that mr. oyenuga was unable to
accurately assess quantifiable physical realities. even if mr. oyenuga was
possessed with a delusion-activated mistaken belief in l.m.’s consent at the
outset of the interaction, his only legal recourse upon being presented with
resistance was to immediately discontinue his actions. he did not do so and
only ultimately stopped his advance when l.m. successfully physically
extricated herself from his grasp. in the face of her strong and active
resistance, mr. oyenuga’s belief in her consent could not have existed and
continued throughout the full and entire course of the interaction.

similarly,
any original and exculpating delusional belief that mr. oyenuga might have had
about l.m.’s consent could not have existed at the moment the sexual interaction
began because there is no evidence she actively communicated her consent or
that he believed she had done so.

although
some evidence exists about mr. oyenuga’s beliefs about l.m.’s attraction to him
as a general matter, there is no evidence in this case that mr. oyenuga was
suffering from a delusion that l.m. communicated her consent to this specific
sex act at this specific time in some way. there is no evidence that mr.
oyenuga was suffering from a delusion that l.m.’s clear no meant yes. both
would be required to constitute consent to the sexual interaction that was
described.

the
foregoing obviously rests on a legal analysis. it is not one that dr. komer
entertained. dr. komer adopted a broad or expansive approach to consent that
did not explore the requirement that it be actively communicated and ongoing. 
that is unsurprising. this observation is not intended as a criticism of dr.
komer. his expertise is that of a forensic psychiatrist. it is the court’s
responsibility to conduct the
s.16
analysis through a legal lens. that is why
the ultimate issue must be decided by the court and not by an expert.
consent
and the requirement to know the acts are wrong

it
must be acknowledged that the question of whether mr. oyenuga ought to be held
criminally responsible does not depend on an entirely legal analysis. the
appropriate query when one examines whether an accused knew his actions were
wrong has a moral dimension that requires an assessment of whether mr. oyenuga
felt personally justified in his actions, and whether he saw his conduct as
justified according to the norms of society.
dobson
at para 24.

the
only appropriate conclusion to draw is that the socially-accepted moral
dimension of appropriate sexual interactions between persons informs and sets
the conditions for the legal requirements of consent in cases of sexual
assault. defining the norms of society as it pertains to the offence of sexual
assault must have, as its starting point, an assessment based on societal views
expressed through statute and jurisprudence.

society
would not justify, excuse or countenance the actions of an individual who
engaged sexually with another in the absence of communicated consent, or
someone who did so despite a clearly communicated absence of continuing
consent. sexual assault presents as an area of the law where there is
substantial if not perfect legal and moral overlap. as a particularly stigmatized
crime against the person, the offence of sexual assault can be distinguished
both from offences that are more regulatory in nature, and that may not express
a moral component.

even
if i was to accept dr. komer’s conclusion that mr. oyenuga was operating under
a deluded belief that l.m. was generally attracted to or welcoming of sexual
advances by him, there is not a sufficient evidentiary foundation presented in
this case that would allow me to conclude that any such delusion extended to a
false belief that l.m. communicated consent to this sexual act or that her
clear “no” somehow meant a clear “yes”. in the absence of evidence of such a
delusion, the only appropriate conclusion that may be drawn in my view is that
mr. oyenuga did in fact understand that his actions were unjustified and
morally wrong.

mr.
oyenuga’s ongoing physical assault of l.m., expressed in the s.279(2) offence is
also important to consider. that charge reflects mr. oyenuga’s effort to
prevent l.m.’s flight to safety or to return her to the apartment where he had
just touched her over her clear resistance. the facts presented about the
forcible confinement demonstrate some evidence of the existence of a mind that
was not operating under a delusion of any consent, let alone a
contemporaneously communicated and ongoing consent.

it
is more likely that mr. oyenuga’s attempt to confine l.m. was indicative of a
recognition that he had offended against her. it either represented an
extension of his original effort to sexually assault her, or it was an effort
to prevent her from fleeing so that she could escape to safety. either way,
given that these actions were effectively contemporaneous to the sexual assault
against l.m., they are difficult to square with a concept of a belief that she
had consented to his advance.

mr.
oyenuga’s relatively proximate statement to the police in which he deployed an
obviously false version of the events supports this assessment. although one
must hold open the possibility that mr. oyenuga’s lie to the police about l.m.
accidentally coming into contact with him was an
ex post facto
gained consciousness
of guilt, there is no evidence to support the suggestion that mr. oyenuga’s
purported delusions were markedly transient, fragile or capable of being
resolved within hours of the commission of the offence. given the temporal
connection to the sexual assault, mr. oyenuga’s effort to mislead the police
was more consistent with a recognition of wrongdoing that was present at the
time of the offence than it is to the contrary inference.
conclusion

as
the crown concedes, and as dr. komer contends, i find that mr. oyenuga was
suffering from a disease of the mind at the time of the offence. his
pre-existing mental health difficulties were, without doubt, adversely affected
by his decision to consume crystal methamphetamine at the time of or shortly
before this offence was committed.

although
i have drawn conclusions that mr. oyenuga understood the nature and quality of
his acts, and knew that they were wrong, such a finding is not required to
dispose of this application

dr.
komer is a highly experienced and very respected forensic psychiatrist. he
spent considerable effort on this matter and attempted to assist the court to
the very best of his abilities. the court is grateful for his assistance in
this case.

unfortunately
though, the information provided by mr. oyenuga to dr. komer, and the evidence
presented to this court through the agreed statement of facts demonstrates a
lack of reliability on the part of mr. oyenuga. he has, by obvious inference,
also resorted to deception and obfuscation in his dealings with dr. komer.

the
information that provided the foundation for the opinion was shot through with
inconsistencies. mr. oyenuga was neither a reliable nor a credible source of
information. the theories of command-direction and a consent-delusion that were
relied upon by dr. komer are alternative and, in my view, are not reconcilable.

neither
proposition pointed to by dr. komer strongly supports a legal conclusion that
mr. oyenuga was incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his
actions, nor of knowing that his actions were wrong.

given
the inherent weakness in the source material, i conclude that the weight that i
can attribute to the reports and testimony of dr. komer are insufficient to
permit the defence to bear its onus to demonstrate, on a balance of
probabilities, that mr. oyenuga should be found not criminally responsible on
account of a mental disorder.

i
conclude therefore that the presumption found at
s.16(2)
of the
criminal code
remains intact. mr. oyenuga will not be exempted from criminal responsibility
in this matter by reason of a mental disorder.
released: september
25, 2025
signed:
justice m.t. poland