source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj60/2025oncj60.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. salehi, 2025 oncj 60
date: 
2025 01 30
court
file no.: oshawa 23-28107197
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
ahsanullah salehi
before
justice joseph hanna
heard
on october 28 - 30, 2024; december 4 -5, 2024; january 17, 2025
oral
reasons given on january 29, 2025
written
reasons for judgment released on january 30, 2025
n. rivers................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
p. aubin
………………………………………………………………..
counsel for mr. salehi
hanna j.:
introduction

ahsanullah salehi was tried for various charges
arising from events that occurred on october 5, 2023 at the durham college
campus in oshawa. the allegations involve two complainants, ishaq habibi and
hashmatullah sherzad.

on the day in question, mr. salehi had multiple interactions
with mr. habibi during which he is alleged to have threatened him. mr. salehi also
had an encounter with mr. sherzad and mr. habibi at which time it is alleged he
retrieved an air pistol from his pocket, struck mr. sherzad with it, and
threatened mr. sherzad. at the time of these alleged incidents, mr. salehi was
subject to a probationary term to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.

these are my reasons for judgment.
general principles

mr. salehi is presumed innocent. it is the
crown’s onus to prove his guilt of the offences charged beyond a reasonable
doubt. i cannot convict mr. salehi if i merely believe that he is probably or
likely guilty of an offence. in that situation, he would be entitled to an
acquittal. while proof to an absolute certainty is not required, proof beyond a
reasonable doubt falls much closer to an absolute certainty than to proof on a
balance of probabilities. a reasonable doubt can arise from the evidence or
from the absence of evidence.

the principles in
r. v. w. (d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 
s.c.j. no. 26 apply in this case. in applying these principles, i am not
required to proceed in any particular sequence:
r. v. c.l.y,
2008 scc 2, at para.
12.
what is essential is that i keep the crown’s burden of proof in mind. lack of
credibility on the part of the accused or a defence witness does not equate to
proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt:
r. v. j.h.s.,
2008 scc 30
at
para.
13.
admitted facts

the defence concedes that mr. salehi was on
probation on the date of the alleged offences and that the air pistol seized by
the police was a replica firearm.

it is not in dispute that mr. salehi was
involved in interactions with the complainants on the day of the alleged
incidents.
ishaq habibi’s evidence

ishaq habibi is a 20-year-old student.

he testified that on october 5, 2023 he had four
interactions with a male at the durham college oshawa campus, which was where
he attended school. the defence admits that this male is mr. salehi.

mr. habibi advised that he had only seen mr.
salehi on one previous occasion while driving, about three months prior to the
incident. he said that his friend, aryan, had shown him a picture of this male
before and told him that the male’s name was ahsan.

mr. habibi indicated that mr. salehi was with
two females, one of whom was wearing shorts and a pink top. one of these
females attended the same school as him. he believed her name to be sadaf. mr.
habibi advised that he understood aryan, ahsan, sadaf, and sadaf’s sister to be
friends. aryan used to date sadaf, and he believed that ahsan had been in a
relationship with sadaf’s sister. mr. habibi had learned all of this through
conversations with aryan.

mr. habibi indicated that he and mr. salehi
conversed in both english and dhari during their interactions that day.

he denied that he was in possession of a weapon
on october 5, 2023.
the first interaction

mr. habibi explained that at approximately 12:00
p.m. he was on campus with four or five of his friends. he said he was approached
by mr. salehi. he testified that mr. salehi stared at him before approaching
him, though he acknowledged in cross-examination that he had not mentioned that
he had stared at him when he gave his police statement.

mr. habibi said that mr. salehi told him: “what’s
up? i know you; i’ll assassinate you” and made different kinds of threats
towards him. in examination in-chief, he said his exact words were, “i know
you, and i know your friends and i know where you live, and i’ll shoot you on
the face.” in examination-in-chief,
mr. habibi testified that he told mr. salehi he was in college and walked away.
he indicated that mr. salehi did not say anything else during this interaction.
in cross-examination, he added that when he had asked mr. salehi what his issue
was, mr. salehi responded by saying that mr. habibi had parked his car beside
his friend’s car and that there was an issue about the parking lot. he advised
that he had been dropped off at the campus that day and had not seen either
this mr. salehi or the females at that time. in cross-examination, he indicated
that he did not remember mr. salehi’s exact words but that the threatening
words mentioned earlier captured the meaning of what mr. salehi had said. when
pressed on this point, mr. habibi said that mr. salehi had used these exact
words but that there were other words mr. salehi had said that he could not
remember. he also said in cross-examination that mr. salehi had said a lot of
stuff, besides his threatening words, but he could not recall them. he also
acknowledged that he and mr. salehi had cursed at each other during this
interaction. when asked what he had said to mr. salehi, mr. habibi responded,
“whatever he told me, i told him the exact same thing.” he denied however
threatening mr. salehi or taunting him. he could not remember whether mr.
salehi had said anything to him about sadaf. he said whatever was going on
during this interaction had nothing to do with sadaf.

mr. habibi said that mr. salehi was very close
to him during this interaction, whispering in his ear. he said the females were
about three steps back from them. he said his own friends were about three
meters away during the interaction. in cross-examination he agreed that one of
the females appeared to be stepping in between him and mr. salehi to ensure a
fight did not occur.

he testified that this interaction lasted
between two and four minutes and half minutes. he agreed there was continuous
talking during that time and that there was a lot more said during that period
than he could now remember.

mr. habibi agreed that he had told the police
that his friends could provide information regarding this interaction but that
he refused to provide the officers their names.

he denied having an expectation that he would
speak to this male again that day, however agreed that he told the police he
had told mr. salehi at the end of the first interaction, “we're going to talk
about it later if i have time.”

overall, i found that there were sufficient
inconsistencies and gaps in mr. habibi’s evidence which caused me concerns about
who said what to whom during this interaction.
the second interaction

after the initial interaction, mr. habibi said
he went to the cafeteria and then called his friend hashma sherzad to tell him
what had happened. in cross-examination, he initially said this call occurred
while he was in the cafeteria but later indicated that he had left the
cafeteria when on the phone because he could not hear mr. sherzad due to the
crowd in the cafeteria. mr. habibi said mr. sherzad told him they would call
the police when he arrived to meet him at the school.

he testified that while outside of the building mr.
salehi approached him again and made further threats about shooting him in the
face, killing him, killing his family, raping him, and raping his sister. in
examination in-chief he advised that mr. salehi did not say anything else
during this interaction. in cross-examination he added that mr. salehi was
asking him to go off campus, where there would not be cameras, to fight. he
also agreed that he probably cursed at mr. salehi during this interaction.

mr. habibi indicated that he believed mr. salehi
had a weapon during this interaction. he advised that the male had his hand
inside the pouch of his hoodie. it appeared as if he was holding a gun inside
the pouch. in cross-examination he explained that he could see the shape of the
gun through the hoodie.

he initially said in cross-examination that
there was no physical interaction between him and mr. salehi and that he could
not recall any pushing occurring between the two of them. when confronted with
his police statement he agreed that he had told the police that the two males
were pushing each other.

mr. habibi also indicated in cross-examination
that mr. salehi reached to his pocket and pushed him. at this point mr. habibi
recalled grabbing mr. salehi’s hand. he said, “once he pushed me, then i
grabbed his hand.”

i found mr. habibi’s inconsistency regarding
whether there had been any physical interaction between him and mr. salehi concerning.
the third interaction

afterwards, mr. salehi and two females left. mr.
habibi said he then waited for mr. sherzad to arrive and met him at the gym
building. the two got into mr. sherzad’s silver honda civic and drove towards
student services. mr. sherzad was driving and mr. habibi was in the passenger
seat.

he testified that while driving he observed mr.
salehi in a white corolla which was driving in the opposite direction. he described this vehicle as having a large islamic logo on the back
window.

mr. habibi advised that he told mr. sherzad,
“that is this guy” and that mr. sherzad then made a u-turn to follow the
vehicle for the purposes of recording its licence plate. he said they then
stopped their vehicle directly behind the white corolla which was stopped at a
stop sign. in cross-examination, mr. habibi denied hearing mr. sherzad honk
their vehicle’s horn at the corolla.

according to mr. habibi, mr. salehi exited the corolla
and approached the driver’s side of the honda civic. he said mr. salehi opened
the driver’s side door and hit mr. sherzad with a black pistol, two times. he
said mr. salehi was about to hit mr. sherzad in the face but that he hit mr.
sherzad’s hand when the latter defended himself. he believed the second blow
was to the area between mr. sherzad’s shoulder and neck. he advised that mr.
salehi hit mr. sherzad with the top portion of the gun, the part where a bullet
would come out. in cross-examination, mr. habibi maintained he was 100 percent
positive that he saw the gun at this point.

he advised that during this interaction inside
the honda civic, while mr. salehi was holding the gun, he told mr. sherzad, “you
see this, i will shoot you”; “i will come after you.” mr. habibi said that mr.
salehi was saying these words while he was hitting mr. sherzad or after he had
hit him.

mr. habibi stated that he was shocked at this
point. after about five seconds he got out of the vehicle for the purposes of
separating the fight and to defend himself and his friend.

while outside the vehicle, he said he exchanged
pushes with one of the females. mr. salehi then got back into the other vehicle
and he and the females left.

mr. habibi agreed in cross-examination that at
the time of the incident he believed the gun was real and that it scared him.
he agreed he thought he and his friend might get shot. he was confronted with
his police statement wherein he described the gun as “like a bb gun or
something fake.” mr. habibi explained that while at the police station, prior
to giving his statement, a detective had told him that the gun was not real.

mr. habibi agreed that because he had thought
the gun was real at the time, he did not want to put himself in a situation
where he might get shot. he said he got out of his car despite this because he
wanted to defend himself. he denied he was trying to get into a physical altercation
with mr. salehi, but maintained he was trying to defend himself. when asked
what his plan was, he responded that he did not remember and that he had been
mad at the time. he then added that he had been scared and mad.

mr. habibi agreed that he forgot to tell the
police that he had exited his vehicle and approached the corolla. he explained
that when he gave his statement, his “brain was… all around” given what had
just happened.

he testified that the white corolla had been
driving fast prior to stopping at the stop sign. he maintained this position
after being shown in court surveillance video of the incident. i found mr.
habibi’s insistence on this point undermined his credibility somewhat.

much of what mr. habibi described of this interaction
was supported by other evidence, in particular the evidence of mr. sherzad and
the video surveillance evidence. when i consider the evidence as a whole, mr.
habibi exiting his vehicle does not cause me to doubt his account of having
seen mr. salehi with a gun. as he explained, he was both scared and mad. his
anger provides an explanation for why he would approach mr. salehi despite what
had just happened.
the fourth interaction

following the incident at the stop sign, mr.
habibi advised that he and mr. sherzad drove to the gym building. he said while
he was standing outside the building there was another interaction with mr.
salehi.

in examination-in-chief, he described mr. salehi
rolling down the passenger window of his vehicle and
threatening him again, saying: “i’ll come after your house, i’ll kill you, and
kill your friends.” in cross-examination, he indicated that mr. salehi said “i
will rape you. i will rape your family, your friends, and your whole
existence.”

in examination in-chief, mr. habibi said he and mr.
salehi were cursing at each other during this interaction. in
cross-examination, mr. habibi said he was quiet the whole time and that he was
in shock. when asked in cross if he said anything during this interaction, mr.
habibi responded, “no, nothing.” i found mr. habibi’s inconsistency here
regarding his involvement during this incident negatively affected his reliability
about this incident.

mr. habibi testified that during this incident
the females in the corolla did not say anything. when confronted with his
police statement he acknowledged that he had told the police that one of the
females had cursed during the interaction. he explained that this inconsistency
was due to his having forgotten about that happening.

mr. habibi said that while he was standing in
front of the gym building, mr. sherzad called 911. he said the 911 call would
have been between 12:40 and 12:57.
hashmatullah sherzad’s evidence

mr. sherzad is also a 20-year-old student. he testified that on
october 5, 2023 mr. habibi called him to inform him that he had been
threatened. mr. sherzad advised that he then attended durham college for the
purpose of getting mr. habibi somewhere safe to call the authorities.

he described picking up mr. habibi and driving towards the
student services building, at which point mr. habibi pointed out a white
corolla and said, “that’s the car.” mr. sherzad then made a u-turn to follow
the vehicle and obtain its licence plate number.

mr. sherzad testified that the white corolla stopped at a stop
sign. a male, which it is agreed was mr. salehi, exited the corolla and
approached his vehicle. mr. sherzad said mr. salehi opened mr. sherzad’s door,
retrieved a gun from the front pocket of his hoodie, racked it once, and said
“you see this gun? i’m coming after you and your family too.” video of the
incident confirms that mr. salehi attended at mr. sherzad’s door and leaned
inside the vehicle for three seconds.

mr. sherzad testified that mr. salehi swung twice at him with the
gun. he indicated that mr. salehi attempted to hit him in the head with the gun,
but he blocked the first blow. he said he was struck in the hand but
demonstrated in court that he meant the forearm area. he stated that mr. salehi
swung again with the gun, and that he leaned back to avoid being hit. he again
demonstrated this in court by leaning back in his chair. my mention of mr.
sherzad’s actions in court are meant to simply explain the way he described the
events. i am aware of the limitations of demeanor evidence, and i do not put
significant weight on it in this case:
r. v. rhayel,
2015 onca 377, at
para.
85;
r. v. j.l.,
2022 onca 271, at para.
6.

the defence argued that mr. sherzad’s account was implausible
given the video footage of this incident depicted a very brief interaction. i
disagree. in my view, the video shows mr. salehi in a position for a long
enough period to commit the acts described by mr. sherzad. mr. sherzad indicated
the gun was pulled out “as soon as” mr. salehi was at his door. in
cross-examination, he agreed he was being hit immediately after the gun was
racked. i appreciate that at one point in examination-in-chief, mr. sherzad
agreed with crown counsel that the hitting motions occurred after the threat.
in cross-examination he indicated the threats were being made while he was
being hit. i do not find this minor discrepancy regarding the precise sequence
of events to be significant. ultimately, i find that mr. sherzad was describing
a very quick event and that there was sufficient time for it to have occurred.

mr.
sherzad testified that mr. salehi and mr. habibi had a verbal altercation in
front of mr. sherzad’s vehicle. mr. salehi then went back to his car. he
mentioned there being two females present at the time. one of these females
exited the corolla and was pushing mr. habibi. he opined that mr. habibi was trying
to defend them.

mr. sherzad stated that mr. salehi and the
female got back into their vehicle and left. he and mr. habibi then
drove to the gym building. mr. sherzad entered the building and called 911.
when he came out, he heard mr. habibi and mr. salehi yelling at each other. he
said he heard mr. salehi say “i’m coming after you. i know where you live.” he
agreed that mr. habibi was probably saying things. he said that he did not hear
anything and that he was not involved in the situation. he acknowledged he told
the police that mr. salehi had been cursing for five minutes during this
interaction and agreed after watching video of the incident that the
interaction was closer to a minute. i do not find this inaccurate time estimate
undermined the credibility or reliability of his evidence regarding the core of
his allegations. when confronted, he admitted that he told the police one of
the females had been cursing. he explained that he had forgotten this given
that the event occurred over a year ago.

mr. sherzad advised that the police arrived
within minutes of his 911 call.

he
testified that while he had seen pictures of mr. salehi on social media prior
to the incident, he had only seen him once in real life while driving with mr.
habibi. on that occasion, mr. habibi drew his attention to mr. salehi, who was
passing by in another vehicle. he agreed that in his police statement, when
asked if he had ever interacted with mr. salehi before, he responded, “never,
ever. i have, this is my first time that i have seen him in my whole life.” he
explained that he had meant that he had never interacted with mr. salehi before
and indicated that he should have been more focused in his response to the
officer. i found mr. sherzad’s explanation for this purported inconsistency to
be reasonable.

mr. sherzad was shown photographs of his arm taken by the police following
the incident. he testified that a mark on his forearm visible in the
photographs was caused by being assaulted by mr. salehi. when it was suggested
to him that he had not been hit by the gun, mr. sherzad responded, “you’ve seen
the picture”, referring to the photographs filed of his arm. i find that the
photographs of this injury provide some confirmatory support for mr. sherzad’s
allegations.

mr. sherzad initially agreed in
cross-examination that mr. salehi had not pointed the gun at him as if to shoot
him, stating rather that, “he racked it.” he then said he could not remember
and explained that he did want to say something in court that he was not sure
of. defence counsel asked mr. sherzad if he was sure from watching the
video surveillance of the incident in court that mr. salehi had not pointed the
gun at anyone outside of the vehicle. mr. sherzad agreed he was.

on this issue, mr. aubin cross-examined mr. sherzad about a
portion of his police statement.
q. so, i’m
gonna take you to page 29 of your transcript from the october 5th, 2023 video
statement that you give to police. okay. and the officer says to you, “and did
he point it at you and your friend”, and you said “no, he first pointed at me”,
and the officer says, “yeah”, and then you say, “and then when he went to step
in the car, my friend was outside of my car and he came out of my

car again and he was pointing
at him.” do you recall saying that to the police?
a. i said that
he was pointing the gun at me inside the car, and he was pointing the gun at my
friend.

my observation was that when mr. sherzad gave this response his intonation
was indicative of him asking a question as opposed to making a statement. i
have listened to the audio recording of this portion of his evidence. in my
view, it confirms that mr. sherzad used a clarifying intonation.

mr. aubin responded to mr. sherzad by stating, “outside of the
car, yes.”

the exchange in court then continued:
p. aubin: q. do you want me, do you want me
to read it to you again?
a. i get it but i told you i was at a state of my mind
that was worried about my life. it happened two hours after, the statement
happened two hours after the incident, so that’s why.
q. so, you’re agreeing that’s wrong, what you tell the police
there. that didn’t happen?
a. i, i was out of the state of my mind,
yeah.
q. i understand that’s your explanation for why it’s wrong,
but you’re agreeing that that’s wrong when you said that to the police?
a. yes. i think, yeah.
the court: mr. aubin, can you give me the question and answer
that you read out?
p. aubin: yes.
the court: page 29.
p. aubin: of, of the transcript from the october 5th, 2023
video statement, and what i read out was, the officer says, “and did he point
it at you and your friend?”, question mark, and then the answer was, “no, he
first pointed at me, and then when he went to step in the car, my friend was
outside of my car, and he came out of the car again, and he was pointing at
him.

after some clarification from the court, the
questioning continued:
p. aubin: q.
sir, would you agree with me that that’s a pretty serious thing to get wrong in
your police statement, to tell the police that somebody pointed a gun at your
friend when that didn’t happen?
a. yes. as i
said, i wasn’t in the state of my mind; i was worried about my life, and this
happened out of everything that day was short(ph). the statement happened two
hours after that, so i wasn’t physically and mentally there.

i do not find that mr. sherzad was seeking to
mislead the officer. first, when the officer asked mr. sherzad whether he had
pointed “it” and him and his friend mr. sherzad responded “no”. this appears to
be an odd response if his intention was to indicate to the officer that he had
pointed a gun at them. second, mr. sherzad in this portion of his police
statement referred to mr. salehi pointing at him, stepping into his car,
exiting his car again and pointing at mr. habibi. there is no mention in this
part of the statement of an item being pointed at mr. sherzad or mr habibi
outside of the vehicle. he does not mention he pointed a gun. third, the video
evidence is consistent with the actual words used by mr. sherzad in his
statement. namely, mr. salehi entering his vehicle, exiting his vehicle, and
gesturing towards mr. sherzad and mr. habibi. fourth, i find that when mr.
sherzad was confronted with this portion of his statement, he sought
clarification regarding what he had said. fifth, even if mr. sherzad had been
indicating to the police that mr. salehi pointed the gun while outside of the
vehicle, it would be reasonable for him to have been mixed up shortly after the
events, given the mental stress of having just been hit by a gun combined with
the fact that mr. salehi did in fact enter his vehicle, exit, and gesture
towards mr. sherzad and mr. habibi.

mr. sherzad denied being in possession of any
weapon that day or showing a weapon to mr. salehi. he was not challenged on
this point in cross-examination.

overall, i found mr. sherzad to be a credible
and reliable witness. he testified in a straightforward manner. he was neither evasive
nor argumentative in cross-examination. furthermore, the core aspects of his
allegations were not undermined through cross-examination or other evidence led
at trial. on the contrary, i find that there is substantial evidence which
confirms mr. sherzad’s testimony.
the surveillance footage

surveillance footage from durham college was introduced
at trial. i have reviewed it several times. i also zoomed in on it at certain
points, particularly during the sequence of events leading up to and during the
stop sign incident. i will highlight the portions of video evidence i consider
most relevant.

at 12:40:10 p.m. the white corolla driven by mr.
salehi is seen driving west on founders drive while the honda civic being
driven by mr. sherzad is driving east. the civic does a u-turn and then drives
west.

at 12:40:24 the white corolla is stopped at a
stop sign at the intersection of founders drive and avenue of champions. the
vehicle is on founders drive, facing west. the honda civic is stopped a few
feet behind it.

at 12:40:28, mr. salehi is seen exiting the
driver’s door of the corolla and walking towards the driver’s door of the
civic. at 12:40:32 mr. salehi is as at the driver’s side door of the civic and
the door opens. at 12:40:33 mr. salehi’s body is leaned inside the driver’s
side door. when the video is zoomed in, some movement can be seen from within
the vehicle. at 12:40:36 mr. saleh’s backs out from the doorway and the door
closes. at this point, a female who has exited the corolla is now near the
front the civic.

at 12:40:38 mr. habibi exits the passenger door
of the civic. at 12:40:43 mr. salehi has entered the driver’s side of the
corolla and closed the door. the female and mr. habibi interact with each
other. the female appears to be trying to prevent mr. habibi from approaching
the white corolla. at 12:40:48 mr. habibi is near the driver’s side door of the
corolla. the female’s body is between him and the door. at 12:40:51 the female
pushes mr. habibi away with one hand and he takes a few steps back. at this
point the driver’s door of the corolla is slightly open and mr. salehi’s foot
is visible on the ground. the female then continues to keep her body in front
of mr. habibi, who is now closer the civic. between 12:40:57 at 12:41:05 mr.
salehi makes gestures in the direction of mr. sherzad and mr. habibi. this can
be seen when the video is watched zoomed in. at 12:41:10 mr. habibi is standing
in front of the civic and gestures in the direction of mr. salehi.

at 12:41:11 mr. salehi closes the driver’s door.
between 12:41:16 – 12: 41:18, the female then enters the back seat of the
corolla and mr. sherzad and mr. habibi enter the civic. the corolla then
proceeds west on founders avenue and is off camera at 12:41:23. the civic turns
left on avenue of champions, going south, and is off camera at 12:41:33. at
12:41:45 the corolla is seen driving eastbound on founders, and then turning
south on avenue of champions at 12:41:48.

at 12:42:10, the honda civic is seen arriving
near the gym building. mr. sherzad and mr. habibi exit the vehicle. at 12:42:32
the corolla arrives near the gym building. a van is in front of it blocking its
path of travel. at 12:42:40 the corolla is stopped parallel to the civic near
the building. the van is still in front of the corolla. at 12:43:12, the van
has parked and is no longer in the corolla’s path. the corolla moves closer
towards the civic. at 12:43:28 the corolla begins to drive away and has left
the area of the gym building by 12:43:37.

at 12:46:46 the corolla is driving east on commencement
drive approaching simcoe street. the vehicle then turns south onto simcoe street.
mr.
salehi’s arrest and the discovery of the air pistol

at 12:42 p.m., police constable ryan banstra
was dispatched in relation the alleged incident which occurred at the durham
college. he participated in mr. salehi and his girlfriend, sarah khulmi’s,
arrest. the arrest occurred near the intersection of taunton road and simcoe
street. footage from p.c. banstra’s body worn camera shows that mr. salehi was ordered
at gunpoint to exit the driver’s seat of the corolla at 1:03 p.m. he was
immediately taken into police custody.

police constable natasha tymcio searched the corolla.
she located a beige tote bag on the front passenger floor. she opened the bag
and observed what appeared to be a handgun. the firearm’s report filed relating
to this item describes it as a 6 mm calibre co
2
semi-automatic pistol fitted with a detachable co
2
magazine. it is further described to resemble with near precision a
1911-a1 semi-automatic pistol. the pistol was not in firing condition given
that it lacked a co
2
canister and had a faulty
magazine.

photographs filed of the pistol show that it
contains a slide which can be moved. no dna or fingerprints were located on the
item.
mr. salehi’s statement to the police

following his arrest, mr. salehi provided a
video recorded statement to detective trafford of the durham regional police
service. the defence concedes that this statement is voluntary and admissible.

mr. salehi’s police statement is a mixed
statement. it contains both potentially inculpatory and exculpatory aspects:
r.
v. m.p.,
2018 onca 608, at paras.
60 – 61. the principles in w.d. apply to
the exculpatory parts of it:
r. v. bucik,
2011 onca 546, at paras.
32-34

the statement is not particularly detailed and
the narrative jumps from event to event. there are portions of the statement
which lack sufficient context to fully understand what mr. salehi is referring
to. for example, mr. salehi often mentions pronouns without elaboration of who
he is referring to. at times during his statement, mr. salehi exercised his
right to silence. it is important to emphasize that i cannot draw any inference
against him for doing so:
r. v. hill,
2015 onca 616, at paras.
43, 46.

the statement’s lack of detail poses some
difficulty to assessing mr. salehi’s credibility and reliability. this is not a
reason to reject the exculpatory parts of mr. salehi’s statement. it only highlights
the importance of considering his denials in the context of the evidence as a
whole:
r. v. r.m.,
2024 abca 321, at paras.
10 – 23;
r. v. van
deventer,
2021 skca 163, at paras.
16 – 25;
r. v. vigon-campuzano,
2022 onca 234
at paras.
24, 38;
r. v. hoohing,
2007 onca 577
at para.
15.

when asked what happened, at p. 7 of the
transcript, mr. salehi told the detective “that guy had a thing too in his hand
and he poked me right here. you can see the marks on here.” when saying this, mr.
salehi points to near his right hip area and lifts his shirt. despite pausing
and zooming in on the video, i was unable to observe any marks. no evidence was
led of there being any marks on mr. salehi’s body and detective trafford was
not asked whether he saw any. while it is not completely clear which
interaction mr. salehi is referring to, contextually, i find that it is most
likely that he is referring to his second interaction with mr. habibi.

mr. salehi told the detective that he was
supposed to clean “her” car and pick it up from the college. he said that his
girlfriend’s sister had a problem with the guys that he saw. he stated that
this problem related to them bothering her and scratching her car. he indicated
that he had dropped “her”, presumably his girlfriend’s sister, off.

mr. salehi agreed that he initially had an
altercation with just one of the males. he described exchanging looks with this
person and that the male called him a “motherfucker” in farsi. he said he told
his girlfriend to stay put while he conversed with the male. he described postering
between him and the male and that they exchanged words about each looking at
the other. he told the detective that “nothing happened and just walked away.”

mr. salehi stated that he saw the male again. the
male was on the phone with a friend who mr. salehi appears to have assumed was
mr. sherzad.


he next described leaving and that he saw the
male and his friend following their car and that “he” was honking at them. he
said that he stopped and went to talk to “him”.

he indicates that the driver showed him a big
knife. mr. salehi then states, “i had that – i go to the thing. i have that air
– airsoft” and that “we go with that thing, laser tags and stuff, yeah. but i –
i never like touched him or anything, like… i never like got physical with
them.” while mr. salehi denied any physical interaction, it is clear to me that
he was acknowledging that he had the airsoft pistol on him at the time he was
at mr. sherzad’s vehicle.

mr. salehi denied threatening the males with the
gun. he also denied pointing the gun. he indicated that words were exchanged
about their mothers.

mr. salehi mentioned knowing one of the male’s
friends. he stated:
i know – not him, like
his other friends, ari (ph) and riel (ph)…yeah, i know him. he used to be with
my friends and he was trying to like be with my girlfriend…like he was trying
to like go after her. i found out about that, like.

it is not clear who mr. salehi is referring to
about trying to be with his girlfriend.

mr. salehi mentioned going to the same high
school with a male, but he does specify who he is talking about. when detective
trafford asked mr. salehi what he used the gun for, he responded “air tag.” he
advised that he bought the pistol online and that he would go paintballing with
friends. when asked if he kept the gun in his car, he responded “no, that’s not
my car. no.” when asked if he carried it with him, he responded, “no.” detective
trafford then asked him why he would have the gun and mr. salehi responded, “it
was in the car, her car” and said, “like from the last time probably we went.”

when asked again if he pointed the gun, mr.
salehi answered, “no, i didn’t point it. no, no, no.” the officer then asked
him if he brought it out at any point, to which mr. salehi responded, “it was
in my pocket.” the detective then asked if he brought it out of his pocket; mr.
salehi responded “no.” the officer asked if anyone was able to see it. mr.
salehi made a thinking sound and responded, “i don’t think so.”

mr. salehi then stated that “they have the same
guns too, the big ones.” he clarified that he was referring to paintball guns
and indicated that “they have it in their car too.” he then stated, “we used to
go with them but they stopped talking with us because he trying to be with my
girlfriend.”

again, it is not clear who the “he” is that mr. salehi is referring to.

towards the end of the statement, at p. 23 of
the transcript, mr. salehi asked if “the guy” would be charged. he said that he
had “put” a knife on him. i consider it most likely that mr. salehi was
referring to the same incident he had mentioned at p. 7 of the transcript when
he described being “poked”, and not the point when he was at mr. sherzad’s
door. i draw this inference because when describing his interaction with mr.
sherzad at mr. sherzad’s vehicle mr. salehi mentions being shown a knife but
does not indicate being touched by one.

when describing the knife being “put” on him,
mr. salehi points on video to the left side of his waist. the officer asked him
if the male had stabbed him and mr. salehi responded, “no, he’s just like, ‘i’m
going to put it in if you don’t walk away.’ then i walked away with my girlfriend.”
mr. salehi said that this event occurred when they were in between two
buildings. given his description of this event, it is apparent that mr. salehi
was referring to his second interaction with mr. habibi while outside. ms.
khulmi testified she was present for this incident and very close by. she was
obviously motivated to assist mr. salehi. she did not testify to observing mr.
habibi brandishing a knife. i find it unlikely that she would have forgotten
that or failed to mention it if she had observed it.

if mr. salehi was talking about the same
incident when he describes being poked by a knife and when he mentions a knife
being “put” on him, it is somewhat odd he demonstrates two different sides of
his body on video. with the passage of time, it would be perfectly reasonable
to forget which side of one’s body one was touched. in this case, mr. salehi is
describing being touched with the knife just hours prior. moreover, he claimed
moments earlier in his statement that he had marks on his body as a result. in
this context, i find it less likely that he would get mixed up about which side
of his body was touched by a knife. if mr. salehi was claiming to have been
touched twice with a knife, then that might explain why he pointed to two different
sides of his body.
sarah khulmi’s evidence

the only defence witness was mr. salehi’s girlfriend, sarah khulmi. she
is 19 years, has no criminal record, and is a student at ontario tech
university. her sister is sadaf khulmi.

ms. khulmi acknowledged in cross-examination
that she wanted to protect mr. salehi and would do whatever she could to try
and help him stay out of jail.

she testified that on the day in question her
sister was going to attend school at durham college and lend the white toyota
corolla to her and mr. salehi so they could go to the eaton centre.

she said she was with mr. salehi the entire day
until their arrest. she testified that while at durham college, her sister
pointed out a male to her and mr. salehi and advised them that this male had
sexually assaulted her a week prior. while she was unable to name this person
in court, the witness was clearly referring to mr. habibi. i will therefore
refer to him by name when summarizing her evidence. she acknowledged that mr.
salehi seemed somewhat angry at hearing this.

ms. khulmi said that mr. habibi approached sadaf
when mr. salehi stepped between them. she remained close enough to see what was
happening and hear what was said. she maintained in cross-examination that she
was within a metre of mr. habibi during the interaction. she insisted that she
could hear the two men speaking. she denied that mr. salehi made any threats
during this interaction. when it was suggested to her that she would not have
heard if mr. salehi had quietly made a threat, she responded that she would
have heard it.

she described the interaction as follows: mr.
habibi told mr. salehi to get out of the way. mr. salehi responded that mr.
habibi was not going to go near sadaf. mr. habibi asked him what he was going
to do about it. mr. habibi then repeatedly told mr. salehi to come outside. in
examination-in-chief, she said she did not recall mr. salehi saying anything in
response. in cross-examination she indicated that mr. salehi told mr. habibi to
get away and asked him what he was doing. she said mr. salehi was not being
aggressive at all.

ms. khulmi said the interaction ended when she
pulled mr. salehi away as mr. habibi was yelling. she testified that mr. salehi
did not threaten or touch mr. habibi. she said mr. salehi did not have anything
in his hands nor did he have any weapons.

she described a second interaction with mr. habibi while walking
through a field. she said mr. habibi was screaming at them. he was swearing at
them in farsi. she said that mr. habibi charged at mr. salehi and pushed him.
she described mr. habibi taunting mr. salehi, trying to provoke him. in
cross-examination she said that mr. salehi said, “get the fuck out of here.”
she said she was about a metre away during this interaction. she said that she
and sadaf pulled mr. salehi away.

the three then got into the corolla. mr. salehi was driving. she was
in the front passenger seat and sadaf sat in the back. while driving to drop
off sadaf, she said the vehicle with mr. habibi and his friend passed them, and
repeatedly honked at them. she testified that this vehicle then came right
behind them and was honking “even more.” she said the vehicle honked more than
10 times. in cross-examination she said they were honking over and over again.
she said mr. salehi put the vehicle in park and approached the other vehicle.
from the vehicle she saw mr. salehi talk to the driver of that car and return
to the corolla. she said she only looked in that direction for a second. in
cross-examination she said she did not believe it was possible that mr. salehi
opened the door to the other vehicle. she explained that she believed she would
have heard that.

she said mr. habibi then came up to the window. he was screaming at
mr. salehi to come out of the car. sadaf then got out of the car to tell mr.
habibi to go back inside his car. sadaf then entered the car and they drove to
a building where there were firetrucks.

while at that building, they encountered mr. habibi and his friend
again. ms. khulmi said the men cursed at them in farsi. she and mr. salehi then
dropped sadaf off and began driving towards downtown. shortly after, they were
pulled over and arrested.

ms. khulmi denied seeing mr. salehi with any weapon that day. she
also denied seeing the air soft pistol that day prior to the police locating
it. she testified that she did not know mr. salehi to own an airsoft gun. when
asked if he had any use for having something like that on that day, she said he
used to go paintballing like a year ago. when asked if he had a plan to go that
day, she responded, “i’m not sure if it was that day, but he did mention that
he did want to go.” when pressed about whether she was suggesting that there
may have been a plan to go paintballing that day she insisted that she was not
suggesting that. she said:
i’m not
suggesting that the was the plan for him to go paintballing, i said him and his
friends had plans later on, not later on that week, but some time to go
paintballing. i’m not suggesting it was that day they that they were gonna go,
‘cause me and him made plans to go shopping that day, exclusively just
shopping.

ms. khulmi claimed to not know who the bag which was by her feet in
the car containing the pistol belonged to. she testified that she did not
believe it was possible that mr. salehi had a gun in his pocket.

when asked if it was possible there was a gun in his hoodie that she
did not see she responded, “no.” she explained that she had hugged mr. salehi
frequently that day and would have probably felt it.

ms. khulmi was obviously motivated to help mr. salehi. she admitted
as much. while she denied she would lie for him, and i cannot assume she would,
her feelings towards mr. salehi are a relevant factor for me to consider when
assessing her evidence:
r. v. tash,
2013 onca 380, at para.
41.

i did not find ms. khulmi to be a believable witness nor does her
evidence leave me in a reasonable doubt.

first, i found that she at the very least exaggerated when she
testified about the complainants’ vehicle honking. she said this occurred more
than 10 times and that it was honking over and over again. the video of the
relevant period shows eight pedestrians who do not appear to react whatsoever
prior to mr. salehi getting out of the vehicle. while i do not rule out the
possibility that the vehicle honked, i consider it contrary to human experience
that there would have been repeated honking to the extent ms. khulmi testified
about without eliciting some visible reaction from the pedestrians. to put it
bluntly, honking is loud and generally startling.

second, ms. khulmi’s confidence that mr. salehi did not open the
door to the complainants’ vehicle was not credible. her explanation that she
believed she would have heard him open the door made no sense. i consider it implausible
that she would have expected to be able to hear the door open from where she
was. furthermore, i am puzzled about how the noise a door would make could have
any impact on her belief regarding whether mr. salehi opened the door. it
appeared clear to me that ms. khulmi was simply unwilling to agree to a
suggestion which she believed may make mr. salehi look bad.

third, ms. khulmi testified that she did not believe it was possible
that mr. salehi could have had a gun in his pocket. mr. salehi acknowledged in
his statement that he had the gun in pocket at least at some point during the
day. i found the confidence with which ms. khulmi ruled out the possibility to
be unbelievable.

fourth, i consider it implausible that ms. khulmi would not have
seen the pistol at some point during the day of the incident. her evidence was
that she had been with mr. salehi throughout the period while they were at the
college right until the time of their arrest. she was seated in the front seat
of the vehicle and her sister was seated in the back seat. her evidence was
that sadaf was dropped off after the stop sign incident and that she and mr.
salehi then drove towards downtown before being arrested. the arrest occurred
within a very short period after sadaf would have been dropped off. the bag
containing the pistol was found by ms. khulmi’s feet. as indicated earlier, mr.
salehi admitted to the police that he had had the gun in his pocket at some
point. indeed, i interpret mr. salehi’s statement as acknowledging he had the
pistol when he was at mr. sherzad’s vehicle. given this constellation of
factors, i consider it unlikely that ms. khulmi did not observe the pistol at
any time.

fifth, ms. khulmi’s evidence about mr. salehi potentially having
plans to go paintballing was problematic. she initially left open the
possibility that mr. salehi may have had plans to go paintballing that day but
when confronted her evidence became that mr. salehi had plans to go
paintballing not even later that week, but some time later on. she further
confirmed that the plans for the day of the incident exclusively involved going
shopping. it appeared clear to me that ms. khulmi floated the possibility of an
innocent explanation for why mr. salehi would have had the pistol that day but
then quickly abandoned it when questioned further on the topic.

aside for the credibility concerns i have regarding ms. khulmi’s
evidence, i note that she testified that she only momentarily looked towards
mr. sherzad’s vehicle while mr. salehi was at the door. on her own evidence, i
conclude she therefore would not have been able to see what transpired during
that interaction.
conclusion regarding the threatening
count relating to mr. habibi

to prove the actus reus of the offence of threatening the crown must
prove that a reasonable person, aware of all the circumstances in which the
words were uttered, would have perceived them to be a threat of death or bodily
harm. to establish the mens rea, the crown must demonstrate the accused
subjectively intended the threatening words to intimidate or to be taken
seriously:
r. v. mcrae,
2013 scc 68, at paras.
9, 10 - 29.

given the concerns i highlighted relating to mr. habibi’s testimony,
i am unwilling to ground a conviction on his evidence without sufficient
support from other evidence. i do not doubt that he and mr. salehi exchanged words,
but i simply am not satisfied to the requisite level as to who said what. i
believe it likely that mr. salehi made threatening comments towards mr. habibi,
but i am not sure what if anything mr. habibi was saying to him. context
matters in determining whether the crown has proven both the actus reus and
mens rea of the offence. i have considered whether mr. sherzad’s evidence
relating to the incident outside of the gym building provides sufficient
support to establish a conviction for a threat towards mr. habibi. given mr. sherzad’s
acknowledgment that he lacked much of the context of what was being said and
that he was not involved in the discussion i have concluded that it does not. i
am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of mr. salehi’s guilt on this
charge.
conclusions regarding the alleged offences
relating to the stop sign incident

in assessing whether the crown has met its burden of proof with
respect to the remaining counts, i have considered whether there is
confirmatory evidence. evidence can provide confirmatory weight even if it does
not directly confirm the key allegations or directly implicate the accused,
where it is capable of confirming or supporting certain aspects of a witness's
credibility or reliability in the context of the specific challenges made by
defence counsel:
r. v. varghese,
2024 onca 555, at paras.
48 – 49;
r.
v. j.b.,
2022 onca 214, at para.
34;
r. v. primmer,
2021 onca 564,
at paras.
33, 38-42, leave to appeal refused, s.c.c.a. no. 462, citing
r.
v. demedeiros,
2018 abca 241, 364 c.c.c. (3d) 271, at para.
8, aff'd
2019
scc 11, 1 s.c.r. 568;
r. v. j.b., 2022 onca 214, at paras.
34. the
degree to which confirmatory evidence advances the crown's case is a matter of
weight for the trial judge to resolve and "is part of the broader
assessment of the complainant's credibility and reliability that trial judges
must make based on the entirety of the evidence":
j.b., at para.
34;
demedeiros, at para. 10;
r. v. g.h.,
2023 onca 89, at para.
20.

having considered the evidence as a whole, i am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the crown has proven the charges arising from the stop
sign incident. the following factors in combination support my conclusion that
the crown has met its onus regarding these allegations.

first, as already explained, i found mr. sherzad to be a convincing
witness whose evidence was not significantly undermined. i accept his evidence.

second, the evidence of mr. habibi regarding what transpired in mr.
sherzad’s vehicle was consistent in its material aspects with mr. sherzad’s
account. while i was unwilling to rely on mr. habibi’s evidence alone to ground
a conviction on the threatening charge involving himself, i can obviously
accept some, none, or all of a witness’s evidence. i found his evidence to be
supportive of mr. sherzad’s.

third, the surveillance footage is confirmatory of mr. sherzad’s evidence.
it reveals mr. salehi leave his vehicle, approach mr. sherzad’s vehicle and
lean his body inside the doorway of mr. sherzad’s vehicle for three seconds. in
this context, i consider mr. salehi’s action of leaning into the vehicle to be
consistent with an intention to engage in an altercation.

fourth, i find that the injury to mr. sherzad’s arm as depicted in
the photographs filed to be confirmatory of the allegations involving him.

fifth, mr. salehi admits in his police statement that he had the
pistol in his pocket. furthermore, when talking to the detective about his
interaction with mr. sherzad, he states “i had that – i go to the thing. i have
that air – airsoft.” i conclude from these statements that mr. salehi
acknowledged that he had the gun on his person during his encounter with mr.
sherzad.

sixth, the circumstances in which mr. salehi was in possession of
the gun. mr. salehi told the police that the gun was in sadaf’s vehicle. he
therefore chose to put it in his pocket. there is no evidence that mr. salehi
was planning on going to play paintball that day. more importantly, the air
pistol was found to be inoperable. accordingly, there does not appear to be any
innocent purpose for why he would be carrying this item.

seventh, the police’s discovery of the airsoft gun inside the
vehicle mr. salehi was driving is confirmatory of mr. sherzad’s account. the
police discovered this item very soon after the events. photographs of the item
reveal that it looks real. moreover, the pistol has a slide at the top which is
consistent with mr. sherzad’s evidence that mr. salehi racked the gun.

eighth, for the reasons stated earlier, ms. khulmi’s evidence does
not leave me in a reasonable doubt, nor does it contribute to a reasonable
doubt. i emphasize that in addition to her credibility problems, her own
evidence does not provide her with a sufficient opportunity to observe what
happened inside the doorway of mr. sherzad’s vehicle.

mere acceptance of a complainant’s evidence cannot lead
automatically to rejection of an accused’s evidence:
r. v. a.i.b.,
2023 onca 557
at paras.
16
– 18;
van deventer, at paras.
15, 25. in this case, i reject mr.
salehi’s denials of guilt contained in his statement based on a considered and
reasoned acceptance beyond a reasonable doubt of the truth of conflicting
credible evidence:
r. v. j.j.r.d.,
2006 canlii 40088 (on ca), 215 c.c.c. (3d) 252 (ont. c.a.), at
para.
53. mr. salehi’s exculpatory statements to the police when considered
along with the formidable crown evidence do not leave me in a reasonable doubt:
r. v. vigon-campuzano,
2022 onca 234, at para.
38.

when i consider the evidence in its entirety, as well as the absence
of evidence, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. salehi retrieved
a pistol which was concealed in his hoodie, hit mr. sherzad with it, and made
threatening remarks towards mr. sherzad.

the weapons charges are particularized as involving an imitation
firearm. the only reasonable inference is that the gun used by mr. salehi to
hit mr. sherzad is the air pistol seized by the police. there is no dispute
that this item meets the definition of an imitation firearm. the way i find the
pistol was used obviously qualifies it as weapon. furthermore, i have no doubt
that mr. salehi meant to conceal the pistol in his pocket as he approached mr.
sherzad’s vehicle.

based on my findings of the fact, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that mr. salehi is guilty of count 1 (carrying a concealed weapon); count
3 (possession of a weapon for the purpose of committing an offence); and count
6 (assaulting mr. sherzad with a weapon).

i am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that a reasonable
person would view mr. salehi’s words towards mr. sherzad to be a threat to
cause death. i am further satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. salehi
intended to intimidate mr. sherzad when he made the threatening remarks. i
consider these to be obvious conclusions based on the content of his words and
the context in which he said them – holding an item that looked like a real gun.
i accordingly find him guilty of count 8.

finally, it was admitted that mr. salehi was on probation with a
condition to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. based on my findings, he
was plainly in violation of that term and is therefore also guilty of count 9.
disposition

for the reasons given, i find mr. salehi guilty of counts 1, 3, 6, 8,
and 9. i find the defendant not guilty of count 7.
released: january 30, 2025
signed:
justice joseph hanna

the correct wording of the statement is “the car” not “my
car.” mr. aubin read the correct wording out in court twice afterwards.

he refers to the person the male is talking to as “the guy
that followed after.”

the transcript, at p. 21, lines 7 – 9 reads: “[indiscernible]
that he was my gun friend.” i find the transcript to be incorrect on this
point.