source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj75/2025oncj75.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. teng, 2025 oncj 75
date: 2025
02 11
court
file no.: toronto
4810
998 23 10000784-00
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
justin
teng
before
justice block
reasons
for judgment
released
on february 11, 2025
c. kalantzis.......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
p. lam and r. pillay............................................... counsel
for the accused justin teng
block j.:

the accused/applicant, justin teng, was
charged with multiple counts alleging possession of the purpose of trafficking
of controlled substances, possession proceeds of crime and breach of
recognizance as a result of a search of his residence and vehicle pursuant to a
warrant on january 15, 2023.

the applicant applied to have the evidence
excluded as a result of an alleged violation of his s. 8
charter
rights
by the toronto police service. in brief, the applicant argued that the warrant
could not have reasonably been granted and that the gravity of the breach and
the extensive infringement of mr teng’s
charter
protected rights
warranted exclusion.

i earlier denied the application and, as the
constitutional legitimacy of the search is the only issue before the court, mr
teng was found guilty of the breach and counts 3,4,8,9 and 11 on the
information before me.

the trial proceeded in an efficient fashion.
the evidence was uncontroversial. an agreed statement of fact was entered as
exhibit 1. as the affiant of the information to obtain (ito) was not
cross-examined, the attack on the warrant was an assault on its facial
validity. a “step six” procedure resulted in the creation of a judicial
summary. together with the ito, the judicial summary formed the basis of the
argument conducted on the sufficiency of the warrant.

the judicial summary was created in an
ex
parte
and
in camera
discussion between the court and the crown. this
dialogue was captured in court on record. that record was sealed and is
available for appellate review together with the complete court file. the
portions of the redacted ito referenced in the judicial summaries are preceded
by the phrase” the issuing justice was advised that” or are enclosed in square
brackets.

the applicant’s argument before me can be
condensed to the following points:
1.
the validity of the warrant depends on the corroboration of the
information supplied by the confidential source (c.s.) by the account of the
2021 search of the applicant’s premises.
2.
the information supplied by the c.s. standing on its own did not
support the issuance of the warrant. it was corroborated by anodyne facts accessible
through public sources only and there is insufficient information to determine
whether it was compelling or credible.
3.
the results of the previous search of the applicant’s residence in
2021, as well as the charges that flowed from that search should be excised
from the grounds to obtain the warrant in issue before me, as that search was
found was found to be in breach of the applicant’s s. 8
charter
rights
at trial before my colleague peeris j. in march 2024. in the absence of that
material, it is contended the warrant could not reasonably have been issued.
4.
the application of the grant test requires the exclusion of the
evidence obtained by the warranted search pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charter.
5.
the affiant lacked a subjective belief that the grounds to which he
deposed would reveal evidence of the offences enumerated in the warrant.

my task is neatly summarized by justice
campbell in
r. v.
boussoulas,
2014 onsc 5542
at paragraph
37:
when the
applicant attacks the facial validity of an ito, the reviewing judge is
required to examine the entire ito and determine whether, on the face of the
information disclosed within its four corners, the justice could have issued
the warrant.

in the following paragraphs i will initially
review the contents of the redacted ito and the judicial summaries. in reaching
my decision, i must allude to the nature but not the detail of unredacted material.

appendix a lists the items to be searched
for in the applicant’s residence.

appendix b lists the offence for which mr
teng was under investigation.

appendix c sets out the grounds for the
affiant’s belief.

appendix d sets out both the information
received from the c.s. and pertinent information about the c.s.

detective constable silvino pinto sets out
in appendix c, paragraphs 4, 5, 6 that information from the c.s. has been
received [within the past 90 days] that a male known as justin teng has been
trafficking cocaine.

paragraph 7 indicated that the focus of the
investigation was for 4709-1 bloor st east and the associated storage locker
c-193 and a 2011 grey acura mdx vin # 2hynd2h65bh005490.

paragraphs 9–19 describe the investigation
carried on with respect to the applicant on january 14, 2023.

paragraph 9a indicated a check on versadex
for justin teng which indicated the residential address searched.

paragraph 9b indicated the substantial
amounts of contraband narcotics and proceeds seized on a previous search of the
applicant’s residence on september 16, 2021 at the same address.

paragraph 9c set out the charges faced by
the applicant as a result of that search.

paragraph 10 detailed the investigation
carried out by the police on january 14, 2023 with respect to the residential
address searched. it was learned that mr teng was the tenant, he had an
assigned parking spot p3 c41, that mr teng had no vehicle registered and the
unit had an assigned storage locker c-193

paragraph 11 described the measures taken by
the affiant to perform surveillance of the applicant’s unit. it was discovered
that there was no video surveillance on his floor, that the floor was quiet and
configured in the shape of the letter “h”.

paragraph 12 related the affiant’s
attendance on floor p3 where he observed a grey acura mdx licence plate
bzsj670, vin # 2hynd2h65bh005490 in the parking spot registered to the
applicant’s unit.

paragraph 13. the affiant checked on the mto
database and determined that:
a.
the plate doesn’t belong on any vehicle,
b.
the owner of the plate is one kevin little
c.
the plate was removed from a grey 2011 acura mdx, vin # 2hynd2h65bh005490
on may 24, 2022

paragraph 14. revealed the substance of the
affiant’s mto check on the applicant.
a.
his current address was 4709-1 bloor st east
b.
the grey 2011 acura mdx, vin # 2hynd2h65bh005490 referenced above is
registered to the applicant.

paragraph 15 sets out the results of further
mto checks on the grey 2011 acura, referenced above, conducted by the affiant.
a.
mr teng owns this vehicle.
b.
kevin little was the previous owner.

the affiant then concluded that mr teng kept
mr little’s plates on the acura, an obvious conclusion, in my view.

in paragraph 16, the affiant offered his
assessment that the opportunity for the police to make observations was limited
because of concern that the target or others in the building might be alerted to
the investigation.

paragraph 17 contains the judicial summary
that [teng’s drug dealing modus operandi including where sells drugs].

paragraph 18 contains the affiant’s evidence
that the 47th floor of the target’s building has no video surveillance and that
the floor is “small and tight”. it also reflects the affiant’s assessment that
police are limited to direct observations of mr teng’s unit.

paragraph 19 contains the affiant’s evidence
that the stairwell does not provide an observation point for unit 4709.

paragraphs 20 through 25 contains the
affiant’s grounds for belief that the items listed in appendix a, once seized
in the targeted residence, will provide evidence of the charges listed.

paragraph 26 provides the grounds to believe
that the items are at the search location.
a.
the c.s. advised mr teng lives at 4709-1 bloor st e.
b.
the judicial summary advises that the c.s. buys cocaine from mr teng
and indicates that the issuing justice was advised of the frequency and
location of the purchases.
c.
the judicial summary indicates that the issuing justice was advised
of the length of time that the c.s. had been buying cocaine from mr teng.
d.
the judicial summary indicates that the issuing justice was advised
of the modus operandi of mr teng’s drug dealing and location of sale.
e.
the judicial summary indicates that the issuing justice was advised
of the specific date that the c.s. bought cocaine from mr teng and observations
of cocaine then made.

paragraph 27 references the affiant’s
information and basis for belief that the grey acura mdx vin#
2hnyd2h65bh0055490 is an appropriate search target.
a.
the c.s. advice is judicially summarized as [teng drives a grey
acura].
b.
teng was the registered owner of this vehicle as of may 24, 2022.
c.
the affiant advised that he attended mr teng’s registered parking
spot, p3 c41 on january 14, 2023 and there observed a grey acura mdx license
plate # bzsj 670.
d.
the license plate indicated above does not belong to mr teng. it did
belong to the previous owner of that vehicle.
e.
the affiant provides his experience that vehicles in underground
parking lots are often used to stash drugs and that the use of a plate not
registered to the target may be a device to frustrate police investigation.
f.
the affiant asserts that large quantities of
drugs are commonly kept in vehicles by dealers and in this case would protect mr
teng from having as much of his product stolen by other criminals.

appendix
d provides a summary of the information provides by the c.s. including features
that support the reliability of the c.s. and features that may negatively
affect the reliability of the c.s. much of this information was redacted. the
summaries of redacted clauses reflect the nature, although not the detail of
the redactions. some of these summaries have been already indicated in
preceding paragraphs of this judgment.
a.
the c.s. in this investigation is registered with the toronto police
service.
b.
their information was provided in confidence. they want to remain
anonymous. the c.s. fears for their safety if their identity was revealed.
c.
the c.s learned the information through first-hand observations.
d.
the c.s. provided recent, detailed and compelling information on the
suspect.
e.
the details of the information have been corroborated.
f.
the c.s. is immersed in the drug subculture.
g.
the issuing justice was advised whether the c.s. is before the
courts.
h.
the c.s. has provided information to the police in the past which
was acted on and proven accurate and true 2 to 5 times in the last 4 years.
[the number of times the c.s. has provided information to the police, the
year(s) in which that information was provided and the details of the results
including the nature and quantity of the drugs seized and whether arrests took
place].
i.
[whether the c.s. has been charged on the past]
j.
[whether the c.s. has criminal record] the c.s
has no convictions for perjury, fraud or other crimes of dishonesty.
k.
[the motivation of the c.s to provide information] the c.s. has been
warned regarding the legal consequences of providing the police with false
information.
l.
pertinent information regarding teng provided by
the c.s. including:
a.
[when the c.s provided the information to the police]
b.
that mr teng is dealing in cocaine.
c.
mr teng lives at 4709-1 bloor st e
d.
[the c.s. purchases of cocaine from mr teng including frequency,
duration of their purchasing association and location of the purchases,
quantity of purchase and price, the specific date of the purchase, observations
made by the c.s. at the time of the purchase and modus operandi,]
e.
description of mr teng as male, asian and chubby.
discussion
application of the
debot
test

i
am guided in my analysis of the sufficiency of the ito by the seminal case of
r.
v. debot
1989 canlii 13 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 1140. i am instructed that the information
supplied by a c.s. that forms the basis for a search warrant application must
be compelling, credible and corroborated. the information supplied is to be
assessed on its totality, weaknesses in one area may be compensated by
strengths in others.
the weight to be given redacted
material

i
do not accept the applicant’s contention the ratio in
r. v crevier
2015
onca 619
is that redacted material has reduced weight because it cannot be
directly challenged. at paragraph 88, crevier does require me to
”consider the
extent to which the accused’s inability to directly challenge the redacted
portions should affect the weight to be given those portions … the reviewing
judge should consider the nature of the information, the extent to which the
judicial summary allowed the accused to challenge it, and whether its nature is
such that it was susceptible to be challenged by cross-examination or
otherwise. crevier, supra, at paragraph
88.

in
examining the redacted portions, i turned my mind to the nature of the
information, and considered whether the weight of the material would survive
determined cross-examination.
the subjective belief of the affiant

i
disagree with the contention that the excision of the 2021 search results from
the ito would undermine affiant’s subjective belief that there were reasonable
and probable grounds to find that cocaine in amounts consistent with
trafficking would be found in teng’s residence. the affiant’s statement in the
ito of their personal belief in reasonable and probable grounds stands unless
undermined in cross-examination. as we know, an application to cross-examine
the affiant was not pursued.
was the information compelling?

i disagree with the applicant’s submission that the information
supplied by the c.s. is incapable of supporting the issuance of the search
warrant without the corroboration provided by the 2021 search. in my view the information
supplied by the c.s. in this matter is extremely compelling, not just because
of its recency but also because of the detailed first-hand observations
recounted. the details of recency and the observations were available to the
issuing justice. i am instructed by the court of appeal in
r. v. rocha
2012 onca 707, that “an informer's personal, detailed and recent observations
of drug trafficking may be considered compelling”. at para. 18. the information
supplied certainly fits that description.
the credibility of the c.s.

the
evidence of the credibility of the c.s. is powerful.

the
immersion of the c.s. in the drug subculture requires the exercise of caution.
an inhabitant of this world may be induced to tell tales in order to attract
payment or to exact revenge or eliminate a competitor. no doubt this is the
reason that investigators require results in order to provide payment.
familiarity with this milieu means that the observations made by the c.s. are
informed by personal knowledge of the complexities of the drug trade. a
stranger to this world might find it difficult to gain introduction to the
dealer and would be likely be unfamiliar with the tools and customs of the
trade.

this
c.s. supplied accurate information to the police on multiple occasions within
the past several years. the detail of this information was presented to the
issuing justice. these efforts produced measurable positive results. the c.s.
was registered with the toronto police service. the c.s. had been warned of the
criminal liability consequences of supplying false information to the police. assistance
of this nature is frequently induced by financial compensation or other
motivation that may seem distasteful. regardless of the motive of the c.s., this
form of cooperation with the police is not usually the product of altruism.

the
issuing justice was provided with the criminal antecedents of the c.s. as well
as current information regarding any ongoing matters before the courts.
corroboration

the
police supplied such corroboration as was reasonably procurable in the
circumstances. the crown has conceded that the level of corroboration may have
been inadequate with a less compelling tip.

the
results of the 2021 search, referenced in paragraphs 9b and 9c of the ito, were
excluded from evidence pursuant to
charter
s. 24(2) at the trial in
march 2024 by my colleague peeris j. when the search warrant at issue before me
was authorized in january 2023, that judicial assessment was 14 months in the
future.

the
affiant in the case before me had a good faith basis to relate the 2021
occurrence to the issuing justice. in my view the facts related in paragraphs
9b, 9c and 26j were properly included in the ito to corroborate teng’s
involvement in the drug trade. in this respect see the dissent of nordheimer
j.a. in
r. v. james
2019 o.j. 1825, and. at paragraph 57 of his dissent,
justice nordheimer commented “prior criminal activity -- including prior
involvement in the drug trade -- is a relevant factor in determining whether
there are reasonable and probable grounds for a search”. his lordship’s dissent
was the basis for the s.c.c. reversal of the earlier decision of the onca by
the scc at
2019 s.c.j. 52. see also
r. v. ribble
2021 onca 897.

i
have not considered the prior warrant in considering the corroboration of the
warrant before me. however, i think it important to observe that police cannot
be faulted for including a report of a relatively recent, judicially authorized
successful search of the target in the ito when judicial quality control had
not yet spoken.

the
applicant argues that there is a complete absence of corroboration. he points
to the absence of surveillance. he argues that, in effect, the speed of the
investigation is a weakness.

it
is correct that the police acted quickly on january 14, 2023. the affiant
conducted his investigation on the 14th. the warrant was authorized on that
date and executed on the next day. given the compelling quality of the
information supplied by the c.s., i do not think that the investigation was
deformed by haste.

i
doubt that the passage of time would have improved corroboration through
surveillance given the modus operandi described in the unredacted ito and
available for consideration by the issuing justice. corroboration was limited
by the location of the target residence. paragraphs 16-19 of the ito are
relevant to the issue of corroboration of the target. the ito offered the
affiant’s assessment that the location of the target was not susceptible to
surveillance. there was no video surveillance installed on that floor. the
suggestion inherent in the ito was that the tight configuration of the hallway
on the 47th floor made discreet observations impossible.

i
have presided over multiple cases involving surveillance and searches in modern
condominiums. these cases often present challenges to police observation of
suspected crime that are not present in the surveillance of detached homes. the
hallway of a condominium is not the equivalent of a public street, either in
physical layout or privacy rights.

i
cannot find anything improbable, contradictory or unlikely in the affiant’s
account of the issues affecting potential surveillance at this location. in the
absence of cross-examination of the affiant or the presentation of contrary
extrinsic evidence, his account stands unchallenged.

the
applicant argues that high-rise condominiums have security desks, surveillance
cameras, elevator cameras, entry fobs and that the data revealing the entry and
movements of persons in the building would have been available to the police
through general warrant. their contention is that the absence of these
materials and the excision of the information regarding the september 2021
search means that there is effectively no corroboration.

the
corroboration in this matter was limited by the character of the premises
investigated.

i
disagree that, in the circumstances of this investigation, anodyne or publicly
available information was shallow or empty corroboration. the c.s. supplied a
name and a physical description of the suspect, a crime, a residence and a
vehicle. the affiant corroborated those details.

the
name and the address of the applicant provided by the c.s. was corroborated by
building security, through an mto check and through versadex.

the
c.s. advised the police of the colour and model of mr teng’s vehicle. the
location of the applicant’s parking spot and locker was provided by building
security. the affiant observed the grey acura in the appropriate parking spot.
he then confirmed the vin number, ownership and ownership history of the
vehicle on the mto database. it is some confirmation of the applicant’s
criminality that the license plate belonged to the prior owner and is not
currently registered to the acura. as the transfer had taken place some 8
months before, it would have been an unlikely innocent oversight. coupled with
the additional reported information, it is consistent with an effort to
frustrate police investigation.

further corroboration was provided by the comparison of the
description of the target provided by the c.s. to the police file photograph of
mr teng.
conclusion

the
issuing justice reasonably granted the warrant. the powerful compelling nature
of the firsthand observations by a seasoned and tested c.s. were corroborated
in a meaningful way by the police investigation.

if
i have erred in my determination of the validity of the warrant, in my view any
state misconduct was minimal. the police received judicial authorization and
there is no suggestion that the affiant mislead the issuing justice. the public
interest in admitting real evidence of serious criminality requires its
admission.
released: february 11, 2025
justice m. block