source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj720/2025oncj720.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. murray, 2025 oncj 720
date: 
november 28, 2025
court
file no.: 19-4993
between:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
david richard murray
before
justice s. murphy
submissions
heard in writing and on october 31, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on november 28, 2025
m. flagg................................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
a. o’brodovich......................................................... 
counsel for the accused, d. murray
murphy j.:

this decision relates to the trial of mr. murray
in relation to several counts of fraud over $5000. mr. murray pled not guilty
to all of the counts.

the conduct of the trial of this matter is set
out in detail in my reasons on the 11(b) application decision, and i will not repeat
them in this decision.

mr. murray was charged with 35 counts of fraud over
$5000 over varying times, commencing in 2016 and ending on august 30, 2019. 
count 16 was an omnibus count which alleged an offence of fraud over $5000 for
offences against 11 complainants.

the crown called 40 complainants, and at the
close of the crown’s case, withdrew count 11 and deleted 4 names from the
omnibus count.

accordingly, this trial decision involves a
total of 34 counts of fraud over $5000 as against mr. murray.
uncontested facts

at the commencement of the trial, there were
several admissions made by counsel for mr. murray pursuant to
s. 655
of the
criminal
code. an agreed statement of facts was read into the record.

the amended date range, jurisdiction and identity of david murray
as the person all complainants dealt with was admitted. all electronic documents
between david murray and the complainants, including text, emails and facebook messages
were all admitted without further proof or
voir dire, provided each
witness testified that he or she was a party or was familiar with the circumstances
surrounding each communication. the banking records were admitted, as all
being under the control of david murray at all material times. some of the accounts
were related to david r. murray, trading as ecolife home renovations, some
related to ecolife home improvements inc., some were related to mr. murray’s
personal accounts, some were related to ecolife home improvements inc. in which
ms. pamala facendi was also noted as a signatory. corporate records and
business names records were all admitted.

it was further admitted that the greenon program was announced on
august 30, 2017, in which the government of ontario announced the creation of the
green ontario fund, which was a non-profit agency to deliver programs and it
was created to reduce energy costs in homes and businesses. the core of the
program was known as the greenon installations program. on december 13, 2017,
the greenon program started to offer rebates to eligible households up to $5000
for replacement windows, up to $7000 for insulation and other unrelated rebates
regarding air sealing and heat pumps. a household could claim rebates for
existing detached, semi-detached and row townhouses. for windows up to $500
per window if they purchased 10 windows. the program did not include doors or
roof repairs, and the consumer had to buy and install through “participating
contractors”, who in turn were required to complete training and certification
for specific low carbon renovations. there were many steps required to be
approved.

for windows, homeowners must have had a total installed cost of
at least $500 each, the windows must be installed by a window wise certified
installer, the installer could be subcontracted out, the window wise dealer
must have a showroom, the installer had to be certified at the time of
installations. the dealer/installer was responsible for submitting the greenon
rebate claim.

following the june 2018 provincial election on june 19, 2018, premier-elect
doug ford announced the cancellation of the greenon program. initially, the
website announced that the government would continue to honour rebates for those
who signed an agreement for work done before august 31, 2018 and applications
submitted by september 30, 2018.

on june 21, 2018, premier-elect ford announced that the final
deadline to submit claims was extended to october 31, 2018, which was later
extended once again to november 30, 2018.

accordingly, all of the contracts with all of
the complainants who testified were admitted into evidence. some contracts had
back pages and some did not. some contracts were quotations, but based on the
evidence at trial it is not disputed that the customer and mr. murray treated
those quotations as contracts, with one exception. mr. murray
acknowledged that his company either did not perform any work, or that they
performed work that was not completed for all but one of the contracts. he
further acknowledged that he took money from each complainant, in the amounts
claimed by the complainant, with limited exceptions. mr. murray claimed that
some contracts submitted into evidence were duplicates of an earlier contract,
and he gave an explanation as to why he was certain they were duplicates. he
admitted that at all times he was the controlling mind of ecolife home
improvements inc. most of his evidence was supported by the evidence of the
individual claimant or by the objective evidence, or a combination of both.
ruling

what i have to determine is whether or not mr.
murray committed criminal fraud, by way of ecolife’s dealings with the complainants
not whether or not mr. murray owes money to each complainant. in fact, the
only relevance of the money involved is whether or not the potential fraud exceeds
$5000.

adjudication of money potentially owed is left
to a civil court is not properly part of what i have to determine. accordingly,
i will be making no findings of financial liability other than what is required
for the crown to prove that the offences have been committed beyond a
reasonable doubt.

in order to determine if mr. murray is guilty of
fraud beyond a reasonable doubt, the crown must prove its case on both the
actus
reus
and the
mens rea
components. mr. murray has no obligation
to prove anything.

in light of the evidence that i have accepted, i
cannot find that mr. murray committed a criminal fraud beyond a reasonable
doubt involving any of the complainants, and so i am entering an acquittal on
all of the remaining counts. i do so for the reasons that are set out below.

the crown urges me to find that mr. murray’s
interactions with the complainants involved a pattern of dishonesty, manifested
in forming contracts, taking money and not performing, in the backdating of
invoices, endless and revolving excuses and deflections of blame, dishonest
dealings regarding the greenon application process, a failure to properly
manage his finances and to segregate client funds and continuing to sell
greenon contracts even after the program was announced to be discontinued by
the newly elected provincial government.

the crown urges me to not accept mr. murray’s
evidence, in which he provided discrete reasons for the failure to complete
each contract that formed the criminal charges.

it is the crown’s theory that i can infer
mens
rea
from mr. murray’s use of pressure sales, often involving the greenon
program to induce customers into purchasing more than what they wanted. he
says that i can also infer
mens rea
from the sheer volume of
complainants and the similarity of the complaints, in that they paid money,
sometimes as much as 100% of the value of the contract because mr. murray
insisted on such payment, even after it was clear that mr. murray was
hopelessly overwhelmed and unable to complete the work. as well, the crown
claims that
mens rea
can be found in mr. murray using financing
companies to induce customers into providing full payment in advance of
performance of work. it is the crown’s position that mr. murray intentionally
misled his clients about his capacity to do the work or at least he was
wilfully blind regarding his ability to do so.

it is the position of the defence that mr.
murray did not engage in any deception with his clients, but rather he was
transparent when dealing with them. mr. murray got caught up in an
unanticipated circumstance regarding the cancellation of the greenon program
and he was managing as best he could. the defence says that mr. murray always
intended to complete the work under each of the contracts, and that he went to
great lengths to do so.

for the reasons set out below, i find that the
crown has failed to meet its burden of proof regarding both
actus reus
and
mens rea.
mens rea
and
actus reus

the
mens rea
and
actus reus
for
fraud were defined by the supreme court of canada in the seminal case of
r.
v. théroux,
1993 canlii 134 (scc), 2 scr. at page justice
mclachlan writing for the majority said:
2.
the
actus reus of
fraud
since the
mens rea
of an offence is related to its
actus reus, it
is helpful to begin the analysis by considering the
actus reus
of
the offence of
fraud. speaking of the
actus reus
of this
offence, dickson j. (as he then was) set out the following principles
in
olan:
(i) the offence has two elements: dishonest act and
deprivation;
(ii) the dishonest act is established by proof of
deceit, falsehood or "other fraudulent means";
(iii) the element of deprivation is established by
proof of detriment, prejudice, or risk of prejudice to the economic interests
of the victim, caused by the dishonest act.
olan
marked a
broadening of the law of
fraud
in
two respects. first, it overruled previous authority which suggested that
deceit was an essential element of the offence. instead, it posited the
general concept of dishonesty, which might manifest itself in deceit, falsehood
or some other form of dishonesty. just as what constitutes a lie or a
deceitful act for the purpose of the
actus reus
is judged on
the objective facts, so the "other fraudulent means" in the third
category is determined objectively, by reference to what a reasonable person
would consider to be a dishonest act. second,
olan
made
it clear that economic loss was not essential to the offence; the imperilling
of an economic interest is sufficient even though no actual loss has been
suffered. by adopting an expansive interpretation of the offence, the
court established
fraud
as an
offence of general scope capable of encompassing a wide range of dishonest
commercial dealings.

accordingly, the concept of deceit relates to
the
actus reus
of the offence, and it is to be determined on an
objective basis, rather than the subjective belief of the complainant.

however, it also relates to the
mens rea. 
justice mclachlan went on to discuss
mens rea
in the following manner:
3.
the
mens rea
of
fraud
(i)
doctrinal considerations
this brings us to the
mens rea
of
fraud. 
what is the guilty mind of
fraud
? 
at this point, certain confusions inherent in the concept of
mens rea
itself become apparent. it
is useful initially to distinguish between the mental element or elements of a
crime and the
mens rea.
the term
mens rea, properly
understood, does not encompass all of the mental elements of a crime. 
the
actus reus
has its own mental element; the act must be the
voluntary act of the accused for the
actus reus
to
exist.
mens rea, on
the other hand, refers to the guilty mind, the wrongful intention, of the
accused. its function in criminal law is to prevent the conviction of the
morally innocent -- those who do not understand or intend the consequences of
their acts. typically,
mens rea
is
concerned with the consequences of the prohibited
actus reus. 
thus in the crimes of homicide, we speak of the consequences of the voluntary
act ‑‑ intention to cause death, or reckless and wilfully blind
persistence in conduct which one knows is likely to cause death. in other
offences, such as dangerous driving, the
mens
rea
may relate to the failure to consider the consequences of
inadvertence.
this brings me to the question of whether the test for
mens rea
is subjective or
objective. most scholars and jurists agree that, leaving aside offences
where the
actus reus
is negligence or inadvertence and
offences of absolute liability, the test for
mens rea
is subjective. the test is not whether
a reasonable person would have foreseen the consequences of the prohibited act,
but whether the accused subjectively appreciated those consequences at least as
a possibility. in applying the subjective test, the court looks to the
accused's intention and the facts as the accused believed them to be: g.
williams,
textbook of criminal law
(2nd ed. 1983), at pp. 727‑28.
two collateral points must be made at this
juncture. first, as williams underlines, this inquiry has nothing to do
with the accused's system of values. a person is not saved from
conviction because he or she believes there is nothing wrong with what he or
she is doing. the question is whether the accused subjectively
appreciated that certain consequences would follow from his or her acts, not
whether the accused believed the acts or their consequences to be moral. just
as the pathological killer would not be acquitted on the mere ground that he
failed to see his act as morally reprehensible, so the defrauder will not be
acquitted because he believed that what he was doing was honest.
the second collateral point is the oft‑made
observation that the crown need not, in every case, show precisely what thought
was in the accused's mind at the time of the criminal act. in certain
cases, subjective awareness of the consequences can be inferred from the act
itself, barring some explanation casting doubt on such inference. the
fact that such an inference is made does not detract from the subjectivity of
the test.
having ventured these general comments on
mens rea, i return to the offence
of
fraud. the prohibited act is
deceit, falsehood, or some other dishonest act. the prohibited
consequence is depriving another of what is or should be his, which may, as we
have seen, consist in merely placing another's property at risk. 
the
mens rea
would
then consist in the subjective awareness that one was undertaking a prohibited
act (the deceit, falsehood or other dishonest act) which could cause
deprivation in the sense of depriving another of property or putting that
property at risk. if this is shown, the crime is complete. the fact
that the accused may have hoped the deprivation would not take place, or may
have felt there was nothing wrong with what he or she was doing, provides no
defence. to put it another way, following the traditional criminal law
principle that the mental state necessary to the offence must be determined by
reference to the external acts which constitute the
actus
of
the offence (see williams,
supra, c. 3), the proper focus in
determining the
mens rea
of
fraud
is to ask whether the accused
intentionally committed the prohibited acts (deceit, falsehood, or other
dishonest act) knowing or desiring the consequences proscribed by the offence
(deprivation, including the risk of deprivation). the personal feeling of
the accused about the morality or honesty of the act or its consequences is no
more relevant to the analysis than is the accused's awareness that the
particular acts undertaken constitute a criminal offence.
this applies as much to the third head of
fraud, "other fraudulent means", as
to lies and acts of deceit. although other fraudulent means have been
broadly defined as means which are "dishonest", it is not necessary
that an accused personally consider these means to be dishonest in order that
he or she be convicted of
fraud
for
having undertaken them. the "dishonesty" of the means is
relevant to the determination whether the conduct falls within the type of
conduct caught by the offence of
fraud;
what reasonable people consider dishonest assists in the determination whether
the
actus reus
of the offence can be made out on particular
facts. that established, it need only be determined that an accused
knowingly undertook the acts in question, aware that deprivation, or risk of
deprivation, could follow as a likely consequence.
i have spoken of knowledge of the consequences of the
fraudulent act. there appears to be no reason, however, why recklessness
as to consequences might not also attract criminal responsibility. 
recklessness presupposes knowledge of the likelihood of the prohibited
consequences. it is established when it is shown that the accused, with
such knowledge, commits acts which may bring about these prohibited
consequences, while being reckless as to whether or not they ensue.
these doctrinal observations suggest that the
actus
reus
of the offence of
fraud
will
be established by proof of:
1. the prohibited act, be it an act of deceit, a
falsehood or some other fraudulent means; and
2. deprivation caused by the prohibited
act, which may consist in actual loss or the placing of the victim's pecuniary
interests at risk.
correspondingly, the
mens rea
of
fraud
is established by proof of:
1. subjective knowledge of the prohibited
act; and
2. subjective knowledge that the
prohibited act could have as a consequence the deprivation of another (which
deprivation may consist in knowledge that the victim's pecuniary interests are
put at risk).
where the conduct and knowledge required by these
definitions are established, the accused is guilty whether he actually intended
the prohibited consequence or was reckless as to whether it would occur.

justice mclachlan went on to say:
the
concern is that any misrepresentation or practice which induces an incorrect
understanding or belief in the minds of customers, or which causes deprivation,
will become criminal. as marshall j.a. put it in
mugford,
supra,
at pp. 175‑76:... it is not sufficient to base
fraud
merely
upon a finding that the appellant induced a state of mind in his customers
which was not correct. any misrepresentation may have that effect. 
criminal dishonesty extends further....
it
would be a startling extension of criminal liability if every statement urging
the public to purchase one's wares because only a limited supply remain were by
itself to be visited with criminal sanction.
actus reus

in these circumstances, there is no question
there has been deprivation. each complainant testified that they were deprived
in some way, with the exception of ms. pearson, who signed a snap loan and,
therefore, although she was not actually deprived, she was at risk of
deprivation.

what remains is whether or not there was some
form of dishonest act in relation to the actus reus. in light of the evidence
that i accept, i cannot find a dishonest act committed by mr. murray or by ecolife
on either an objective or subjective basis. he certainly became overwhelmed,
which he admitted. however, i cannot find that any of the contracts, either
individually or as part of a pattern, involved dishonesty that mislead the
individual complainants.
mens rea

because the
actus reus
and the
mens
rea
are linked regarding the issue of dishonest act, i also cannot find
that mr. murray knowingly engaged in a dishonest act, knowing that he was
either depriving or putting at risk his clients’ money, or that he was reckless
or wilfully blind to that risk.
assessment of the evidence
david murray

mr. murray testified on his own behalf. he
agreed that he had entered into the contracts, but he testified that he
believed that each contract had a back page, which was missing from many of the
contracts entered into evidence. in many cases, we only had a copy or a
photograph of the individual contracts. two original documents were put into
evidence, when those complainants testified. both of those original contracts
had terms and conditions noted on the back of them. the terms and conditions
governed termination of the contract. for many of the contracts, the
complainant unilaterally terminated their contract and asked for refunds. mr.
murray relied on the termination to stop work, or to not schedule work. he
refused refunds, saying that it was a civil matter, and he would abide by a
civil court’s determination of whether or not he had to provide a refund.

mr. murray testified that the cancellation of
the greenon program had a disastrous effect on his entire business. he said
that he effectively had two months to complete a year and-a-half worth of work,
when the greenon program was cancelled. it forced him to divert his workforce
to fulfill all of the greenon work that had been arranged.

he agreed that some of the work that resulted in
the charges were not for greenon projects, but he said that the effect of the
abrupt implementation of a deadline to the greenon program caused chaos in the entire
industry. he testified that he did not know about the glass and other
component shortages for windows in the industry, until after june of 2018. all
he knew was that it was taking longer and longer for him to get windows from his
supplier, euroseal, and he could not get any answers from them. he contacted
mr. frattini from gentek, who gave him firmer delivery dates for windows, and
he then shifted all of his orders from euroseal to gentek.

he testified that he did not know when he took
that step, that this act would take his orders for windows and put them at the
end of the queue and, effectively, reset the clock on his expected delivery
date for each order, in a circumstance of shortages. he did know that he had
to pay euroseal for the windows that were custom ordered and then switched to
gentek. he also knew that he had to pay gentek for the same window orders. he
was aware that he could not pass this cost on to the customer, and that he was
taking the full financial responsibility for this.

for the work that was not related to greenon, he
gave particular explanations for a failure to perform the work under the
contract. he also gave similar explanations to clients and to the court
regarding work that was related to greenon. i will deal with each of those
situations specifically below when i deal with each contract.

in light of mr. murray admitting almost the
entirety of the crown’s case, the analysis of the evidence hinged almost
entirely on the evidence of mr. murray. i engaged in the analysis as set out
in
r. v. w.(d.),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), as that case has been refined. i
must consider the evidence as a whole. if i believe mr. murray’s evidence in
the context of all of the evidence, then i must acquit. if i disbelieve mr.
murray’s evidence but it is capable of raising a reasonable doubt about the
charges in the context of all of the evidence that i believe, then i must
acquit. if i disbelieve all of what mr. murray says, and his evidence is not
capable of raising a reasonable doubt, then i must assess the remainder of the
evidence that i do accept to determine if i am left with a reasonable doubt. 
it is only after engaging in the entire analysis, that i can be satisfied that
the crown has discharged its burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

after engaging in that analysis, i find that i
cannot reject the entirety of mr. murray’s evidence, as i am asked to do by the
crown. the bulk of his evidence is supported by certain elements in the
crown’s case. the crowns’ case calls for an explanation by mr. murray and
his explanation is cogent, logical and unshaken on cross-examination. it is
also supported in many ways by the objective evidence that the crown
introduced.

having said that, there were some problems with
mr. murray’s evidence, which i will deal with below when examining the evidence
of mr. murray in the context of individual complainants. however, overall,
those problems do not cause me to reject his evidence entirely, and it raises a
reasonable doubt regarding the elements of fraud.
objective evidence

some of the evidence called by the crown i
characterize as objective. i will deal with those pieces next.

the crown called darren frattini from gentek and
two people from the building department of the city of sudbury. as well, there
were admitted facts regarding brendan adair from the city of sudbury and the
entire transcript of evidence from p.c. williams at the first aborted trial.

the evidence of all but p.c. williams was not
controversial, and virtually uncontested. i accept what was said by those
witnesses and the admitted facts regarding mr. adair.

the evidence of p.c. williams will be dealt with
below:
gentek

darren frattini is an employee of gentek. he
testified that he had contact with mr. murray regarding ecolife ordering
supplies from gentek.

he provided a letter dated june 18, 2019 that
was sent to ecolife home improvement inc. in which gentek claimed that
$89,242.82 worth of special ordered product was being held by gentek, and which
had not been paid for. gentek was going to offer the product directly to the
customers, upon payment by the customers unless payment was forthcoming from
ecolife immediately. mr. frattini testified that no payment came from ecolife.

mr. frattini testified that ecolife had a line
of credit with gentek, and sometimes the value of the orders superseded the
line of credit, and it had to be paid down before more product was released. in
june of 2019, it became clear that ecolife had not paid for some time and
likely would not be able to pay the outstanding amount owing.

he confirmed that ecolife purchased a variety of
products including windows from gentek and that his relationship with ecolife
began before mr. murray was the owner of the company. he confirmed that the
greenon program created a high demand for windows, which created production
problems for gentek. there was also a glass shortage and “stuff like that”
which created manufacturing delays of up to six months for “painted windows”
meaning colour of frame. there were similar delays for windows that were not
painted, but not quite as long.

he confirmed that ecolife had a lot of windows
on order. he confirmed that mr. murray brought some homeowners to the
warehouse to see their product “over the span of a year or so”.

he confirmed that there were ongoing
communications between gentek and mr. murray about lead times for windows
being delayed. he confirmed that he spoke to employees of ecolife when they
were ordering product for the clients of ecolife.

he further confirmed that gentek did not reach
out to any homeowners prior to the letter. gentek did not sell directly to the
public and would not communicate with people who had their windows ordered
through contractors. he testified that homeowners would try and call and
confirm orders on their own, and mr. frattini would refer them back to the
contractor. this experience was not limited to ecolife, but rather happened to
other contractors as well.

he confirmed that ecolife had a lot of orders
that were sent out but not yet paid, as well as orders still being held and not
released by gentek, as of june 18, 2019. he confirmed that these windows were
custom ordered to individual specifications and not stock items. he believed
that the ultimate debt that gentek had to absorb was about $79,000, after
credit was given for any product that had been purchased directly by the
homeowner.

mr. frattini testified that ecolife was not a
large customer until they grew with the greenon program into 2018. he
confirmed that there were other companies whose orders increased and who
requested additional lines of credit, similar to ecolife.

mr. frattini confirmed that it was common for
labour to be scarce during the time of the greenon program. he was generally
aware that payment problems from ecolife began approximately in late summer or
early fall of 2018, but he could not be certain, as this was the work of the
credit department.

he confirmed that mr. murray was in regular
contact with him through 2018 and into the spring of 2019, and that he was
aware that mr. murray’s mother had passed away in december of 2018. he also
confirmed that mr. murray discussed bad weather as a reason for delay in his
being able to work.

he was not aware of a company called euroseal. 
he was not asked if he was aware of other companies who built and sold windows
to contractors.

mr. frattini’s evidence supports mr. murray’s
evidence in several important ways. he confirmed that mr. murray’s dealings
with gentek significantly escalated after the greenon program was announced. 
he said that it happened in about the spring of 2018 which supports mr.
murray’s claim that he transferred his window orders around that same time.

he also said that he believed that there were no
issues with payment on a line of credit until late summer or fall of 2018, but
he did not say when gentek stopped sending out product to ecolife. he could
not be certain about that, since the credit department dealt with this issue. that
is consistent with mr. murray’s evidence.

further, he confirmed that mr. murray or someone
from his company had ordered product, and that the lead times for delivery of
product got longer and longer, from an original range of four to six weeks to up
to six months, due to pressure on the manufacturer and due to shortages of
required components such as glass. he confirmed that customers of ecolife
contacted gentek, inquiring about their product, and that gentek would not
confirm or not confirm that a product had been ordered or was ready for
delivery. he confirmed that there was a lot of product sitting in their
warehouse, waiting for payment. he was not certain of the exact date that
gentek stopped sending out product because of the unpaid account, but it was
certainly stopped by the date of the letter. he said that there was a lot of
product piling up and waiting for payment, which was not forthcoming in the
spring of 2019. this is consistent with mr. murray’s evidence.
city of sudbury

ms. jamie lavigne was called by the crown. she was
a by-law licencing clerk for the city of sudbury in 2018 and 2019. ms. lavigne
confirmed that the city of sudbury required businesses conducting building
renovations to be licenced, and required a current police check, a current
liability insurance as well as an annual renewal of the licence. she confirmed
that the licences expire on december 31 of each year. a reminder notice was
sent out in the fall, alerting the licensee to renew their licence. the city
retained the ability to refuse to renew or to revoke a licence. complaints
might trigger an investigation and such investigation may result in a licence
revocation. she confirmed that her office received complaints about ecolife,
and that an investigation was conducted, and referral was made to her manager,
brendan adair.

ms. lavigne believed that mr. murray attended
the building department of the city of sudbury sometime in 2018 to renew his
business licence. she identified a letter from mr. adair, dated march 28, 2019,
in which mr. adair advised mr. murray that his 2019 business licence had
expired as of december 31, 2018 and the city of sudbury was not going to renew
it, based on expiry and non-renewal prior to expiry of the licence, and based
on a complaint that was received. ms. lavigne believed that mr. adair gave mr. murray
an extension to operate his business until the letter was delivered. she could
not provide dates.
brendan adair

mr. adair’s evidence went in by reading a
statement of facts agreed by the defence. mr. adair was the manager of
security and bylaw services for the city of sudbury in 2019. in march of 2019,
his department received seven complaints about ecolife home improvements inc.
and mr. murray. he was also notified about a protest held in relation to
ecolife in an effort to encourage the sudbury police and the city to
investigate eco life.

as a result of the complaints, the protest and
an investigation which mr. adair ordered ms. lavigne to undertake, he involved
s. 24(e) of the business licensing by-law to revoke the business licence of
ecolife based on grounds to believe that ecolife was not acting with honesty
and integrity. on april 9, 2019, mr. adair hand delivered a letter to mr.
murray to notify him of the decision to revoke the business licence of ecolife. 
mr. adair informed mr. murray he had until april 11, 2019 to appeal the
decision to a hearing committee.

the admission of the letter or the evidence of
mr. adair cannot be taken as an admission by mr. murray that, in fact, he was
not acting with honesty and integrity, only as an admission that his licence
was revoked and not renewed. mr. murray asked for a hearing in an effort to
get his licence back, and the hearing was scheduled to take place after mr.
murray was charged. based on legal advice, mr. murray did not attend the
hearing.
andre guillot

andre guillot is the manager of building
inspections for the city of sudbury. he testified that the city of sudbury
requires a building permit to be issued when any material alterations or
repairs are required to be made to a home. he testified that changing or
replacing shingles, eavestroughs or replacing windows or doors with the same or
smaller replacements a permit is not required. nor would replacement of soffit
and fascia.

he interpreted the requirement for a building
permit to be when there was a structural component involved, such as changing
rafters or plywood on a roof, expanding window size or altering the structure. 
replacement of siding, relocating load bearing walls or washrooms would require
a building permit. the city of sudbury requires a letter of authorization from
the homeowner to obtain a permit, if the contractor applies for a permit on the
homeowner’s behalf. if a permit is being sought, generally the city of sudbury
requires a set of plans or a design, and a quote of the work being done and a
plot plan to show the location of the work on the site. he confirmed that a
permit could be amended, if the work had begun and problems arose or the work
changed.

the only timeline that existed was regarding the
approval of the permits. that was governed by whether or not all the
components of the work were in place, such as proper plans and paid fees. once
all the components were in place, there were timelines of 5 days for approval of
smaller jobs such as siding, up to 20 days for large structures.

building permits could be revoked after six
months if the work has not been commenced, but the permit can be extended. a
permit does not expire. if staff at the city flag a permit, the city sends an
inspector out to verify what is going on. a business with an expired or
revoked business licence cannot apply for a permit.

mr. guillot had interaction with mr. murray
during the period of time that his licence was revoked. he testified that mr.
murray went to the front counter asking for him.

he confirmed that inspectors would also
investigate complaints by neighbours. if the work is found to violate the
building code, the inspector can issue a stop work order.

mr. guillot’s evidence supports mr. murray’s
evidence that generally mr. murray did not obtain work permits, it was the
responsibility of the homeowner. a review of the individual contracts show
that generally when mr. murray obtained a work permit, it was written into the
contract. it cannot be said, based on this evidence, that mr. murray or his
company was required to obtain a work permit for work to be done, and the
failure to obtain that permit was mr. murray’s failure. in fact, a lot of the
work that was done or contracted for, did not require a permit. mr. guillot
was clear that if there was no change to the structure, for things like windows
of the same or smaller size than what existed, or a replacement of shingles, no
permit was required. a permit was required for the replacement of siding, roof
trusses, or rebuilding walls. the city of sudbury required the homeowner to
get the permit and many of the contracts did not oblige ecolife or mr. murray
to do that.
p.c. williams

the evidence of p.c. williams from mr. murray’s
first aborted trial was admitted without calling p.c. williams as a witness.

he was the officer-in-charge of the
investigation involving mr. murray. p.c. williams testified that he got
production orders to obtain banking records related to mr. murray and to
ecolife. there was an admission that the identification of the source of
particular deposits into the bank accounts was correctly identified by the
crown as being from particular complainants.

p.c. williams testified that there were a couple
of transactions in the bank accounts of mr. murray that he deemed to not be
business related, such as a purchase from toys r us, liquor store purchases and
some restaurants. he later conceded that some of the same purchases could be
related to the operation of the business. he did not see any extravagant
purchases or luxury or big ticket item purchases.

p.c. williams confirmed that he had conversations
with mr. murray before charges were laid, that mr. murray’s company was having
trouble completing work due to the cancellation of the greenon program. this
is a prior consistent statement by mr. murray, and not admissible to bolster
mr. murray’s credibility, but it should have prompted some additional investigation
by p.c. williams. p.c. williams seems to have discounted this because some of
the work left unfinished and forming charges had nothing to do with greenon. 
that ignores the effect that the cancellation of the greenon program had on the
rest of mr. murray’s business, and it appears that it went completely
uninvestigated. the same comments apply to mr. murray advising p.c. williams
of staffing issues due to greenon pressures, such as certified installers
quitting, and having to certify new installers.

p.c. williams further confirmed that his
dealings with mr. murray were cordial, but that he could not be sure that he
said that he sympathized with mr. murray and characterized the entire
investigation as civil in nature, as claimed by mr. murray. he confirmed that
he told mr. murray that if he completed the work, mr. murray would not be
charged. he did not give him a date for completion, and said that if mr.
murray did the work there would not have been a criminal offence.

he agreed that it was possible that there might
be an innocent explanation for work not being done that did not amount to
fraud, but this question was in the context of many reasons that people cannot
get work done, and not specific to mr. murray’s case. however, it also appears
that he either did not believe that the issue relating to greenon provided a
defence or that there might be other reasons for a failure to complete the
work.

in p.c. william’s mind, he testified that if a
person is paid a large sum of money to do something and the work does not get
done, it is fraud. he testified that some of the contracts were dated to 2016
and 2017, and that gave ample time to complete work if “you plan on doing it”. 
he also testified that mr. murray should not have entered into new contracts
when he had not completed the work on older contracts. he testified that he
was not aware of window manufacturers pressing the government for more time to
fulfil greenon window contracts or that there was a shortage. he was aware
that mr. murray’s licence was suspended and that mr. murray could not work on
the existing contracts.

overall, the evidence of p.c. williams had
little value. he was able to confirm that he spoke with mr. murray several
times before mr. murray was charged. he confirmed mr. murray’s claim that p.c.
williams suggested that he would not charge mr. murray if mr. murray completed
the work. his interpretation of the law of fraud leaves much to be desired,
but there is no issue being raised regarding his grounds to arrest mr. murray.

p.c. williams’ claim that mr. murray should have
finished the work that was already contracted before entering into new
contracts belies the reality of workflow in a contracting business. he also
appears to not have done much investigation beyond the formation of the
contract, the payment of money and the failure to complete the work, other than
obtaining banking records, corporate records, and obtaining statements.

he did confirm that there were contacts from
other customers of mr. murray’s company, who were referred to civil courts,
which in turn confirms that the contracts that form this criminal complaint
were not the only contracts that ecolife was bound by.

that evidence is not admissible to prove the
charges against mr. murray, because they would be inadmissible and irrelevant
as pieces of character evidence, but they do support mr. murray’s claim that he
did a lot of other work, which has not been taken into consideration.
banking records

the banking records were admitted into evidence
on their own. they were not used by either crown or defence in any substantial
way, so they stand on their own. the crown asked general questions regarding
cash flow and overdrafts, and mr. murray admitted that he had not segregated
the deposit funds of his clients into a trust account, but rather used the
funds to purchase supplies and to run his business.

mr. murray was asked about debits for gentek,
and he explained that before shifting his window orders from euroseal to
gentek, he purchased other items from gentek, such as siding and caulking, and
other smaller construction items. sometimes he wrote cheques and sometimes he
used his debit card. p.c. williams did not obtain copies of cheques written on
behalf of ecolife, or copies of deposited cheques.

there are many codes unique to these records,
which make them difficult to read regarding the source of funds and what
happened to some of the funds. i do not have information about payees of
cheques written by ecolife, or identification of depositors, other than what the
records identify through the notations. snap loan proceeds and account
transfers are two such entries that i can identify. i recognize the code for
“nsf” meaning “returned non-sufficient funds” or returned unpaid. in many
cases, when a transfer is made between accounts, the account number to or from
which the funds were being transferred is noted and it can, therefore, be
determined.

based on the banking records, i find that there
was additional work completed by ecolife workers and additional contracts
entered into, paid for and possibly finished between 2017 and march of 2019. 
the banking records admitted into evidence support this.

scotiabank business account record for account
number 30262 00260 18 shows that the account was opened on october 11, 2011 and
closed on march 23, 2018. it was opened in the name of david richard murray,
trading as ecolife home renovations.

deposits made between february 28, 2017 and
march 31, 2017 into that account amounted to $189,315.94 for that month. march
to april of 2017 show deposits of $238,600.43. april to may of 2017 show deposits
of $301,842.10. may to june of 2017 show deposits of $278,086.48. some of
these deposits include amounts for cheques returned as non-sufficient funds,
from ecolife’s account, but those amounts are relatively minimal.

this pattern continued with deposits in excess
of $180,000 for each month until the end of november of 2017. after november
of 2017, there is very little activity in that account, and no customer driven
access after december 4, 2017. the crown has identified in the records, by way
of memo, where they believe the deposits can be attributed to particular
contracts and complainants. however, there is at least one deposit, namely on
november 15, 2017, in which snap loan proceeds in the amount of $40,250 were
deposited, and those funds are not attributable to any complainant.

scotiabank account number 06486 02766 26 is mr.
murray’s personal account. records were produced between february 1, 2016 and
march 26, 2018. the transactions in that account were mostly modest, and what
would be expected from a personal account. notably, there is one transaction
on august 15, 2017 for a transfer in the amount of $14,500 out of mr. murray’s
personal account. there is a corresponding transfer into the account for
ecolife on the same date, showing a transfer from the personal account into the
business account. on august 21, 2017, there is another transfer of $3,600 from
mr. murray’s personal account into the business account. a close review of the
banking records demonstrates that mr. murray, from time to time, would transfer
money from his personal account into the business account. as well, there are
similar transfers back to mr. murray’s personal account, in what appears to be
compensation for the earlier infusion of funds.

the activity in that account ceased on december
4, 2017.
cibc banking records

cibc account number 1012010 was opened on
november 9, 2017 in the name of ecolife home improvements inc. david murray is
listed as the president and a signatory on the account. incorporation
documents and corporate minutes provided to cibc were included in the
information.

the cibc records show a similar pattern of
transactions as the scotiabank, in that monthly deposits far exceed the money
claimed by the complainants. at least at the beginning, there appears to be a
pattern of e-transfers rather than cheques being written on behalf of ecolife. 
there are some nsf cheques that were written on behalf of ecolife, which
artificially inflates the deposit figures, but not substantially so.

the cibc records end in november of 2018, but
all customer activity ends in october of 2018. in september of 2018, deposits
into the account drop dramatically to $41,725.20. there are no nsf cheques
charged back, so the deposits amount to funds paid into this account.
td banking records

the td records relate to 5249689 37 12. mr.
murray is the signatory.

the records provided by td bank show that the
account was being moved over from cibc on october 17, 2018. the same
incorporation documents that were provided to cibc were provided to td bank. they
document that mr. murray is the sole director of ecolife home improvements inc.

the td bank records do not have monthly totals
or any totals at all associated with them, so it is difficult to assess monthly
activity. all customer activity ends on december 31, 2018. a review of
the production order for td bank reveals that p.c. williams sought
information up to december 31, 2018. the last deposit appears to be from dawn
mckelvie in the amount of $6,000 on december 24, 2018.
murray’s evidence regarding banking records

mr. murray testified that he sometimes wrote
cheques to suppliers, or had running accounts with suppliers. he did not pay
individual amounts for individual orders, but rather he made bulk payments.

he testified that he did not segregate his
clients’ deposit money into a trust account, but rather had a mixed business
account into which he deposited funds and operated his business from the
proceeds.

contrary to the crown’s claim, there is nothing
illegal or dishonest about this arrangement. i have carefully reviewed the
contracts that were put into evidence, and there is nothing on the contract
that required mr. murray to inform the client that he was putting their deposit
money into a segregated trust account and only using their deposit money to pay
for supplies. i was not provided with any regulation that requires a trust
arrangement for deposit funds.

in fact, there is ample evidence from mr.
frattini and from the banking records that mr. murray was operating a large
contracting operation, and that he was making bulk payments toward the line of
credit being held by gentek. that same evidence supports mr. murray’s claim
that he would order large amounts of materials, sometimes in the form of custom
orders. mr. frattini confirmed that custom orders could not simply be sold to
anyone other than the customer for whom the order was made. his evidence
supported that mr. murray’s company ordered materials under customer’s names,
because the letter sent to mr. murray named two of mr. murray’s customers.

the crown also suggested that mr. murray’s use
of point of sale purchases for identified retailers and from atm banking
machines suggest that mr. murray was using his business account for personal
expenses. when confronted by this claim, mr. murray said that this was
discussed at his earlier, aborted trial, and the crown could only prove one
transaction that was for personal expenses. mr. murray testified that for a
period of time, he did not even pay himself even though he did extensive sales
work and visited worksites.

i have not been provided with any expert report
regarding mr. murray’s banking records.

the crown asks that i draw the inference that mr. murray was
struggling financially, and had cash flow problems directly related to
mismanagement of his company or mismanagement of client’s money. the crown
points to cheques written by mr. murray, that were returned nsf or
non-sufficient funds and further points to the fact that each month his company
appears to have used all of the money and perhaps gone into an overdraft
position. the crown says that this points to mismanagement of mr. murray’s
company, which would provide evidence to refute mr. murray’s own evidence that
his company was lucrative and growing.

mr. murray testified that he had a long-standing relationship with
scotiabank, but that he was having problems with that bank holding funds even
on cheques that were certified. because he depended on what he was told by the
bank, he wrote cheques when deposits were made. as a direct result of the bank
holding funds, the cheques that he wrote were returned as non-sufficient funds,
even though he had deposited cheques. he said that this caused problems with
suppliers and employees, so he switched banks to cibc. he began having a
similar problem with cibc, and so he changed banks again to td bank.

a review of the banking records demonstrate that mr. murray spent
money when he had it. there were times that his cheques were returned nsf. 
however, it does not appear from the records that this was the usual course. 
there is nothing in the banking records that refute what mr. murray said about
the bank holding funds and not immediately making the funds available for
expenses.
overall conclusion regarding banking
records

accordingly, i find that the banking records do not serve to refute
anything said by mr. murray regarding his business activity, and in fact support
his evidence in many ways. typically deposits fell off in the late fall and
early winter over the course of three years. mr. murray testified that his
busy season started in late march or april and runs all summer. the banking
records support that. mr. murray testified that his business typically shut
down right before christmas each year and it did not reopen until late january
of each year. the banking records support that claim.

the deposits into the various company bank accounts far exceed the
claims by the complainants. mr. murray testified that he had entered into and
fulfilled the work on many contracts during the same time period that the complainant’s
contracts were left unfulfilled. the banking records support that claim.

based on the banking records, i cannot make a finding that mr.
murray performed any dishonest acts related to the banking records. depositing
money into a separate trust account for client’s deposits is not required in
law or by the contract. mr. murray had no obligation to inform his clients
regarding the use of the deposit funds.

i also cannot draw the inference that mr. murray was having cash
flow problems, based on the nsf cheques written by his company and based on
the use of the funds.

i am able to infer that mr. murray’s company was not as financially
viable as he had hoped, but mr. murray testified to that fact. he testified
that he incurred additional costs when transferring orders from euroseal to
gentek. the gentek products were more expensive, and he still had to pay
euroseal for the product that he had ordered and not received, because they
were custom orders. he testified that he did not pass that cost along to his
customers, but rather absorbed those costs. he also testified that he had uncollected
accounts receivable, which caused financial problems. he said that he was
losing his business and did not know it.

accordingly, the banking records do not establish what the crown
seeks. as well, there are inferences available that support mr. murray’s
evidence, rather than support the crown’s theory.
crown submissions

the crown urges me to reject mr. murray’s evidence and to find him
guilty on all counts. for those complainants whose loss or risk of loss
amounted to less than $5,000, he urges me to find him guilty as charged, and if
i find that is not available to me, to find mr. murray guilty of fraud under
$5000.

the crown submits that accepting money without performing work,
submitting false rebate applications, and misleading clients are objectively
dishonest acts. there is no controversy over whether or not mr. murray
accepted deposits and sometimes full payment of contracts without completing
the work. he denies submitting false rebate applications and he also denies
misleading his clients about the rebates, about changes to the contract dates,
or his intention to complete the work. in my assessment of all of the
evidence, i accept mr. murray’s evidence.

although it is true that mr. murray accepted money from his clients and
did not fulfil the terms of the contract, that in and of itself is not a
dishonest act. the crown’s position is deceptively simple, but fails to take
into consideration that the complainants were contracting for future work.

that future work was either not performed or partially performed.
mens
rea
and
actus reus
must coincide. the crown argues that because mr.
murray continued to not perform the work, the dishonest act is proven, as it
was a continuum of behaviour. in my view that is not what i must focus on. 
mr. murray continued to conduct his business, and deliver on contracted work
through his business until his business was effectively shut down by the city
of sudbury by refusing to renew his licence. mr. murray had a storefront. he
had preprinted invoices in his company’s name. he had trucks, employees and
equipment. he had an office phone line and a cell phone through which his
customers could contact him. many of the contracts had no start or anticipated
completion date noted on them, most particularly as the effect of the greenon
program cancellation began to be felt. in light of the legal test set out in
theroux
for
actus reus, the failure to perform and then to issue refunds is not
an objectively dishonest act.

i do not find that mr. murray had a pattern of misleading clients
about the dates of the contracts and, in fact, most clients were aware and
actually consented to the date being backdated. for those who claimed to
either not be aware or who did not consent, there is nothing in their evidence,
or any of the evidence that i do accept, that causes me to reject entirely mr.
murray’s evidence in this regard.

i do not find that mr. murray filed false rebate applications to
greenon. in fact, it is not controversial that the application process was
multifaceted and it involved many steps to accomplish a completed application. 
the contractor was expected to begin the application, and to provide some
preliminary information as well as before and after photos of the work to
greenon. the certified installer had to provide a certificate that verified
that the work was completed. the customer had to provide confirmation that the
invoice was paid in full and that the work was completed as described. until
all steps were completed, the application process was not finalized.

mr. murray testified that his office staff started the application
process. they got behind and he was required to hire additional staff,
including his son, his stepdaughter and his niece. he tried to supervise them,
but he was ill and they were overwhelmed. he candidly admitted that mistakes
were made, and they were not perfect. there is evidence of only one false
application, which mr. murray acknowledged. i reject the other claims of false
applications. however, the accepted false application involved an uncle of mr. murray’s
wife. mr. murray’s mother-in-law worked for him, and she was also related to
this customer. mr. murray said that his mother-in-law falsified the
application with photographs of another home and in which it was claimed that
the work had been completed. in fact, the work had not been done. the
customer, mr. facendi, had to verify that the work was done, in order for him
to get the rebate funds that he testified that he did receive and he kept. 
ultimately, mr. murray acknowledged that it was his responsibility, as the sole
director of ecolife. however, this action by his mother-in-law cannot make mr.
murray criminally liable for the actions of an employee.

mr. valiquette’s greenon application was not a “false application”. 
it was commenced in error and when mr. murray caught the error, he told mr.
valiquette to do nothing further with the application. that was completely
appropriate.

i also accept mr. murray’s claim that he expected to perform the
work for which he was paid. in fact, i find that he made extensive efforts to
complete the work. p.c. williams’ evidence supports this, and so does the
evidence of many of the complainants. they described consistent communication
with mr. murray at the beginning. those who contacted him directly described
that mr. murray was responsive to their requests at first. it was only as time
went on that mr. murray’s responses became less frequent and he became
unresponsive. the text messages that were put into evidence support that. the
client’s claims support that. mr. murray admits that.

i accept that there were several causes for mr. murray’s failure to
complete the work. for contracts that were entered into before june of 2018,
which were originally not greenon contracts, each contract appears to have been
problematic for one reason or another, and in the analysis below i will address
the specifics. however, in light of the objective evidence and the evidence
that i accept, there were reasons found to accept that this class of contract
was not the product of criminal fraud.

for
those contracts that were specifically greenon contracts or contracts that
turned into greenon contracts, the objective evidence supports that there were
significant and unanticipated supplier issues, and catastrophic effects from
the cancellation of the program. this was worsened by the poor state of
weather between november of 2018 and april of 2019. i accept mr. murray’s
evidence that there was a cascading effect resulting in a loss of his business
that he did not see coming. it was the cascading effect rather than anything
that mr. murray did or did not do that resulted in the failure to complete this
class of contract.

there
remains a class of contracts that were entered into which were not directly
greenon contracts, and they were signed after the greenon program launched. 
there is little controversy that mr. murray’s company workers were working as
hard as they could within the restrictions of the greenon program, which
resulted in mr. murray having to redirect his workforce to ensure that the
greenon jobs were completed. i accept mr. murray’s evidence that some of
his workers could do other work, such as decks, siding and roofing, and when he
sold those contracts, he fully expected that he would have the capacity to
perform the work, and assessed objectively, he had every reason to have this
belief.

the
full analysis of the above contracts are noted below.
crown’s theory

the crown’s theory of liability for mr. murray can be grouped into
the following categories:
i)
a pattern of deceit and misrepresentations about upfront payments,
false promises of timelines, use of greenon as a sales tactic, financing
contracts, lack of communication and evasion and misuse of funds.
regarding this claim, i find that there was no such pattern of
deceit and misrepresentations. mr. murray did not demand upfront payments,
although some clients paid up front, either through loans or in cash. some
clients paid their invoices, in the hope of qualifying for the greenon program
rebates as their work had to be paid in full before october 31, 2018.
he gave time estimates that he later discovered were
unrealistic and were impacted by what he called the “surge” caused by the
greenon program and then the abrupt cancellation of the program. the later
contracts had no completion date noted on them, and any claims by the customers
of verbal agreements regarding completion were either not verified by mr.
murray or he explained intervening events.
he admitted to using the greenon program as a sales tactic and
said he could have sold many more contracts if he was just interested in
selling. in my findings below, i found that there were four jobs sold after
greenon was cancelled that were connected to the greenon program: paul facendi’s
job, chris crawford’s job, robin cameron’s job and mark lowe’s job were all
sold in the summer of 2018. mr. murray said that he sold only two greenon jobs
after the announcement. this is clearly not the case, but this inconsistency
is not central in the overall picture.
a review of the cancellation notice released by the province of
ontario cancelling the greenon program reveals that it can be interpreted the
way that mr. murray interpreted it: no actual date of termination for
selling
jobs is noted, just a date for
installation and a date for submission of paperwork.
mr. murray had no way of knowing that the program was going to
be cancelled before the election, beyond rumours. after the election, i accept
that he had little guidance about what the actual effective date was to stop
selling greenon eligible jobs. premier-elect ford cancelled the program. he
then extended the program to august 31, 2018, with paperwork to be submitted by
september 30, 2018. the deadline was extended again to november 30, 2018.
of the entirety of the contracts that were the subject of these
charges, only three were sold in july of 2018 and one was sold in august of
2018. one contract was sold in september of 2018. three were sold in october
of 2018. one was in november of 2018. two were in december of 2018. only four
of these contracts were connected to greenon. the work associated with the
remaining contracts is consistent with mr. murray’s claim that he was selling
jobs for which he did not require his most skilled workers.
i also find that mr. murray did not continue to sell window
contracts with promised start dates knowing that he was having supply issues. mr.
murray discovered in or about june of 2018 that he was having supply issues
with euroseal. he then spoke to darren frattini from gentek, and got firmer
delivery estimates. however, even darren frattini testified that the lead
times for getting windows in this period was affected by the greenon surge and
shortages of components. those factors changed anticipated delivery of windows
from a period of six weeks to up to six months. this was unanticipated and
unknown prior to june of 2018, and it continued to evolve. mr. murray was
relying on what he was told by mr. frattini. a review of the contracts reveals
that mr. murray was often no longer putting firm timeframes regarding
completion of contracts, and he was having conversations with his clients
regarding the pressures of greenon and the need to complete that work.
i find, based on the text messages that were admitted into
evidence, based on the claims of the individual complainants and on mr.
murray’s evidence that communication with complainants did not start off as
being evasive or unresponsive. in fact, it is clear that mr. murray was
responsive and followed through reliably until he became completely overwhelmed
in the summer of 2018 and then he became evasive and made empty promises. his
communication became less and less, and the timeframe is consistent with his
illness, his mother’s death and his office shut down. it ceased entirely when
his licence was revoked, until as he put it, he could not stand it anymore. he
then provided limited responses to his clients. once he was charged criminally,
his communication stopped almost completely.
mr. murray admitted to increasing the amount of ms. pearson’s
contract to ask for additional funding for her wedding. ms. pearson was aware
and was a party to this. this did not deceive ms. pearson in any way.
mr. murray admitted to backdating many of the dates of some of
the contracts. he did so for various reasons. to ensure that the client
received last year’s pricing and to ensure that the client would qualify for
the greenon program (most of which contracts would have qualified by date in
any event). however, most complainants admit that they knew what mr. murray
was doing and they either consented to it or were indifferent to it. they were
not deceived by it. for those who claim that they did not consent or were not
aware, i have made specific findings noted below.
the crown relies on paul facendi’s evidence that mr. murray
misrepresented the scope of work and pressured him to enter into a contract for
more than what he wanted. for the reasons set out below, i specifically reject
mr. facendi’s evidence.
mr. murray did admit that he was overwhelmed by volumes of
work, but that admission was related to an unanticipated cancellation of the
greenon program and the corresponding need to complete a year’s worth of work
in two months. it is a logical effect of a sudden and unexpected termination,
that it would cause disruption. the overwhelm occurred as a result of factors
that were out of mr. murray’s control, not something that he engineered.
mr. murray admitted that there were mistakes made in
scheduling. he did not admit that he “lost control of scheduling”. he said he
delegated it, there were problems and he intervened. he agreed that it was
ultimately his responsibility.
mr. murray’s evidence was not that he failed to track orders or
to prioritize clients who had already paid. his evidence was that he delegated
the ordering of materials to his employees. he said he created a simple
tracking and scheduling system that would ensure that all employees saw the
schedule on a daily basis, as it was a board on which every job was to be
scheduled once materials arrived.
mr. murray admitted that he referred clients to other agencies,
i.e. sawdac or greenon, but that was not in an effort to deflect, but rather to
ensure that clients were informed of the reality of what was happening in the
industry.
mr. murray acknowledged that clients were screaming at him and
that he was juggling too many jobs at once. that was directly related to the
greenon cancellation, the corresponding concern by the public and his customers
that their jobs would not be done and they would not receive their rebates.
ii)
misuse of client deposits by not segregating deposit funds and
dedicating those funds solely to obtaining materials and supplies for clients. 
this was followed by a failure to return the deposits upon request of the
clients.
the crown claims that using client funds for personal or
unrelated business expenses is a strong indicator of fraudulent intent. i have
reviewed the banking records above and i find that the evidence does not
support this submission. there was no obligation on mr. murray to segregate
client deposits from his general operating funds. the banking records do not
support this claim. mr. murray denies this claim. the spending as
demonstrated by the banking records does not show extravagant or unrelated
spending. mr. murray refused to return deposits because, at least for windows
and some siding materials, these were specially ordered products which could
not be cancelled.
iii)
a pattern of dishonesty regarding reasons provided to clients for
failure to have work done.
mr. murray admitted to several reasons for which his ability to
fulfil the contracts was impeded. he said that he was ill in november and
december of 2018. he said that his mother fell and died in december of 2018. 
he said that the winter of 2018 to 2019 was unusually cold and snowy, and
prevented his workers from working. he said that he had employee issues. he
talked about the abrupt cancellation of the greenon program, and its
corresponding effect upon the schedule and all of his work. he talked about
supplier issues. he said that some clients altered the work that they wanted
to have done. he claimed issues regarding the labour board and his inability
to force workers to work in what they believed was an unsafe environment. he
said that his licence was suspended, preventing him from working.
i find that most of the reasons provided by mr. murray are
supported in the objective evidence or the evidence of the complainants, specifically
regarding the weather, several of the complainants agreed that the winter was
an unusually long and harsh winter, with lots of snow and ice and it came
earlier and lasted longer than usual. darren frattini substantiated the
supplier issues regarding windows and the labour problems common in the
industry, and particularly during this period, as well as the surge due to
greenon. i have found below in a review of the individual contracts that some
clients did change their choices in the contracts, cancelled the contract
effectively ending mr. murray’s ability to work, or failed in their own
obligation to do work that was required prior to the start of the work on the contract. 
the licence suspension and the affect of that suspension was corroborated by
mr. guillot, ms. lavigne and mr. adair.
there is no independent evidence regarding mr. murray’s health
and illness or his mother’s death. however, i see no reason for which mr.
murray should be doubted on those points. he said that he had no idea how ill
he was. he thought that he had the flu and that he just could not shake it. 
ultimately, he discovered that he had a heart attack, and that he is a type one
diabetic. he said that his mother fell, was admitted to hospital, and died. 
in fact, he described in great detail the events that surrounded her death, and
the need for him to leave the hospital to address a worker issue, during which
time she passed away without him being present. he was visibly emotional about
that.
accordingly, i do not find that that the reasons given by mr.
murray were mere excuses or dishonest in any way.

the crown suggests that the above represents a sustained pattern of
deceit by mr. murray over a period of years. for the reasons noted above, i
find that there was no pattern of dishonesty related to formation of contracts,
dating of contracts, management of jobs, management of funds or loan terms. i
do find that there was a pattern of communication with customers that evolved
into empty promises that evolved into an almost complete lack of communication
with customers.

the crown suggests that mr. murray’s evidence was self-serving,
internally inconsistent, unresponsive and inconsistent with admissions made. 
further, the crown says that mr. murray’s evidence is not corroborated by
documents or records. the crown acknowledges that mr. murray has no obligation
to prove anything, but because of the perceived inconsistencies, without
corroboration, he submits that mr. murray’s evidence cannot be accepted.

he further submits that mr. murray’s evidence is in direct
contradiction to the evidence of the complainants, and he urges that i accept
the evidence of the complainants as being credible and reliable, and
corroborated by the documentary and photographic evidence.

for the reasons noted above, and in the analysis of each complainant’s
evidence below, i cannot find that mr. murray’s evidence is sufficiently
internally inconsistent on material issues to reject it. i cannot find that it
is inconsistent with the objective evidence or with the admissions made.

i do not find that it was self-serving, but i do find that it was
often prolix and filled with political speeches about the legality of the
actions of the newly elected premiere, doug ford. he often answered questions
with rhetorical questions of his own, and he had to be cautioned about that.

the crown submits that i can find that mr. murray was reckless or
was wilfully blind to support the claim that mr. murray had the requisite
mens
rea
for fraud.

recklessness may relate to either the conduct (deceit) or
consequences (deprivation) aspects of the
actus reus. the accused must
be aware of a substantial risk but proceed with the conduct despite the risk.


willful blindness suggests a deliberate failure to inquire into
facts the accused suspects may exist. this is treated as the equivalent to
actual knowledge for the purpose of assessing
mens rea.


the crown cites the volume and irregularity of transactions, mr.
murray’s failure to reconcile financial records, the submission of false
applications for government rebates, and avoidance of client complaints and
refund requests to support his claim of proof of
mens rea.

however, given my findings related to the banking records and the
greenon applications, as well as the communication with clients, i am really
only left with the volume of what the crown claims to be irregular
transactions, i.e. the contracts. the remainder are not founded in evidence. 
there is a large volume of complainants. there are 40 in total. on the face
of it, that is a relatively large number of unsatisfied customers who paid for
something and did not get satisfaction. however, given my findings related to
the amount of business that mr. murray’s company was doing, as well as the fact
that these complainants span a four year period between 2016 and 2019, the
number lessens in significance. that factor alone, in these circumstances
cannot support the finding the crown seeks. this was a multimillion dollar a
year contracting operation, and the contracts in issue are only a portion of
the annual business of this company.

the crown submits that mr. murray ignored the risk to the clients
when he discovered his staff submitted improper rebate applications. however,
mr. murray testified he did not know that this occurred until into 2019, and
specifically for mr. facendi. he also discovered that mr. valiquette’s job had
resulted in a greenon application when it should not have. when he discovered
that this had occurred, he immediately communicated with mr. valiquette and
told him to do nothing with the application. mr. murray said that he
tried to supervise his staff, and he fired his mother-in-law for filing the
false application for her brother-in-law. in light of this evidence, i cannot
find that mr. murray ignored the risks to his clients, and it is not clear
to me what the risk would have been to the clients in general of this potential
failure by mr. murray. his evidence was that his office staff was inputting
applications for people who were not eligible for the program, not that his
staff had not input applications for people who were eligible. mr. murray
was candid in saying that he was overwhelmed and that he severely limited the
new business that he sold after he became aware of the surge with greenon and
the cancellation. the banking records support this claim.

the crown also claims that mr. murray continued operating his wife’s
company without informing his clients. that is contrary to the evidence. ms.
facendi formed the company. she operated it. she met with the clients and
signed the contracts with the clients. mr. murray was then presented as an
employee of her company. there was no claim that he was not connected to the
company, and there was no claim by any of the clients that mr. murray was
operating the company. they were aware of the arrangement and they consented
to it.

the crown filed a similar fact application, which was granted. the
crown relies on the similar fact application to demonstrate:
i)
each complainant had independent evidence of
loss;
ii)
allegations were documented; and
iii)
that there was no air of reality to collusion
among complainants.
however, the crown also relies on the similar fact ruling to
establish:
iv)
a repetitive pattern: accepting deposits and failing to deliver,
offering similar excuses;
v)
backdated contracts and false rebate promises;
vi)
lack of meaningful remediation or refunds; and
vii)
this undermines the defence claim that each incident was isolated or
accidental.

the crown specifically submits that the similar fact evidence
supports the dishonest act element of the
actus reus
of criminal fraud,
or the objectively dishonest act and deprivation or risk of deprivation because
it identifies a pattern of objectively dishonest conduct.

according to the crown, this identifies subjective knowledge of mr.
murray that the acts were dishonest, establishing the
actus reus
but it
can also be used to establish wilful blindness and foresight of financial harm
to his clients, which is the
mens rea
element of criminal fraud.

he acknowledges that similar fact evidence cannot simply be used as
character evidence, to prove that mr. murray is the type of person who is
likely to commit criminal fraud.

the crown wants to use this evidence across counts, to support an
inference that the failure to perform under the contracts was not mere
accident, but rather established a pattern of conduct.

however, much of what the crown relies on regarding similar fact was
already admitted by mr. murray. there is no dispute that he took the money and
did not do some or all of the work. the question is why? mr. murray has
provided an explanation, which i have accepted. that explanation does not
involve accident or coincidence. it involves a cascading effect from an
unforeseeable set of circumstances that started with the unanticipated and
abrupt cancellation of the greenon program with little notice, which was
compounded by the loss of key, trained and required employees to do the work. 
it was further compounded by the need to retrain other employees in an
environment when there was a documented shortage of skilled workers. it was
then exacerbated by mr. murray’s ill health, the death of his mother and
the poor weather. his licence was then revoked by the city of sudbury. regarding
the work that preceded the greenon program, each contract had unique problems,
which were explained by mr. murray. those explanations were borne out in the
evidence of the complainants and in the documentary evidence that was
provided. subsequent to the greenon program, mr. murray contracted for
minimal work that did not require highly skilled workers for relatively simple
jobs.

for the reasoning as set out above, the elements above do not
support an inference of the claimed pattern of conduct.
browne v. dunn

the crown identified several areas where mr. murray’s evidence
raised an objection by the crown because of a perceived violation of the rule
in
browne v. dunn, which is a rule of fairness. it requires a witness
to put his or her differing version to another witness to afford an opportunity
to explain.

the first objection raised relates to the claim of a change in
window manufacturers when mr. murray became aware of the delays in receipt from
euroseal and switched to gentek as a supplier. specifically, the crown cites
the evidence of judy strato and the failure of the defence to put that claim to
her.

i have carefully reviewed the evidence of ms. strato and of mr.
murray on this point. ms. strato said that she was told that there were manufacturer
delays. she thought her windows were coming from toronto and that she
remembered the name regency. she did not recognize the name euroseal. mr.
murray said that he originally ordered the windows from euroseal, but when he
discovered the delays that euroseal were facing and that they would not give
him firm delivery dates, he switched to gentek. he said that he talked to ms.
strato’s husband about that issue.

because of ms. strato not recognizing the name euroseal but
believing her windows came from toronto (which would be true of euroseal
windows and not of gentek windows), as well as mr. murray saying he spoke to mr.
strato about switching suppliers, i find that this issue was explored
sufficiently with ms. strato to satisfy the rule in
browne v. dunn.

the same was true for many of the complainants. some were asked
about whether or not they recognized the name euroseal, and most who were asked
did not. of those who were specifically asked about being informed of a switch
in supplier before the switch was made, none admitted to hearing that. this
issue applies only to contracts involving windows. it is not unusual for
customers to not know the specific supplier of their materials, and mr. murray
testified that he was entitled to substitute materials by the terms of the
contract. the reverse of the contract specifically says that ecolife was
entitled to substitute superior material without notice to his clients. 
however, mr. murray said that kept his customers informed about this change,
and he clearly did not. this element factored into my assessment of mr.
murray’s credibility and reliability, but ultimately it alone or in combination
with the other factors did not cause me to reject his evidence.

the crown claims that ms. cameron and ms. crossman, and others were
not asked questions regarding anticipated start date would not be until 2019.

i have reviewed the evidence of ms. cameron. she sold her home in
2018 and oved in december. there does not appear to be any claim that the work
was not anticipated to start until 2019. in fact, mr. murray said that he
specifically instructed his son to call mrs. cameron to schedule the completion
of the job for december of 2018 and that was how he discovered that she had
sold her home and was moving. as well, ms. cameron’s job actually started
within a week of signing the contract in july of 2018, but it was not
completed.

ms. crossman’s evidence related to two contracts. it is the second
contract that was problematic and the work was not completed. mr. murray
claimed that there were problems related to the stucco on the home needing to
come off, which delayed the project, and mrs. crossman agreed that she got a
text saying that. however, mr. murray claimed that he told ms. crossman that
the work regarding the change to the stairs would not start until 2019. ms.
crossman agreed that she had talked about a change to the stairs. overall, i
do not find that this violates the rule in
browne v. dunn. ms. crossman
admitted that she changed what she wanted regarding the stairs after the work
started. it was that work that mr. murray said he would not be able to start
until 2019.

the crown claims that issues relating to structure and permits for
robert bouffard’s home were not put to mr. bouffard. mr. murray claimed that
mr. bouffard did not want to get a permit which resulted in the structural
choice of the replacement beam. mr. bouffard claimed that he told mr. murray
to make the replacement beam up to code. mr. bouffard was cross-examined about
the permit, and the term on the back of his contract regarding the customer’s
responsibility to obtain a permit, and he said that he had not seen it before. 
he denied that mr. murray asked him to get an “engineer permit”. mr. murray
testified that mr. bouffard did not want to get a permit, which would not cause
an issue unless the house was inspected. this issue was put to mr. bouffard
sufficiently to satisfy the purpose of the rule in
browne v dunn.

the crown claims that issues relating to tony nash and abuse of
ecolife staff were not put to mr. nash. in-chief, mr. nash described an
incident whereby mr. murray kicked him out of the office but mr. nash said that
it was because mr. murray didn’t want mr. nash leaving with the order form for
gentek. mr. nash claimed that mr. murray struck him and he went to the
police. mr. murray said he kicked mr. nash out due to his behaviour toward the
staff and that mr. nash bumped him when he was leaving the office. he said
that he showed to the police officers who attended, the internal video of his
storefront. mr. murray’s claim about mr. nash is not central to the issues. both
mr. murray and mr. nash agree that there was a confrontation in the office
and it regarded mr. nash wanting to leave the office with the order form. the
rule in
browne v. dunn
has not been violated regarding this issue.

the crown claims that it was never put to mr. frattini that mr.
murray decided to switch all of the window orders from euroseal to gentek. mr.
frattini was not specifically asked this question, but his evidence does
generally support this. as noted above, mr. frattini did agree that he
had a conversation with mr. murray and that ecolife’s business increased
significantly in the summer of 2018. this does not violate the rule in
browne
v. dunn. mr. frattini would not be able to confirm this issue, and if mr.
murray told mr. frattini that he was transferring all of his window orders to
gentek, it would be inadmissible as a prior consistent statement.

the crown claims that mr. murray’s claim of advising the client and
converting the bissonnette’s window contract to a greenon contract was not put
to mr. bissonnette. both mr. and mrs. bissonnette testified that mr. murray
talked to them about the greenon program. in fact, mr.bissonnette believed
that it was in 2017 when he originally signed the contract. mrs. bissonnette
believed that it was in the spring of 2018. mr. bissonnette testified that he
was told that there were problems with window manufacturers. they both
testified that mr. murray asked for a final payment in december of 2018, and
they dated the cheque for october of 2018. there is no violation of the rule
in
browne v. dunn, given the above evidence.

the crown claims that it was not put to ms. pearson that she
originally signed a different contract than the ones that were put into
evidence for less than the contracts in evidence. however, ms. pearson agreed
that mr. murray “discounted” his contract by $4,000 and facilitated her
application for financing to permit her to have one loan for her wedding and
she was also able to finance her renovation job. what is important in this
transaction is that ms. pearson was given the extra $4,000 by mr. murray from
the loan proceeds, and she acknowledged that. this is not a central or
material issue. as well, it was not unforeseen by the crown, given that mr.
murray claimed that this issue was explored at his earlier aborted trial, and
the earlier contract was put into evidence. he was not impeached on this
point.

the crown claims that it was not put to mr. facendi that mr. murray
claimed that mr. facendi was aware that the greenon application was a false
application. i find that this was an inference available from all of the
evidence. the greenon application was a multistep application, which required
the homeowner to certify that the work had been done. mr. facendi said that he
received the funds from greenon, and that the work was never done by mr.
murray’s company. he kept the grant funds and used them to pay for the work
done by another company. if mr. facendi received the funds, and kept them i
can infer that he participated in the fraud on greenon regardless of what mr.
facendi said. the “failure” to put this to mr. facendi does not violate the
rule in
browne v. dunn, it is an inference available on mr. facendi’s
evidence regardless of his potential answer. mr. murray’s comment that mr.
facendi was part of the fraud on greenon comes from mr. facendi’s participation
by keeping funds he was not entitled to.

the crown raised an objection regarding mr. jedrezek’s evidence. 
it is the crown’s claim that mr. jedrezek was not asked about converting the
contract to a greenon contract, which violates the rule in
browne and dunn.

mr.
jedrezek said mr. murray told him as he was working on the house that he might
qualify for a rebate but did not specify what for.

the work that was done on the house was done in june of 2018. he confirmed
that he got a rebate cheque but did not know what it was for. he said that the
work was not done so he did not cash the cheque. he said he reported to
greenon that the work was not done and then gave the cheque to the detective. 
the cheque is in the amount of $3,900. mr. jedrezek also said that he went to
mr. murray’s office to sign a document but he did not know what it was. he
confirmed that he gave the secretary his email address. in cross-examination, mr. jedrezek
was asked again about mr. murray telling him about the greenon program after
the work had started, and he agreed.

he also said that he signed the form with the secretary but did not read it. mr.
jedrezek clearly was told by mr. murray about a rebate program, and he did not
specify when he was told but it had to be in june of 2018. he had to have
participated in the process by way of responses to the request for confirmation
from greenon, but he said that he did not respond.


there
is no violation of the rule in
browne v. dunn
given this exchange with
mr. jedrezek.

the
crown raised an objection regarding mr. rainville not being asked if the job
was contingent on “weather permitting”. however, tab 3 of mr. rainville’s
exhibit # 21 is a contract that mr. rainville identified as the first
contract. it is clearly noted on that contract regarding the estimated start
and finish date “30 to 45 days weather and scheduled dates”. as well, the
crown filed a similar fact application in which they sought to have evidence
apply across counts. the similar fact ruling is not limited to what the crown
wants to have apply, it is open to me to apply evidence relating to other
complainants to this complainant. there is evidence in mr. rainville’s
examination in‑chief that this issue was explored. many other complainants
testified that mr. murray told them that weather would affect the work on their
job. as a general rule, they did not believe that weather was in fact a cause
for the delay. it is also a matter of logic and common sense that weather
would affect the work on a job that involves reshingling and removing siding
and insulating a home. this is not a violation of the rule in
browne v dunn.

as
well, the crown submits that it was never put to mr. rainville that the
contract was rewritten and that he and his spouse were asked to attend the
offices of ecolife to sign a rewritten contract. this was also part of mr.
rainville’s evidence in-chief. mr. rainville said that when he signed the
contract, it was to be rewritten. the handwriting on what mr. rainville
identified as the original contract and the handwriting on what was identified
as the rewritten contract are clearly different, and mr. and mrs. rainville
both signed the rewritten contracts. nothing turns on this point, it is not a
central or material issue in dispute and it came out of the examination in-chief
of mr. rainville. it does not violate the rule in
browne v. dunn
if
counsel does not revisit this issue in his cross‑examination. it would
be a waste of time to do so.

the
crown raised an objection relating to the rule in
browne v dunn
regarding mrs. chomiak’s evidence. mrs. chomiak testified that her
husband had to fix the deck that was built by mr. murray. mr. murray, in his
evidence, said that mr. chomiak had changed a component on the deck by
splicing, and he said he was being held accountable for work not done by his
company, since the deck had been altered by someone else.

there are two problems relating to this objection. first, mrs.
chomiak is not an expert and she cannot identify for the court what was
improperly done, only what she believed to be substandard and why she believed
that. this is not conclusive evidence that the work was substandard, poorly or
improperly done. secondly, it was mrs. chomiak who was testifying and it was
mr. chomiak who performed the work. this would have been a question for mr.
chomiak and not for mrs. chomiak. the crown chose to not call mr. chomiak as a
witness, and certainly could have called him. this is not a violation.

the crown claims a violation of the rule in
browne v. dunn
relating to mr. murray’s counsel’s failure to cross-examine on the issue as to
whether or not mr. murray advised clients that the greenon jobs caused delays. 
the similar fact ruling answers this. there was evidence put to many of the complainants
that mr. murray claimed that greenon was the source of delays, and they agreed.
 as well, the fact of greenon causing delays is a central issue only in that it
explains why mr. murray was overwhelmed. mr. murray’s evidence was that he kept
his clients informed about delays and what was happening. he also relied on
news and media releases to inform his clients. he posted notices on his
facebook page and he told clients in text messages, phone calls and the like. the
delays were not solely caused by greenon and the cancellation of the program,
but also by bad weather, illness and injury and loss of qualified employees. to
focus narrowly on a failure of counsel to put to a particular or group of
witnesses mr. murray’s claim of one of many causes for the delay in getting
their jobs done is too close a focus. the whole point of the evidence of the
complainants is that mr. murray was claiming that he kept his clients informed
that their jobs were delayed, is not for me to find that they were each
informed of the exact and ongoing cause of the delays of their jobs.

the crown raises an overall objection that defence counsel failed to
put to the complainants that they were aware and consented to switch the
supplier of windows from euroseal to gentek. i have dealt with this issue in
paragraph 122 (i) above. this is not a violation of the rule in
browne v.
dunn, but my finding in paragraphs 126 and 127 affects my assessment of mr.
murray’s credibility.
criminal record

mr. murray has a criminal record. there are convictions for assault
in 2000, two counts of failure to comply with a recognizance, assault and
harassment as well as disobey a court order and forcible entry from 2007. the
remaining entry post-dates the charges for this matter but relate to 17 counts
of failure to file corporate income tax returns in 2019, which resulted in $17,000
in fines. in relation to the convictions that pre‑date the offences,
there is a gap of at least 12 years between the date of conviction and the date
of arrest for these offences. there is a further gap of six years between
arrest and mr. murray testifying. the criminal record for offences has
little probative value, given the gap and the fact that mr. murray remained
record free in the interim.

i am concerned about the convictions for failing to file 17
corporate income tax returns. however, i have no context within which to place
these convictions. the fine in relation to the penalty is instructive. it
appears that this may have simply been a failure to file returns in relation to
an inactive company, rather than a failure to file and to pay income tax, given
that tax owing factors largely in the fixing of the penalty. if there was a
large amount of tax owing, it is likely the penalty would have been considerably
harsher.

the crown claims that mr. murray’s evidence is vulnerable in that it
sometimes lacked specific details. the crown cited mr. murray’s claim of being
“locked out” of his office in the spring of 2019, and that it was related to
mr. murray’s claim of being bound by a peace bond. a close review of the
evidence of mr. murray was that the original “lockout” was as a result of his
landlord getting an order based on unpaid rent. in fact, many of the complainants
saw a notice posted on the door saying exactly that, and mr. lachance
submitted a photo into evidence of the actual notice on the door.

mr. murray claimed that the lockout was due to 2 months of unpaid
rent, which was a situation that happened to him annually. he said that as a
result of being locked out of his storefront, he lost inventory and equipment. 
the crown says that this evidence lacks detail and a legal foundation. mr.
murray is not obliged to prove anything or to support his claim with anything,
which is also acknowledged by the crown. however, given that the notice was
referenced in evidence by several complainants all around the same time that
mr. murray claimed that he was locked out of his office, i accept this
evidence.

when the crown challenged that this was a primary cause of mr.
murray’s failure to deliver under the contract, mr. murray responded that he
believed that he would re‑open his office and regain his licence. in
fact, it is not disputed that mr. murray along with his wife, formed another
company, paid to incorporate that company, paid for wsib and other insurance,
applied for a business licence and then ms. facendi met with the clients. no
client was asked for any additional funds. if mr. murray was not accurate in
his statements, i have to question why he would go to the lengths that he went
to, to form another company and finish the work. the reasons cited by the
crown to disbelieve mr. murray’s evidence as inconsistent are not borne
out in the evidence that i have accepted. it is the actions of mr. murray’s
landlord and not mr. murray which were being challenged. the crown believes
that since mr. murray was habitually behind in rent in the late winter, that it
should not have come as a surprise to him that the landlord locked him out. that
is not mr. murray’s actions, it is the landlord’s action. mr. murray had a
reason to be surprised. he was in this very situation in other years, but the
landlord took no steps in years past.
credibility assessment of mr.
murray’s evidence

the criminal record has does have an effect on my assessment of mr.
murray’s credibility, but a limited one. it demonstrates that mr. murray
neglected his legal obligations or has in the past completely ignored or defied
legal obligations to file a tax return. therefore, it is important in my
assessment of his credibility to examine the controversial parts of his
evidence in the context of the objective evidence. i have done that.

as well, mr. murray claimed to have informed all of his clients who
ordered custom windows that he switched suppliers in 2018 from euroseal to
gentek. i have found above that he did not inform all of his clients, but as
well that he did not have to inform them according to the terms of the
contract.

mr. murray claimed to have only sold two greenon contracts after the
program was cancelled. the evidence that i accept is that he sold four greenon
contracts. however, the difference in the number is not significant.

mr. murray’s evidence consisted at times of rhetorical questions and
political speeches. however, it was also responsive to the questions asked.

the crown says that mr. murray’s evidence should be treated with
caution because he testified to being bound by a peace bond, and their
corresponding concerns about the failure to provide documentary evidence to
support that claim that this was an invalid excuse for the primary reason that
mr. murray was unable to finish the work in 2019. a review of mr. murray’s
evidence demonstrates that mr. murray claimed that this event was only a
partial reason. he also claimed that his licence was suspended, which was
verified in evidence. he further claimed that the weather delayed restarting
his business in the spring which was supported by several customers. i find
that it is unfair to mr. murray to focus solely on this factor to found his
claim. it was a multifaceted complaint, not limited to the lock out.

the crown cites a concern related to mr. murray transferring orders
from euroseal to gentek as evidence that he had prior awareness of the supplier
problems. he then testified that he lost key installers and lacked certified
staff, which the crown says belied his claim that he believed that he could
still finish the work. however, this was an evolving and dynamic situation,
and as i observe elsewhere, mr. murray significantly reduced the sales of new
business in september of 2018 and continued to reduce that business over the
next several months. hindsight is 20/20. mr. murray cannot have been able to
foresee the future and a potential impact on his business of the cancellation
of the greenon program, the requirement to do 18 months worth of work in 2
months and the corresponding impact on his schedule, the poor weather and his
own poor health. as mr. murray testified, this was a chaotic storm, and
he was caught in it. he testified that he was reacting to the evolving
situation and doing his best.

mr. murray did not claim to have paid for windows up front when they
were ordered. he said that he paid for them and they were released by gentek. 
he also had a credit line, which he used to cover the cost of windows which he
ordered and pulled. this evidence is supported by darren frattini.

the crown points to the use of financing options, and the lack of
understanding of complainants of the terms to support an inference of
mens
rea. in fact, many complainants acknowledged that they were aware that mr.
murray would be paid the full amount. ms. pearson relied on that, so that she
could get the money for her wedding. each client knew what they were financing
and signed the documents freely. the complaints by the complainants to snap
financial and home trust were made because the complainants did not get
satisfaction under the contract, not because the clients did not understand
what they signed. this element does not support
mens rea.

the crown suggests that mr. murray testified contrary to the
admissions made on his behalf. the crown first suggests that mr. murray
testified that he submitted applications for greenon for work that was
“starting” and not yet commenced. i accept that the greenon application was a
multi-step application which must be commenced by the approved contractor. i
accept that mr. murray was referencing this process when he testified that his
employees started the application process. this is not contrary to the
admission regarding the steps that had to be accomplished before applicants
were approved for greenon grants.

second, the crown submits that mr. murray testified that the program
was still active into 2019 when the asf clearly identified that the program was
cancelled in 2018. mr.murray testified as to his understanding of the
cancellation of the program, and i have already found that the announcement was
subject to the interpretation as understood by mr. murray. this is not
contrary to the asf, as drafted. the asf states “following the june 2018
provincial election, incoming premier doug ford announced the cancellation of
the greenon rebate program on june 19, 2018.” initially, the program’s website
stated that the government would continue to honour rebates for those who
signed a work agreement with a contractor for work that would be done before
august 31, 2018, or submit an application by september 30, 2018. the application
submission date was extended to october 31, 2018 and then to november 30, 2018. 
what is in issue is a matter of interpretation, and mr. murray’s interpretation
of this statement is consistent with the asf. mr, murray testified that the
accepting of the paperwork was still active, not that the deadline had been
extended. he said that his staff continued to submit application material
after december 1, 2018 and the government processed that information.

third, the crown says that mr. murray testified that he incorporated
a new company in his wife’s name, called maple ridge, to keep promises to
customers. the crown linked that to greenon applications. there is no
suggestion in mr. murray’s evidence that he took this step to preserve greenon
rebate applications, but rather to ensure that he could proceed with work on
the existing ecolife contracts.

the crown suggests that the defence submissions fly in the face of
the admissions regarding the crown calling into question mr. murray’s attempts
to clarify the greenon cancellation. rather, i read the defence submissions to
say that the crown did not call anyone from greenon to testify as to the
processing of applications past the application dates, not about the fact that greenon
was cancelled and processing deadlines were put into place. however, that is
not necessary. the evidence of the complainants, who provided emails from
greenon, establish that greenon was continuing to process claims into 2019. the
belief of mr. murray regarding greenon continuing to process applications past
the deadline is borne out in the evidence and not contrary to the asf.

the crown suggests that these factors go to the heart of an
assessment of mr. murray’s credibility. given my findings above, the
claims by mr. murray were supported by the crown’s evidence and by objective
evidence, and they do not negatively impact on mr. murray’s evidence.

given all of the above concerns, i have evaluated mr. murray’s
evidence, and while i treat some of it with caution, i cannot reject it
entirely.
evidence of individual complainants

i will group the complainants in timeline order in order to assess
their evidence.
yvon carriere

the crown used mr. carriere’s evidence as an example of where the
evidence of mr. murray is completely contradicted by the evidence of mr.
carriere and, therefore, mr. murray’s evidence should be rejected.

the contract for mr. carriere was signed on february 2, 2017, but
dated for december 15, 2016. this was not a greenon job, and it amounts to a
problematic contract.

mr. carriere and mr. murray both agree that the contract was
backdated, but disagree for the reason. mr. carriere says that mr. murray
wanted to get a government tax rebate but mr. murray says that mr. carriere
would be getting 2016 pricing. i find that nothing turns on this point. what
is important is that mr. carriere was well aware that his contract was
backdated.

the contract has a handwritten notation on it which says that
installation was scheduled for may/june, but no year is noted. it is unclear
if this notation was made when the contract was signed. regardless, i accept
that when the contract was signed, mr. carriere had an expectation that
the garage would be built before his surgery, scheduled for november of 2017.

a review of the contract reveals that ecolife was responsible for
pouring the slab. however, the contract is not clear regarding who was
responsible for excavating for the slab. because the obligations on ecolife
arise directly from the contract, and the contract is silent regarding an
obligation to excavate, i can infer that mr. carriere was responsible for the
excavation. it is a basic concept of contract law that the obligations arise
from the contract. if the contract is silent regarding ecolife excavating,
then ecolife had no such obligation.

the contract states that mr. carriere was responsible for providing
the fill for the slab and the excavating equipment and the packer. he was also
responsible for the drawings, which were not provided until april of 2018. it
is undisputed that the drawings were required to be completed before a permit
could be obtained.

mr. carriere testified that due to the height of the garage, he
would have to get “special permission” and that the town and the neighbours
would have to approve. he said that his garage was much larger than the
average garage, as it was 26 by 50 feet and higher than the usual height.

he was asked about obtaining the permit, and he said that it was not
specifically part of the conversation with mr. murray, but that he understood
mr. murray to be taking “care of everything”.

this is further complicated by mr. carriere saying that he spoke to
josh, who was a project manager with ecolife. mr. carriere testified that he
was waiting for josh to come and measure, so that mr. carriere could do the
drawing. in a text message dated august 3, 2017, mr. carriere complained that
mr. murray’s “guy” did not show up, and he asked for another timeline. there
is a gap of 8 months before there is a text message provided in evidence.

the next message is from april 2, 2018, in which mr. carriere asked
mr. murray which day and time he would be attending to take measurements. i
presume that the discussion regarded the measurements that were required for
the drawing, based on the evidence of mr. carriere at trial. as well, based on
the tone of the message and the content of the message, it appears that there
was some communication with mr. murray or someone from mr. murray’s company
prior to this text message exchange.

the next message is from april 4, 2018, in which mr. carriere says
that today is not a good day to take measurements, and suggests “tomorrow”
instead. mr. murray responded to that message with “no lol…its pretty bad out
there eh”. on april 9, 2018, mr. carriere texted mr. murray, and told him that
all the measurements were done, and he had made a footprint pattern, where the
garage will be, and that he had made a “blueprint” for the garage measurement
away from the house and all that. mr. carriere asked mr. murray to come and
see it and pick up the blueprint.

on april 12, 2018, mr. carriere again asked mr. murray to come and
pick up the blueprint. on april 30, 2018, mr. carriere texted mr. murray to
ask if he had a digging date scheduled. mr. murray responded that he was
“behind schedule”. on may 3, 2018 after another inquiry by mr. carriere, mr.
murray said he would call mr. carriere “this afternoon” and that henry was
going to look at it. on may 4, 2018, mr. murray asked if he could go to mr.
carriere’s home the next day, because it was raining way too hard, and no one
came in. on may 4, 2018, mr. carriere texted mr. murray and said that he was
tired of “playing the game”.

on may 7, 2018, mr. carriere texted mr. murray again and said, “i am
home now, and will be home all day”. mr. murray responded with “ok”.

the next text is from mr. carriere on june 5, 2018, asking mr.
murray to call him. several text messages follow over several days until june
15, 2018. mr. murray responded to some of the messages. on june 15, 2018, mr.
carriere asked for his money back, and said he had doubts as to whether or not
mr. murray ever intended to build the garage.

mr. carriere could not remember if mr. murray called him in between
the dates of the text messages.

mr. murray responded to the text message cancelling the contract
that there was a contract, and the garage was scheduled to start “this month”. 
in his message, he claimed that the delays were due to “your lot issues”.

on june 18, 2018, mr. carriere said he had to leave and would not be
home until 11:00 a.m., and that he had to leave again at 2:00 p.m. he then
texted and said he would be home at 10 a.m. mr. murray responded by saying
that “henry and jean marc are in the area”, and he asked if they had shown up
yet. mr. carriere responded by saying that it was mr. murray that he wanted to
see.

on june 19, 2018, after several text messages starting at 11:02 a.m.,
it is clear that mr. carriere was waiting for mr. murray and other workers to
attend his home, and that mr. murray was promising to attend. by 6 p.m., mr.
carriere told mr. murray not to bother coming, as he was going out.

on june 26, 2018, mr. carriere again asked if mr. murray had a
“digging date”. mr. murray responded by asking if “they” stopped by and looked
at it, and said he would have to stop by and talk to dana from lafreniere. mr.
carriere responded that “he” said he needed the “engineer plan so he could
quote the job”, so mr. carriere told “him” to talk to mr. murray. mr. murray
responded that he would call “him” tonight”.

on july 4, 2018, mr. carriere texted mr. murray and told him mr.
lafreniere “needs the engineer slab plans so he needs to know what kind of
material to bring to quote me a price”. on july 6, 2018, july 9 and july 13,
2018, mr. carriere sent text messages to mr. murray, and it was evident
that mr. murray had not responded. mr. carriere again said that mr. lafreniere
needed the slab engineer “friend”, which i presume means “plan”, as he was
“ready to dig anytime”. mr. murray responded that “it should be ready monday! 
we sent it last week”.

on july 18, 2018, mr. carriere texted mr. murray to advise that he
had confirmed that no permit had been issued. that is the end of the text
messages provided in evidence.

based on the contract and the text messages, i find that mr.
carriere knew he was responsible to dig the slab. this is based on his text
message between july 4 and july 13, 2018, in which he clearly stated he
was attempting to arrange for a quote for digging the slab. if he was awaiting
a quote for excavating for the slab, he was not expecting mr. murray to
excavate for the slab, he was expecting someone else to excavate for the slab,
and he would then pay that person.

this evidence is not inconsistent with mr. murray’s evidence that
mr. carriere was responsible for digging the slab.

further, some delay regarding the work for mr. carriere resulted
from mr. carriere not preparing the drawings that were required to be submitted
for the permit until april of 2018. this is also borne out in the text
messages and in mr. carriere’s evidence. mr. carriere said that when the
work was delayed into 2018, he changed the orientation of the garage. given
the evidence of mr. guillot, even if a permit had been obtained prior to april
of 2018, another permit would have been required.

as well, mr. murray claimed that the city of sudbury required a
cadastral survey, in addition to the drawings that were submitted in or around
april of 2018 for a permit to be issued. despite a claim that mr. carriere was
responsible for this, mr. murray said that he paid for the survey, which was
about $2,000.00. there is nothing in what mr. carriere testified to that
contradicts this. obtaining the cadastral survey also caused delays in
obtaining the necessary permits.

in fact, when mr. carriere was confronted with the contract which
states that the contract did not cover certain items, mr. carriere said that it
was his understanding that mr. murray was “going to do everything from the
ground up” and agreed that the contract said something different than what he
expected.

mr. carriere was aware that there were two meetings with his
neighbours prior to a permit being issued, which also caused delays. he was
aware that the first meeting took place over a year after he signed the
contract with ecolife. he was not aware of the time gap between the meetings. 
this is consistent with mr. carriere not providing the drawings until after
april of 2018.

mr. carriere also said to his knowledge, josh was to do the survey,
the pickets and the digging and compacting. he was the “main guy” of mr.
murray then. he agreed that the contract did not say that ecolife was do the
survey. he said that he ultimately did not get a survey done. he said that he
gave the drawing to liette from ecolife in the second summer, meaning 2018, and
it was approximately two years after the contract was signed. he agreed that
mr. murray told him that he needed a survey about two years after josh was
supposed to do the work. when asked if it was closer to the time that the
contract was signed, his answer was “not to my knowledge, sorry”.

he claimed that he did not know that he had to provide drawings in
2017, he said that he did not know that he had to, despite the contract being
clear on this point.

mr. carriere confirmed that the weather was poor in the winter of
2018, and that there had been a big snowstorm in october of 2018. he said that
the winter was “longer”.

mr. carriere said that he told mr. murray to not do the work at the
end of 2018.

mr. carriere then contracted with another company, rocan homes and renovations
to dig and pour the slab as per the “drawings” on july 24, 2019. mr. carriere
was responsible for the compaction after the slab was prepared. page 2 of
exhibit 10, tab 4, is an acknowledgement that rocan had prepared the slab which
was inspected by a city building inspector, and the homeowner was responsible
for proper compaction on august 8, 2019. after that, rocan was to pour the
slab. page 3 confirms that ron belanger prepared an engineered drawing, which
was supplied by mr. carriere. clearly, the finished garage required more than
just mr. carriere’s drawing to be approved. it required engineered drawings,
which were done by ron belanger.

there is no evidence about when mr. belanger provided those drawings
and who ultimately obtained the permit for the garage, but his drawings were
referred to as engineered drawings. clearly, more was required than the simple
drawing provided by mr. carriere in order to obtain the required permit from
the city of sudbury.

overall,
mr. murray’s evidence regarding the work to be done for mr. carriere cannot be
rejected. where it is inconsistent with the evidence of mr. carriere, i accept
mr. murray’s evidence. mr. carriere’s evidence was inconsistent with the terms
of the written contract, he did not fulfill his obligations under the contract,
and the delay was his doing in failing to get the survey, changing the
orientation of the garage, and significant delays in providing the drawings. he
terminated the contract at the end of 2018, at which time, mr. murray’s company
was closed for the season.
richard harrison (stephanie orsini)
dated 
december 14, 2016

mr.
harrison testified as to the interaction between mr. murray, ms. orsini and
himself. ms. orsini has since passed away. the contract related to the
installation of five new windows and insulation, and it was not a greenon
contract. it is one of the problematic contracts. it later morphed into a
greenon contract.

the
installation was to be in may of 2017. the contract was for a total of $6,000. 
the $3,000 deposit was paid on january 9, 2017. ms. orsini wrote a letter to ecolife
on february 2, 2018 demanding installation or their money back. she sued in
small claims court for $4,000 and cancelled the job.

the
obvious difficulty with mr. harrison’s evidence is that he testified to things
that his wife did and said. he testified that his wife had most of the
interaction with ecollife and with mr. murray. he testified that his wife
contacted mr. murray from time to time, and that there was little to no
response.

he
testified that he did not know anything about the greenon program until long afterward,
and through third parties. he did not find out that the windows ordered for
his home had triple pane glass packages until he saw his windows at gentek. he
said he did not know why he went to gentek, but he thought someone from gentek
contacted him. he could not say when that happened, but it probably happened
in 2018. he suspected that gentek wanted payment.

mr.
richardson and ms. orsini are named specifically in the letter from gentek, as
being a customer of ecolife, whose windows had been ordered and manufactured,
and remained at gentek in june of 2019. the letter is clear that someone from
gentek would be contacting them to ask if they wanted to purchase the product
that had been manufactured for them.

mr.
murray testified that there was a scheduling error, and that the windows for
this job were not ordered and installation was not scheduled, when it should
have been done. he said that it “slipped through the cracks”. when the
contract was first drafted, the job was not eligible for greenon. by the time
he discovered the error, the job was eligible. this is consistent with the
letter from ms. orsini. mr. murray was never asked how and when he became
aware of the error.

mr.
murray said that he offered a discount, and ordered triple pane windows. he
said that he met with ms. orsini at his office at least twice. he told her
about the error and that the windows were now eligible for the greenon
program. he said she was happy about that. he ordered the windows, but they
were delayed in coming in.

he
said that he was served with the small claims court documents in september or
october of 2018, which surprised him. he said he then could not do anything
until after the settlement conference, which was scheduled in november of 2018
because the matter was in court.

he
said he felt horrible and that he scolded his employees for making the
mistake. he said that his workers were not a machine and that they made
mistakes. in addition to offering the greenon rebate, he offered a discount of
$1,500.

overall,
i cannot accept mr. richardson’s evidence where it conflicts with mr. murray’s. 
he was having difficulties in remembering some events, and quite a bit of his
evidence was hearsay. there was no application by the crown to admit evidence
relating to conversations between ms. orsini and mr. murray. as well, mr.
murray testified that he spoke to ms. orsini about the error and the efforts to
rectify it. i accept mr. murray’s evidence that the original job was not
scheduled and the product was not ordered as expected, due to a mistake rather
than malfeasance. i accept that he attempted to mitigate the mistake, and that
the ultimate order for windows was part of the greenon program, with the prior
knowledge of ms. orsini. i accept that the windows were ordered from gentek,
and that fact was supported by mr. frattini’s evidence. because of the delays
that mr. frattini testified to, i accept that the job was delayed due to
manufacturer’s delays.
jenny lynn shaw
contract dated april 6, 2017

ms.
shaw contracted on april 6, 2017 for versetta stone, trusses, work to insulate
the roof, and other work. the total cost was $38,300. there was a second
contract for $8,300. this was a problem contract.

ms.
shaw testified that she first spoke to josh from ecolife. she only wanted her
roof to be done at first. mr. murray attended her home, and they talked about
the job. she said that she and mr. murray talked about more work being done,
and that he could make her house look like a showpiece, with new siding,
windows and doors. this work would be done for a better price, because mr.
murray could then use it to show potential purchases the quality of his work.

she
signed the first contract on april 6, 2017 for the roof and paid a total of $8,430
for payment in full of the contract. she then signed a contract for the rest
of the work on the same date in the amount of $38,300 and paid a deposit of
$16,000 in cash on june 8, 2017. she said that she did not get a receipt
and said it took her a year to get a receipt. she went to mr. murray’s
storefront to get a handwritten receipt. as part of her evidence, there is a
handwritten receipt dated may 14, 2018, signed by liette langevin.

she
testified that mr. murray offered to do the entire bathroom, but that she did
not have the money to do that. instead, he did the bathroom wall, which was in
very poor shape. she said that the work started, but there was no permit, and
she had to wait some time for them to get the permit. she said that the roof
got done and the bathroom wall was done, but she was not happy with the work. 
the siding was stripped and not replaced and the eavestrough and fascia were
not replaced. ecolife replaced the bathroom window, but no other windows.

photographs
were entered into evidence, which ms. shaw said reflected the current state of
disrepair to her house. one photograph depicted the place where ms. shaw
said workers from ecolife attended to fix a metal piece that was hanging. she
said that she did not contact mr. murray after the work stopped to report her
dissatisfaction because of all the trouble she had in getting the work started
in the first place. she said she basically fired mr. murray. she estimated
that the work on the roof was worth about $10,000 and that she would have agreed
to have mr. murray’s company return to do the work. she never asked for her
money back. she believed that the $16,000 that she paid was for half of the
promotion work that mr. murray’s company was to do.

on
cross-examination, she said she could not remember if any of the work was to be
done for free. she agreed that it is not noted on the contract, but she said
that it was discussed with mr. murray “back and forth”. she did not recall if
there was a back page to her contracts.

she
agreed in cross-examination that when the roof was being done, the workers
found mould and that is when she and mr. murray had a discussion about “promo
work”. she applied for a loan and was rejected. she confirmed that the place
on the roof where the mould was found required new sheeting and trusses, and
that was additional to the terms of the contract. she agreed that this work
was on the entire front of the house. she agreed that mould was found in the
insulation as well but did not know if new insulation was installed. she
agreed that some of the soffit had to be removed and replaced due to mould. 
she agreed that the loan was to pay off the balance of the renovation, but she
was denied. she said that she and mr. murray agreed that he would take an atv
that she owned as partial payment for the balance of the renovations, but he
did not come and get it. she sold it to pay for other bills.

she
agreed that when the siding was removed, more rot was found. the porch had
problems, which also had to be fixed.

she
denied that the work done and the cost of materials used exceeded the amount
that she had paid. she confirmed that all of the work on the back porch was
finished. she confirmed that the fascia board was done. she believed that
some work was done in the winter but did not specify a month. she said that
the workers would work on the job for a while and then stop, and come back some
time later.

she
then said that when she gave mr. murray the $16,000 he started work on someone
else’s home and never really came back. this is inconsistent with her earlier
evidence that the workers worked in the wintertime. she confirmed that mr.
murray asked for more money to complete the work in relation to the roof and
the bathroom wall.

david
murray said that almost all of the work on the contract was done. there was
some shingling on the roof that had not been finished and they had to go back
later. the work on the bathroom wall was unanticipated, as were the repairs to
the structure of the roof. that work was extra, and not included in the
contract. he was not aware that the workers did not replace the siding on the
house, where they had taken it off, and that the siding was not part of the
contract. i have reviewed the contract, and there is no provision for siding.

he
testified that when the workers started working on the roof, they discovered
mould, and as the work progressed, they found more and more mould and rot. he
said that the money paid was for the work that was done, including all the
extra work.

the
second contract that was signed was for anticipated work, for which ms. shaw
was to get a loan, which was denied. the shortfall between the anticipated
loan and the work was to be made up by mr. murray taking the atv. because she
was not approved for the loan, mr. murray did not take possession of the atv. accordingly,
he said that his company did not do any of the work regarding the second
contract, and he did not take any money regarding the second contract.

in
cross-examination, mr. murray denied upselling ms. shaw. he said he was trying
to avoid having her home “shut down” because it was full of mould and rot. he
insisted that he was paid for the work that he did, and that he did not take a
deposit on the second contract. he said that his workers did the best that
they could do, and that he gave her a fair price. mr. murray testified that he
gave ms. shaw a better price for all of the extra work for paying in cash, and
then incorporated the same work into the second contract. he said he did that
to permit ms. shaw to get a loan for the total amount of work, which would ease
her financial situation. his evidence became confusing on this point, in that
he talked about a contract for $11,000, which was not in evidence, and he
related that to the reduction in price.

overall,
i found ms. shaw’s evidence to be inaccurate. she agreed that there were major
issues that arose during the repairs to her roof, which led to significantly
more work that had to be done. she verified issues related to mould and rot,
which then led to replacement of trusses and roof sheeting. she is not an
expert, but estimated the cost of what she received as about $10,000. this is
a significant underestimation, based on what she admitted was required. her
bathroom wall had to be rebuilt, her roof, at least in the front portion of her
home had to be completely rebuilt including trusses and sheeting, and she chose
not to finish the rest of her bathroom because of money. she never asked for a
refund of any money, and she did not ask mr. murray to come back to finish any
additional work. i find that she simply ran out of money to proceed any
further.

mr.
murray’s evidence is not without some issues, but overall, his evidence was
unshaken. he testified that the contract that was signed for over $38,300
incorporated the cost for work on the first contract, and the extra work on the
first contract, as well as the “promo work” that ms. shaw testified to. ms.
shaw agreed that she applied for but was not approved for a bank loan, and mr.
murray said that because she did not get the loan, he did not take the atv and
did not do the additional work. i accept that the second contract in the
amount of $38,300 was for work that had already been done
and
for work
that was anticipated. no additional payment was made on that contract, and it
incorporated $24,300 worth of work that was performed.

while
this evidences sloppy business practice, it is not deceitful to ms. shaw. i
find that she knew what the purpose was for the contract that cited $38,300,
and that it incorporated work that was outlined in the roofing contract, and it
included the $16,000 cash that she paid.
debbie chomiak

mrs.
chomiak and her husband contracted with ecolife to do various renovations
around their home in 2017. this is another problem contract. she testified
that a friend of hers had hired ecolife to do some work on her home. she said
that her friend thought that they did a good job, but that they were slow. she
said that she and her husband did not care and contacted mr. murray. they got
a quotation dated april 21, 2017. they ultimately paid a total of $50,000 on a
contract for $60,000.

they
paid the first deposit of $30,000 when they signed the contract and second
deposit of $20,000 was due and paid when the workers started work on april 28,
2017. the work included roof trusses, install 3 doors, new soffit and fascia,
new shingles on the home and garage, new front deck, columns front and back,
gables as well as other work. they expected june 2017 for installation, but
she said she told mr. murray that september was fine too. she said that she
and her husband were very lenient.

the
workers replaced the shingles on the garage, and replaced some shingles on the
house. she agreed that work stopped due to issues with the septic bed, but she
believed that other work could have been done on the project that did not
involve work in the back of the house. she said that they contracted for
doors, and that the doors were never installed.

she
testified that henry was the project manager at first, and he did the drawing
for the permits. she said that the permits were issued to her based on henry’s
drawings. then henry and dan could not agree on how to do the job. she said all
of sudden there was “no henry, the secretary would not pick, and dave would
ignore. there was excuse after excuse”. she said that the workers did do the
roof on the house, but that the job was “shoddy”, and had to be replaced. she
complained that the worksite was not kept clean, and that there were pieces of
wood with nails sticking out, and that the workers did not clean up after
themselves. she said that she had to clean up. she agreed that work started
in september of 2017.

in
july of 2018, she said henry came over to show the company responsible for
installing the helical piles where to put the holes for the posts for the front
porch. she claimed that they were “off” by 7 inches and had to be redone. she
also claimed that the front steps were fastened to the house by cement nails
and not lag bolts, which in her mind was improper. she said no vents were
installed in the roof. she said she kept asking about the doors that were
ordered. she picked the doors from a catalogue. no one at ecolife would show
her that the doors had been ordered. the secretary and josh said that they
could not show her.

through
ms. chomiak, entered into evidence was a letter from a law firm dated march 6,
2018 seeking payment in full. a refund cheque of $23,000 from ecolife was
returned nsf on march 31, 2019. she and her husband had sat with mr. murray and
his wife and they confirmed that they did not have the money to pay the refund,
but that they would give cheques and asked them not to cash them right away. they
signed full releases in march of 2019. it was related to a settlement. on
july 1, 2019, mr. murray provided a $5,000 refund cheque.

she
said initially she and her husband just wanted doors, but after discussing with
mr. murray, the work expanded based on what her husband wanted. the work
included removing a ridge on the roof, a new front deck, installing a roof over
the back deck, and roof vents. she confirmed that work started but stopped,
because the health unit became involved, and that a new permit had to be
obtained. she said that the back deck was not part of the contract, but she
confirmed that they talked about it. she claimed that she was told by a
building inspector that the back deck was not done properly, and her husband
had to fix it.

in
cross-examination, she said that henry and dan were working together, but then
josh took over as project manager. josh did not come to her home. when asked
if dan was the cause of the project delay, she said she did not know what was
the cause, but she felt like she was just being pushed off, and she used the
word “bottleneck”. she did not recall specifics of conversations between dan
and henry, but she did say that she thought there was an issue between dan and
henry, and that all of a sudden, mr. murray’s “people” could not build it the
way henry had drawn it. she said that all of a sudden, henry told her that dan
did not work there anymore either. she agreed that she wanted the job done by
september 1, 2017 or she wanted her money back. she denied that she fired mr. murray
or ecolife, she just wanted her money back or she wanted the job done.

she
confirmed that she did not remember dates, that she was relying on dates that
she had written in a booklet. she confirmed that before any work was done,
there was a deck behind the house. she further confirmed that her husband
dismantled the existing deck, before the work was done, and that she got a
permit based on drawings for the work that were done by henry.

she
first insisted that communication with mr. murray was not by phone calls, but
rather by text message. she later said that there were no text messages asking
that work that did not need a permit be done while awaiting the permit. she
said that it might have been in a phone call. she confirmed that there was a
conversation between mr. murray and her husband for replacement of the back
deck, and that there was a price given by mr. murray of $6,600. she said that
she never paid any additional money, and said that the back deck was only to be
done if the rest of the work was done and they were satisfied.

she
did not remember when she first approached a lawyer about her dissatisfaction,
but thought it was close to january of 2018. she did instruct her lawyer to
send a letter telling mr. murray to not return to the property. her lawyer
also sent a letter dated february 12, 2018. she agreed that the letter told
mr. murray that he was not to return to her property but said that she did
consider the contract to be terminated at this point. she insisted that the
back page of the contract that she had was blank. she confirmed that she
received 2 refund cheques on april 8, 2019 postdated for july and october of
2019.

mr.
murray confirmed the contract. he said that they started work after his
workers finished a couple of big jobs that they were working on. he said that
this was a large home, with an attached three car garage. he characterized it
as a big job. murray explained the “hole” in the roof that mrs. chomiak
complained about. he said that when workers removed the uneven roof, at the
request of the chomiaks, they installed a ridge cap for ventilation. he said
that this style of home had no real attic space, so traditional vents were not
appropriate. the ridge cap allowed for ventilation, and it was designed that
way.

he
agreed that he was not originally supposed to do the deck, but he got a phone
call from ms. chomiak’s husband asking him to do it, after the initial
discussion about doing it with both mr. and ms. chomiak. he said that ms.
chomiak’s husband went to get the permit for the deck, and that is when the
issue regarding the septic bed came up and once the septic bed issue was
resolved, his workers began working on the deck.

he
said his workers stripped the shingles on both the garage and the house,
rebuilt the roof peak which involved trusses, and installed new shingles. he
could not touch the back deck until the issue of the permit and septic bed was
addressed, so his workers moved on to another job. once he was able to return
to work on the back deck, he arranged for a company to come and install the
helical piles for the deck. then his workers began working on the deck. he
estimated that the job was 60 percent finished.

he
said from time to time, the weather delayed the work, because the roof had to
be opened up. he was concerned about moisture getting into the home and
causing issues, and he said it was not ideal to do the roof while it was
raining. he said winter came and slowed the work down. he confirmed that ms.
chomiak picked out doors but did not make her final choice until into the fall. 
the door that she chose in the showroom was black, and she originally chose two
white doors to be installed elsewhere. she later changed the colour of the
last two doors from white to black to match.

mr.
murray thought that the white doors had been ordered, but said that there were
issues between henry, who was the production manager, and dan, who was a worker.
 he said henry was then no longer a production manager, and josh stepped in. 
josh was supposed to order the doors but did not. mr. murray discovered that
the white doors had never been ordered when the colour choice was changed, and he
was able to order black doors instead. when the door colour was changed ms.
chomiak also changed the colour of the fascia boards.

he
explained that henry moved out of the position of a production manager, because
dan was questioning him in front of customers, and they were infighting. henry
stayed with ecolife, as an installer. when ecolife sent dan to do the work, he
said it cannot be done that way, even though the permit was granted by the
building department based on henry’s drawings. mr. murray was informed that
dan quit, and he spoke to ms. chomiak, who told him that dan said it could
not be done the way that henry had designed. he said he reassured ms. chomiak
and then arranged for henry and another worker to attend and start work on the
front porch.

when
pressed about why his workers did not install the doors or do the capping, when
there were delays due to other issues, mr. murray said that this was a
construction site. installing doors was the last thing that was done, because
there was potential for damage during construction and he would be held
liable.

he
confirmed that he received the letter from ms. chomiak or her lawyer telling
him to not return to the property. he contacted his lawyer and he “let the
lawyers battle it out”. he acknowledged that there might have been some
deficiencies, but that is normal in construction that that was not finished. 
he said that the deficiencies would be corrected by the time the job was done. 
his workers never returned to the job, because the letter told him to not
return. he negotiated directly with ms. chomiak and her husband in the spring
of 2019 and ultimately provided a post-dated cheque. he said that he asked to
be contacted before the cheque was cashed, and then his licence was pulled
shortly afterward. that was why the cheque bounced. he was charged shortly
afterward. he did provide the other cheques.

he
reviewed the photographs of the work, and explained that the back deck was in
progress and not finished when the work was interrupted. he confirmed that ms. chomiak
may have believed that the wood that was used was old, but that it was new from
the lumber yard, and commonly looks like what she was complaining about. he
said that his workers had cleaned the site, despite her complaint that they had
not, and he pointed to the neat pile of material that was covered by a sheet of
plywood. he said that the wood with nails sticking out was a building
technique to hold something temporarily while it is being constructed, and it
was pulled out of the pile. he agreed that the job was not finished and was
interrupted. he explained that ms. chomiak had control over the permit, and
she arranged for an inspection by the city of sudbury mid-build, without notifying
him. then he got the letter telling him to not return, and he did not, because
in his view she cancelled the contract.

introduced
into evidence at exhibit 28, tab 12, is a copy of the short inspection notice
issued by the building department of the city of sudbury. it is important to
note that this notice makes no reference to any of the work that ms. chomiak
claimed was done poorly. it references a report and some minor work that
needed to be done.

mr.
murray pointed out that in many of the photographs entered into evidence, snow
is visible. he explained that the work stopped late in the year of 2017 and
said that the weather “caught us”. he said that during the initial phases of
work, the workers used dump trailers to remove debris, and the debris that was
left was a very small amount. he insisted that some of the photographs showed
work or alterations that ms. chomiak and/or her husband did, rather than what
his workers did.

nothing
was put into evidence from the city of sudbury regarding any deficiencies on
the worksite, so the only evidence i have is from ms. chomiak and mr. murray.

the
photographs put into evidence have typewritten notations on them. i have
ignored all of those notations. ms. chomiak explained each photograph in her
evidence. the notations are not admissible evidence, and in some instances
they contain inadmissible opinion.

mr.
murray agreed that there were times when ms. chomiak reached out to him and he
did not respond. he said that he had already directed her to speak to the
project manager. he confirmed that there were times when he spoke to either
her or to her husband by phone. he stopped at her job when the job began. 
when there were interruptions in the work, the workers had to be put on other
jobs. they could not just simply wait for the interruption to be resolved. 
once the interruption was resolved, the job was put back in the schedule. that
sometimes caused some delays, but that was how the scheduling worked.

ms.
chomiak was clearly dissatisfied, and mr. murray was clearly frustrated. mr. murray
said that she did not understand the realities of construction work, and
eventually he just wanted to get out of the contract too. despite his
frustrations, mr. murray was not critical of either ms. chomiak or her
husband, beyond saying that they altered his work, and did not seem to
understand the realities of construction. he clarified that construction work
happens in stages, and certain stages had to be completed first before others
were done. he said that the back deck had to be built before the roof
extension over the back of the house was built, because it had to sit on
something. he said that drip caps, capping, fascia and soffits would be
installed as finishing work. he said that the doors would be replaced last,
given that this was a construction site and they were subject to damage. he
said that the front porch was almost done, and the workers were working on the
back deck when the work was interrupted. once the back deck was built, the
roof could be finished, and then the finish work could be done.

overall,
i accept mr. murray’s evidence. ms. chomiak made several complaints about the
work of ecolife, and related her complaints to the building inspector. those
complaints do not appear in the short inspection report. ms. chomiak was
dissatisfied and mr. murray wanted out of the contract. ms. chomiak told mr.
murray and his workers to not return to the job site and he did not. all of
that is clear from the evidence.
daniel savard
may 2017

mr.
savard testified that he contracted with mr. murray in may of 2017. this
contract is also one of the problem contracts.

his
contract is written on a document called a quotation. the work to be done
included siding, which included board and batten, roofing. he said that mr.
murray suggested the change to the style of the roof from a flatter roof to a
more pitched roof. he said mr. murray suggested that the work included taking
off the bricks of the home, replacing them with siding and redoing the entire
roof, by replacing the stick frame and shingles, which would raise the roof by
12 or 16 inches.

he
said that when the workers took the brick off, “i guess” he wanted the wall to
be flush with the basement. the photographs show a home with a hip about
halfway up, and it was this hip that he wanted to be removed and the walls of
the upper portion of the house to be built out to be flush with the lower
portion of the house. he said that mr. murray suggested windows and a
door, and mr. savard agreed.

the
original quote had a provision for weeping tile, which was crossed off. mr. savard
said that he found out later that the area that he lived in had good drainage,
so weeping tile was not required. he testified that this resulted in a
decrease of $10,000 of the contract. the contract specified that the contract
was to cover all materials, labour, permits and taxes. $10,000 was added to
the contract, for the extra work regarding windows, the door and the picture
window and “the two by six that work that has to be done”. the quotation has
substitute work, involving insulation and framing. the total amount of the
quotation was not changed. then there is a notation for a door and windows. he
said that the notations were made when he came back after three weeks of
working out of town. his work involved three weeks working out of town, and
three weeks at home.

in
the quotation, mr. savard agreed to provide all electrical work. he said he
did not really read that part of the quotation. mr. savard actually had the
original quote in the courtroom, and it was entered into evidence. he
testified that there was nothing on the back of the document. he said that the
agreement included putting vinyl siding right up to the second storey windows. 
versetta stone was to be installed in the lower part of the home.

he
paid a total of $50,000 toward a $55,000 quote. his evidence was confusing on
this point. he said he gave a $35,000 cheque, and that $10,000 was cancelled
because the workers did not show up when he expected them to. he said that the
workers did not show up before he left, so he cancelled that cheque. he said
that “he” showed up later, and mr. savard was kind of mad a little bit, and
said “he” owed mr. savard $5,000 for the material he bought, the window, the
two by six, so mr. savard gave him a $5,000 cheque.

he
testified that mr. murray told him the work would take three weeks, and it was
supposed to start right away. he understood that the work would be done while
he was on the next three week work cycle and it was not. mr. savard said that
the deposit was to buy materials and to pay the workers while he was gone.

he
wrote a cheque for $5,000 on june 15, 2017 to pay for material and the picture
window. he then wrote another $10,000 cheque, which cleared on july 3, 2017 to
replace all the windows and the doors except the patio door. the windows and
doors were not included in the original quote. after he paid the money, mr.
savard said workers would come from time to time to do work. various reasons
were given for failure to work, such as guys were sick or they were busy
somewhere else. he could not remember all the reasons given.

he
confirmed that the first storey was framed, the second storey was framed with lengths
two by four lumber, about which he was not happy because he felt that it should
have been two by six lumber because for insulation it was not the same. he
said the original documents showed that it was supposed to be two by six. i have
reviewed the quotation, and there is no mention of two by six or two by four
regarding the framing. he then said that that is what “he” had said. i find
that mr. savard is mistaken about this issue.

mr.
savard said he expected the work to be done right away because of the rainy
season in the fall. he identified photos of his house taken before the work
was done, and after the work started. it is clear that work had been done to
remove the “mansour” roof, and to remove all of the brick. the entire home was
covered in typar. there were no openings made for windows in the typar in the
photograph. mr. savard confirmed that the roof was “closed” at this point, and
that he could live in the house, because he had no choice. he testified that
his home was left like this from late august until he could get it done the
next year.

mr.
savard said that he went to the city to inquire about the permit, and
discovered that there was no permit. he then said that mid-october or
september he was told by josh that there was a permit. he talked about a
time-period when he went away and when he came back he asked if “they” got the
permit” and he was told it is on its way. he was never asked when he went to
the city to find out about the permit, but it is apparent from his evidence
that he checked before josh told him that the permit was “on its way”. he
confirmed that mr. murray told him to communicate with josh, as he was the
manager.

ultimately,
mr. savard had to pay someone else to finish the job. he said that he paid to
have the framing work done by ecolife workers replaced. he said that ecolife
workers did not replace the shingles on the roof. he said that mr. murray did
not replace the doors or windows as agreed.

mr.
savard said that he expected that all of the work would be done while he was
gone the first time, after the quotation was drawn up and signed. however,
this would not have allowed for the permit to be issued. this position does
not make sense, given that the city of sudbury required the permit.

mr.
savard said that changes to the contract only came after he came back the first
time, after entering into the contract. the copies of the cheque put into
evidence confirm that he signed the cheques for the initial deposit on the same
date as the contract. the next cheque that was put into evidence was in the
amount of $5,000 and it was dated in june of 2017.

he
then agreed that there were discussions over the phone after the initial
contract, where he, mr. murray and josh had conversations over the phone about
changes to the contract. he confirmed that the discussions continued when he
returned. he agreed that about a month after he returned he discussed
replacing windows, and that became part of the contract. he also agreed to
replace the doors. he confirmed that he thought it was a good idea to replace
the windows and the doors, and he willingly added those items to the contract. 
he agreed that historically there had been water damage associated with the
roof, and that he did not like the style of roof. he agreed that in order to
remove the gable ends, which was necessary to redo the roof, the siding had to
be replaced.

mr.
savard said that he had paid $55,000, when he had earlier said $40,000. then
he said the amount that he paid was $50,000. i found this evidence to be
confusing.

mr.
savard confirmed that when the brick was removed, the workers told him that
there was very little insulation and suggested that it be upgraded. he also
confirmed that as the workers worked on the roof, they raised the issue of the
roof not being flush with the foundation, and that it would take additional
work to fix that issue, because he wanted the roof to be flush with the
foundation. he confirmed that he did not want a “foundation lip”. he
confirmed that he wanted the existing eaves to be extended at least 12 inches,
which also was not part of the original agreement. he did not remember any
discussion about engineered trusses. he could not confirm that this extra
work affected the permits, because he was not the one who was dealing with
them. he then said he asked josh about why the work was not getting done, and
josh told him they were waiting on a permit. he said that the work for framing
and insulation was done in august of 2017.

mr.
savard said the main roof was removed and all the frame was done in august of
2017. he then said that water got in and the insulation had to be removed
because there was no more roof and it was their error.

he
confirmed that the workers put aspenite sheeting and then typar over the
insulation, and he said that occurred in august of 2017. he could not remember
asking for the pitch of the roof to be changed. he agreed that one window was
installed and it involved enlarging the opening to accommodate it. he agreed
that he changed the door colours after the agreement for the doors was entered,
but that it was in 2018. he told mr. murray that it would look nicer with a
black door, and mr. murray agreed. he admitted that mr. murray took him to
other jobsites to show the other work that ecolife was doing, but denied that
this step made it clear to him that mr. murray was still interested in doing
the job. he did agree that mr. murray never said that he was not going to do
the job. when asked if mr. murray ever told him about the greenon program,
first mr. savard said that that was before that day, and then said, “no, i
don’t remember that”. he then said when he ordered the windows, he remembered
mr. murray saying something about some kind of a program and that he was
getting a good deal. he fixed that time to when he gave the $10,000 cheque. 
when he asked how come it was so cheap, he said mr. murray told him that they
will take pictures and then send them to the window fabricator for advertising,
or something like that, and that he remembered that. he was asked if he was
told about a government program, and he said yes, that it was for insulation
and windows, and that it was in 2018. he said he was not told about delays
with greenon.

he
said he believed that the roof could be done in the winter, because a “real
contractor” could have done it in the wintertime too, but that there was no
conversation about that. he said that last time he heard from mr. murray was
that he confirmed that they got the permit for the roof, and they would be
coming in the next week or two weeks, if the weather was “there”.

he
then confirmed that there was a conversation about the roof, and concern about
water getting in, but he was concerned about more damage caused by the existing
leak. he then said that mr. murray should have gotten the permit for the roof
at the same time as he got the permit for the siding, and confirmed that he had
been given the permit for the siding. he agreed that his house was warmer
after ecolife put in the insulation.

he
confirmed that the siding permit was placed in his window while he was gone
during the first three-week period of work after the quotation was turned into
an agreement. he said he saw the siding permit and the weeping tile permit.

while
he was with mr. murray on the tour of the jobsites, he confirmed that he knew that
mr. murray was on the phone with gentek, but it was not about his job.

he
confirmed that he started a civil action in june or july of 2018, but it was
not processed.

he
confirmed that ecolife workers built the upper wall out to make it flush with
the foundation.

mr.
murray testified that mr. savard was confused. he said that there were
constant changes to the contract. they got the permits right away for the
initial work, but the contract was then changed. the first change was to
remove the weeping tile work. the workers installed the new door and window
that were in stock, and then they removed the brick and installed foam
insulation. that had to be taken down, because mr. savard wanted to reframe
the house and install different insulation. a new permit had to be pulled for
that. another change that was made was for the roof. mr. savard wanted the
roof to be knocked off and a new roof constructed.

mr.
murray said he got into an argument with the installer that recommended changes
to the roof, because he was worried that this would significantly delay the
job. the issued permit did not reflect what the installer was discussing with
the customer, and it would have to be amended. when the customer wanted the
change, then josh had to get information regarding the trusses on the proposed
change in order to get the new permit. mr. murray said that the customer
requested engineered trusses.

this
also called for a new permit. this put the job late enough into the year, that
mr. murray felt that removing the roof would cause a liability issue, and the
job was delayed into the new year. he believed that mr. savard was happy with
the delay, because this was a change that he requested.

when
shown photographs of the home, showing typar all around the home, he said that
this upset him. it looked like an amateur job, and it never should have been
left that way. he said that they then had to remove the roof, raise it, and
shingle it. they would then install siding and the stone work.

mr.
murray said that this job was affected by greenon, because of the delays caused
by the program, but that was after repeated changes to the contract, and
repeated changes to the permits. the job was delayed into the spring and summer
of 2018.

i
accept that mr. murray did not start this work as a greenon job.

mr.
murray called this a revolving contract in that there were changes being
proposed all the time, which then caused delays because they were required to
get a new permit when structural changes were made. therefore, there was no
completion date discussed. murray said that he spoke to mr. savard in the late
spring of 2018 and explained the problems with labour and greenon. he told mr.
savard to contact him when he was ready to recommence the work, and he never
contacted mr. murray. he then said that he met with mr. savard in july, and it
was at that point that he explained the greenon problems to mr. savard. the
workers who were qualified to do the roof for mr. savard, were also certified
for greenon work. he explained that he had to devote that workforce to the
greenon jobs.

he
said that he was unaware that the job had been left with the house just wrapped
in typar. he said that mr. savard never complained, and he was embarrassed
when he saw the photographs. he said that mr. savard kept changing the
contract, and it was difficult to communicate with him because he was gone all
the time. some of the work had to be redone, and he was frustrated. some of
the changes required changes to the work permits. redoing the work and having
to get the permits changed caused delays.

he
testified that his workers did not do anything to the roof, because of the
changes. if the roof was leaking, it had nothing to do with any work that his
workers had done. he said that there was no contract for the roof, and there
was no cost worked out for it at that time. he had to pull his workers until
the changes to the roof were clarified.

he
said that when he sold the original job it was to be about four weeks. with
all the changes it became a six month job, and they could not finish because
they were still waiting on the permits for the roof. at first the job was not a
greenon job, but he said that mr. savard could now benefit from greenon grants,
given all of the delays.

overall,
i am concerned about the evidence of mr. savard. he was tentative and
uncertain about aspects of the contract, and it was only on cross-examination
that he admitted to the constant changes to the contract. mr. guillot from the
building department was clear that the many changes involved in this contract
would require another building permit. mr. savard seemed to be unaware of
that.

mr.
murray said that the work on the job had to stop and be clarified before it
could continue, due to constant changes. then there were delays because they
had to apply for new permits. his workers had to be redirected to other job
sites and could not just sit idly by while waiting for that process. mr.
murray said that he became frustrated with dan, who was suggesting constant
changes to mr. savard. this appears to have been a pattern for this worker,
given his interference in the job for ms. chomiak.

i
am concerned that mr. murray offered to change the contract, to permit mr. savard
to benefit from the greenon program, but that was not done to deceive mr. savard
in any way. mr. savard testified that he was aware of that.

i
find that i have no reason to reject the evidence of mr. murray, despite the
concern about greenon. his evidence was supported in mr. savard’s evidence
regarding the constant changes to the contract, the payments, the cancellation
of the $10,000 cheque and the delays. his evidence is supported by mr. guillot
regarding the need to obtain new permits for the proposed changes.

overall,
his evidence was unshaken on cross-examination, it was internally consistent
and consistent with other evidence.
sylvie and noella perrier
– may 2017

noella
perrier and her late husband, leonard, contracted with mr. murray’s company on
may 10, 2017 to build an addition and roofing. this is also one of the problem
contracts. she testified that the work needed to be done. the anticipated
cost was $28,840. she said that there was nothing on the back of the contract.

the
contract included new soffit, eavestroughs and fascia on the complete home,
insulation and siding as well as the new addition and the roof. although she
expected the addition to be built in september or october of 2017, she said
that there was no expected completion date. she testified that she paid $23,000
in deposits over two installments. she paid the first installment of $15,000
and she believed that was for materials. she confirmed that she was not told
that the money would be used for materials, she just believed it was. she paid
$8,000 and the reference was for fascia and soffit. she said that the day
after the contract was signed the roof was done and the siding was removed, and
the gable ends. she said that the gable ends were never finished. she did not
make the last payment of $5,840, which was due when the addition was done.

she
believed that the roof was done on may 11, 2017 by another contractor, but not
done properly. she described that the water was coming in between the roof and
where the eavestrough was.

she
said that mr. murray was not around and they could not reach him but could not
remember details. she identified a letter that was signed april 16, 2019,
asking for her money back. the letter described her attempts to contact mr.
murray, without success, between september and november 14, 2017, and the steps
that were taken the following year. this letter contains hearsay, and is a
prior consistent statement, so it is not admissible for the truth of its
contents. ms. perrier testified that the contents of the letter are accurate,
but she was not asked if it revived a present memory.

however,
it is admissible to explain what ms. perrier did and why. ms. perrier
confirmed that there was a family emergency, that prevented her from contacting
mr. murray. on january 12, 2018, the letter outlined that she stopped at
the office of ecolife and spoke to “muriel”. the letter outlines that on
january 25, 2018 “joshua” came to the house to have another letter signed for
another building permit. the first permit was signed in may of 2017. she
believed that it was mr. murray’s responsibility to get the permit. on june
13, 2018, a secretary from ecolife told ms. perrier that she thought the work
on the contract was completed, because it was filed in the completed section. 
mr. murray did not call, but a secretary called and said that the work would
start the week of june 18, 2018. however, no one showed up. she called again,
and was told that the office was overwhelmed with windows and insulation jobs
and that those jobs needed to be done before the subsidies ran out. the letter
details that rob came over on july 31, 2018, and asked for a copy of the
contract. she confirmed that no further work was done on the job.

she
could not remember if it was snowing in early november of 2017. she said that mr.
murray did not tell her that snow and cold could delay her job. she confirmed
that all the text messages to mr. murray were through her daughter, sylvie.

she
agreed that the contract does not mention a permit. she had no knowledge of a
building permit that might have expired. she confirmed that the medical issue
lasted from november to january, and she was pretty sure that she told mr.
murray or his company that she did not want work to be done during the medical
issue. she confirmed that she saw news articles in the spring of 2019
regarding criminal charges against mr. murray. she also said that she was
aware that ecolife offices were closed in the spring of 2019. the police
attended her home afterward, and it was a surprise to her. her husband had
passed away by that point.

i
will consider sylvie perrier’s next, and then the evidence of mr. murray.
sylvie perrier

sylvie
perrier could not remember texting or calling mr. murray about the concerns
related to the contract with her parents, until she was shown the text messages
that were put into evidence. she said that her father changed the foundation
of the mudroom from posts to footings and that she communicated that to mr.
murray. her texts confirm that the project also had to wait because the hydro
had to be marked. she could not recall any communication with mr. murray after
november of 2018. she confirmed that she authored the letter from her mother,
but she was just taking her mother’s words and typing them down. she did not
remember having a conversation with mr. murray that she and her mother wanted
the work on the project to pause due to the medical emergency in november of
2017.

mr.
murray testified that he attended the home and he told mr. and mrs. perrier
that he would send someone to do the first part of the job, the roof, but that
he needed a different worker to do the addition. he said that there were
problems with the roof, and it had to be resheeted, not just replace the
shingles. he believed that they were dealing with either henry or josh,
because it was their job. he was on the road, doing sales.

he
said that the job stalled when they called the office and said to hold off in
the late fall of 2017. then the foundation for the addition changed, and the
permit had to be changed. josh went to the home and got the authorization for
the permit signed. mr. murray then said that it ran into greenon, and the
entire project got delayed due to greenon. he said that he went into panic
mode when greenon was cancelled, and all the 2017 jobs that had not been
cancelled got put on the back burner. he said he did talk to them and he
instructed his staff to talk to them. he asked for their understanding, but
that he did not have enough manpower to do all the jobs. he said that he had
conversations with sylvie, and later found out that what he said went on
facebook, which upset him.

the
evidence of noella perrier left me with some questions. she appeared to have
no present memory of the information contained in the letter, she simply agreed
that it was true. she was not asked if it revived her memory, so it cannot
represent a present recollection revived, based on the letter, and there was no
application for the letter to be admitted as a past recollection recorded. i
attach very little weight to the contents of the letter. noella perrier did
not type the letter, her daughter did. her daughter said that she simply typed
what her mother said, but that she suggested wording. in other words, it
contains what her mother told her.

mr.
murray confirmed that the contract did not include sylvie perrier, but that he
had conversations with sylvie. sylvie could not remember having conversations
with mr. murray. mr. murray said that he instructed his staff to contact
ms. perrier, and it was his expectation that they would do that. mr. murray
said that he had a long conversation with sylvie perrier in march of 2019, and
he explained the reasons for all of the delays. he said that it was amicable,
and that he told her that he intended to finish the work. he then discovered
that that what he said was put on facebook.

mr.
murray claimed that there were problems when the roof was repaired, and that
they discovered rot. the roof required more work than simply replacing
shingles. they had to resheet the entire roof. that would have required a
permit, and caused delays. noella perrier could not remember discussions. further,
he said that there was still time in 2017 to do the addition, but the family
asked for the project to be halted. this also caused a delay.

i
accept that there was a delay in the fall of 2017, due to more extensive work
that had to be done on the roof. i accept that the project was delayed due to
the family emergency, and the corresponding instructions from the family. i
accept that there was a change to the footings, as instructed, which caused a
change to the permit. i accept that the work could not restart until late
spring or summer of 2018, and that the work was affected by the greenon program
cancellation.
josee viau
– june 13, 2017

mr.
and mrs. viau had discussed replacing windows. this contract is one of the
problem contracts.

mr.
and mrs. viau had gone to a few home shows and were in the market to replace
theirs. they were approached by a person going door to door from mr. murray’s
company. they made arrangements to meet with mr. murray, and replace half of
their windows in the current year and the other half in the following year. the
contract is dated june 13, 2017. ms. viau testified that when she first talked
to mr. murray, they talked about a credit of up to $5,000 for window
replacement. the original estimate was over $30,000 to replace all of the
windows in her home, plus two patio doors. she asked for an estimate to
concentrate on the basement windows. ultimately, the contract was drawn up for
three basement windows and two patio doors. the total cost was $14,800 and she
paid a deposit of $7,400. they selected triple pane windows. the expected
date of installation was september of 2017, weather permitting. she recalled a
discussion that weather could impact any installation date expectation. she
also testified that she and mr. murray talked about delays on other jobs which
might have an impact on the start of their job. she confirmed that they had
met before, through the work she and her husband did through scouting. mr. murray
asked for a 50% deposit, to help toward payment of the windows, which were very
expensive. they also felt comfortable paying half because they already knew
mr. murray.

she
testified that she and mr. murray had some back and forth texting and phone
conversations in september and october of 2017, when her job was not started. 
she visited the store on occasion, and spoke to josh. she said she was not
getting any clear information about when her windows were going to be
installed. she said that mr. murray told her that there had been some rainy
days that inferred with the schedule, as well as a big job that required a lot
more work than what was originally anticipated. that job was scheduled for
three days, and it took three weeks, which interfered with the schedule. mr. murray
could not or would not give her a firm date to install the windows and doors. 
she suggested that the windows be provided to her, and she would find an
installer. mr. murray told her that this step would potentially void any
warranty on the windows, because the installer had to be properly certified.

when
it became clear to her that she was not going to get the work done before
winter set in, she wrote a letter cancelling the contract and asking for her
money back on november 17, 2017. she had additional conversations with mr.
murray after sending the letter, and agreed to extend into 2018. in may of
2018, she instructed a paralegal that she hired to file a claim in small claims
court to give mr. murray three options, return the funds, do the work or give
her the windows so that she could pay to have the windows installed.

ultimately,
arrangements were made to have henry come and measure for the patio doors in
june of 2018, but he called in sick. the arrangements were as a result of
hiring the paralegal and negotiating directly with mr. murray. she brought to
the meeting a “different window layout”. mr. murray said that he would take $1,500
off of the original invoice to compensate for the cost of the retainer of the
paralegal and talk to his supplier to see what he could do. mr. murray said he
would send someone to remeasure the patio door. that worker called in sick on
the day that he was to come. in july of 2018, mr. murray told ms. viau
that he was extremely busy with the cancellation of the greenon program. ultimately,
no windows or patio door were installed.

ms.
viau filed a claim in small claims court, had a trial on october 23, 2018, at
which time mr. murray did not attend and she obtained a judgment.

in
cross-examination, she testified that she had not heard of euroseal. she
remembered that the manufacturer was from toronto, and that someone would have
to drive to pick them up “when they were needed”, which corresponds with what
she was told by josh (which is hearsay but informs what she believed, that the
windows could not be kept at ecolife, but were stored at the manufacturer’s
until ready to be installed).

she
said that mr. murray did not tell her the windows would take longer to
manufacture, “not necessarily”. full payment would have been made when the
work was completed. she agreed that she changed the windows but had an
expectation that the new style windows would be installed by mid-july of 2018,
based on the conversation in mid-june of 2018. she believed that the greenon
program was active in the summer of 2017.

she
testified that she first cancelled the contract in 2017 in november in person
at mr. murray’s office, when she spoke to josh. she confirmed that mr. murray
always gave her the impression that he wanted to finish the work on the
contract, and that he never cancelled the work.

when
she originally spoke to the police, it was before she hired the paralegal. she
was directed to small claims court, and that she was advised that it was a
civil matter.

mr.
murray agreed that the contract was not signed right away, because there were
some changes to what mr. and mrs. viau wanted. he testified that when the
contract was signed, he expected to be able to complete the work in september
or october of 2017, but that there were sometimes complications such as
manufacturer’s delays or problems with employees. he said that this was part
of the life of a contractor, to deal with complications. he had those
complications on this job.

he
testified that ecolife ordered her product. her patio doors were a specialty
size and they had to wait for them to be manufactured. once they were ready in
september or october, then the job got scheduled. he said that this was all
the back end stuff that clients do not see. he went through three project
managers in three years, which had caused problems for him. as well, other
jobs had caused problems because of what he called “can of worms” problems,
which can delay a job for four or five weeks. he said that he could not
complete her job because she cancelled the contract. he said that there was
some negotiation for the next several months, and then greenon was cancelled.

he
said that he has little recollection of what happened over the months after
june of 2018 due to the chaos that greenon caused, and he had no recollection
of ms. viau getting a judgment. he testified that her cancellation delayed the
completion of the project into when the greenon program was cancelled, and it
was significantly affected by that cancellation. he testified that he just
could not get to the work because he had to redirect his installers to greenon
jobs. he did not know if he was going to get any further extensions, so those
jobs took priority.

he
said that the manufacturer had a 72 hour cancellation window on specialty
product, and the patio doors were specialty product. therefore, he was stuck
with the doors and he had to pay the supplier for them.

mr.
murray testified that the contract does not specify a manufacturer, but the
product described identified it as a euroseal contract. mr. murray said that
ms. viau’s job may have qualified for greenon, after it was cancelled and then
reinstated. however, he just could not get the job done. he was dealing with
her legal representative and said that he was swamped and could not say when
the product was going to be available. he told the legal representative that
he would get someone to do it. he denied using greenon as an excuse and said
that his manufacturers had a queue and so did he. he could not just bump
someone’s job up and neither could the manufacturer.

he
confirmed that he stayed in contact with her, and that he instructed his staff
to stay in contact with her. he expected that his staff followed his
direction.

when
confronted with the text messages negotiating the contract, he said that he was
not pressuring ms. viau, he was giving her options for the original agreement. 
mr. murray said that the original delay was because of weather,
backlogging all of his jobs. he said that the text messages bear this out, as ms.
viau in her text in september acknowledged that weather was rainy and that it
might delay their work. he said he tried to advise her of what the problems
were, but she was being unreasonable. he testified that sending someone to
measure for the doors in june of 2018 could mean that they were just getting
ready to do the job, not that they were re-ordering the doors.

he
then said that he had to switch the windows from euroseal to gentek, and that
they went back into the queue, which caused delays. this was inconsistent with
his earlier evidence in which he said that the windows had been received in
either october or november of 2017. however, it is consistent with ms. viau
saying she changed the window configuration.

he
said that he could not give a date because gentek could not give him a date. he
said that he knew these people through boy scouts and did not want to ruin
their relationship.

i
find that this contract was delayed due to the problems with a supplier, then
the original cancellation, and then the change to the configuration, which then
took the timeframe into the chaos created by the greenon program cancellation. 
the contract was cancelled again, and ms. viau went to small claims court.
gerry and anna bissonnette
– june 2017

mr.
bissonette testified that they were looking to have the windows replaced in
their duplex rental unit. the unit was divided into an upper and lower unit. they
entered into two contracts on the same day, but one was to be completed in june
of 2017 and the other was to be done first. the upper unit was done first, and
it was for $6,840 and it was paid in full. that work was done in 2016 and was
completed and paid.

the
second contract was not to be done until 2017. mr. bissonnette paid a $1,000
deposit toward the second contract. he made a further payment of $3,000 toward
this contract in october of 2017. he later was asked what he did after he paid
in full for the lower windows, but he had not said that he paid in full for the
lower windows. his evidence was that he had paid $4,000 toward the lower
windows and paid the entire balance of the upper windows.

in
december of 2018, he testified that he paid the balance for the windows for the
upper unit. apparently, he went to mr. murray’s office and claims he was told
that if mr. bissonnette paid the balance for the windows, mr. murray would
finish the job. he said he felt at the time that he had nothing to lose when
paying the remainder of the balance of the contract.

he
testified that he tried to call mr. murray and went to see him several times. 
sometimes he got a call back, and promises were made. he was told about worker
injuries and various things. mr. bissonnette is now suffering from leukemia,
and it has affected his ability to remember. he said that mr. murray shared
that there was a greenon program, and that he thought it was a good idea. he
thought that was in 2017. he said he was told by a secretary that it would be
a good thing that the windows were not installed because of greenon. he
confirmed that mr. murray told him that the greenon program had made it hard to
get windows and that things were getting really busy. he went to his member of
parliament, france gelinas, as a last resort. he later contracted with another
company to do the windows for the lower unit for a total of $8,742.81.

in
cross-examination, mr. bissonnette said that when mr. murray was to install the
windows in 2017, mr. bissonnette was gone to florida, and then there were
problems with getting windows, which mr. bissonnette did not realize at the
time. he just knew that there was a greenon program but did not know much
about it. he said that he knew he qualified for greenon when he signed the
contract because they were supposed to be installed in 2017, but he did not
know anything about greenon continuing. when challenged about greenon not
being available until december of 2017 at the earliest, mr. bissonnette
said that maybe it was another grant program, because his son had windows done
in 2016 through him and he got a rebate. mr. bissonnette said that it was not
possible that the reference was to green star and not greenon, because he had
just heard of green star on the day he was testifying. the contract that mr.
bissonnette signed on may 7, 2016 specified green star windows. when that was
pointed out to mr. bissonnette, he said that it did not change his answer,
because “who cares what type of window it is, you know?”

he
agreed that the installation of the windows was weather dependent. he also
agreed that he and his wife went to florida each winter, and that he was in florida
in the wintertime of 2018 to 2019. he said that his son, for whom mr. murray
had done work, lived just down the street, and that mr. murray could have
contacted him. he also said that he had tenants who occupied the unit, and
that he believed that no one contacted them. he said that every time he came
back, nothing was done and that the weather cannot be bad all the time. when
asked whether he had told mr. murray to contact those other people, mr.
bissonnette said that mr. murray could have figured that out. he then said
that mr. murray was told that his son had keys for the house, and he could get
ahold of him when he needed to. he agreed that he came back from florida in
april in the spring of 2019, and he saw a closed sign on mr. murray’s offices. he
left messages but did not get ahold of mr. murray. he did not know that mr.
murray lost his licence, and that he could not communicate with his clients.

mr.
bissonnette said that mr. murray told him that he had the windows that were
ordered, but that there were too many in the warehouse. he said that later, mr.
murray told him that he did not have the windows. he had no idea when he had
that conversation with mr. murray about not having the windows. he said that
he was sure that mr. murray told him about delays with window manufacturers, and
he said that mr. murray told him that he was on the list of customers who were
going to be getting their windows through the greenon program. he confirmed
that he was told about injured workers. he said that it was probably true that
he was told that people were quitting their jobs at ecolife, and he confirmed
that mr. murray told him that jobs were being delayed by that. he confirmed
that he talked to mr. murray about his mother passing away, while at mr. murray’s
office. this had to take place before mr. bissonnette and his wife went to
florida in late 2018 and early 2019. he said that he never contacted greenon
directly because he was not good with computers and stuff. he said that he
believed some of the excuses, but you cannot believe everything when nothing is
happening. he said that he had no intention of paying the final payment, and
that it was his wife’s idea.

anna
bissonnette also testified. she confirmed that she and her husband were happy
with the work that was done on the upper unit. she said that she expected the
work in the lower unit to be done in 2016, but i think she was confusing the
upper and lower units. her evidence differed from her husband’s regarding
which payment was for which contract, but little turns on this given that no
one is calling into question whether or not the amount paid was over $5,000.

the
copy of the cheque showing final payment is dated october 28, 2018 and it was
certified on december 18, 2018. ms. bissonnette said that she was certain that
the payment was made on december 18, 2018 and she did not know why the cheque
was dated october and not december. she said that they paid the final payment
because david asked them “…to pay in full because before he could fit, do it”,
page 180, line 18, june 9, 2025. she said that they had split up the jobs for
tax purposes because these two units were rental units.

ms.
bissonnette said that she and her husband went to see p.c. williams in 2018,
and then went to see their mpp, ms. gelinas, with no response from ms. gelinas. 
they went to the offices of ecolife, and looked at the “board” and their names
were not on it. despite that, ms. bissonnette believed that maybe mr. murray
had a date, and that their name was coming up. she testified that she believed
mr. murray told her in the summer of 2018 about the greenon program, and she
believed that this was the first time he mentioned greenon. she remembered
that mr. murray told her that “his” back was sore and that he could not work,
but she never explained about whom the reference was made. she testified
that mr murray wanted final payment in december of 2018 to do the installation.

she
claimed that mr. murray told her that he would do the work on the contract
while she and her husband were in florida, and the work would be finished when
they returned. she said that she and her husband would tell her son when mr.
murray needed to access the unit to do the work. when pressed about not
telling mr. murray that, she said that she was sure he was told. she then said
that mr. murray was to notify her son, and that she and her husband would not
have left knowing that she would come home and mr. murray had not spoken to her
son. she then said that when they left, they told their son that mr. murray
was going to contact them, and they would contact their son when the windows
were to be installed.

she
confirmed that they returned to sudbury in april of 2019. she confirmed that
mr. murray’s office was closed when they returned. she confirmed that most of
the communication was with her husband and sometimes she was involved too. she
said that mr. murray told her that the windows were in, in 2018, but that they
were in a warehouse, so they could not see them. she said that mr. murray told
her that there were delays with manufacturers and injured workers. she said
weather might have been a factor, but that her son’s windows were installed in
january. she confirmed that she was not asked to sign any paperwork for
greenon.

mr.
murray acknowledged that this contract was a mistake by his company. he said
that the $1,000 deposit was not properly documented and it might have slipped
through the cracks. he acknowledged that his company made mistakes. he said
that the glass package had changed, and that they had to wait to order the
product to make it match. he said that he put henry on all of the scheduling
in the spring of 2017 when there was a staff change. he said that they
benefited because it could now go through greenon since the error was not discovered
until later in 2018. he said that the date of the cheque for the final payment
proves that they wanted to show final payment before the end of the greenon
program. to qualify for the program final payment had to be made by october
31, 2018. he said that they benefited from the delay, because they could
qualify for greenon and that he did not demand the final payment rather the valiquettes
wanted to ensure that they qualified for greenon. he said that this was one of
the jobs that they were trying to squeeze in, but they just did not get to it. 
he also said that this was the period (october and november of 2018) when he
started getting really sick.

mr.
murray disputed that he was told to call their son to do the installation. he
said that he was waiting for them to tell him when they were returning from
florida. he said that there was no proper deposit given. the documents prove
a payment of $1,000 when the contract was signed and then a payment of $3,000
in october of 2017. the final payment was made in december of 2018. i find
that it did not come to light until october of 2017 that the product had not
been properly ordered. by that time, mr. murray said that he was starting to
have trouble with euroseal. he testified that after getting this second
deposit, they left again for florida and did not tell him when they would be
back. he said he did not think he even had their phone number when they left
the first time.

mr.
murray denied that anyone told him to contact the tenants and said that mr. bissonnette
had to contact them himself. he did not remember anyone telling him to contact
their son. he said that he did not get involved until 2018, when it came to
his attention that the contract had not gone into production. i believe this
meant that the windows had not been ordered, and that the job had not been
scheduled for installation, although he was not asked what this meant.

ultimately,
mr. murray said that he could not finish the job because his licence was
revoked in april of 2019.

mr.
murray testified that he had a lot of problems with a production manager, david
prentice, who was intoxicated on the job and some jobs were not properly
handled. he was terminated in the spring of 2017 and henry took over. it took
henry some time to get up to speed. it was likely during this time that the
error was made.

overall,
there is little dispute between the evidence of mr. and mrs. valiquette and
that of mr. murray. mr. murray has provided a partial explanation for the
delay as being an error on the part of his staff. i accept that explanation. 
further, i reject mr. and mrs. valiquette’s claim of instructing mr.
murray to contact their tenant or their son while they were out of the
country. they could not give specific information about telling mr. murray
who to call along with contact information. in fact, mrs. valiquette said that
they would have instructed mr. murray, not that they did. mr. valiquette said
that mr. murray could figure it out. mr. and mrs. valiquette left sudbury
for about four months each winter, between january and april. i accept that
mr. murray was waiting for them to return in april of 2017 to schedule their
job. i accept that there was an error made regarding properly recording their
deposit. i accept that mr. murray was not aware until october of 2017 that the
error had been made. i accept that the windows were then ordered, but that the
supplier was delayed in delivering product. i accept that mr. and mrs.
valiquette again left for florida in january to april of 2018, and that mr. and
mrs. valiquette were told that the order was then eligible for greenon. 
then the greenon chaos ensued and mr. and mrs. valiquette made the final
payment in december of 2018, believing that they would still be eligible for
the rebate.
mariette bradley
– june 23, 2017

this
is another problem contract. ms. bradley testified that the original contact
with mr. murray’s company was to build a shed. the discussion turned into a
discussion about building a garage. she said that they were not ready for a
garage at that point, but that mr. murray convinced them to do it. ultimately,
she and her husband contracted for a 20 x 26 foot garage. the total cost was
$44,200, and she and her husband paid a total of $34,000. she testified that
she paid a deposit of $20,000 in june of 2017, and then an additional $14,000
in november of 2017, when mr. murray called and there was another man on the
phone, and they wanted a further deposit to purchase materials. she said that
mr. murray promised several times in this phone call that he would have the
garage done by christmas. she said that when the contract was signed, there
was a verbal agreement to start the work in the summer of 2017 and it was to be
completed by the fall of 2017. nothing is noted on the contract regarding
start and completion dates.

she
believed that a permit was part of the package, and that someone came to her
house in the fall of 2017 to get a paper signed to get a permit. the contract
shows that permits were part of the contract. she said that they dug the hole
in 2017 and stayed like that for a year, before they installed blocks in may of
2018. she did not sign an additional cheque, but her partner did. she was not
part of the conversation with her partner about providing the money, but she believed
that it boiled down to having to give more money to finish the job. to her, a
foundation did not have to have a hole, just a cement slab. in the photographs
entered as exhibits, she identified that the photographs show cement blocks
outlining the shape of the garage, with sand in the centre, not a cement slab.

the
job was left in an unfinished state for a year and-a-half to two years, with
just cement blocks and sand. she testified that there was no cement keeping
the blocks together, that they were just sitting there. she tried to cancel
the contract and get her money back, but she said mr. murray said he could not
refund the money, and that there was a contract. she told him that he had a
contract too, and he had not fulfilled it. she still does not have a garage
today.

she
denied that she had a conversation with mr. murray that there was a problem
with the ground, and that it was not level. she said she was not aware of any
changes to the permit, and that she only saw one permit. she said that she had
paid more than what she was supposed to pay. she did not remember that changes
were necessary once mr. murray got to the site and checked out the ground. 
she did not remember that the plans had to change to footings from a slab,
which meant that the workers had to dig a three-foot deep hole to accommodate a
foundation. she did confirm that a deep hole was dug. she said that the only
time she spoke to mr. murray was when the contract was signed. she confirmed
that subcontractors came and dug the hole, and that she believed that they were
not mr. murray’s direct employees.

to
her she had a turnkey contract, and that if costs ran over it would not be her
responsibility. she contracted for a garage, and she believed that she should
not have paid anything further than what she contracted for. she believed that
the weather should not have had any impact on construction. she admitted that
she did not have any experience with construction. she did not recall any
workers coming in the spring of 2018 with compactors.

she
agreed that she had contacted a lawyer to start a small claims court
application in june of 2018. she agreed that the claim was filed at the
beginning of the fall of 2018. she believed that it was still pending. she
agreed that mr. murray’s employees were working on her jobsite in the spring of
2018, installing blocks. this conflicts with her earlier evidence regarding
workers installing the blocks and leaving them to the weather. based on this
evidence, she had to have taken the photographs in 2019 or later.

she
agreed that she was told about employee problems and labour problems. she said
that it was always an excuse.

mr.
murray confirmed that the project started and stopped. he said that it became
a bigger job than anticipated. he said that they were still waiting on the
permit in the fall of 2017. he said most of his dealings were with mr.
bradley, and not with mrs. bradley. he said that they went to do the slab, but
found that the ground had been disturbed, and it was no longer virgin ground. 
it now required a foundation, which changed the job. he said that mrs. bradley
was getting frustrated that nothing was getting done, and he tried to explain.

he
said that 8 inch walls had to be put into the ground, to serve as a foundation. 
he said that he negotiated with mrs. bradley that if they paid the second
deposit toward the job, he would absorb the additional cost of the foundation. 
the additional deposit was $14,000 and the cost of the foundation was $15,000. 
he said that they never would have finished the foundation in time for the
winter because they would not have gotten the permit in time. so they dug the
hole in the fall, and returned in the spring to put in the cement block
foundation walls. he said that they could dig the hole without the permit, but
they could not do any more work until the permit was granted. they restarted
work in may of 2018 because they had to wait for the ground to thaw and dry. he
said that his company arranged for the fill, and that mr. bradley wanted more
fill so he gave an extra $2,000 to get additional fill to do the whole yard.

mr.
murray viewed the photographs in evidence and agreed that is what the job
looked like. to him, the job was ready to move forward, with compacting the sand
to pour the concrete floor and then to start work on the walls. the job did not
get finished because the worker who was assigned to the job just stopped
showing up and there was equipment that was missing. he had other workers who
could do some of the work, but then greenon was cancelled. he said that he
told mr. bradley that there were delays due to the greenon cancellation. 
lawyers were involved at this point. he asked if they could put it off as long
as possible, because his back was against the wall.

in
the photograph he identified the rebar that was placed in the cavity in the
blocks forming the walls. he testified that all of the cavities were filled in
on three walls. he testified that it was only the front wall that was not
filled in. the photos bear this out. the installer who was responsible for
pouring the floor stopped showing up and took the equipment. he explained the
blocks that had separated had had water getting in and freezing. he said that
it was easy to fix that issue. he said that the same workers who could work on
the garage, were the workers who were certified under greenon. he said that he
had to redirect those workers to finish as many of the greenon jobs as he could
get finished. he testified that when greenon was cancelled he was forced to
“change gears”, and focus on those jobs.

he
did not know anything about a blank authorization form and said that the city
would not accept a blank form. he did not remember mrs. bradley asking for her
money back or that he said that it was a binding contract but he did say that
she was upset and he would have said that. he said that “i was in the middle
of working on a patient, and all of a sudden bombs were dropping everywhere, it
was chaos while i was doing this around june 19”. he said he was just managing
as best he could. he did not have the manpower or the people skilled enough to
do the bigger jobs as well as the greenon jobs. he was just doing the best
that he could.

i
accept that this job was delayed due to the required change in the foundation,
which caused a change to the permit. mrs. bradley did not appear to appreciate
that this kind of a problem occurred, and the consequences of this problem. in
fact, her position was that it was not her problem and it should not increase
her cost. i accept that lawyers got involved, which would then cause mr.
murray to believe that this contract was going to be cancelled. his shifting
of his workers to greenon jobs was reasonable.
jedrezek
– july 25, 2017

mr.
jedrezek’s contract is also a problem contract, that was converted to a greenon
contract. he said that he contacted ecolife because he wanted to have some
work done. after talking to mr. murray, he decided to go with ecolife, because
the cost was better and the products seemed to be eco-friendly. the work to be
done was insulation, siding, soffit and fascia, two windows, stonework, a steel
door, eaves and mould removal, among other work.

the
total contract was for $21,700, and then there was a later quote of $35,317
which incorporated the first contract. it was signed on july 25, 2017. the
work did not start until june of 2018. in the intervening time, he went to the
office, and was shown the “board”, and shown where his name appeared on the
board. he confirmed that when the work started, the workers found mould, which
caused additional costs. the porch and siding had to be removed to remediate
it. he said that mr. murray had told him that the delay in starting his job
was that he was behind in getting contracts done. he said that when the
workers started work on the back of the house they found more mould, which had
to be remediated, and increased the cost. they also discovered that the roof
needed some work, which he authorized and it was done.

he
said mr. murray told him later that he might qualify for a rebate but did not
specify what for. he confirmed that he got a rebate cheque but did not know
what it was for. he said that the work was not done so he did not cash the
cheque. he said he reported to greenon that the work was not done and then
gave the cheque to the detective. the cheque is in the amount of $3,900.

he
said that the sliding door and the steel door were not replaced. the siding
was not capped. he was expecting a “free window”, which was not replaced. 
some of the siding was not replaced. he said that the window that was replaced
with a smaller window was to be finished on the inside and it was not. he said
that normally contractors get the permit, but that he had to get it himself. in
his text messages, he texted to murray that he got a stop work order for the
porch, and that he needed to get the permit. he testified that mr. murray said
that he already got the permit.

he
testified that he was constantly trying to communicate with mr. murray, and
that sometimes mr. murray would respond and sometimes he would not. the text
message bears this out.

in
cross-examination, mr. jedrezek acknowledged that he had previously testified
that he had signed a document with one of mr. murray’s staff in the fall of
2018. he did not read it. he confirmed that the insulation had been
installed, but that he did not know what the rebate covered. he assumed that
all of the work had to be done on the job in order to qualify for the rebate. he
confirmed that mould was found when the siding was removed, and that the
insulation and mould had to be removed before they could proceed on the work. he
agreed that ultimately three windows were to be replaced.

he
said that there was water infiltrating through the walls in the basement, which
was a problem. mr. murray’s company had to go all the way down to the sill
plate to remediate the mould and the water problem. he was not there to see if
any studs or plywood had to be replaced. he agreed that the problems with mould
would have delayed the completion of the contract and said that it was common
sense. he confirmed that the insulation was replaced with superior insulation.
 he did not know if mr. murray took photos of his home, but the survey that he
received from the greenon program said that he did. he later said that the
photos of his house were not of the windows that were part of the agreement to
replace. he said they were photos of the other side of his house. however, i
have to question how he knew this when he said he was not aware of the photos,
except for the survey, and he did not know what the grant was for.

as
well, he said that he was aware that mr. murray changed the date of the
contract to qualify for the greenon grant. however, there is nothing on the
original contract that would qualify for the grant. there is no insulation
mentioned, and the two windows that are referenced were not the specialty glass
or triple pane windows that were required. the handwritten contract references
two different kinds of insulation, and the contract is not dated. payment for
the contract was made on june 25, 2018. this is the only contract that
outlined qualifying services, and it was not dated. it was paid in the
timeframe where greenon work was authorized. mr. jedrezek’s conversation with
an unidentified person from greenon is not admissible as hearsay. it is only
admissible to explain what mr. jedrezek did.

there
is one typed contract and one handwritten contract. mr. jedrezek confirmed
that all the items in the handwritten contract were finished and the work of
$12,317 was paid in full. he said that the only work not done was the corner
piece on the back of the house to remediate where his dog was rubbing his
chain. however, this item was specified on the contract in the exhibit book at
tab 1, and not the handwritten contract.

there
is a notation on the typed contract for an additional charge of $1,300 for
extra repairs. there is no mention on the contract of a permit being mr.
murray’s responsibility, however, mr. murray accepted responsibility in a text
message and in his evidence said that he should have gotten the permit. he was
not certain when work stopped but believed that it was around september of
2018.

he
agreed that the majority of the work was done on the contract. when asked what
value he would put on what was completed, he said he had no idea. when asked
if it would come up to $35,000, he said he had no idea how much the materials
cost. when asked if he felt he got the full value of what he paid, he said not
really.

mr.
murray testified that he was still working at the end of 2018 and into 2019 to
process all of the greenon applications, and that was why mr. jedrezek got his
grant money. mr. murray did not think he needed a permit for the porch,
because it was under two feet. however, it might have been a little over that,
so he agreed to pay. however, he said that it was a fine rather than the cost
of the permit.

he
said that the little amount of work left undone would have been done in the
spring of 2019, but his illness and then losing his licence prevented him from
finishing the job.

i
accept mr. murray’s evidence regarding this contract. this was one of the jobs
that mr. murray called a “can of worms”. once the work started, problems
started arising, such as mould and the basement wall leak. it became a much
more complicated job, that consumed much more time. in the end, mr. jedrezek
was unsure if he got “full value” for the money that he paid. accordingly, i
find that the crown has not proven that this contract was unfulfilled, based on
the additional work that was required to be done and mr. jedrezek’s evidence.
kevin fajcz
– july 2017

this
is another problem contract. mr. fajcz said that he contacted ecolife because
he was having problems with a roof and that there were ventilation issues in
the attic, which would have been in july of 2017. he identified a siding and
roofing quotation, signed in july 20, 2017. he said that they did not talk
about siding at first, rather it was focused on the roof and the ventilation
problem, and it was also going to include insulation in the attic. he thought
that mr. murray took notes and came back with a typed contract, but he did not
think it was the same day.

he
said that the agreement to solve the ventilation problem for the roof was to
raise it three inches. he said that there were a couple of ways to do it. he
said that mr. murray had a ventilation expert named jack. he said there
was a second appointment, and jack came and looked in the attics and came up
with an idea that raised the roof rather than turn his second story into a
construction area. he said that because of the age of his house, there was a
discussion about possible rot, which he called a realistic expectation. he identified
that the top of the contract showed a date of july 20, 2017 but the bottom of
the contract referenced august 31, 2017. he said that he believed that the
contract was actually signed on august 31, 2017 and that he paid his deposit on
that date, but he could not be certain. he said that he could not get a start
date, and he said that mr. murray told him that he was busy and he would get to
the job in due time. he said that they talked about that mr. murray’s
company would get to the job when his current work was finished, so he knew he
was in the queue.

he
agreed that there was another meeting, where he changed the contract. he thought
it was in august. he went to the showroom because he had been thinking that a
metal roof would be a better solution. he and mr. murray discussed that mr.
murray had a metal roof that he had sold to another customer who changed his
mind. they agreed on the metal roof, and then mr. fajcz added siding to match. 
he identified the second contract as being additional to the first contract
(but the first was for a shingled roof). he believed that he contracted for
board and batten siding on his entire house, but only got board and batten
siding on the top part. he got vinyl siding on the first floor. he then said
that he was not sure if the board and batten siding was only for one part of
the house. he said that the reference to no charge for the versetta stone was
that it was an incentive for mr. murray to get the job done.

he
identified that part of the contract that says metal shake roof $9,944 and said
that this was the amended contract to the first contract. he said that he had
already paid for shingles, and then he wrote a cheque for $9,944. then it said
45 days paid $24,996 remaining $11,627. mr. fajcz said that this referenced
that he was asked to loan mr. murray $20,000 and it was a 45 day loan but was
not sure why it said 45 days. when he paid the first contract payment, and
then paid the $9,944, his expectation was that the $9,944 was for the entire
second contract, meaning not just the roof but the siding too.

his
attention was drawn to a notation on the contract that said “advanced 20k to
ecolife 45 days minus …”, and he identified the handwriting as david murray’s. 
he said that he did not know why mr. murray was asking him for a loan, but that
they had talked about divorce and he had a lot of friends in the same
position. he understood how much trouble that could be. he said that he told
“at the beginning of the process but i thought this money was going to be paid
to him eventually, and it was supposed to come back to me in 45 days, so i
thought i’d do him a, a solid and may be that would give, give him the impetus
to move my job up the pole and maybe get done a little sooner.” page 24, june 24,
2025, line 20.

his
attention was then directed to another notation which said “5,373 if the roof
work is finished, then 5,373 to be returned to kevin 45 days”. he said he
thought that is what it read. he was not sure what it meant.

he
identified another agreement in tab 3 for a contract dated january of 2018. he
identified it as the other work he agreed to. he said mr. murray told him he
could rewrite the agreement for the siding and insulation, and that he could
get money back from greenon for this work if he did. he was asked if the
amount on the contract of $11,700 was a ‘real amount” and he said it was. he
said that the contract was written up in march and it was backdated to january. 
he said he was told that it would help him qualify for greenon and it should
probably have been done when the insulation and siding were done in the first
place. it was overlooked and that was how he understood it. he did not pay an
additional $11,700 because he felt that it was covered in the original contract
so there was no additional payment to his knowledge. he said that this
contract was for work that had already been completed on his home, and it was
for the insulation. he did not remember if greenon came when he signed the
original contract. he doubted that he knew anything about greenon in the
summer of 2017.

he
believed that in march of 2018 the greenon program was likely coming to an end and
in order to be sure to qualify for the program, mr. murray wanted to move it back
a few months, and he said that this was what he was going to be submitting on
behalf of mr. fajcz. he was not sure if an amount was discussed, but he
would be applying and hoping to get something back. he said it was mr. murray’s
idea to “create” this third contract. he said that there was no reason for
this contract to exist, apart from mr. murray’s suggestion to go to
greenon for the rebate.

tab
4 is another contract. he said that early winter of 2018 was pretty cold. he
had a cracked window and wanted to do something about it. near the end of the winter,
he was thinking about his roof again, and so he thought he would ask mr. murray
to come and look at the window. he said the next thing you know they were
talking about doing the whole house. he was going to do triple pane windows. 
he said he was not really keen on the idea but the price was good, and he
signed the contract.

he
said he had been thinking about changing the window for a while but did not
want to get into changing windows in the winter. he was hoping to reboot the relationship
with mr. murray, and there was no scheduled date for the roof. he insisted
that the contract was signed in march of 2018. he was told that the contract
was dated january 10, 2018 to get it under the wire for greenon rebates
for the windows as well. he said that the contract was for 10 windows, and he
thought that it involved a door as well but could not find the door on the
contract. he confirmed that it said foam framed vinyl jamb and trim. he did not
believe that there was anything on the back of the contract.

he
identified making a payment of $5,000 for roof repairs on august 8, 2017. he
said he had written a $10,000 cheque earlier than august 11, 2017. he said
that he paid the $5,000 for materials to help get the job started. he also
wrote a cheque for $9,944 on august 11, 2017 for the upgraded amount to buy the
metal roof. he identified another cheque in the amount of $20,000 and the memo
line says siding, foam insulation, stripping, build out, but he identified it
as the loan agreement with mr. murray, and he believed that if he advanced this
loan to mr. murray it would move his job up the queue faster. (there is
nothing in evidence to support this other than mr. fajcz’s word. mr. murray
disputes this and explained why he called it an advance). he expected that it
would be paid back, and he said it says 45 days. he said that he did not
discuss repayment of the loan with mr. murray. he was going through a fair bit
of anxiety at the time, as an older man training to do a new job in the
workplace. he said that he had a discussion with murray who said you have a
contract and these are legally binding documents that meant i was going to get
my work done. (this only makes sense if he was trying to cancel the
contracts), so he did not worry about the money as much as he should have.

he
confirmed that the work that was done was the siding and insulation, soffit and
fascia, and the window capping was done by around christmas time, and then in
the spring the versetta stone was done in 2018. he said for the roof, he never
came to the top of the pile. he said he called and texted mr. murray about
that. he said that mr. murray hired a subcontractor to do the siding and
insulation. (murray says that it was his employee who brought his own guys),
and it seemed to be all that was doing to be done by the end of the year.

he
identified a snap home finance agreement. he said that it was kind of insisted
on by mr. murray to pay for the windows. he said he was kind of willing to pay
cash on most of this stuff, thinking that it was going to speed up the process,
but murray said this loan was interest free and it was his preferred way of
doing the window job, so he agreed to the snap loan. he said that there was an
application process for the loan, and he agreed that mr. murray took him
through the forms. he made a cash downpayment on the windows, made by way of
e-transfer. this money was to be refunded when the loan was approved, but he
had to pursue mr. murray for the refund, which he got in two installments.

he
said that he signed the window contract for $11,700 at the same time that he
signed the contract for the siding, and it was for the same amount. he said
that the snap loan was for the windows, but the loan says, “siding and
insulation”. he said he was told that the siding and insulation contract was
for work already done, and that the contract was simply for purposes of
applying for greenon. when asked if mr. murray told him that the loan was for
siding and insulation, mr. fajcz said, “that’s what the agreement was, the loan
was to pay for window, to pay for the window, the siding and insulation was
already paid for by the other cheques.” june 24, 2025, page 42, line 25. he
signed the snap loan document on march 18, 2018. he said that the two
contracts were done at the same time. he identified that he signed the
acknowledgement and acceptance, and that he must have just skimmed it without
really reading it. he said that he was signing a lot of documents and did not
really understand what he was signing. he thought it was just a finalization
for the loan, and the loan was for something that had not yet been done. he
said that the document seemed to be more about accepting that the siding and
insulation was already done (why would a loan company need to know that), which
had nothing to do with the loan. he did not know when he realized that the
siding agreement had been swapped out for the loan, and the loan was again to
pay for the siding and insulation which was already done. when his attention
was directed to a portion of the form where it talked about being satisfied
with the work, he said that it did not make sense to him at the time. he said
it still does not make sense to him. he was pressured into signing that one. 
he paid a total of $3,575 on the snap loan and then stopped paying, based on a
conversation with a person from the snap loan company.

he
identified an email that he sent to mr. murray in march of 2018, where he was
asking for his refund of $2,700, and that the person who was to install the versetta
stone had not attended yet. he wanted to tell mr. murray that he was satisfied
with the work that had already been done. he identified a letter dated april 12,
2018 in which he terminated the contract with mr. murray and he wanted his
money back. he said that he had previously signed up and paid for his job in
2017 and we were now starting in 2018. page 46, line 22, june 24, 2025.

he
was suffering a lot of anxiety on his job and in waiting for this job, and he
had to cut out what was necessary to continue to function. he felt that this
job was going nowhere, so this had to be what was cut. when asked if he had an
expectation of when work was to start on the roof, he said that he did not. he
felt that mr. murray was going to get to him early in 2018 and he was not
getting any reassurance of that at all.

he
said that he never heard from greenon. he pursued mr. murray by phone calls
and going to the office but never got a start date. after he sent the letter,
he was not prepared to let mr. murray do the work. he had a friend who offered
to negotiate a settlement with mr. murray, but it never materialized. he was not
certain how much out of pocket he was but believed it was somewhere in the
$30,000 range. he agreed that he had seen other jobsites done by mr. murray,
and that he was impressed with those jobs. he testified that he ultimately had
his roof replaced in january of 2020 by someone else.

he
agreed that a permit would be required, and that it would take time to obtain a
permit. he agreed that he changed the contract for the roof, but he believed
that it would not cause any delays because mr. murray had the metal roof on
hand. he said that greenon never had anything to do with his decision to enter
into contracts with mr. murray. he said that he read through all of the
snap loan documents but then said not carefully enough. he believed that all
of the labour for the roof was included in the first contract, so it made sense
that there was no additional charge for labour for the metal roof.

he
agreed that mr. murray told him that the greenon program was cancelled, and
that there was ongoing debates about extensions. he remembered that mr. murray
sent him a press release from sawdac. he agreed that he understood that there
was a “building season”.

when
confronted with the email dated april 17, 2018 regarding a proposal from mr.
murray, he disagreed that the proposal related to discussions of a date for
installation. instead he insisted that he was hoping that using this phrasing
meant that he was hopeful that mr. murray would make a proposal. however, the
wording of the email says that he wanted to consider the proposal before making
a final decision. this does not make sense. he could not remember what the
proposal was, and then said it was not really a proposal.

mr.
murray responded with his own email, saying the weather had not been good, and
he agreed that the weather had delayed the work. he confirmed that he was told
that there were manufacturing delays regarding windows.

he
agreed to sending a letter to mr. murray by purolator courier, cancelling the
contract, and getting his money back. his attention was drawn to a letter that
he sent to mr. murray identifying the snap loan as connected to windows and
asking mr. murray to cancel the snap loan. he said that mr. murray had the
power to cancel the snaploan because he had the power to sign him up for the
snap loan. he never reached out to greenon and never got any communication
from greenon.

the
only documentation regarding a “loan” between himself and mr. murray is the
notation on the contract as being an advance. he agreed that there were no
text messages between himself and murray about the loan and said that he had changed
phones. he agreed that mr. murray never told him that he was not prepared to
do the work.

he
believed that mr. murray had been operating for several years without a licence. 
he agreed that he had become a member of the facebook group, victims of ecolife,
and he thought it was sometime in 2019, but denied that he had heard about
fraud allegations in the media before he made his complaint to police. he
contacted police and did not pursue civil ligation as against mr. murray.

mr.
murray said that he agreed to refund to mr. fajcz, his job fell through the
cracks and he felt bad. he insisted that he told mr. fajcz that the window
manufacturer had changed, but he could not remember how. it would have been by
phone call or in person at his house or in the office. he found out that mr.
fajcz wanted to back out of the contract when he communicated through a third
party and threatened to go to the police and the media in june or july of 2018
and he remembered he was sitting beside the campfire with his family. the
windows could not be installed because it takes weeks to get them, and then
there were problems with euroseal.

mr.
murray said that mr. fajcz only signed up for windows in january, the first
contract was for the roof and then he changed what roof he wanted in the months
after the contract was signed. they were ready to do the roof in the winter
but could not open up the whole roof during winter weather. he qualified for
the greenon rebate because of the insulation work that was done.

the
stone work was finished, and mr. murray said that he had photos of mr. fajcz
with his thumbs held up in front of the home showing the stonework. he said
that the photos show the stone before they finished the work, but that they
continued to work and finished the stone. mr. murray disputed that the windows
contract was backdated. mr. murray said that they were mostly done the
stone work, and had not done the roof or the windows, when fajcz wanted to
cancel and he was floored. at first, mr. murray could not remember if the window
contract was backdated but then said that it was not based on the letter at tab
11. they originally contracted in 2017, but because the work was not done in
2017, he qualified for greenon and then ordered windows.

mr.
murray denied that his preferred method of payment was a snap loan, because it
could take weeks for approval and payment. he preferred cash and cheques
because it was less paperwork and less time. mr. murray insisted that mr.
fajcz knew exactly what he was signing, and that he is a grown, intelligent
man. he did not misrepresent what the loan was for.

he
agreed that mr. fajcz gave him $2,700 in january but believed that it was a
cheque. he said he must have forgotten to refund the money when the snap loan
proceeds were advanced and mr. fajcz reminded him. he agreed that he started
the siding project in 2017 but did not finish it. he changed the contract date
because the job did not finish, in order for mr. fajcz to qualify for greenon
credit for insulation. the roof was to include lifting the roof by three
inches to give it better air flow, so it was not a simple roofing job.

he
disputed that he took a loan from mr. fajcz, but what he did take was an
advance payment for the work done. they did have a conversation about divorce
and how tough it was, but the “advance” was not a loan, it was money toward the
job. he did not call it a deposit or a payment, he called it an “advance”
against future work. he said that there was no interest payable and no repayment
terms. he expected to do the work that the advance was to cover.

mr.
murray said mr. fajcz kept changing the contract. he would meet with jack, and
then the job would change. he liked jack’s ideas, but the contract was
constantly changing. when the discussion about raising the roof arose,
originally the plan was to do it from the inside, which involved removing
plaster. jack suggested doing it from the outside, and he called it scabbing. mr.
fajcz liked jack’s idea of doing it from the outside better. he agreed that he
charged over $9k for the roof but said that it should have been over $30k. he
was doing mr. fajcz a favour, and mr. fajcz was taking stock off his hands.

he
said that he did not backdate the original contracts, but that it took a while
to get the deposits, and the contract changed regarding the roof. he
remembered that the first meeting was in july and josh was with him, because
he was training josh. he said that the first contracts were signed with him,
and the others were rewritten with the office. he agreed that the fourth
contract was for windows and said that it was with euroseal because he did not
know that gentek was selling vinyl jamb windows at the time.

he
said that mr. fajcz did not have enough money to do the windows, which was why
they did the snap loan. he said he only started using snap loans in late
2017. he only had enough to give a deposit for the windows, which was to be
refunded when the snap loan was processed. he did not use snap and home trust
as a means of persuasion. he denied that mr. fajcz did not need the loan to
pay for the windows, and that was not what mr. fajcz said in his home. he said
that mr. fajcz was the only client who said he was upsold, and that it was not
true. he said that the financing was a tool and not a trap.

he
said that he had never been faced with such a monster, referring to greenon and
the cancellation of the program.

murray
said that he got the permit for the siding, but that the metal roof did not need
a permit and neither did the windows. he said when mr. fajcz was trying to
cancel, his company was just trying to schedule the big jobs that they did not
get to in the previous year. he did not take any steps to cancel the snap loan. 
he said that kenny roussel had worked on this job before he moved to the
bradley job and had disappeared with the equipment. he had hired mr. roussel
about a month before, and mr. roussel brought his “own guys”.

he
agreed that offering zero percent financing gave him a means to encourage
clients to sign up, but he said that the client was helping him out so he was
helping the client. he said that he never scheduled the roof job in 2018 for mr.
fajcz because jack quit and then others quit, and he had to refocus on greenon
jobs.

overall,
i found mr. fajcz’s evidence about a loan between himself and mr. murray to not
be reliable. there are no documents which identify the $20,000 payment as a
loan. payment of the money is not in dispute. what is in dispute is what was
the money for. mr. fajcz said it was a loan and mr. murray said it was a
payment toward the work that was to be done. there are no terms of repayment,
other than a notation of 45 days. mr. fajcz said that he never pursued
repayment of this money, which is astounding, given that he did pursue mr.
murray for $2,700 for a deposit that was to be returned to him. by the time he
communicated his protest about the deposit, the loan would have been overdue by
at least six months. given the circumstances, i cannot find that mr. fajcz
advanced a loan to mr. murray as opposed to advancing funds on the contract. 
therefore, this cannot be relied upon by the crown when claiming that mr.
murray’s company was showing signs of insolvency because he asked for a loan
from a customer.

further,
mr. fajcz said that he had made changes to the contract regarding the roof from
shingles to metal and that was based on a conversation with jack. that is
consistent with mr. murray’s evidence. he agreed that the work for the siding,
fascia and soffit, insulation and window capping was all done. that is also
consistent with what mr. murray said. the work that was not done related
to the windows and the roof.

mr.
fajcz said that he was aware that there were construction seasons. he said
that he had his roof replaced by another company, but that roof was not
raised. he did not specify whether or not the replacement roof was shingles or
metal. he had an expectation that mr. murray could have redone his roof in the
winter, but replacing a metal roof is a far different job than replacing a
shingled roof with another shingled roof. as well, there was an expectation
that the roof was going to be raised, which was a change after the original
contract was signed. that change would have necessitated a new permit.

mr.
fajcz said that he entered into the contract for windows in march of 2018, but
the contract was dated for january. mr. murray did not think that he backdated
the contract but could not be certain. in either january or march of 2018, mr.
fajcz would have qualified for the greenon program, as long as the program
requirements were fulfilled. i find that nothing turns on whether or not the
windows contract was backdated.

mr.
fajcz said that he read all of the loan documents before he signed them, but
that he did not read them closely enough. that is not mr. murray’s
responsibility, it is mr. fajcz’s. the loan clearly referenced siding and
insulation. i found mr. fajcz’s evidence to not be reliable on this point.
kandiah vijayakanthan
– august 2017

this
was another problem contract. dr. vijayakanthan was looking to replace the
roof on his home. it was 31 years old and needed to be replaced. he contacted
mr. murray’s company and entered into a contract.

the
contract is dated august 8, 2017. he paid a deposit of $8,150 on the same
date. when the contract was signed, dr. vijayakanthan was told that mr. murray
was working on a house and had another house lined up. their home would be
done next. no timeline was discussed. dr. vijayakanthan’s home was a large
three storey home built on a slope.

he
said that he waited until september and contacted mr. murray again. he claimed
that mr. murray told him he was busy doing a roof, but that he would get to dr. vijayakanthan’s
roof in about a week, but he did not come. this pattern repeated in october,
with promises to come but no one showed up. mr. murray sent an employee by the
name of josh to the house in october. josh explained that he was responsible
for scheduling and that the weather was getting too bad, so the work would not
be done until the spring of 2018. dr. vijayakanthan said that he agreed,
because he did not want his roof opened up in bad weather and risking damage.

in
the spring, when no one came, dr. vijayakanthan said that he called a couple of
times in may and june. he said that when he spoke to mr. murray, mr. murray
was not as cordial as he had been before. he then lost confidence in mr.
murray’s company and started a small claims court action. he was not happy
with the first paralegal, so he hired another one in the fall of 2018. he got
a default judgment on april 4, 2019.

in
cross-exam, he said that he saw the names of some of his neighbours on the
board, so he assumed that mr. murray was doing work for them. he did not
notice the back side of the contract and did not read it. he agreed that mr.
murray never told him that his company was not going to do the work outlined on
the contract. he was not aware of mr. murray’s mother passing away, and he did
not remember knowing anything about the greenon program causing delays.

this
makes sense since he cancelled the contract in june of 2018, which was before
greenon was cancelled.

mr.
murray said that dr. vijayakanthan agreed to put his job off until the next
year. mr. murray then said he explained to dr. vijayakanthan that they were
busy with greenon on jobs, and that the workers who were skilled enough to do
this job were also the ones who were certified to do the greenon work. he said
he became aware that dr. vijayakanthan wanted to cancel his contract after
the protests. this timing is problematic, since dr. vijayakanthan sued in
small claims court and got a default judgment by april 4, 2019, which was
immediately after the protests. in order to get the default judgment, mr.
murray had to have been served no later than about march 1, 2019 or before the
protests.

mr.
murray then said that when they went to do the roof in 2018, he became aware
that dr. vijayakanthan had contacted a lawyer, which then stopped the work. he
said that the house was a large, three-story home and it required specialized
workers with specialized equipment. his company was bound by the occupational health
and safety legislation, and the job had to be done safely. it required a big
team of workers to do it, and the ministry of labour was all over their butts.

he
said that the job would have been done in april or may of 2018, but that he was
still in talks with the lawyer into the summer of 2018. that put a stop to the
work. this aligns with dr. vijayakanthan’s evidence.

mr.
murray explained the board that dr. vijayakanthan referenced. it was the board
upon which all the jobs were scheduled. he had three production managers and
office staff who were responsible for putting jobs on the board. jobs were
managed by his employees. he did not take day to day responsibility for the
scheduling of the jobs on the board, but he said that was what he paid people
to do. the board was simple, but it worked. he said that he could not do all
of the jobs, and if he tried it would be even more of a mess. if a job was going
to be bumped up in the queue, he instructed his staff to contact the clients
whose jobs were going to be affected to get their consent to be bumped. he
acknowledged that it was possible that staff error resulted in some jobs not
being properly tracked or scheduled. this was an important admission. he was not
foisting responsibility for errors, he was accepting it.

he
said that in the summer and early fall of 2017 he was working on a house across
the street from this home. they ran into some problems that delayed that job. he
agreed that he had a conversation with dr. vijayakanthan about starting the job
the following week, but that it was also raining a lot and the job across the
street delayed his schedule. he said that he talked to dr. vijayakanthan, and
he agreed that he did not want his roof done at that time of the year and
agreed to wait until the spring. the delays from the house across the street
extended over september and october of 2017.

mr.
murray believed the work would start in may or june of 2018. he was aware that
dr. vijayakanthan had contacted the office and spoken to either josh or henry
in the spring of 2018. he was not privy to the conversation but then found out
that dr. vijayakanthan had called a lawyer, and the work could not start.

he
said that he could not start the job in may of 2018, because he was still
finishing jobs that had been scheduled before this job, and he cited the
bradley job.

overall,
the evidence of mr. murray and dr. vijayakanthan aligns, and there is nothing
controversial about it.
brenda perry and mary perry for richard perry
– november
10, 2017

this
is another problem contract. brenda perry confirmed that her brother had
passed away in may of 2019. she remembered that mr. murray came to their home
to talk to her brother about getting new windows. she sat in the living room,
while mr. murray and mr. perry sat at the kitchen table. she said she wanted
her brother to do this on his own. she confirmed that the contract was signed
on november 10, 2017. she said that her brother had some physical ailments,
but that he had no trouble with understanding conversations. she said that the
windows were her brother’s idea because the windows were quite old. she was not
really listening to the conversation while mr. murray and mr. perry were
talking about the windows. afterwards, she asked her brother how he was going
to pay for the windows and he said to not worry about it. she said that she
did not find out about the snap loan until later when she had to take her brother
to the bank to make a payment. she confirmed that she lived in mr. perry’s
house between 2017 and 2019. she was present when the ecolife workers took
down the siding and did not replace it. she confirmed that no windows and no
doors were replaced. she took her brother to ecolife offices once, but did not
go into the office, because she just let him do it.

she
ran a renovation business with her husband in her early years and believed that
the weather did not interfere with the work to be done because she had done
work in all kinds of weather. she testified that it had been about 20 years
since she had done any work installing windows, and that she had no experience
doing triple pane windows.

mary
perry said that she was not aware of the arrangements with the snap loan until
her brother died. she was his estate trustee. she called mr. murray in may of
2019 to tell him that her brother had passed away, and that she wanted to
schedule to have the work completed. she said mr. murray told her that he had not
worked in six months, that he had manpower issues and weather issues, but he
had all the materials on hand. she asked him to drop off all the materials but
he said that it was a liability issue. he said that that he would call her in
the next couple of weeks to arrange to install the material. she said that she
was not fully aware that mr. murray had lost his licence when she talked to
him.

mr.
murray said that he did not remember talking to either sister until after his
business was closed in 2019. he dealt directly with richard perry. he
remembered that mr. perry was in the hospital in the fall of 2018, and he
visited with him for about an hour.

he
identified a contract from september of 2017, for 11 windows and one door. he later
executed a snap loan for the windows with mr. perry because mr. perry went to
the office and inquired if he qualified. he had to pay in full for the windows
in order to qualify, so mr. perry wanted to do the loan. mr. murray
facilitated the loan document and mr. perry was approved. mr. murray then said
he would do the siding at no cost.

mr.
murray negotiated with mr. perry to discount the job if mr. perry agreed to do
work on mr. murray’s fleet of trucks. mr. perry was a mechanic and he agreed. when
the workers took the old siding off, they discovered that the concrete wall had
to be specially prepared in order to install the new siding. the worker doing
the work was not qualified to finish this part of the job. right around that
time, henry had quit, and a lot of his workers were bouncing around. he then
got caught up in the greenon cancellation. he thought that the agreement was
signed in january or february, and the work was to be done in either may or
june. he said that he stayed in contact with mr. perry and kept him informed. 
the windows took a long time to come in, but they came in, and mr. murray
remembered seeing them in the warehouse.

the
problem regarding the house being a block construction, meant that a specific 
permit was now required for the strapping over the block construction, which
was not known when the work was arranged. it also required a differently
skilled worker. he also identified that there was rot around the doors which
had to be fixed. he testified that he did ongoing training with his workforce,
and that he was always present.

he
remembered one sister contacted him after his company was closed and he lost
his licence in 2019. he reassured her that once he got his licence back, he
would do the job. when asked if mr. perry ever got his windows, mr. murray
said that mr. perry came to the office in late may or june and they talked
about the siding. he was told about the process and how we do things. he was
told about the crisis of greenon and that only certain guys could do it because
of certification. henry and frank had just quit, and mr. perry then went
into the hospital. then they started the siding and ran into the problem with
the block walls.

when
asked about the lien on the home, he said that it was standard for snap loans
to secure a lien. he did not explain the liens and said that the customer
should ask the bank about that. it was not his responsibility, and he could not
take steps to remove a lien. he said that he thought that brenda perry reached
out to him to talk about completing the job, and he explained that his licence
had been revoked. he kept the discussion short, because he was not supposed to
be talking to customers.

neither
ms. perry is able to give evidence about the formation of the contract and the
terms of the snap loan. ms. brenda perry was present in another room when the
contract was made, and she stayed outside when mr. perry went to ecolife to
apply for the loan. ms. mary perry did not know about the loan until after mr.
perry died. there is nothing in their evidence that is capable of refuting
anything that mr. murray claimed.

ms.
brenda perry was not qualified as an expert, and so her opinion about the
ability to install windows and doors in winter weather is based solely on her
own experience which was dated. mr. murray routinely closed his offices over
about six weeks of the winter months, the windows were only contracted in
november of 2017, and it appears that no deposit was taken until the snap loan
was arranged later. there is unequivocal evidence in the form of mr.
frattini’s evidence that there were problems with the manufacture of windows
which caused delays. i accept mr. murray’s evidence that there were problems
with installing the siding, due to the construction of the home and he needed
to get permits as well as the appropriate worker to do the work. by this time,
this job got caught up in the greenon storm, which caused delays.

i
do not accept that mr. perry had any cognitive vulnerability. ms. brenda perry
said that he had no difficulty in this regard and, in fact, she wanted him to
do this on his own. she expressed no concern about mr. perry’s ability to
contract or his capacity.
christopher meandro
– november 23, 2017

mr.
meandro said that someone from ecolife was canvassing door to door in early
november and he contacted ecolife to arrange for some work. he signed a
contract for seven windows for a total of $4,600. he paid a deposit of $2,300,
for gentek regency double pane windows. he had heard of gentek before, but not
the model of window. he said that mr. murray showed him multiple samples of
windows before he made his choice.

he
said that there could be some writing on the back side of the contract, but he
could not be sure. he thought that the installation of the windows was weather
dependent but could not be sure about that. he wrote a cheque for $2,300 on
november 23, 2017 and said that they talked about installation in the spring of
2018. he acknowledged that in sudbury the city would get a fair bit of snow,
and it was not typically melted until march so he did not expect installation
until then.

he
said that after he began contacting mr. murray in the spring of 2018, mr.
murray brought up the greenon program. he explained that the tradespeople have
to do specialized training and be trained through the government. he said that
the windows had to be installed by october 31, 2018. he was advised that mr.
murray’s “main guy, jack” had to have a tumour removed, and that the weather
was interfering with the schedule. this conversation had to have taken place
after june 19, 2018 due to the cancellation and the deadlines being imposed.

he
asked for his money back and was told by mr. murray in mid-september that he
would install the windows by the end of october. he was shown a picture of the
windows and assumed that his windows were in the pile. he met with mr. murray
in his office, and mr. murray seemed rushed and overwhelmed. mr. murray
offered him $500 and sudbury wolves tickets, but mr. meandro just wanted his
windows installed, so he said no. after many requests for a date or his money
back, mr. meandro said that it just continued.

he
confirmed that his communication with mr. murray was 50 percent phone calls and
50 percent text messages. he was never asked for more money and mr. murray
never said he was not going to finish the work. he could not remember signing anything,
but he did remember getting electronic documents. he could not say whether
the photos that were shown to him were of mr. murray’s warehouse or gentek’s
warehouse. he said that he reached out to gentek, and they confirmed that
there were no windows in their warehouse with his name on them. this is
contrary to the evidence of darren frattini.

he
agreed that there were times when mr. murray reached out to him but he was not
available. he recognized the name euroseal as being a window manufacturer and
could not say whether or not his windows were originally ordered from euroseal
and then the manufacturer was switched. he agreed that he cancelled the
contract on september 7, 2018 and wanted a full refund but later said that
he would have been happy for mr. murray to install his windows after that date.

mr.
murray confirmed much of what mr. meandro said. he identified the contract,
but he said that he contacted mr. meandro in the new year to tell him about
greenon. he said that he spoke mostly to mrs. meandro. he offered the program
to mr. meandro and told him that the glass package would have to change, which
increased the price, but mr. meandro was not asked for more money. he could not
remember if he ordered windows from euroseal or gentek at this time. he agreed
that he sent photos to mr. meandro but said that the photos were not from
his own warehouse. he said that if he had the windows, they were the euroseal
windows, and not the gentek windows. he did not take gentek windows from their
warehouse.

he
received the letter from mr. meandro in 2019, asking for a refund, but did not
respond because his licence was revoked and he was instructed to not speak to
clients. he denied influencing mr. meandro to upgrade or buy more expensive
products. he said that he gave them options and let them choose.

he
said that the greenon program was shortened from 3 years to 90 days, and it
caused chaos. he was doing as many jobs as he could, and he completed many
jobs. this was a job that he did not get to because he could not be in two
places at once. he did not specifically recall offering mr. meandro hockey
tickets or cash but said that he did that often to ensure that he maintained a
good relationship with his clients when they were not happy. he said he would
have offered a rebate, not cash.

he
said that when the greenon program was cancelled, it made him work in a very
rushed manner, and he sometimes made mistakes. he said it felt like the rug
was pulled out from under him, and the goalposts were moved on all of his
contracts. he identified the photographs of the windows as him being
transparent and telling his clients that he has all these jobs to complete,
that they were working with insufficient manpower and doing their best, and
that the photo was not taunting mr. meandro.

he
agreed that mr. frattini said that he exceeded his credit limit with gentek. 
he said that it happened from time to time and that he paid. he was given a
timeline of 6 months to pay at one time. he said that he was always a good
customer to the manufacturers. he said that gentek was having credit issues
themselves, and that they had financial pressure. he said that frattini could
have told him no in june of 2018, when he was approved for credit, but he was not.

he
said that the $79,000 owing to gentek was nothing. and that he was expecting
to see an invoice of over $250,000. he said that if the manufacturer stopped
supplying, he was unable to do his work or pay his bills. he had been stung on
a job for $50,000 and had to sue.

when
asked what he did with the money, he said it was like a credit card. the
deposit money came in and it went into his bank to pay his rent, his truck
payments, his insurance and wsib and his staff. he did not segregate the money
and did not believe that he was required to do that. he said that he had $300,000
to $400,000 in receivables. he got behind and was trying to catch up. he said
that it happened every year, but this year was especially bad because he hardly
sold any jobs after august of 2018. he said he would have ordered the windows
in january of 2018, not in november of 2017, and at that time he expected to be
getting windows in a couple of weeks. he was guessing that the manufacturers
do not have that many orders in the winter and that windows would not have been
installed until march. he said that these windows were likely never originally
ordered from gentek because of the switch of the glass package to a greenon
approved package.

he
confirmed that mr. meandro’s contract started as a gentek window order, but it
was changed when he switched to greenon. he said that the client was aware. 
he said that he sent jack to measure windows in january of 2018. he later
explained that the windows were likely never originally ordered from gentek but
were ordered from euroseal when the contract was changed to a greenon contract.

he
said that he did not respond to some texts in the spring of 2018 because henry
was supposed to talk to him, as the production manager. he confirmed that
sometimes they texted and sometimes they talked on the phone. the phone
conversations were more detailed and lengthier.

he
said around june 15, 2018, he was swamped. he had recently found out about the
delays with euroseal, and not getting answers. he was working with gentek to
switch contracts. greenon was a popular program, and he was working hard to
keep up. at this point, he said that he still did not understand that it was a
problem that was industry‑wide regarding the manufacturers. he switched
to gentek because they gave him firmer delivery dates, and by the end of the
summer he was still waiting for the product to come in. he had maintained
telephone contact with mrs. meandro.

he
said all the windows that he had ordered in 2018 started arriving in
september. between september and october he had 300 windows to install in 6
weeks.

by
the end of november of 2018, mr. murray said he was really ill, with a fever
and he was bedridden. he had a heart attack and was struggling and his health
was deteriorating. josh stopped showing up, and mr. murray had to let him go. 
he said that the weather was really bad starting in the first week of november,
with major storms with freezing rain and ice. he said that he was still trying
to work in november, not knowing why he was sick.

despite
mr. meandro saying that he did not receive anything from greenon, his text
messages say that he did receive communication around the first week of
december of 2018. mr. murray had arranged for extra staff to help with the
application process, and that this documentation may have been in error. he
was trying to supervise but could not ensure that everything was done
correctly. he said that he was catching mistakes and calling greenon to report
that no work was done. the text message mr. murray tells mr. meandro to
do nothing with the communication from greenon. he confirmed that he continued
to send applications after the november 30, 2018 deadline because the program
continued to accept them. he had no control over the program, and he was just
doing his best. he believed that it was a soft deadline because greenon
employees were continuing to call to ask for more information. if the grant applications
were not successful, he could redirect the clients to other grant programs.

based
on this evidence, i find that mr. meandro’s contract at first did not involve
greenon because the program did not exist. it had been announced but was not
effective until december of 2017. i accept that mr. murray talked to mr.
meandro, and the order was switched to a greenon contract. it was during this
period between january and june that mr. murray was having trouble with
suppliers providing product and he switched to gentek as a supplier, and then
greenon was cancelled. based on mr. frattini’s evidence, there was a
significant backlog of orders, due to the surge in orders and shortages of
components. this contract was directly affected by that. mr. meandro then
cancelled the contract in september of 2018, and he refused the offer by mr.
murray to follow through with the contract for further consideration.
craig hannon
– december 10, 2017

this
was a greenon contract. captain hannon was referred to mr. murray through mr.
and mrs. cooley, who were clients of ecolife. he and his wife contracted with
mr. murray for a complete renovation of the exterior of his home. he
testified that mr. murray attended his home on january 15, 2018. mr.
hannon noted that the wrong date had been typed on to the contract, which he
pointed out to mr. murray. the date was scratched out and corrected. (mr. murray
agrees with this. he said he used the cooley contract as a template and forgot
to change the date).

captain
hannon said that one contract was for windows and the other contract was for
the remaining work. when the contract was signed, he paid $20,000 and later
mr. murray asked for an additional $7,400. he said that the discussion started
with windows and later expanded to the full exterior. greenon was raised by
mr. murray. he said he was led to believe that the doors on the home and some
exterior siding and insulation would also qualify for greenon. when asked in cross
what he was told would qualify for greenon, he said windows, maybe doors and
insulation.

he
said that he had a budget to start and the work quoted was within their
budget. when reviewing the contract, he claims to not have known that there
was a cost built in for “unforeseen issues” but said that it was written on the
contract and he should have known.

he
identified the two additional contracts dated march 10, 2018 and march 30, 2018
as rewritten contracts. he said that they were the same as the january 15,
2018 contracts, but that they had to be rewritten because of a legibility
problem. he said that he and his wife signed the rewritten contract dated
march 10, 2018 on a different date. he could not remember what date it was. he
said that he signed both rewritten contracts after march 30, 2018. a review of
the contracts show that one is dated march 10, 2018 and one is dated march 30,
2018, both are signed by captain and mrs. hannon. he said he believed that mr.
murray told him that the contracts had to be rewritten if he remembered
correctly. he said that he signed after march 10, 2018 due to qualifying for
greenon. he could not remember the conversation about resigning and seemed to
remember that mr. murray was not at the office when mr. hannon and his wife
attended to sign the redrafted contracts.

captain
hannon said that he gave the second payment of $7,400 in february by way of a
bank draft because mr. murray wanted more money. when asked what it was for,
he said to purchase materials for the renovation work. he said that there was
no discussion of a start and end date for the work, but he waited until the
spring to start asking about a date. he agreed that his expectation was that
it was going to be an open ended contract until the end of the year because he
did not know how long the job was going to take. he said that the roof was
finished in june of 2018, but nothing else was done. he said that the quality
of the work was good and cleanup was satisfactory.

captain
hannon waited until august of 2018 to start contacting mr. murray about finishing
the work because his faith was starting to wane. several emails were put into
evidence. his email contact continued until mid-december of 2018. then captain
hannon said that he did not contact mr. murray until march 29, 2019, because
his work could not have been done during the winter. he contacted gentek about
the windows behind mr. murray’s back because he wanted to store the windows at
his home. he confirmed that mr. murray took him to gentek and showed him the
windows. this is reflected in an email from december 13, 2018, and it
references a “productive meeting” with mr. murray.

captain
hannon got an email regarding his qualifying for greenon, but was not provided
with an incentive number, which he required in order to access the website. in
december of 2018, he said mr. murray told him not to do anything with the
greenon application because they had to supply photos. he communicated with mr.
murray to renegotiate the contract, with a definitive start and end date with
penalties built in if the work did not get done on time. he identified a
letter that he sent to mr. murray on december 10, 2018. the letter does not
request a start and finish date with penalties. it asks for a refund if mr.
murray wanted to retain their business. he later said that he never wanted out
of the contract, he just wanted the work done. when confronted with the clear
wording of the letter, captain hannon insisted that he was not cancelling the
contract, he just wanted a start and end date or a refund. when confronted
with his email from august of 2018 threatening legal action, as being an
attempt to cancel the contract, mr. hannon said that that was an interpretation
but that was not what he meant. these were serious external inconsistencies.

when
asked if he felt that mr. murray was doing his best to work in the situation, captain
hannon said that it was a fair comment. he confirmed that when greenon was
cancelled, mr. murray was looking into other government rebate programs. he
did not remember a conversation with mr. murray about the manufacturer of his
windows going out of business.

captain
hannon agreed that he went to gentek to see the windows but said that he was not
worried about the windows being ordered, he was worried that the windows were not
paid for, which does not make sense. he agreed that mr. murray never said that
he was not going to do the work. he said that he saw a gentek sales order for
his windows in july of 2018.

captain
hannon agreed that he was told in the summer of 2018 that mr. murray had to
send employees for training, which caused some delays. he agreed that he was
told in the early summer of 2018 that greenon was cancelled, and that
potentially mr. murray said that this event would cause delays for
customers. he claimed to have never seen the terms and conditions on the back
of any of the contracts that he signed and was given.

mr.
murray said that he first met with mrs. hannon and that captain hannon was
away. she caught the error on the date and changed it and initialed it.

he
said he went back on a different day for the siding contract. he also said
that he returned because gentek was offering a way to show pictures of the
house with their model of windows installed.

he
applied for greenon approval about a week after his mom died, maybe in the
first week of january of 2019.

he
remembered dealing mostly with mrs. hannon. captain hannon disputes this.

mr.
murray said that he was not aware at first that his office staff was asking
clients to come to the office and sign rewritten contracts. he became aware
that staff were doing this in november of 2018 when he was assisting with
submitting the applications for greenon. he later said that he became aware
late in the summer. this is an inconsistency, but it is really not material.

mr.
murray was able to start the roof work in july, because he had a crew available
to do that work. it did not require any of his workers who were greenon
certified, and he recalled the names of the workers he sent. he said that this
customer wanted the work for windows and siding to be done all at the same
time, but one installer had cancer and the other installer could not do windows
but could do siding. another installer had been hurt and could not work and
the windows were not in yet. he said that “he” agreed to wait and was “fine”
with that.

captain
hannon was told that his job would be installed in 2019, and that there was a
different grant program.

mr.
murray was challenged about not telling his customers that his licence had been
revoked. he said that he told gagne, hannons, cooleys, lachance and stratos. he
said that anyone who called was told. myhers knew from the media. when
challenged about not telling customers that he had formed another business, he
said he told them a business but that they did not yet have the name.

he
agreed that he asked for more than the 25 percent deposit for most jobs, and he
agreed and said that it depended on the job. he said that he typically took
between 25 to 50 percent.

he
said that most of the greenon jobs were sold in january of 2018. he absolutely
expected to be able to do this work. he said a few were grandfathered in from
the previous year. this is consistent with the evidence of some of the complainants.

when
asked why he was selling greenon windows as early as january of 2018, he said he
was approved for windows before he was approved for insulation, and he was
approved by that date. he checked with the greenon program. while this
evidence is hearsay, it can go in to explain why mr. murray acted in the way
that he did. he said that backdating contracts into december had nothing to do
with greenon, it was to get his clients a better deal. he said he had trained
and certified his workers. he could sell but he could not install until he got
the final approval, which included the insulation.

when
it was suggested to him that he put his clients off, mr. murray said that he
did not put them off. he met with them, spoke to them, called them, and told
them what was going on.

he
said it was originally a euroseal contract, switched over to gentek. there
were delays with receiving the windows from gentek, and he had committed to
install the windows in july of 2019 and then lost his licence. he ordered from
euroseal, switched to gentek and then had to pay for both. he believed it took
six months for the windows to come in and it was likely november when they did.

he
said they paid 50 percent of the work not the entire contract. he agreed that it
was a reasonable expectation that the work would be done in 2018. he said that
the contract was for more like $35,000. in fact, the letter from captain hannon
on december 10, 2018 says that that total cost was $34,000. mr. murray
said around this time his communication was less because he was ill, he was
dealing with the greenon fallout and his mother was in the hospital and ill. he
said that he never tried to mislead anybody, he was giving the information that
he knew at the time.

he
said that he told jody hannon that he had to switch manufacturers and it was
only after the roof was installed that he was communicating mostly with captain
hannon. he remembered stopping where she worked at the bank of montreal to
talk to her.

overall,
there is little difference between the evidence of mr. murray and captain hannon. 
they differ in that captain hannon claims that the contract was backdated and
not corrected. mr. murray says jody hannon caught it as an error and changed
it. the contracts show a change to the dates of the contracts and initials,
which were identified by mr. murray as those of jody hannon. mr. murray says
that most of his initial contact was with jody hannon at first and then captain
hannon after the roof was done. captain hannon says that most of the
communication was with him and not his wife. captain hannon said that he was not
told of a change in window manufacturer. mr. murray says that he told jody
hannon.

captain
hannon says that he believed that mr. murray told him that the contract had to
be rewritten, if he remembered correctly, but that mr. murray was not in the
office when he and his wife attended to sign again. mr. murray says that he
was not aware of the rewritten contracts until later in the year, and he was not
clear on whether it was august or november but did say it was when he was
helping the clerical staff in submitting applications.

captain
hannon said that he signed the rewritten contracts after march of 2018 to
qualify for the greenon program. mr. murray says that he sold the contract on
the basis of greenon, which would make the timing january of 2018.

where
the evidence differs, i have difficulty accepting captain hannon’s evidence. 
his evidence about his efforts to not cancel the contract but to negotiate new
terms are not borne out in his letter to mr. murray. the letter is clear on
this point. as well, if he was simply concerned about the windows being paid
for rather than the windows having been ordered, it leaves the question as to
why he would make inquiries of gentek, ask the secretary from ecolife to show
him the work order and then go to gentek to see his windows.

mr.murray remembers details of his conversations with mrs. hannon, and captain
hannon was sometimes away during these interactions. i accept that mr. murray
met with mrs. hannon and the first contract was signed. i accept that mr.
murray had conversations with mrs. hannon, about which captain hannon may have
no knowledge, including the change to manufacturer for the windows. i accept
that the windows were not received until november of 2018 and, therefore, could
not be installed before then. i accept that mr. murray was ill, that his
mother was dying in hospital and that he was having trouble keeping installers
in his employ, which started during the summer months of 2018 and worsened as
the year progressed. i accept that the windows could not be installed until
into the spring of 2019, at which time, mr. murray’s licence was revoked and he
was unable to do the work.

the
first document that bears signatures is a siding and roofing quotation, and it
has a zero total on it. it appears on the face of it to be a quote and not a
contract. it may have been turned into a contract later, but the document put
into evidence has no pricing on it at all. the rewritten contracts do not have
any amounts owing or cost noted on them. i accept that these contracts were
simply rewritten because there were problems with the original contracts being
legible. because captain hannon and mr. murray both agree that the total
amount was $34,000 or $35,000, i infer that there is another contract for work
that has not been put into evidence.
natalie cooley
– december 10, 2017

mrs.
cooley identified the two contracts entered into evidence were between her
husband brian cooley and mr. murray. her name does not appear on the first
contract and her signature does not appear on either. both contracts are dated
december 10, 2017. she said that the first contract was between mr. murray and
mr. cooley and not her.

she
said that she did not see an attachment or back page with terms and conditions,
but she did not sign the contracts.

she
testified that they had gotten two other quotes before deciding to contract
with ecolife. mr. murray’s prices were a little cheaper, and they included
soffit and fascia at no charge, which the other’s did not. she said that she
did not have a discussion with mr. murray about the name of a manufacturer,
that she remembered. she did know that the windows were triple pane windows. 
she did not remember if there was a conversation about the manufacturer, and
that the manufacturer had to be approved for the greenon rebate program.

when
asked in-chief if she remembered having a conversation with mr. murray that the
choice of window might affect the manufacturing lead time, which would also
affect the installation date she could not remember. the name euroseal did not
mean anything to her, but she said that as far as she knew, the manufacturer
was from sudbury. she did not know how she came to know that the manufacturer
was gentek, but she found that out “later”. she did not remember having any
conversation with mr. murray about changing manufacturers. she confirmed that
her home needed the work done for the roof and the windows.

she
said that the first meeting with mr. murray was not in december of 2017 when
the contract was dated, and that it was in january of 2018. she identified
that the second contract was signed on january 24, 2018. she said that she
knew at the time that mr. murray had a lot of work already lined up, and
that she had no concerns about his ability to complete the job. she testified
that they gave a $10,400 deposit for the windows on january 24, 2018 by bank
draft. she remembered that mr. murray came back to her home on january 25,
2018 and they discussed siding on the garage as well as the house. she did not
remember if mr. murray went over every single line of the contract, and she did
not really look at the contract. she said he had a portable printer with him,
and that she was guessing that mr. murray added in handwriting some items, and
that he was supposed to give them “a proper contract”, but that they never got
one.

she
said that mr. murray suggested backdating the contracts because the window
company he was dealing with had a special deal on the windows in december, and
that they would get a better deal if the contract was dated december of 2017. 
she did not have a concern about that because they just wanted to get their
windows at a better price.

she
identified the rewritten contracts as being dated, but that she went into mr. murray’s
office to sign them in november. she spoke to mariella. the contents of the
conversation with mariella was not objected to, but it contains hearsay. it is
only admissible to explain what mrs. cooley did. she signed a blank form at
the office and expressed her surprise because she understood that the greenon
program ended in october. the completed documents were received by mrs. cooley
by fax on november 7, 2018. she later agreed that she signed the blank
document, and it was her request since she had to get back to work not because
someone wanted her to sign a blank document.

she
gave two deposits and expected that the deposits were to pay for materials.

she
said that after she signed the contract which included a patio door that mr. murray
had in his showroom, he contacted her to install it. she said she told him no,
that they wanted to wait and have everything done at once. she said that he
wanted to do the siding first, and she refused. she later said that she wanted
the job to start “…from the beginning right to the end complete, not getting seeming
done in …february and then the siding in june and then the windows in the fall,
no.” page 181, line 26, june 18, 2025.

she
confirmed that she was aware that the permit had been issued by contacting mr.
murray’s office and speaking to liette. she said that she picked it up in 2019
but was not asked from where and when in 2019 she got it. she confirmed that
she specifically asked mr. murray to get a building permit because she had a
nosy neighbour and she wanted to ensure that everything was in compliance,
because she thought a permit was required for either the siding or the windows. 
she admitted that she filed a complaint to the better business bureau about a
homeowner whose job was finished, and hers was signed before theirs. she felt
that it was unfair. mr. murray confirmed that he and mr. cooley spoke
about this, and that the homeowner with the finished job had ordered stock
windows. that homeowner was not part of greenon.

she
confirmed that she was aware from the news and from mr. murray that when doug
ford was elected the premier of ontario, he announced that the greenon program
was cancelled. she was aware that the first deadline was august 31, which was
extended to november 30, 2018.

she
said that she pursued a start date from mr. murray, but he kept promising in
two weeks or two days, but no one ever showed up. she confirmed that mr.
murray told her that his mother had died. they also discussed the weather
being a factor. he also talked about manpower and greenon being cause for the
delay. she could not remember if she found out that his licence was revoked
before or after he was charged, but she became aware of it. she was aware that
mr. murray could not contact clients.

she
confirmed that mr. murray never asked her for more money, and that he never
told her that he was not going to do the work. she confirmed that she went to
mr. murray’s office but did not think that it was in 2019. she could not be
certain. she confirmed that right into the spring of 2019, mr. murray was
trying to find a way to complete the contract.

mr.
murray said that he met with the cooley’s in the third week of january of
2018. he suggested backdating the contract so that he could get 2017 prices. 
he was either not approved or just approved to sell windows with greenon
rebates. he agreed that the second contract had handwritten changes because
mrs. cooley suggested adding siding work for the garage, to match the house. she
also wanted to add insulation and other work. he said that mrs. cooley brought
up greenon. mr. murray said that she was present when the contract was
discussed, but that she left before it was finalized. mr. cooley paid the
deposit.

he
said he could start right away, but the work was going to depend on installers,
and that he had the patio door in stock. it was delayed to may or june at the
cooley’s request because they wanted all the work to be done at once. he said
that jack was sent to measure the windows again in march, likely because
greenon wanted to ensure that there were no errors. he confirmed that the
windows were ordered from euroseal, and he expected to get them within 12 weeks
at the latest. they were never received from euroseal. they were later
received from gentek. mr. murray said that he was in a panic because euroseal
was not delivering windows and not giving him answers. he changed suppliers to
gentek.

mr.
murray remembered a conversation with brian cooley, in which there was an
argument between mr. murray and mr. cooley about installation, when mr. cooley
again refused to have the patio door and siding installed in the summer of
2018. mr. murray said that he was going to have to bump their job and mr.
cooley was upset about that. he told mr. cooley about the change in
manufacturers. he said that windows came in in three or four packages in
either september or october.

mr.
murray explained that he could have done all the other work on the contract,
other than the windows, but mr. cooley refused. when he refused, the schedule
had to be redone, in order to bump the cooley job and accommodate someone
else’s job. this permitted him to do the work for mrs. crossman.

he
had initially trained five installers and certified them for the greenon jobs. he
lost four during the summer months and trained four more in august of 2018. he
just kept losing installers and had to do his best with the workers that he
had. he said he kept his workers and customers apprised of what was
happening. the customers believed they were excuses but they were reasons.

on
december 10, 2018 she emailed mr. murray and asked for a refund. she said that
she was hounding mr. murray and nothing was getting done. he kept telling her
a couple of weeks. terry was supposed to come and he did not. in an email to
mr. murray in december she asked for the terms and conditions of the contract. 
she said that she never met with mr. murray again.

she
got an email from the greenon program which she deleted. she then got another
email and contacted detective williams. at his suggestion, she contacted
greenon and told them that nothing had been done.

she
knew her brother-in-law, captain hannon, had contracted with ecolife and did not
know when his roof was done.

she
remembered having a telephone conversation with jason neal from sawdac in
september of 2018.

she
agreed that mr. murray told her that his installers had to be certified, and
that he was having problems with his employees. she later confirmed that mr. murray
spoke to mr. cooley for the second contract, which was done while she was at
work on january 25. she then said that she was at the house when the contract
was signed on january 24.

mr.
murray was asked if he was still willing to do the work. he said he had been
attacked by them, name calling, they called the better business bureau and they
called police on him but he was still willing do the job. he was told he could
not speak to anyone after his licence was pulled. he said he went to the mayor
and to the building department and he was talking to detective williams
throughout this whole process. he said he was frustrated because it did not
matter what he said or did or who he talked to, his clients believed that he
was lying to them.

he
later agreed that he had backdated contracts for a group of several named
clients in order to protect them for the greenon rebates, and one of the names
was cooley. this is a relatively minor inconsistency.

he
insisted that he met with brian cooley in his office at the same time he met
with captain hannon in his office. natalie cooley was not there, and brian
cooley was not called as a witness.

mr.
murray said that the application process for greenon was a multistep process. 
the customer had to provide payment in full, proof of payment, and the
contractor had to provide documentation such as before and after photos and to
ensure that the installers were certified. if the application was started but
the work was not done, the application would not be processed. he said that
there was nothing wrong with starting the application, even if the work was
ultimately not done. the final step was the client certifying that the work
had been done and the final payment had been made. that step was not completed
for mrs. cooley’s job, despite ecolife starting the application process.

overall,
there is little difference between the evidence of mrs. cooley and that of mr.
murray. mr. murray provided explanation for his actions. mrs. cooley agreed
that mr. murray offered to start her job and to do all but the windows, and it
was her choice to turn him down. i accept that the windows were not received
by ecolife before mrs. cooley cancelled her job.
catherine gagne
– march 21, 2018

this
was a greenon contract. mrs. gagne and her husband had gotten a couple of
quotes and decided to go with ecolife for work on their home. they wanted to
replace 9 windows. mr. murray took a 50 percent deposit for the windows, which
was $4,746. the contract is dated march 27, 2018 and so is the deposit. she
could not be certain of the manufacturer that they chose but only knew the type
of windows. she thought that it might have been gentek. she was aware that
there were jobs scheduled before hers but expected the work to be done in june. 
she wanted the work to be done quickly because of the grant program and because
of the weather.

mrs.
gagne said she let things go for a while and then she started calling and
texting. mr. murray sometimes responded and sometimes he did not. on december
1, 2018 she got an email from greenon and she was surprised because the work
had not been done. the email was congratulating her on getting the work done. 
she did not submit anything to greenon because she said mr. murray said that it
was his responsibility to submit the documentation. she said that she was
still willing to give him another $5,000 just to get the job done.

mrs.
gagne believed that the windows were never ordered because she went to the
gentek warehouse several times. this is contrary to what mr. frattini said. 
she said that mr. murray invited her to go to the warehouse to see if the
windows were in, and she and mr. murray could not find them. he said that the
windows were not in yet. she said that she talked to darren at gentek and she
did not find her windows. if this is the case, it would have been after
ecolife was no longer operating, but her windows may have been at ecolife.

she
agreed that there was a back page to the contract, which she gave to counsel. 
she understood that the terms included a term that the contract was not subject
to cancellation. she believed that the windows were hers, even if she did not pay
the whole contract because she had paid for the deposit. therefore in her
mind, the windows were hers.

she
agreed that she was in regular contact with mr. murray in several ways. she
said he was not keeping her up to date, but rather that she was hounding him. she
said that mr. murray told her that he had lost some employees, that some were installers
and that others had to be sent to toronto to be retrained. when asked about
the winter months, she said he told her he still did not have the windows to
put on the house. she agreed that the summer was a wet summer. she said that
the timeline for completion of the job was a verbal discussion for completion
in june.

she
was aware that mr. murray’s mother passed away. she agreed that she contacted
sawdac, the government, her mpp at the suggestion of mr. murray.

she
went to a home around the corner from her home with mr. murray, to see a
jobsite at the suggestion of mr. murray. she saw some workers installing
windows. she did not know who the workers were, but mr. murray told her it was
an ecolife jobsite.

mr.
murray testified that he went to ms. gagne’s house to sign the contract, which
was amended later because she wanted changes. he said he probably told her
that the work would be done by july or august, because he expected the wait
time would be the standard 8 to 12 weeks. the contract was with euroseal,
because the package that was ordered was only available through them. gentek
did not offer the same jambs, casing and frames as indicated on the contract.

he
said he did not know how long the windows were going to take, and then he had
to switch manufacturers when he could not get answers. he said he had no idea
how bad it was at the time. he had done this work for 30 years and had a 20
year relationship with euroseal. when he changed manufacturers, her job went
back in the queue. he said that he was able to do all the foam and insulation
jobs because there were no problems getting those supplies. the windows were
the problem. he said if his licence was not suspended, he would have finished
this job. he agreed that he went to gentek three or four times with ms. gagne
to see if her windows were in. after his licence was suspended mr. murray said
he notified several clients that his wife was trying to form maple ridge, and
he thought ms. gagne may have been told.

he
said that he was completing other jobs, while waiting for the windows to come
in, and then to get to these window jobs.

he
said that he gave a potential completion date of june of 2018 for this job, and
others because he did not know how big the surge was and that there was going
to be a problem with suppliers. he was asked if he gave a completion date of
the first week of june and said no. he admitted that there was no completion
date on the contract, and that he would never give a firm completion date. he
knew that the manufacturers were busy, but he did not know how bad it was. he
said he gave an approximate date, because he had to wait for the product and
then schedule the job.

he
confirmed that in a text message he asked for a copy of her contract. he said
that it might have been lost in all the confusion, but it was found, and he
confirmed that the windows had been ordered about 10 days after the contract
was signed, to permit the client time to cancel. the windows were originally
ordered from euroseal and then switched to gentek in june. he confirmed that
he offered a discount to her because of the delays.

he
said the manufacturing delays and the effect of the greenon cancellation was
all over the news. it caused a huge public outcry. that was why he referred
ms. gagne to sawdac and to her mpp.

when
confronted with the text messages from december of 2018, mr. murray said he was
very ill and responding from his bed. he was not “blowing her off”.

he
admitted to conversing with ms. gagne after his licence was suspended. he said
the rules were not clear about what he could and could not do, and he may have
had a brief conversation early on during the suspension. he disagreed that he
had earlier said that he had communicated with clients after he had a conversation
with mr. adair from the city of sudbury. this is clearly contrary to his earlier
evidence.

he
insisted that the windows had been ordered from gentek, and that maybe they
were still in the queue or being held back by gentek, and that it was out of his
control.

regarding
submitting the greenon application, mr. murray said that he had brought on many
members of his family to process applications, hoping that the installations
would happen in time for the client to get rebates. there were mistakes made
and when he realized that an application had been submitted that was not appropriate,
he told the client to not respond.

overall,
there is little discrepancy between mr. murray’s and ms. gagne’s evidence. i
accept that ms. gagne’s windows had to be reordered from gentek, because
euroseal was not giving delivery dates and not delivering product. the windows
were delayed for manufacture, given mr. frattini’s evidence. mr. murray
confirmed that he attended gentek with ms. gagne several times to see if her
windows were in yet. the winter interrupted that, and then in the spring of
2019 mr. murray said the weather delayed work, and then his licence was
suspended. i accept all of that.
robin cameron
– april 2018

this
was a greenon contract. mrs. cameron said that she and her husband were
looking to replace some windows on their home, so they stopped into mr.
murray’s company’s storefront and left their name and number. mr. murray met
with them in their home.

despite
the contract having a date in april of 2018, mrs. cameron said that she
remembered that their meeting was after the first week of july, when they were
on vacation. the contract shows april 9 and april 14, 2018, and she was not
sure why the dates were different, but that mr. murray said that the contract
had to be backdated in order to qualify for greenon. she said that she did not
know anything about greenon until mr. murray told her about it.

she
said he told her that april was the cutoff, and the paperwork had to be in by
july 9, 2018. she said she and her husband paid a deposit of $1,000 by cheque
toward the over $7,000 contract. the cheque was cashed on july 10, 2018. she
said that when they had not heard anything by august, she and her husband
started contacting mr. murray. he responded and told her how busy he
was. she said he had to sit her down and tell her how busy he was. the last
contact she had with mr. murray was that the windows were not in yet, and they
had until late fall to install them. she was familiar with the storefront as
she passed it every day on her way to work. she thought maybe the storefront
had been there for a year, but she was not sure. she said that she pursued a
civil claim, and that she reached out to the police to lay a charge.

she
and her husband sold the house and moved in december of 2018. she remembered
that her husband received a phone call on december 10, 2018 when asked if she
got a phone call from mr. murray’s son. she did not remember a back page or
another page to the contract. she did not ask for the windows to be given to
her because she no longer owned the home. she said that mr. murray may have
mentioned problems with the government program, but she could not remember.

mr.
murray said that the date on the contract was probably a stupid mistake, and he
agreed that they met in july of 2018. when asked if there was a purpose to
backdating the contract, he said that there had been an extension of the greenon
program, and he was afraid that the client would not qualify, so he backdated. 
this was based on past experience with grant programs. he said that ms.
cameron was definitely aware of the backdating. he was not concerned about
completing the job before the end of october, which was the cutoff date for the
extension, because he could always go to another grant program being offered by
the city of sudbury. he was pushing for december of 2018 or january 2019.

he
said that ms. cameron stopped by his office a couple of times. her office was
about 300 feet away. she last stopped by in 2019. he agreed that there was a
conversation with her in october of 2018, where she was inquiring about her
windows. she told him that they were selling the house. he said no one had
mentioned it to him before that, and that he still did not have the product. 
he instructed his son to call a number of customers in december of 2018 to try
to schedule installations. he discovered that the house was sold and now he
was now stuck with custom windows for which he had only been paid a deposit.

mr.
murray identified the regency window notation on the contract as being a gentek
product. he said he would have just recently had the conversation with darren
frattini from gentek, who promised windows in less than12 weeks, so he would
have told ms. cameron that her windows would likely have been installed in
september. he identified ms. cameron’s contract as 6 regency windows and knew
because there was no jamb extensions.

he
agreed that he sold this job after the cancellation was announced but said that
there was a grace period. he believed that he was protecting his clients by
backdating the contract, and that he had other grant programs that could be
accessed if they missed out on this program. he said that there was a lot of
confusion about the cancellation of the program, and that there had been an
extension.

he
denied that he continued selling greenon jobs because he was greedy and knew
that he could not possibly fulfill these contracts. he said that if he was
greedy he could have continued to sell greenon jobs into august and september
and he did not. he said that the government announced that no one would lose
money on the program, and he believed them.

he
said at the time of the first announcement, doug ford was not yet sworn in and,
therefore, was not in power. he said that the information was unclear and
there was a lot of uncertainty. he said he backdated the contract to april
because he did not know what the government was going to do, and he was trying
to protect his client. at the time, he believed that selling the contract on
that date was allowed and that he was doing nothing wrong. he also said that the
clients were aware, and that if they were not accepted for this program, he
would try another grant program.

there
is nothing controversial about either ms. cameron’s or mr. murray’s evidence.
judy strato
– april 2, 2018

this
was a greenon contract. judy strato met with mr. murray on april 2, 2018 and got
a quote to replace 10 windows. she then got other quotes for the same windows. 
she knew about the greenon program, and david murray told her his company was
greenon certified. she did not remember if there was a back page to the quote
which she said she considered to be a contract. she believed that they met
about six weeks later, and she committed to ecolife. mr. murray came to her
house, they agreed, and mr. murray asked for a 50 percent deposit for the
windows. they went right to the bank and got a bank draft for $9,400. mr.
murray followed her to the bank. it was about a five minute drive from her
home. she said from the beginning mr. murray said that the windows would be
installed in late july or early august and it would take about five days. she
said that she wanted it done asap.

when
nothing happened in july she said she started calling mr. murray in august. mr.
murray was reassuring her that he would get there, and she kept on getting the
same message as time went on. he said that he had difficulty getting the
windows and that there was a backlog in getting the windows from the
manufacturer. she said by november winter was coming, and he told her that her
job would be delayed until spring. she said that many times he would not
answer when she called, so she called from another phone and he answered. she
could not remember if mr. murray ever gave her an alternate phone number to
reach him.

she
said he became quite frustrated with her in november and again in the spring. 
mr. murray told her that his company had to close because of the lack of rent
payments, his grandmother died, he was under a lot of stress, and the excuses
started. she was not being rude, and he was tired of her phone calls, and he
was tired of her asking for an installation date. around that time, she heard
of the gathering of people downtown who were also included in some of ecolife’s
problems.

she
inquired with a lawyer regarding suing but did not actually sue. she said that
she was never asked to fill out paperwork for greenon.

she
thought the existing windows in her house were single pane pella windows, and
she agreed that the windows she was ordering were superior. she said he came
with a brochure for regency windows. she believed that the brochure had the
name gentek on it. she was aware that the greenon rebate required triple pane
windows. she did not recognize the name euroseal but believed that her windows
were going to be coming from toronto.

she
agreed that the ecolife contract was the highest of the three quotes that she
received before contrating with ecolife. she was aware of work that ecolife
did for a neighbour, but not at the time she gave mr. murray the bank draft. she
agreed that the contract had no start or completion dated noted on it and no
estimate of the time needed to complete the job. she said mr. murray did not
coerce or threaten her to hand over the bank draft.

she
could not say when she became aware of the cancellation of the greenon program but
that it might have been in 2019. she did not read anything in the papers about
the greenon delays in the media. when talking about the timeline, she said that
the other two quotes she got stated four to six weeks for delivery for their
windows, and that was where she got the information about delivery date.

she
denied that mr. murray said that there were delays with the manufacturer but
then said that mr. murray told her that he was overloaded and that they had
back orders. this is also contrary to what she had said moments before. she
described mr. murray as being frustrated with her phone calls. he never swore
or threatened her. he got angry. when asked if his frustration was explained
by mr. murray, she said he had deaths in the family, the ecolife building being
closed, he had family issues, a new baby, so there were many frustrations
expressed.

she
agreed that the weather in the winter of 2018 and spring of 2019 was wet and
snowy. she said november was a very cold and snowy month.

she
said that he stopped answering her calls in the spring of 2019, but he answered
when she called from a different number. she was aware that the licence was
suspended. she agreed that mr. murray and a lady came to her house in the
spring of 2019. she believed that the woman’s name was pamala and believed
that she said she was his wife. she said that “she” said that “she” was not
allowed to speak to anyone involved in the situation, and that his wife would
do the talking. she said mr. murray never told her his wife was taking over
the contract. they didn’t ask for any more money. this was the first and last
time she saw this woman and she never heard from mr. murray afterward.

she
remembered calling gentek and speaking to darren. she agreed that darren told
her that they had too many windows to be able to confirm her order for her. she
agreed that mr. murray never said that he was not going to do the work.

mr.
murray believed that he may have started with euroseal for this contract, and
that the notation of regency windows might have been a mistake. he remembered
dealing mostly with mrs. strato’s husband, stan, and bringing a cross-section
to the house for stan. he remembered that mr. strato sat at the table the
entire time, and that mrs. strato would get up and walk around so she was not
present for some of the conversation. he later said that he could tell it was
a euroseal contract and that after the quote was given, he had a conversation
about the jamb. the name should have been changed, and it was an error.

he
remembered double checking the measurement for each window on the day that they
decided to proceed. he said he might have told them that the windows would be
installed in early fall, but that he did not know how long it would take to get
the windows. he said historically, every year as the manufacturers got busy
moving from spring into the summer, the lead time for production would get
longer.

prior
to this he had rarely sold gentek windows and thought that this job may have
started as a euroseal job and then switched to gentek, which caused delays.

he
said that there was a delay with windows arriving, large orders were coming in
every two weeks, at the time of the contract the election had not happened yet,
there were many jobs ahead of hers and there were scheduling problems. he said
that they just did not get to her job.

mr.
murray testified that he talked to ms. strato and explained the reason for the
delays. he called her a nice lady. he said that his company was caught up in
this. he always believed that he could do the work. in that late fall it
became clear that the further extension would not be granted. he was still
waiting for the product to come in and he was still willing to do the job. he
said he could not have foreseen that the winter would be the worst winter in 30
years.

he
consulted with a lawyer after his licence was suspended. he said he felt like
he was being sucked into a twister with this stupid program. he said he was
going to start over again, when he could not get his licence reinstated. he
had done it once before, and he intended to do it again. his wife met with the
stratos and the myhers. he wanted to give his son a company to take over. he
had worked in the industry for 30 years.

he
did not think that he spoke to ms. strato after his licence was suspended
because he had spoken to some clients, and what he said was being reported on
facebook. he did not want to get into any more trouble.

there
is nothing controversial about the evidence of ms. strato and mr. murray. mr.
murray said that this was a job that they just could not get to, and i accept
that. the delivery of windows may have been delayed by a switch of
manufacturers, but that is not clear. mrs. strato was clearly aware of the
delays in receiving product, because she said she was told that. she later
said that she was not told. it was her impression that mr. murray was
doing whatever he could to do this work.
eric lachance
– april 2, 2018

this
contract was a greenon contract. mr. lachance knew mr. murray, as their sons went
to school together. they had gone to some of the same parties and knew each
other. mr. lachance wanted some windows to be replaced and had heard about
greenon. he had also heard that doug ford was going to cancel the program if
he was elected. he was going away in the summer and wanted to have the job
lined up, so he contacted mr. murray in may of 2018. he said that mr. murray
came to his home on may 23, 2018 and they entered into a contract and he
gave mr. murray a certified cheque. he said that the contract was backdated to
april 2, 2018. he was aware that the contract was being backdated, and he said
he was told that mr. murray had another window order for the same date and this
order was tied with that one. he thought that the name regency was the brand
name for the windows but was not sure. he did not remember mr. murray
mentioning directly the brand of windows. he also wanted doors to be replaced
as well as a side lite.

he
said he was gone for july and august. a neighbour had a key. he was expecting
installation by september. when asked if mr. murray explained the greenon
program, he said that mr, murray talked about the need to provide hydro and gas
bill, and once the windows were installed, photos had to be sent to greenon to
show that the job was done.

after
making multiple attempts to transfer funds electronically, he borrowed $3,000
from his wife’s small business and wrote a cheque for $9,000, which paid the
invoice in full. the invoice is marked paid in full. in the text messages,
mr. murray expressed his gratitude that the invoice had been paid in full, and
that it took pressure off of him.

he
said that his wife had to make some decisions about the door, and then he went
away on vacation. when he came back he started making inquiries about the
windows. the text messages establish that the final decision about the door
was made on may 23, 2018.

on
june 20, 2018 mr. lachance asked if his windows would be installed before the
end of august, because of the cancellation of the greenon program. the next
text is dated september 9, 2018, in which mr. lachance is again asking when his
windows will be installed.

when
he asked, mr. murray told him that there were some delays from greenon, he
said that there was a lot of demand on windows, and that they were still waiting
for the windows to come in into october of 2018. they had an earlier winter
which made it difficult to do installation. then as time went on the weather
warmed up again, and he contacted mr. murray and asked what is going on. he saw
some issues with mr. murray’s licence which needed clarification, and then he
had to bring in his hydro and gas bill.

he
confirmed that on may 23, 2018 mr. murray did not explain any issues with
delays in ordering windows. this makes sense, since mr. murray did not have
the conversation with mr. frattini until later.

he
asked again in late september, and mr. murray sent to mr. lachance a copy of a
post from windowwise and sawdac explaining about the delays and cancellation of
greenon. when mr. lachance pressed mr. murray for a date for installation
before october 31, 2018, which was the last date for installation, mr. murray
said technically they had until november because there were no auditors.

on
november 21, 2018, mr. murray asked mr. lachance to bring in the rebate
paperwork. mr. lachance identified that as the request by mr. murray to bring
in his hydro and gas bill. he continued to talk to mr. murray in the late winter
and early spring of 2019. he then started communicating with mr. murray over
facebook because his cell phone was not working. he started seeing in the
news that mr. murray’s licence was pulled and then when he went to the office,
he saw a bailiff’s notice.

mr.
lachance got a letter from greenon by email congratulating him on having his
work done and asking for confirmation. he did not respond to the email.

he
agreed that mr. murray told him that he was not making any money on the
contract. he was aware that there was a large increase in volume of window orders
because of the greenon program, and he said that there was a lot in the media
about that. he said that when he ordered mr. murray did not tell him that
there would be delays because of the volume of orders, but they had that
conversation afterward.

he
confirmed that he did not follow the steps for the greenon approval, because he
did not have any proof that the windows had been installed.

he
knew that mr. murray’s licence had been suspended in april of 2019, but mr. lachance
believed that he could contact mr. murray. in his contact with mr. murray, on
may 25, 2019, he was telling mr. murray that unless mr. murray delivered the
windows and the entry door to him by may 29, 2018 he would be contacting the
police. he said that he knew mr. murray could not communicate with him. he
then contacted the police.

he
said that he was not aware that the manufacturer of his contract had switched,
and he confirmed that mr. murray was consistent in stating he was going to do
the work.

he
had a vague recollection that mr. murray’s wife was going to set up a company
with his wife. mr. murray did not ask him for more money. he confirmed that
mr. murray told him that he was trying to get his licence reinstated.

mr.
murray said that he was shocked that mr. lachance and others were being
contacted into december and january after greenon was cancelled. he said that
this shows that there were no firm deadlines. his son and others in the office
were filing the paperwork for all the greenon contracts. his son was 14 years
old. he saw nothing wrong with putting his son in charge of filing this
paperwork.

mr.
murray said his first contact was with mrs. lachance, who wanted work done on her
office and he said he was too busy. he agreed that the contract with mr.
lachance was backdated, but doug ford was not elected yet. he did it so that
the customer wouldn’t lose out on the grants. mr. murray confirmed that there
were no changes made to the contract after it was signed. the contract says
regency triple pane windows. he said they may have discussed brands and mr.
lachance had to talk to his wife, who was not present during their conversation. 
he expected to be able to install the windows by september, but the windows
were not in by that point. mr. murray said that he was going to piggy back
this order on another order, which would then make the product cheaper.

he
believed that the windows came in either october or november. when the windows
come in the job gets put into a queue system and the jobs got scheduled. he
said that the job would have been scheduled for the winter or early spring. he
talked to mr. lachance to tell him. the winter was bad and then he lost his
licence and was charged.

he
said he was installing in the fall, but he just could not get to mr. lachance’s
job. the only thing he could have done differently to get the job done, was to
forego the grants and just put any of his workers on the job. but the
certification handcuffed him.

there
is not anything other than what has already been noted that is controversial
about either mr. lachance’s evidence or mr. murray’s evidence. this was a
greenon contract that ecolife simply could not reach.
anne lamega
– april 6, 2018

this
was a greenon contract. ms. lamega said that she had seen signs from ecolife
on some homes in the neighbourhood and she wanted to have some work done. she
contacted them. she said when mr. murray came to her home, he talked about the
greenon grant coming to an end. the total for the invoice was $14,000. she
planned to give him a deposit of $2,000 and then she got a loan for $10,000
through snap financial. she had not heard of snap financial before talking to
mr. murray.

the
contract is dated april 2, 2018 and she said she met with him that same day. 
she said that mr. murray had the paperwork for snap and he helped fill it in. she
said mr. murray told her that he was too busy in the summer and that her job
was scheduled to be done in the fall. she said she gave him a cheque for $2,000
the day that she signed the contract. he called her the next day and said he
needed another $2,000, so she gave him the second cheque. she identified her
cheques but said that she did not certify the cheques. her first payment on
the snap loan was on june 21, 2018, and she made monthly payments afterwards. 
she stopped paying to snap in may of 2019 when someone from snap contacted
her. her payments were $277.78 per month.

she
called mr. murray and the office many times. sometimes she spoke to mr. murray,
sometimes she spoke to office staff. she said that at some point in november
someone from ecolife’s office came to her house to measure her square footage. she
said that she never got her windows and they were never installed. she said
that the contract had a back page, with terms and conditions. she said that
mr. murray did not point out the terms and conditions.

she
was contacted by someone from greenon on january 10, 2019. she believed that mr.
murray was supposed to send in all the paperwork for greenon, and that she did not
do it. ms. lamega said that she did not try to cancel the contract. she did
ask that the windows be given to her.

when
asked about the reasons mr. murray gave her for not completing the contract,
she said that he said he did not have enough staff, the weather was too cold, his
truck broke down so could not do anything, he was sick, he said his mother died
but she did not know if she believed that because everything he told her turned
out to be lie.

she
said that she did not know his licence was suspended in april of 2019 and did not
know that he was not supposed to talk to clients. she said that the snap loan
was to be a zero percent loan.

mr.
murray recalled measuring the windows in april of 2018. he believed that his
mother-in-law was with him at the time. they talked about the contract, and he
went back to his office to write it up. he believed that ms. lamega went into
the office to sign and brought the deposit. the windows were supposed to be
installed in august or september. he said that when he offered a zero percent
interest rate, which he did for seniors, the amount that would reflect the
interest would be reduced from the loan proceeds paid to him. on a $10,000
loan, ecolife would receive maybe $8,000 or $8,200.

at
the time he entered into the contract, mr. murray said that he was not aware of
the manufacturer delays and shortages of glass. he said that the contract was
not completed because the windows did not come in, in time. he said windows
started coming in, in batches in late september, october and november. some
came in, in january. he kept losing installers and had to train new ones. the
weather caused problems and winter came early. he said his workers were doing
their best, they were always installing when they had the product. the
cancellation of the greenon program caused delays. they just did not get to
this job, but they were doing their best. they did install a lot of jobs. he
did not know that the greenon rebates program was going to be cancelled when he
signed the contract, but he was leery because “the government is always pulling
the rug” out from under contractors and consumers and that risks happen.

he
said that all clients got the terms and conditions pages, because his forms
were printed with them. if he used his printer, the printer printed out the
page with terms and conditions. he followed that practice with every witness
on every contract.

he
said that when he signed up as a dealer with snap financial, they did their due
diligence. he said that anna lamega asked him about financing when she did not
have enough to cover the entire contract. he said he did not refund ms.
lamega’s money and did not finish the work. he intended to do the work, and he
was in contact with p.c. williams for over a year regarding the unfinished
work. he identified the contract as a regency contract, which meant gentek.

when
asked in cross-examination if he backdated this contract from june, he said
that he knew he went to quote the job in april but did not think he backdated
the contract. he said that ms. lamega knew his mother-in-law and spoke to her rather
than to him. he said that when the contract was signed he did not know about the
shortages. if she called and he did not call back, he would have directed his
staff to call her. he instructed his staff to give a consistent message to all
of his clients to keep them informed.

when
asked if he told her in august that everything was fine, he said he told his clients
the reality, that it was chaos and the cancellation of the program was causing
a collapse. it was confusion and the whole industry was pushing for extension
of the program. he said that as late as october he still did not have the
windows, they were installing another 50 jobs, and they were hopeful that there
would be an extension so that they could finish all of the jobs. he said that
he helped ms. lamega get a snap loan for the remaining balance of half down and
the rest of the contract. snap would not just finance the down payment, they
would only give a loan for the balance. he said that the contract clearly
shows to him that he quoted the job as a euroseal job, but that when ms. lamega
came with another $2,000 for the downpayment, he told her that he had to change
manufacturers to gentek and he told her that and wrote it on the contract.

he
could not remember when her windows came in because he had over 300 windows
come in over time.

there
is nothing controversial in the evidence between mrs. lamega and mr. murray. 
this was a job that ecolife just could not get to.
tony nash
– april 4, 2018

mr.
nash said that one of his neighbours was having work done and talking about the
greenon program. mr. murray showed up around 5 p.m. and they started talking. 
 he said that they were talking in the backyard about the rebate program, and
how it might end soon. mr. murray measured the windows and gave him a good
price. they had replaced windows before but not the big picture window or four
basement windows. the receipt of the greenon grant was the main factor in
agreeing. he said that he met with mr. murray on june 6, 2018, despite the
contract being dated april 4, 2018. he believed that it was june because it
was late in the summer. he had to give a deposit and could only do it in $3,000
increments, so they gave him a cheque. the cheque for $5,500 is dated may 6,
2018 and there is an etransfer of $3,000 dated june 6, 2018. the total cost on
the contract dated april 4, 2018 is $11,700. it shows deposits paid of $5,500,
with a balance owing of $6,200. there is a notation on the side which notes
deposits of $850 and a balance owing of $3,200. these notations are not dated,
and the amounts owing and calculations appear to be struck through.

he
decided to give a bigger deposit, because he would get a better price. he said
that they discussed start and finish dates, and the contract shows estimated
start and finish dates of august/september 2018. mr. nash clearly met with mr.
murray before june, given the date of the cheque.

he
said that he wanted the job done before winter and it was a main factor. mr. nash
said that he waited about three months and then started making inquiries. he
got a bunch of excuses, like illnesses and problems in the family. he said he
confronted mr. murray in his office and said that he did not believe that the
windows had actually been ordered. he was given a document that showed that
the windows had been ordered on april 5, 2018 but he did not believe it because
he only contracted with mr. murray in june. the first three letters of his
name are noted on the contract under “customer po#”.

he
said that he went right to the police station after this because mr. murray did
not want him to leave the office with the document and then he pushed mr.
nash. mr. nash ended up talking to the fraud department. he said he did not
know why the cheque was dated may, and that there was an error on the cheque
that the bank caught, and his wife had to initial. there are initials next to
the figures on the cheque dated may 5, 2018, and the cheque is certified. 
clearly, when the change was made the cheque was certified. the date on the
cheque is not changed. clearly mr. nash is wrong about the date that he met
with mr. murray, and he cannot be correct about meeting with mr. murray in
june.

he
kept trying to communicate with mr. murray and asked for the windows. mr. murray’s
company did some window installations on his neighbours, and he expected that
his house would be next. that did not happen and he was upset.

he
eventually was contacted by someone from gentek, and he purchased his windows
from gentek at about $2,500. they first said that they would give them to him
“at cost” for about $8,000 or $8,200, but he refused. he said that he
“cancelled” with greenon by telling them that the work had not been done.

he
agreed that there had been no changes to the contract from the time that he had
signed it. first he said that it was backdated to ensure that he would get the
greenon grant, and then he said that he was never told about the date not being
accurate. he then said that mr. murray told him that the contract was being
backdated so that he would qualify for greenon. his evidence was inconsistent
on this point.

he
then said that he did not even know if he was going to get the greenon grants. 
he said that if his windows had been installed, he would have paid the
difference, even if he did not get the grant. he then said that he did not
know why the contract was backdated, and then that he thought the contract was
backdated by about a month from the date that his wife gave him the cheque. he
then said that he thought greenon was only for insulation and not windows. he
said mr. murray did not offer another grant program.

he
insisted that the sales order was dated two months before he even knew about
ecolife, and the order form cannot be correct. he acknowledged that mr. murray
told him about employee problems. he agreed that he knew that workers had to
be trained. he believed that there was some kind of labour dispute.

he
said that he knew he was signing a “false” document at the time that he signed
the contract, specifically regarding the date, and then he said that mr. murray
told him that it was just to get the rebate and it was nothing to worry about. 
he agreed that mr. murray never told him that he was not going to perform
he contract.

mr.
nash’s evidence was replete with internal inconsistencies regarding the date of
the contract and when he knew about the greenon program. he reported mr.
murray to police about an assault and talked to the fraud department. i find
that mr. nash’s evidence is imprecise and completely unreliable.

mr.
murray said that the contract was signed on june 6, 2018, and that mr. nash
knew that it was backdated to make it easier to get the greenon grant. in any
event, he was eligible at the time of the forming of the contract. mr. murray
remembered standing in mr. nash’s driveway and talking because they discussed
that one of mr. murray’s workers quit ecolife to work at mr. nash’s company.

he
said that he took mr. nash to gentek to show him the windows that had been
ordered. mr. murray said that mr. nash was one of the last ones to jump on
board with the program. when the windows did not come in as expected and he
lost out on the greenon grant, he offered other grant programs and installation
in 2019. he said that they talked about the delays related to greenon jobs
before mr. nash signed the contract. he said that mr. nash tried to cancel a
couple of times, the last time was in 2019.

mr.
murray insisted that mr. nash’s contract started out at as a euroseal contract
and noted that only euroseal was offering the referenced vinyl casing that was
noted. the contract had to be switched from euroseal to gentek. mr. murray
did not know why the order form is dated april of 2018 when he did not sell the
windows until june of 2018, but he said that the order form proves he was
ordering product.

mr.
murray said that mr. frattini’s evidence supports that the windows were coming
in up to six months after they were ordered. mr. nash believed that they had
lied about whether or not the windows had been ordered. mr. murray believed
that he was the reason that sawdac put out a press release, because there was
an incident between mr. nash’s neighbour and mr. nash. he said that mr. nash
was upset that his windows were not done right after his neighbours, but the
neighbour signed up in 2017.

mr.
murray talked about his order system and the board that showed scheduling. 
some colours identified particular installers. mr. murray said that his staff
made mistakes and things slipped through the cracks. ultimately, he is the
owner and he takes full responsibility. he said they were overwhelmed and made
mistakes. mr. murray said that he was not aware of all of the problems
ordering and receiving product until mid-june. he said that annually, there
was a slowdown when ordering product late in the spring and summer, which was not
a surprise but that delays were longer and longer and euroseal was not giving
him firm delivery dates. mr. murray said he switched suppliers around the end
of june, when darren was able to give him more firm deadlines for receipt.

he
said he believed that mr. nash’s windows came in, in late october. mr. nash
assumed that his windows would be installed right after his neighbours, and that
was never promised to him.

he
said that mr. nash was wrong about the greenon application. the installer
never signed off on the job, the photos were not submitted and there was
nothing to tell greenon that the job was complete. he said that there were
many steps to the process and it was not finished.

contrary
to what mr. nash claimed, mr. murray said he never told mr. nash to falsify the
greenon claim as being completed. he said that mr. nash was lying about that. 
he said that mr. nash had come to his office screaming at his staff about his
greenon rebate, so his claim that he did not care about the rebate was false.

regarding
mr. nash’s claim that mr. murray pushed him, mr. murray said that it was
false. mr. nash came to his office, was screaming and swearing in front of mr. murray’s
14 year old son, so mr. murray escorted him out. mr. nash walked into him and
not the other way around. he showed the police the video footage from the
cameras inside the business to prove that he never pushed mr. nash. mr. murray
was not charged with assaulting mr. nash.

mr.
murray said he did not look at the document that was given to mr. nash. he
only handed to mr. nash the copy that the secretary gave to him. he did not
know why things were blacked out, and he could not answer why the date was
april 5, 2018. when i look at the order form, the date could either be april
5, 2018 or may 4, 2018. it is simply digits without demarcating which is month
and which is day. at the bottom, there is a notation that says, “branch
delivery date 10/02/2018”. this would suggest an estimated delivery date of at
least 5 months for the windows to be received at gentek’s branch. i find that
mr. murray is incorrect about the contract being signed in june, based on the
order form. there is nothing in the order form that appears to have been
altered. it verifies that mr. nash’s order was submitted to gentek probably in
may of 2018.

mr.
murray admitted that his communication with mr. nash in december of 2018 was
limited. he said that he was ill and his mother was in the hospital. the
weather was horrible and that continued into the new year. he then laid off
staff because they could not work.

i
find that this is a job that ecolife just could not get to, given the delivery
of windows, the poor weather in november and the overwhelm of ecolife workers.
paul and mary anne facendi
– april 25, 2018

this
is a greenon contract. mr. facendi is mr. murray’s wife’ uncle. he saw work
that mr. murray did on mr. facendi’s brother’s home and wanted to have some
work done on his own.

he
remembered that he and mr. murray discussed some work to be done at his
daughter’s wedding party, and mr. murray came over the next day. the party was
in july and not in april. the contract that he signed was dated april 25,
2018, but the snap loan document is dated july 12, 2018 for a loan for $18,000.
 he believed that mr. murray came over on july 8 or july 9, 2018. he gave a
deposit of $1,500. the work that was to be done was to extend eaves, roofing, siding
and enershield insulation among other work.

he
claimed that he did not notice that the date at the top of the contract was april 25,
2018 and not the july date until later that night. he then said that mr.
murray told him to backdate the contract in order to qualify for the greenon
rebate, which was going to end in july. this was an inconsistency. he then
said that he thought that maybe backdating the contract would put his job ahead
of others, but he was not sure about that. the $1,500 deposit was paid by
cheque. the cheque is dated april 28, 2018 and it was certified on july 9,
2018. mr. facendi said that he dated the cheque the same day that it was
processed on, which is clearly incorrect. there is a snap loan equal payment
agreement which references siding, and it is dated july 10, 2018. it bears mr.
facendi’s initials and signature. he then said that the contract was backdated
to allow for an application to greenon, and that he knew that. based on all of
this evidence, mr. facendi clearly knew that the contract was backdated when it
was written. mr. murray agreed that the contract was backdated.

mr.
facendi knew about the greenon grants but thought that they were just for
windows.

he
said that the only money that was paid by him was for the extra stone work. 
from this evidence, i infer that the “deposit” of $1,500 was for work not
reflected on the contract that mr. facendi wanted to have done.

regarding
the snap loan, mr. facendi said that he agreed to finance the job. he could not
pull money from the bank so he had to finance it, and mr. murray suggested the
snap loan. he did not apply for the snap loan on the same date as he signed
the contract. he said that mr. murray processed the application. he said that
mr. murray filled out the application. he said that he signed the acknowledgement
page, which meant that the work was completed, in order for mr. murray to get
paid so he could start work at his house. he first said that no one explained
this document to him, and then he said that mr. murray explained it to him. the
loan application clearly bears mr. facendi’s initials and signature. i find
that he knowingly signed the loan application.

there
are three contracts, each reflecting the same work. mr. facendi signed each
contract. mr. murray signed each contract. mr. facendi said that the first
one was just for a quote. he did not know about the others but believed that
another was for ordering materials and one was for the grant. he did say that
he attended ecolife offices to sign them.

he
said that no work was done on the house. not the roof, not the siding, not the
insulation. he started contacting mr. murray in august of 2018 to inquire
about the work. he said that mr. murray told him that he had manpower issues
and that the weather was a problem. mr. facendi volunteered that the winter
was brutal.

mr.
facendi said that the only communication that he received from greenon was a
letter and a cheque. he took that money and got the work done himself.

at
one point mr. facendi said that he was aware that mr. murray said that he did not
want to do the work, and that he would refund the money.

mr.
facendi talked about a patio door that he had installed by mr. murray’s
company. he said that it was installed around thanksgiving, but it was the
wrong door. he insisted that the door was never fixed to open the correct way.

he
remembered that there was a back page to the contract, entitled terms and
conditions.

mr.
facendi agreed that the handwriting on the first contract in tab 1 of exhibit
37 appears to be different than the second contract. he said that he saw mr.
murray fill out the first contract, then he said he believed that david murray
filled it out as far as he knew but did not see it.

he
agreed that no contract had a start and finish date, and that he was told that
mr. murray was very busy, but he thought that two months was a reasonable
delay.

he
agreed that until mr. murray said on april 15, 2019 that he was not willing to
do the work, that he was saying that the weather was causing the delay. he
said that mr. murray never mentioned the death of his mother. mr. facendi
said that the weather was brutal and that there was snow until march of 2019. 
he was not aware that mr. murray lost his licence in april, 2019.

mr.facendi agreed that his contract did not require mr. murray to obtain permits,
but the work required a permit. he said that there was a verbal agreement that
mr. murray would get the permit, and he agreed that he himself ultimately went
and got a permit in the summer of 2019.

mrs.
mary anne facendi testified that she took over communications with mr. murray
due to health issues with her husband, in march of 2019. she referenced that
there was still a lot of snow, called the snow crazy and said that it seems
like it is never going to stop. mr. murray communicated with her that he had
laid off his “guys”, and that it was an e.i. issue. on april 15, 2019, mr.
murray sent a text to mrs. facendi that she should stop at the office to talk
about installation. on the same day, after further exchange, mr. murray said
that he did not want to do the work and he would refund the money.

mr.
murray said that his signature appears on the first contract in tab 1, but that
it was a stamp. he claimed that he did not sign the document.

mr.
murray said that he was giving mr. facendi a “steal of a deal”, and that there
was no start or finish date. he would get to the job when he got to it. if it
did not get into greenon, he would find another grant program. mr. facendi
said that mr. murray’s quote was much lower than the verbal quotes he had
gotten. mr. murray said that he lost an important worker for about four
months. he was arrested and had to live with his parents out of town. the
worker did not return until january. the rest of the crew was put on greenon
window jobs. he had another guy who was greenon certified to do the job, but
he quit. he said that he talked to mr. facendi about the problems with workers
and with the weather.

he
said that he was not comfortable doing this job after april of 2019, because he
was on the phone with mary anne and he could hear mr. facendi in the background
making threats. he lost his licence in april of 2019, and it was not clear at
first what he could and could not do. he met with brendan adair, and mr. adair
explained to him that he could not speak to clients, could not schedule jobs
and could not even do administrative work.

mr.
murray said that he found out in january that his mother-in-law had processed
the green on application for mr. facendi by using false photographs. he had
nothing to do with that. he later said that he fired her for this. he sent
the text inquiring about the greenon cheque to see what they would say. the
crown then asked mr. murray if he was suggesting that mr. facendi was
participating in the fraud on greenon and knew that his sister-in-law submitted
a false application, mr. murray said that he did not know if mr. facendi
participated.

mr.
facendi said that his sister-in-law only worked for mr. murray for a short
period of time.

mr.
murray said that he asked if mr. facendi had the permit for the patio door and
later found out after he installed the patio door that no permit had been
issued. i infer from this evidence that mr. murray did not believe that he was
responsible for the building permits.

overall,
i find that mr. facendi’s evidence was internally inconsistent regarding the
date of the contract and his knowledge of it. it was also internally
inconsistent regarding the terms of the snap loan. i am also concerned about
mr. facendi keeping the greenon grant money when he testified that he knew he
was not entitled to it. i cannot accept his evidence where it conflicts with
mr. murray’s.
cheryl crossman
– april 17, 2018

this
was a greenon contract. ms. crossman contacted ecolife to have work done on
her home. she said she met with him on july 10, 2018. she wanted some siding,
stone and maybe a garage done. she identified tab 1 as the second contract and
tab 2 as the first contract. she said that mr. murray told her that the
contract had to be backdated because of the greenon rebate. she wanted to
change a few windows and a door because she had previously replaced some but
not the ones on the lower floor. she said that mr. murray had some windows and
a door in his shop that he could use. she said that the rebate was important
to her. mr. murray was at her house until 11 p.m. and said that it was the
last day to file for greenon, and she was afraid of missing out. she said that
she remembered that the date was july 10, 2018 because it was just before her
son’s birthday, and it was a sore spot for her so it was easy to remember. the
first contract only has one window that may qualify for the greenon program, as
well as enerair insulation that may make it a greenon contract. mr. murray
agreed that he backdated the april contract. then later, when confronted about
backdating greenon contracts he said he did not backdate this contract. this
was a relatively minor inconsistency.

she
said that she wanted the work that was outlined on the contract, and that they
spent hours looking at before and after photos of other jobs to decide what they
wanted. the contract specified that ecolife would get the required permits. 
the total price was $43,900. she made a $3,000 downpayment by etransfer that
same night. she said that it was not supposed to start until around the end of
september. the next day she drove into the driveway, and workers were already
at her home and all the siding was already pulled off. she said there were
workers at her house daily, including mr. murray’s son who was about 15 or 16
at the time.

mrs.
crossman was impressed with the speed at which her work was done, so they
entered into a second contract. she wanted a garage or a mudroom.

the
second contract is dated july 24, 2018. there is nothing in this contract that
is greenon eligible.

for
the first contract she said that the workers removed all the siding, removed
the stucco, they started to insulate, and put the strapping on the house to do
the siding and the versetta stone was started. she said the siding was
started, and there were two vent holes left open to her attic that she asked
mr. murray to cover because she was afraid that animals might get in. she said
the soffit and fascia was done. one window was replaced, but she believed
there were three windows to be done.

the
first contract references one window, triple pane. the second contract
references two stock windows.

she
said that she decided not to do the garage, but to do the mudroom instead. she
said that she went away during the month of july and returned in august. some
work was done while she was gone, but the workers left while she was away and
never returned. she said that mr. murray told her he was waiting on supplies
and he appeared to be trying to complete the work. she made payments in
addition to the $3,000 initial deposit. she paid $21,000, $15,000 and $17,250 for
a total of $56,250 in payments for both contracts which totaled $84,107. she
understood that the money she paid was to pay for materials.

she
said that mr. murray asked her if she could pay half up front on july 10, 2018,
so she went and got a draft for $21,000. because of the dates, i infer that
this conversation was about the contract dated april 17, 2018, for which the
work was substantially started but not finished. accordingly, this would not
have been half up front but rather a payment for work in progress. she
testified that no other work was done, other than the initial work on the first
contract.

she
said that she met with mr. murray and his wife at the office on notre dame in
april of 2019, and he said that when he got his licence back he would finish
the job. she said she hoped that he would get his licence back or put it under
his wife’s name, and that her job would be finished. she remembered that she
saw a notice posted on his door when she later attended and the office was
locked. she took a picture of it and sent it to him. she said he was told by
his lawyer that he could not talk to his clients and then the communication was
less and less.

she
was first texting him, and his phone number was not “listing”, so she started
messaging him on facebook in june of 2019. mr. murray responded with a phone
number. there is a long gap to october of 2019, where ms. crossman tried to
communicate with mr. murray. he responded in october of 2019, saying that the
superior court had said that what doug ford did was illegal but it did not
reinstate the rebate program. that was the last time she heard from mr.
murray.

mrs.
crossman said that she never looked at the back of the contract and she did not
remember anything being on the back of the contract. she agreed that there was
no start and finish date noted on the contracts. the first contract shows half
payment upfront, then a quarter payment and then the final quarter payment. mrs.
crossman could not say whether or not there were problems in taking off the
stucco from the home, because she was away when it was done. she did recall
getting a text from mr. murray telling her that the stucco was in bad shape and
it had to come off.

she
agreed that she qualified for greenon and got the rebate cheque. she went to
the office and gave the staff the information to apply. she said that the
plywood was installed over the completed insulation.

she
did not remember the weather being bad in late 2018 or early 2019. she agreed
that siding was prone to cracking in the cold and versetta stone required
warmer weather to be installed. she remembered a meeting at mr. murray’s
office where he was looking to work under his wife’s company, and that he was
fighting to get his licence back. he said he had trouble with employees stealing
from him, the weather was bad and his mother died. she was very empathetic
because she was a nurse.

she
agreed that mr. murray never asked her for more money.

she
agreed that she talked to jason vachon about a change to the stairs, and to have
them go against the house instead of having them go straight down. she called
him later in the year and he sounded annoyed about why she would be asking him
about david murray.

mr.
murray said that he thought the first contract was signed the same day as the
date. he then said that it was backdated to qualify for greenon. he said that
he had a cancellation, which created a week and-a-half opening, so he sent a
crew. he connected the opening to the hannon and cooley jobs, and the fact
that they opted out. he said it was a greenon job, staff notified him that
there was an opening, and he had a greenon certified worker to do it.

he
said that when they negotiated the second contract, they had to go back and
forth about how the stairs were going to be done. he told her that he was
really busy and not able to start until 2019. he said that he met with them in
his boardroom in 2019 before his wife’s licence was granted, and he should not
have talked to them. he said that they were very reasonable people.

he
agreed that he messaged her on facebook about the superior court ruling, because
he felt that what doug ford did was illegal and wrong. he agreed that he spoke
with her and others after he was directed to not.

he
then said that regarding greenon he was only doing what he was directed to do. there
was no firm termination date, and that applications that were taken late were
still being processed and accepted by greenon. as an example, mrs. crossman
got her money.

when
pressed with why the workers started and stopped the job, mr. murray said that
he ordered product, and then jason vachon was to finish the work but he quit, he
did extra work he was not supposed to be doing, removing stucco and rot, when
he removed the siding he found another problem, the project was delayed and
then the workers finally completed two side walls, and the back, they just had
to finish the veranda. jason vachon was certified on greenon, and then he quit
around the time he was going to send another guy to do board and batten, and had
to wait for it to come in.

he
said that they did not do the second contract, because she only wanted rob
seguin, and he was not available. mrs. crossman said that she did not know a
worker by the name of rob, but she was not asked about wanting a particular
worker to do her job.

when
pressed about jason quitting in 2018 was not her problem, mr. murray said it
was not her problem but it was his reality. he said he had to become surgical
when jason vachon left to ensure that as much of the greenon work was
completed. he said if jason had not left, the contract would have been
finished.

he
said in the fall they were likely waiting for the permits to come back, meaning
be approved. he admitted that he promised to send work crews, but that the
weather turned bad. he said that everything was good with this customer until
his licence was pulled. he said that he could not build the deck in the winter
because the helical piles could not be done in cold weather. he was not as
responsive to her in the winter because he was ill, his mother had died and his
office was closed. he had to wait until he could access his equipment which
was frozen to the ground. then his licence was pulled in april. he thought
that the issue would be resolved quickly, and it was not.

overall,
this was a greenon job that became a problem. the stucco on the home caused a
delay in completion. when a key worker quit, mr. murray was already in crisis
mode, and that event caused even more pressure. even if ms. crossman had not
insisted on rob seguin doing the work, there were other pressures in ensuring
that the appropriate workers would be able to do the work. mr. murray did the
work that was required to complete the work for greenon and then had to put
this job on the back burner while he concentrated on the greenon work. his
workers could not get back to finish this job due to greenon pressures, bad
weather, his office shutting down for the seasonal shutdown, and then the bad
winter and spring weather. the final event was the loss of mr. murray’s licence,
which then meant that he could not do any further work.
daniel rainville
– april 15, 2018

mr.
rainville called mr. murray to come and meet with him, and he believed that it
was in may of 2018. initially he only wanted two doors replaced, which
corresponds with the first contract. he did not want the doors to be installed
between may 26 and june 16, 2018 because he would be away. he said that they
had a conversation in which the installation would be done by late august. he
said that the first contract was a rough draft and he knew that it was going to
be rewritten.

the
four contracts are all dated april 15, 2018. the first two contracts are
duplicates of each other. the next is for the doors and the total was $3,234.51
plus tax and it is found at tabs 3 of exhibit 21. the installation date says
30 to 45 days weather and scheduled dates. tab 4 is the measurements for all
of the windows referenced in tab 1.

after
mr. murray wrote up the first contract, he started saying what other work would
make the house look like a showpiece. he would remove and replace the shingles
and the siding on the garage, and he was going to replace 9 windows, which was
later changed to 8. he was also going to replace a slab door on the garage. 
he was going to install eavestrough with soffit and fascia around the home and
to install insulation around the home. he was also going to install versetta
stone on the front of the house. some of the siding was to be board and
batten. there were supposed to be special corners installed. mr. rainville
suggested making a bedroom window smaller, and mr. murray was to finish the
inside by putting up plywood and mr. rainville would do the rest.

mr.
rainville said that he had the same conversation with mr. murray about the
completion of the second contract, that it would be done by the end of august.

he
testified that tab 2 is just a neater version of tab 1. tab 4 is the window
measurements.

mr.
rainville said that originally he had no intentions of doing anything but
doors, but the deal was so good, he ended up agreeing to it.

mr.
rainville testified that the contract was backdated to qualify for the greenon
program. he had not heard of it until mr. murray suggested it. mr. murray
told him that the rebate program was for windows and insulation. when asked if
he expected to be paying almost $30,000 for the work, he said that he was
first interested in doors, but the deal for the other work was so good, he and
his wife decided that they could afford to have the work done, so they went for
it

he
produced the original contract for the doors, and he confirmed that there was a
back page. he had not seen it before. on the day that the contract was signed
mr. rainville paid mr. murray $5,000 in cash. he said that mr. murray did
not ask for it. he acknowledged that the agreement required him to pay an
additional $15,000 for mr. murray to start the work. he then gave mr.
murray a $15,000 bank draft two days later.

about
two weeks later, some workers showed up to do work on the shingles for the
garage and it was finished in one day. he said that they did an awesome job,
but that they left a trailer filled with old shingles in the driveway for about
a week. sometime later, a crew showed up to strip the siding off the house and
garage. around october, a worker showed up to do some styrofoam around the
house. mr. rainville produced photos of the house before the siding was
stripped and after it was stripped. he said that the workers never removed the
old siding, and he had to do it.

none
of the windows were replaced and the insulation was started but not finished. 
the doors were not replaced. he said that mr. murray did not shrink the window
opening and another contractor had to do it. he agreed that the photograph
showing the insulation work was taken before ecolife workers finished the
insulation. he then said that the workers finished about 75 percent of the
insulation work. his letter to mr. murray says about 80 percent of the
insulation work was done. he agreed that very shortly after the insulation
work stopped, winter came.

he
remembered that mr. murray told him that greenon had caused delays. he believed
that mr. murray maybe had said that he had taken on too many jobs and he could
not finish. he agreed that the windows had to be special ordered. when he was
challenged by a claim that mr. murray asked to store the windows in mr.
rainville’s garage. mr. rainville said that his garage was small, and there
was no reason to store the windows there. i took from this answer that he had
had the conversation with mr. murray.

he
ended up firing mr. murray in march of 2019. he was not willing to have mr. murray
finish the work. he agreed that mr. murray came to his house in the early
spring of 2019 and saw a big ice dam. he said that he could fix it. mr.
rainville said no, that his sons were going to fix it and that he did not want
mr. murray on his roof in the winter when he showed up with two guys with a
truck and no ladder. he agreed that mr. murray was not going to charge
anything for this work. he said that he had an argument with mr. murray over
the phone earlier in the day, but that they did not discuss the ice. he was
aware that mr. murray called his wife, and then he just showed up with two guys. 
mr. rainville did not know why mr. murray was there.

when
asked if he filed any paperwork for greenon, he said yes. when asked if it was
for windows, he said no. he got money from greenon. mr. rainville said that mr. murray
was supposed to get a permit for the work, but no permit was taken out. he
came home from work one day, and there was a stop work order from the city of
sudbury. he was able to confirm that mr. murray had applied for a permit but
that it was not issued.

mr.
murray thought that the contract was signed around april of 2018 and said that
mr. rainville gave him a cheque in the same timeframe. he later said that mr.
rainville gave him cash first and a cheque about a month later. he recalled
two meetings, and he said that mr. rainville had to get his financing in place
and get the draft. he denied that he told mr. rainville that he was backdating
the contract in order to ensure that he qualified for greenon. he admitted
having conversations with mr. rainville about the fact that the trailer was
left and that the site was not cleared of garbage. he said he was scrambling
to try and get as much of the grant work as he could get done. he admitted
that the material was left, and that he was going to send someone to clean the
site up.

mr.
murray named the workers who worked on the house. he said he was trying to be
surgical at this time. he had lost workers and was waiting on windows. mr.
murray said that the whole house was foamed. a greenon grant was approved so it
was probably true.

mr.
murray said that mr. rainville’s windows were originally ordered through
euroseal and had to be switched to gentek, which caused delays.

overall,
most of the evidence of mr. murray aligns with the evidence of mr. rainville. 
they differ in the amount of work done on the foam insulation. mr. rainville
got his grant money. greenon had to be satisfied that the insulation was
finished for that to happen. mr. murray said that his workers finished the
insulation on the house and the greenon grant supports that. i accept that the
insulation work was finished.
anne marie singh
– june 3, 2018

ms.
singh remained present in the courtroom during the evidence of the first couple
of witnesses, despite being present for the order excluding witnesses. i intend
to treat her evidence cautiously because of this.

ms.
singh called mr. murray to get a quote, and she ultimately signed a roofing and
siding agreement. she said that mr. murray tore up the original. she said
that mr. murray called her to his office and said that he needed some
money. she claimed that she had already paid him and had no money to give
him. she then said that the contract in evidence was a second agreement. she
said that the only reason she signed it was because of her windows because he
tore up the first agreement. i do not believe her on this point. her evidence
does not make sense and mr. murray denied it.

the
date of the agreement is june 3, 2018 and she said that this was the date that
she signed it. she said that the original agreement was signed in november of
2017 and he tore that up. that agreement was to replace all of the windows in
her house. she said that the agreement was for $8,000.

she
said that mr. murray told her that he wanted to do the whole house, and she just
wanted windows. she said he had measured for windows in november of 2017 and
she paid him $8,000. when asked why she went to the store in june of 2018, she
said to get the windows.

she
claimed he said that they did not need the original document anymore, we are
drawing up a new one and he put it aside. she said the agreement said siding
and roofing, but she did not sign up for siding and roofing originally. she
said mr. murray mentioned greenon in november of 2017. she said she wanted
windows and two doors. she said that she paid the entire invoice and mr.
murray told her that he would install in march of 2018. she said he came in
the winter and asked if she wanted snow taken off her roof. then he came with
workers and ripped off all of her siding, and she did not pay for siding. this
was the winter of 2018, before june.

she
said that she took notes at a meeting in november of 2017, where they discussed
that the total cost of the windows was going to be $13,800, after the grants. she
said but upon doing one window, that wall was very soft, like the drywall was
rotted. she said that it had to be removed and she changed the window to a
door.

she
said mr. murray told her that he would give her the windows for $8,000 and
there was a grant coming in that would give her $6,000 back. she said that mr.
murray mentioned gentek, and she googled that name. she then identified
another note where she said mr. murray told her that she could get the whole
house done with siding and windows for $17,300 but she did not agree to it.

she
said she repeatedly texted mr. murray between november 2017 and june of 2018,
but that she got no response. she was able to provide text messages, but they
are all from 2019. none are dated any earlier. i find that this evidence is
not reliable, given that she then attended the ecolife offices in 2018 and
signed a contract.

she
said that she arranged to meet with mr. murray at his office, and he asked if
she was going to be bringing him money. she said he took the invoice out of
her daughter’s hand and tore it up right in front of her. he told her that she
did not need it. he took out the invoice that was entered as evidence, and it
said roofing and siding. mrs. singh said she did not agree to that, that
she only agreed to windows. when asked if she got her windows, she said no not
yet. she said that siding was removed from her home. nobody put new siding up
and it stayed like that for the winter. she believed that she paid someone
else $8,000 for the windows and installation.

one
of the messages in 2019 is from mr. murray asking if mrs. singh is coming to
sign off on the door colour today. in the same message, mr. murray talked
about going to “their” office and a person by the name of darren. she agreed
that meant going to gentek. she agreed that she was told that the windows were
special windows that would take more time to come in.

when
confronted with the contract that lists siding that she signed, she insisted
that she never contracted for siding. she said that mr. murray pressured her
into contracting for more, and she refused. she insisted that the only reason
she signed the contract was for the windows and not for the rest of the work
listed. she agreed that workers found a mould problem when they removed the
siding, but they accidently removed the siding when they came to chip the ice
from her roof. she did not want it done, but she did not simply ask them to go
away. she said she had no money to pay for removing ice and snow from her
roof. she agreed that she went to the ecolife office almost weekly.

mr.
murray said that he first met with mrs. singh in june of 2018. he thinks she
is confused. they entered into an agreement and she made constant changes. 
she did not seem to understand that the contract was for custom products. she
wanted to change the colour of the siding for a colour that his mother-in-law
showed her. he told her that he could not do that. he said they discussed
greenon and how it was causing delays. he would have told her that the work
was going to be done later in the year.

he
said they started the siding later in the year and ran into a lot of mould
issues. he said that the mould was seeping through the walls. she came back
to the office around that time and wanted more changes. the windows were not
in yet, and they would probably do the work in the spring of 2019. he
identified his boardroom in a photo that was not entered into evidence. he
said that siding sample colours were visible, showing that she was trying to
change what she had chosen.

he
said that the deposit was supposed to be $13,000, but she could only get $8,000
and she was struggling to do that. he said that gentek was getting frustrated
with this order because she kept changing what she wanted.

mr.
murray said that he did not remember ripping anything up. he said he may have
ripped up a paper but he did not rip up the contract.

overall,
i find that i cannot rely on mrs. singh’s evidence. it is internally
inconsistent and inconsistent with the contract. mr. murray disputes it as
well. i find that this contract was evolving and mrs. singh wanted changes,
which mr. murray tried to accommodate. ultimately, this was a contract that
could not be fulfilled because of the poor spring weather in 2019, mr. murray’s
loss of his licence and the lockout of his office.
robert bouffard
– june 20, 2018

this
was not a greenon contract, but it was affected by greenon. mr. bouffard said
that he reached out to ecolife to do some work. he wanted the beam on his
carport to be worked on. he said that the end was rotting where it was
supported and it had started to sag. he wanted the whole beam replaced. he
had no construction expertise but believed that the existing beam was not up to
code.

mr
murray told him that the beam was not protected from the weather which he could
fix. he said that the house could use new shingles, so he agreed to that. he
suggested that the gable ends be extended by 16 inches on both sides. he also
suggested to finish the carport with soffit, and soffit and fascia all around
the house, new eavestrough and two vents on the roof and storm doors. mr.
murray quoted $20,216 for the whole job.

mr.
bouffard said that mr. murray told him that if he paid more upfront that mr. murray
would start the work sooner. he did not give a start date for the contract,
but he gave him a completion date as the end of august. he wrote a cheque
dated august 16, 2018. he did not read the back page of the contract. 
the claim regarding the date does not make any sense, given that the contract
was backdated, but he dated the cheque for august of 2018.

he
said that mr. murray came the day after the contract was signed with some
guys. he started calling ecolife’s offices after the end of august because the
work was not done. he said on october 16 or 17, workers came and put up a
retaining wall to hold up so that they could remove the beam. the next day
they showed up and replaced the beam with a beam that was inferior to the one
he already had. he knew it was inferior because the beam that was replaced was
2 x 12 and they replaced it with a 2 x 10 beam. the guy putting it up said it
was way stronger because it was laminated veneer lumber, and he believed him. 
he spoke to an engineer and now believes that the beam was not strong enough. 
a photo from december of 2018 was put into evidence. mr. bouffard said that he
was shoveling snow off the roof weekly. he had not had to do it in the past
for 12 inches of snow. he claimed that the photo shows that the beam is
sagging. mr. murray first disagreed that the beam was sagging and said
that the photo shows that the house was sagging because of the line of the
siding. he later said that the beam could sag a little as it was bearing the
load.

in
the photo mr. bouffard identified a gap in the roof that he said the workers
left open and he was worried because rodents could get in. he said that he did
not communicate his concern to mr. murray because by that time the office was
closed and the phone was off the line. he ended up hiring another contractor
to do the work.

his
attention was drawn to the back page, where there is a clear term that the
purchaser was to obtain all permits. he said that he did not see that and did not
look. he did not know that it was his obligation. he said that it was a few
days later that he saw the back of the contract, but he did not follow up.

he
did not remember a conversation with mr. murray that he would get his shingles
at a cheaper price if the contract was backdated.

mr.
bouffard said that the contract was backdated because of greenon, and to ensure
that he would qualify. he said that the rebate program was ending at the end
of august, so to ensure that mr. bouffard qualified, it should be backdated a
month. there is nothing on this contract that is eligible for greenon grants.

mr.
bouffard said that his roof was flatter and not steeply pitched. he said that
the home was built in 1960. he only had to clear snow when it was deep, like
three to four feet. he said that he had to clear snow at least six or seven
times that winter, and he had to put a four by four beam in the centre of the
beam to hold it so it would not come down.

he
agreed that the winter of 2018 to 2019 was snowier, but a little above average
but no records broken. he said that it might have been wet, but that there was
a subdivision being built close to his house, and they kept working through the
winter, so he did not see a problem putting shingles up in winter. he denied
that the replaced beam was only to be a temporary solution. he said that the
beam now sagged about four inches, when the original beam only sagged about 2
inches. he agreed that his house sagged before the work was done but then said
it sagged very little and only the carport. he said that mr. murray never did
any of the other work on the contract.

mr.
murray said that he met with mr. bouffard, and he noticed that the house was
sagging. mr. murray said that generally they would get an engineer to do the
drawings but mr. bouffard did not want to spend the money to do that. he did not
want permits, he just wanted a price, so they sat down and drew up the
contract. he said that what they came up with was more than code compliant,
and that they would install posts at either end and laminate the beam with
three 2 x 6 beams. he also said that the beam was attached to the house for
load bearing. he said that homeowners often want to do work without permits,
and if the home was inspected then there would be a work order.

he
said that the contract was not backdated and it was not eligible for greenon. 
he insisted that the contract was not backdated and pointed to the completion
date which was august.

he
said that the beam was done in october, and he had to pull his only red seal
guy to do it. the beam took one day. he did not have skilled workers available
to do the gable ends which required framing, because they were certified for greenon
jobs. he talked to mr. bouffard, mr. bouffard agreed to wait. the winter came
and delayed the job until the spring. then he lost his licence and could not
do the work.

mr.
murray said that he did not agree with the claim about an engineer and insisted
that the beam that was installed met code. he said that he kept mr. bouffard
informed about the delays.

when
challenged about selling contracts after he knew that greenon cancellations
overwhelmed him, he said that he did not need specialized workers to do this
job, and he only sold a couple of jobs after july of 2018. he said he could
have sold a lot more but he did not.

mr.
bouffard testified that he did not want to pay the extra money for an
engineering report. this supports mr. murray’s evidence. i cannot accept mr.
bouffard’s evidence that the replacement beam was insufficient. he
specifically said that he had no expertise. i have carefully reviewed the photo
as suggested by mr. murray and i agree that it appears that the house itself
was sagging.

the
photos support that the winter was very early and very snowy. this photograph
was from december of 2018 and it clearly shows over a foot of snow.

i
do not accept that this contract was backdated. there is no work on this
contract that would be approved by greenon for a rebate, and i accept that mr.
murray did not tell him that it was better to backdate the contract. i accept
that mr. bouffard was told that the cancelled greenon program was causing
delays in completing all of mr. murray’s work. i accept that mr. murray was
telling mr. bouffard the cause of the delays.

i
do accept that this job was unfinished. the photos clearly establish that. 
mr. murray admits that the work was unfinished.
mark lowes
– april 18, 2018

this
is was a greenon contract.

mr.
lowes said that he believed he met with mr. murray on july 18, 2018. he came
out to measure and to give a quote. he said that he did not know that the contract
was backdated to april 18, 2018. he did not remember if mr. murray told him
that it was backdated. he wanted to replace all his windows and doors on his
property. the total was $11,600 with a deposit of $9,000, leaving a balance of
$2,600 to be paid upon completion. he said that they discussed a completion
date of september of 2018 and that is noted on the contract. he knew about the
greenon grant program because he was having insulation done by another
contractor, and that job was a greenon job.

he
said he paid on july 18, 2018 by draft, and that mr. murray followed him to the
bank in spanish to get the draft. he did not get any windows or doors from mr.
murray and he had to pay someone else to do them.

he
expected that six weeks to get his windows and doors was reasonable, and when
that did not happen, he contacted mr. murray several times. he was told that
the windows were not in, but that mr. murray would finish the job, into the
following year. one time the phone was out of service.

he
was referred to mr. murray by the insulation company because they only did
blown in insulation and he needed a greenon window installer. he only met mr.
murray once and that was on the date of the exchange of the bank draft. all
other contacts were by phone. mr. lowes could not remember if the cancellation
of greenon was discussed.

he
was asked if he was familiar with a program called eco energy, and he
identified it as a government program. he said that he was aware of only one
grant program, and that mr. murray was going to file the paperwork. he did not
remember a program that involved a paid energy audit. he did not get any
communication from greenon and he did not recognize the name euroseal. he said
that he contacted all the window manufacturers in sudbury and could not find
one that had his size windows on order. based on that, he believed that mr.
murray did not order his windows. he said that mr. murray may have given the
excuse of manufacturing delays, but he believed that the greenon cancellation
did not have any impact on that because they were two different things. he
could not remember what mr. murray told him about the cause for the delay.

mr.
murray remembered attending mr. lowes’ house and he believed it was july 18,
2018. mr. lowes had two big dogs which intimidated mr. murray and the dogs had
to be moved around so that mr. murray could measure the windows. he said that
they had just gotten the extension to install greenon jobs and they talked
about maybe not qualifying for it. he said that he sent the information to
liette and asked her to process it and the response was that it looked like
greenon accepted the application. mr. murray said that they specifically
talked about backdating the contract to make it more likely he would qualify in
the end. he said that his office was a day or two behind submitting
applications.

he
recalled a conversation in october with mr. lowes and mr. lowes was told that
they were still waiting on product. mr. murray was still hoping that there
would be an extension of the greenon program. he talked to mr. lowes later in
december, when mr. murray was ill, and his mother was dying. he said that
they would talk in the new year. mr. murray said that his office was closed
into january and then he switched phone lines in february of 2019. he posted a
message on facebook for his customers. mr. murray said that he saw a post
on facebook about mr. murray scamming, and mr. murray connected it to mr.
lowes and confronted him.

mr.
murray lost his licence shortly afterward and then was charged. the job was
not done. he said he only took two greenon contracts after the program was
cancelled in june, and that was for lowes and cameron.

he
agreed that the contract was for 13 regency triple pane windows from gentek. 
he said that it was unclear at the time whether he could sell until the end of
august 2018 or if he could not sell after june 19, 2018. he was essentially
testing whether or not he could continue to sell by submitting the application
online.
he
said that the
industry was saying that there was a grace period, it was unclear
and there were still no rules regarding the cancellation, so he relied on
anything he could find out. the insulation installer referred mr. lowes to mr.
murray specifically because of the greenon program, he said that mr. lowes’ job
was the last greenon application sent in. mr. murray said that he still
believed he would get the windows in time for the cut off, because of his
conversation with darren frattini.

there
are really no issues in dispute regarding the evidence for mr. lowes. he paid
$9,000 deposit for windows that he did not get. i accept that mr. murray
instructed his staff to file the initial greenon application. mr. lowes did not
remember this discussion but did remember talking about greenon. the whole
reason for the referral was because mr. lowes wanted the greenon rebate. 
clearly, he believed that he was eligible for the rebate. there was little
guidance from the program regarding what was permitted and not permitted, and
there was clearly some uproar in the entire industry because of the way the
program was cancelled. mr. frattini and mr. murray spoke regarding mr. murray
directing his business to gentek, and mr. frattini testified that due to
shortages of window components and the pressure from greenon, windows were
taking up to six months to be delivered. this job was delayed due to delay in
receiving the windows and then the weather, the seasonal closure of mr.
murray’s offices then the loss of his licence.
christopher crawford
– june 2, 2018 and may 21,
2018

this
was a greenon contract for insulation.

mr.
crawford said that he was driving around looking for someone to replace the
shingles on his roof. he said that this was in may of 2018. he said that
other stuff needed to be done but he was only looking for shingles at that
time. his budget was $20,000 because that is what he could get from his line
of credit. he said that mr. murray came to his home and they talked about
greenon grants for insulation if mr. crawford upgraded his insulation. he
could also do his siding. he then said that he made an error on the date, that
the estimates show may but it was really in august when he was looking to get
his shingles done.

he
identified the contract or quote dated june 2, 2018 as really being an august
agreement. the quote is for roofing work to be done and it is for a total of $36,894. 
he made a $3,000 etransfer, and a $17,000 bank draft. he did not remember
sending a $10,000 payment. he said that left $6,894 to be paid, for a total of
$36,894. he identified his own initials on the contract. he then said that he
paid $20,000 within a day or two of their first meeting. he said he was not
aware that the date on the contract was the wrong date.

he
identified a second contract dated may 21, 2018 which was a second contract
that was signed after the first contract. he did not know why that date
appeared on the contract and he did not remember questioning it at the time. he
said that this contract had free work on it because when the roofing job was
done, it turned out to be more work than was anticipated. the entire roof and
sheeting had to be replaced, which increased the cost. he identified that this
contract was signed in august and the work on the other contract had already
started. he said that the siding and shingles were removed, and the shingles
were replaced. that was all that was done. he then said that the one and-a‑half
inch foam was not done on the entire home, but it was started. he said that
the soffit and fascia was done.

he
identified that the total on the second contract was $51,300 was the revised
price which incorporated the work on the first contract dated june 2, 2018. the
deposit showed of $20,000. he identified a third contract dated august 17,
2018 and believed that this contract was dated for the day it was signed. he
said that this contract came about when the workers had pulled off the siding
and discovered that there were issues that had to be repaired, such as around
the doorframe and the basement door, the sill plate had to be replaced and
waterproofing membrane was to be installed. the total cost on this contract
was $11,500.

mr.
crawford got a snap loan to finance the contract with a balance owing of $31,900.
 he applied on august 10, 2018. he applied for a home trust loan on august 20,
2018 for $11,500 for basement waterproofing, 2 doors, wall repairs and water
proofing.

when
his attention was directed to the authorization form, and asked what it meant,
mr. crawford said that it acknowledged that the work was finished and directed
payment to mr. murray. he was clearly aware that mr. murray’s company was
going to be paid directly. he said that mr. murray just told him that was how
things were done. it caused him some concern but he did not raise it. he made
approximately 11 or 12 payments on the snap loan before snap cancelled the
loan. he paid the entire loan for home trust because he just could not bring
himself to contact them.

he
said that after working on his house for a couple of weeks, the workers stopped
showing up and no further work was done. there were many conversations between
mr. crawford and mr. murray, but no further work was done. he could not
remember the content of the conversations with mr. murray. he said that he
remembered a worker came in december and put up three sheets of insulation. 
there is a reference in the text messages that mr. murray said, “i got u
grants” and mr. crawford believed that meant greenon grants.

on
december 2, 2018, mr. murray sent a text message asking mr. crawford if he got
an email for greenon grants. mr. crawford asked for his deposit back in a text
message from december 6, 2018 and mr. murray responded with a message stating
“work with me… i got u in grants”. mr. crawford then sent to mr. murray
information needed for the greenon application and says that he does not have
any pictures of the house. on december 17, 2018, mr. murray said he was
working on the greenon application.

mr.
crawford went to the ecolife office at least once to pick up a copy of a
misplaced contract. he was getting fed up by this point. there was a six foot
hole in front of his house and the siding was removed. he was embarrassed by
the state of his house. there was a lot of material left lying around, but he
did not tell mr. murray about it. he also said that he never communicated to mr.
murray that there was a hole in the front of his home.

he
agreed that issues came up when the work on the first contract started. rot
was visible when the shingles were removed. the sheeting and gable ends had to
be replaced and rebuilt. he did not remember that insulation was also involved
with mould and had to be removed. he also agreed that rot was found in the
walls when they were opened up and agreed that the sill plate had to be
replaced. he agreed that the plywood on the home was replaced with chipboard. 
he agreed that the foundation had a crack in it and it was leaking into the
basement. he denied that he was told because of the major issues the job was
going to take a lot longer to do. he said that he did not recall any
discussions about the duration of the project.

he
said that the foundation was repaired, but that contract also included the
carport. when asked, he agreed that there were issues with the carport leaning,
which was not known at the time that the contract was signed. he said that mr.
murray agreed to return the $20,000 deposit sometime in january or february of
2019 in a text message. i have reviewed the text messages and there is no
message of this kind at all.

he
did not remember being told that the trusses on the roof had been replaced.

mr.
murray said that mr. crawford stopped by the office sometime in the summer but could
not remember if the contract dated june 2, 2018 was signed on that date. he
later said that august was when they had time to start the work. he said that
the work was done by dave bissel, who he hired in may or june of 2018. he said
that this work was the second or third job that dave bissel did.

he
said that the contracts might have been backdated for either greenon or eco grant,
and he thought that windows were part of the contract. he later said that the
contracts were not backdated. this was an inconsistency, but it was not
something that caused me to reject mr. murray’s evidence.

he
said that the third contract was for work that was unforeseen until the work
started. when shown the photographs of the home, he said that he saw that the
work was not finished yet. the preparation work was all done, and they just
had to go back and finish. he believed that the entire roof had been replaced,
some of the sides of the home had been done, the porch roof was done and he
believed that two doors were replaced. he identified where some of the fascia
board had been replaced. he identified where some of the insulation was
replaced. he identified the material in the yard as belonging to mr. crawford. 
the job was 70 percent completed. he said that the remaining doors would take
one day to install. he said that the strapping had started but it was not
finished. then the siding would go up. he said that the upper level did not
need insulation because there were no bedrooms upstairs. once the strapping
was done, his workers would have installed another foam sheet.

he
said that they had to replace almost the whole sill plate, but they were able
to salvage some. when they started this job, they found rot everywhere.

he
said that they had prepped the wall for the blue skin, and it would have not
taken much to finish the foundation waterproofing.

for
the carport, he identified where ecolife workers had replaced the wood. they
still need to install the j channel and then cap the posts.

he
said he went to the house twice to see what work was yet to be done. he said
that as soon as the weather broke in 2019, he would have finished this job. he
explained to mr. lowes what the problems were, with the snow and the cold, the
lack of workers and the delays from greenon. he said that if mr. lowes did not
get the greenon grant, he could get the eco grant.

he
agreed that he told mr. crawford that his workers work year round. he said yes
as long as the weather was decent. he agreed that the weather was always a
risk, and that he did not have control over the weather. he said that he could
rebuild a roof truss on a garage in bad weather, but working on a home’s roof
was a different story. he said when it was too cold his workers could not be
forced to work.

overall,
the only thing that was contentious in the evidence of mr. crawford and mr.
murray was whether or not the first two contracts were backdated from august. 
based on the evidence of mr. crawford, and the date when mr. crawford gave mr.
murray the money, and the fact that at first mr. murray could not remember if
the contracts were backdated, and then said they were and then said that they
were not, i find that the first two contracts were backdated. however, i also
find that mr. crawford was aware that the contracts were backdated. his
signature appears directly below june 2, 2014 on the first contract, and
directly below the date may 21, 2018 on the second. he testified that the
contracts both look exactly the same as when he signed them, so the date is the
same as when he signed them. in addition, mr. crawford applied for and was
granted a loan from snap to pay the invoice in full. that was required by
greenon. he was aware that mr. murray was going to receive the full loan
proceeds. the anticipated greenon grant was not for windows, it was for
insulation, and the work was not finished. the final date that work was done
for mr. crawford was in december of 2018, and it demonstrates that mr. murray’s
company was still trying to get work done in order for mr. crawford to be given
the grant.

it
calls into question whether or not mr. murray was continuing to sell greenon
jobs after the cancellation date, since he said that he only sold two greenon
jobs, for lowes and cameron, and this one was clearly sold after the
cancellation date.

substantially,
both mr. murray and mr. crawford agreed regarding what mr. murray was paid and
when, and the work that was done. they both agree that major issues came up
when the work started, which caused the third contract to be created, and the
work done to remediate those issues. it was the extra work referenced and paid
by the home trust loan.
doucette
– april 30, 2018

this
was a greenon contract. mr. doucette contracted with mr. murray in august of 2017
to do a patio door which was done. mr. doucette was satisfied with the work. he
then talked to mr. murray about doing 6 stock windows for him. in the spring
of 2018, mr. murray contacted him about the greenon program and he
ultimately ordered 10 windows. the contract dated april 30, 2018 is for 10
windows for a total of $7,915. there is a $2,000 deposit noted on it. mr.
doucette produced a receipt in the amount of $5,915 dated december 7, 2018,
which was for the final payment.

he
also produced a letter from ecolife dated december 7, 2018 advising him that
the windows will be at his residence on december 10 or 11, 2018.

mr.
doucette said that he signed the contract on april 30, 2018. about two weeks
later, some workers came and measured the windows. he expected that the
windows would be installed in august of 2018. he said that he delivered the
cheque to mr. murray, and mr. murray contacted gentek and assured payment. mr.
doucette was present for the phone call. mr. doucette said that it was kind of
like a group thing. mr. murray said that gentek agreed to release the windows,
and that the windows would be installed on either december 10 or 11, 2018.

mr.
doucette cleaned off the space needed for the workers to work, but they did not
show up. when he contacted mr. murray, mr. murray said he was sick all
weekend. when mr. doucette went to the storefront, mr. murray was not there. 
mr. doucette said that the conversation got belligerent and mr. murray said
that it was not his fault, and that mr. doucette was ungrateful. mr. doucette
said that he knew that he was not going to get his windows. he tried calling
in january but there was no answer and he could not leave a message. the last
time he called was in march of 2019.

mr.
murray said that this contract was not backdated. it was signed on the day it
was drafted and that date is noted on the contract. he said that his workers
were supposed to install the windows in december but he could not force them to
work. the weather was crappy and mr. murray was ill. he had a heart attack
and diabetes, as a result of the stress and did not know what was wrong with
his health at the time. he thought he just had the flu.

he
said that mr. doucette’s house is on a grade, and with the weather the
installers did not feel safe. to install the windows, the staging had to be
set up in freezing rain, and the installers were not willing to do it. when he
was told that mr. doucette said that the weather was good that day, mr. murray
said that the installer told him that there was freezing rain, and that he
himself was home sick.

ultimately,
the weather interfered with the installation, as well as mr. murray’s loss of his
licence in april of 2019.
nadine williams
– september 17, 2018

this
was not a greenon contract. mrs. williams contacted ecolife for some soffit
and fascia and reshingling and resheeting the roof. she contracted with
ecolife on september 17, 2018 for a total of $3,800 and paid $3,000 by interac
to pamala facendi. the note on the contract says, “reduced price for offered
payment upfront”. there is a second contract dated september 11, 2018 for
$13,500 to put enershield insulation where there was not any insulation, to
remove fascia and replace on the complete home, to put in vents, vinyl siding,
corners and versetta stone. there is also a notation on this contract that
says, “early payment reduce discount” and a reduction of $700. it also
includes a building permit. she wrote a cheque in the amount of $13,500
payable to mariella facendi dated september 11, 2018. on november 21, 2018 she
also made an etransfer of $500 to pamala facendi.

she
said that when she contracted for the work, she definitely wanted it to be done
by christmas but there is nothing noted on either of the contracts. she later
said that mr. murray promised her that her house would look pretty by
christmastime. she said that both contracts were done on the same date, which
is supported by the date on the cheque and the date of the etransfer for $3,000.

after
the contracts were signed, she went to mr. murray’s showroom and saw a window
that she wanted for her front hall. she believed that it was a $1,000 window,
and she gave a deposit of $500. she believed that the second invoice
incorporates the first, and she cannot remember why she sent $3,000 by
etransfer to pamala facendi. she didn’t know either pamala facendi or mariella
facendi before this date. she said that mr. murray instructed her to write the
cheque payable to his mother-in-law because she did the banking.

she
said a couple of weeks after signing the contracts workers came and stripped
all the siding. she said foam was put up on two sides of the house. the roof
was not done and the eaves were not done. she said that material was left all
over the jobsite, which concerned her because she had two dogs. mr. murray
came at one point when she called him, and he cleaned some of it up. she had
gathered up some of the debris and put it on the driveway. she started calling
and stopping by the office. she said one time she went, the office was closed
and another time there was a note posted on the door that the office had been
closed by the landlord and another time a note said that he had lost his licence.

she
identified a ladder and other equipment that was left at her home by workers. the
photos that she identified show her home with the siding stripped off, no
capping on the windows and doors, construction debris and equipment left by
workers. she said that her front porch was a hazard area, and that they could not
use it.

she
said that she was picking up the garbage in the yard after the ice melted, and
that it had been frozen to the ground. she could not remember the weather in
2018. she agreed that the ladders were frozen to the ground but said that they
should not have been left there in the first place. she then said that the
ladders were not frozen to the ground, but that they were covered.

she
denied getting a back page to the contract and said mr. murray commented that
he was running out of contracts and had to write on a photocopied contract.

she
said that she was given lots of excuses, such as his workers were in jail, his
mother died, she said that she texted his workers who were working down the
street and she was told that the greenon jobs had to be finished, which she was
not aware of when she signed the contract.

she
agreed that he never said he was not going to finish the job, but when the
winter passed and it turned to summer, no one came.

mr.
murray said that mrs. williams offered to pay in full because she had received
an inheritance from her mother and he was shocked. he agreed that he told mrs.
williams that he had one guy who could do all the work, and it could probably
be done before christmas. he also told mrs. williams that his workers were
going crazy doing the greenon jobs and it made scheduling difficult

he
said dave bissel started the job but got arrested. mr. murray did not know at
first that he was arrested. when he was released on bail, he had to relocate
to southern ontario and was no longer available to do the job.

mr.
murray paid a guy to come and remove something that was left hanging, and he
later said that he paid david bissel $100, who did it right away because he
wanted the money.

he
could not remember if the first and second contracts were done on the same
date, but it was within a week. he said that mrs. williams wanted more work
done, such as versetta stone.

he
said that jean marc had to take over when david bissel was arrested, and he
believed that it was in november. jean marc was working on it between other
jobs. mr. murray said all the preparation was done and it was the hardest
part. he pointed out in the photographs that mrs. williams house was located
very close to her neighbours, which made working on it very difficult. he said
that the weather caught them, when winter came really early and shut the job
down. jean marc was the worker who stole the company truck and mr. murray had
to leave his mother’s sick bed in hospital in december to deal with it.

he
said that it was too cold to do the siding and the versetta stone, so it had to
wait. they could have done the siding earlier in the spring than the versetta
stone, but they were not able to get to any of it. he lost his licence and
then was charged.

mr.
murray said that he removed the debris in march of 2019. he actually went to
her home twice, once with his son and once when he picked up his tools. he
said that she then fired him. he said that sometimes customers do not
understand tight working quarters and the safety issues, and he was not blaming
her. he cleaned up what he could get loose and he went back to get his tools
when the ice thawed enough to permit him to do that. he said that the photos
of his equipment demonstrate that his workers intended to return to do the work
and that they got caught in bad weather. he identified his ladders, a bender
and a staging system that was left behind. he retrieved his equipment in april
of 2019.

overall,
there is little controversy between mrs. williams’ evidence and mr. murray’s. 
mrs. williams’ photographs and her evidence supports that mr. murray’s equipment
was frozen to the ground, and inaccessible to him until the spring thaw. this
job simply could not be finished due to staffing issues and the poor weather in
the late fall and winter.
brad pearson and cheryl sharp
– september 10,
2018

this
is not a greenon contract. mrs. pearson said that her home desperately needed
some work so when someone came to the door from ecolife, she and her husband
agreed to contact mr. murray’s company. mr. murray came and gave her a quote
for replacement of some windows and doors. the quote was for $20,000.

she
expressed some concern about being able to afford the work. mr. murray
suggested a loan and she told him that they had to get a loan for their
upcoming wedding for $4,000. she said that mr. murray suggested that he would
discount her job by $4,000 if she signed. she and her husband signed a
contract with mr. murray in october of 2018, and that mr. murray said that if
the contract was backdated, they would get the work done faster and because of
greenon. she said that mr. murray set them up with home trust for the loan. 
he etransferred two payments of $2,000 each, for the signing bonus of $4,000,
which they needed to pay for their wedding. she found this attractive because
it sounded like free and clear money.

she
said that mr. murray told her that he was backlogged, and that he was still
trying to work through the greenon stuff.

she
said that she never saw the two pages of terms and conditions of the contract that
were put into evidence when she signed. mr. murray did not point them out. 
she also said that she did not believe that she had seen them before giving
evidence at trial. she understood that the proceeds of the home trust loan
would be paid to mr. murray, he would then install the work and they would pay
loan payments after 12 months. mr. murray went over the terms of the loan
with her and her husband.

she
said that she never made payments to home trust because mr. murray’s company
did not do the work. she said that she called and texted mr. murray in an
attempt to get him to do the work, but she was not successful. at one point,
someone named bonnie came to her home to tell her that she was a current
customer of mr. murray’s and that she was satisfied with his work. mrs. pearson
still was not successful in having the work done and she and her husband moved.

she
agreed that the contract had no completion date noted on it. she said that she
was advised to get a special kind of window, and that is what was ordered. she
said that it was a fair statement that the weather was worse than usual over
the winter, with lots of ice and snow. she said that she and her husband were
concerned about doing the windows in the winter, but mr. murray told her that
it was doable.

she
denied that she asked mr. murray to get the additional funds, and i found this
to be contrary to her earlier evidence.

mr.murray said that the contract that was put into evidence was not the original
contract. the original was for $15,000, but that was not put to mrs. pearson.

he
said in his previous trial both contracts went into evidence. she was denied a
loan by snap, and then they contacted him again in october. he said he would
try home trust. she asked him to try to get the extra funds, and so he did. he
was surprised when the loan was approved. he said that he was aware that they
were having a destination wedding at the same place as he and his wife had been
married so he remembered the conversation.

mr.
murray identified the windows on the contract as not being greenon qualifying
windows. he said that they were ordered from a different manufacturer that was
not backlogged. he said he told them that he was too busy with greenon to do
their job until the spring of 2019. and insisted that he did not sell this
contract as a greenon rebate contract. he knew that even if his other work did
not qualify for greenon rebates, he still had to finish the work and he was too
busy to do this work until the spring.

he
said that the winter was horrible, and he spoke to mrs. pearson a couple of
times.

in
light of the evidence that mrs. pearson supported, i find that there were two
contracts. mrs. pearson asked mr. murray to help her in applying for a loan,
that would enable her to help pay for her wedding, which mr. murray did. this
was a job that was not sold to be completed until the spring of 2019. the poor
weather delayed the start of the season, and then mr. murray lost his licence
and could not complete the contract.
mrs. kinkaide
– october 17, 2018

this
was not a greenon contract. mrs. kinkaide was looking to have some work done,
so she contacted ecolife. she wanted a main door and storm door and a bathroom
window. the contract is dated the correct date, october 17, 2018. mr. murray
and ms. kinkaide negotiated a price and agreed on $3,600. she was to pay a
50 percent deposit and got a receipt from liette langevin for $1,800 on october
19, 2018.

the
work was never done. she tried to contact mr. murray several times, but she
did not think he responded and she did not get the work done. she was aware
that mr. murray’s licence was revoked. she said she tried to contact the
city a couple of times to help mr. murray to get his licence reinstated. she
believed that this was in the fall.

mr.
murray said that he told mrs. kinkaide that he was busy with greenon jobs. he
insisted that he told her that her job would not be done until spring. he said
that when he lost his licence, she even when to the city to try to get them to
fix the problem.

he
identified the window as a stock window, and it was from euroseal. he said
that this proved that he ordered product for other customers and then switched
the manufacturer.

overall,
it makes little sense for ms. kinkaide to not have spoken to mr. murray if she
contacted the city of sudbury to try to reinstate his licence. her memory was
poor and her evidence had little detail. mr. murray remembered her contract
and said that he told her that her job would not be done until the spring. i
accept that evidence. her job was not a greenon job, and so mr. murray sold it
as a job for 2019 and not 2018. i accept that the weather was poor starting in
late november or early december, which then pushed all of his remaining
contracts into the new year. he simply did not get to her job before his licence
was revoked.
kevin suchoplas
– april 10, 2018

this
was a greenon contract. mr. suchoplas said that he went to the ecolife office
in may of 2018 but actually signed a contract to replace 9 windows on june 2,
2018. he said that mr. murray just decided to do it to ensure that mr.
suchoplas qualified for greenon, and mr. suchoplas was not in agreement to
change the date. he then said he did not care, and that mr. murray said that
it did not matter. he was aware of the requirements for the greenon program
before he visited ecolife. mr. murray told him that the timeframe to order was
8 to 10 weeks. the approximate anticipated date for installation was august or
september. there is a second contract with updated measurements for the same
windows, and there is no completion date noted.

he
acknowledged that there was a back page to the contract with terms and
conditions. he paid $100 as a deposit and then paid half of the value of the
contract. he then charged the other half of the value of the contract to his
credit card on november 24, 2018 by etransfer. he paid a total of $6,880. 
when work did not start as anticipated, mr. suchoplas said that he started
contacting mr. murray by text and phone.

mr.
suchoplas said that by december, when he did not have windows installed,
greenon was asking for more information, which included photos of the completed
work. he said that mr. murray told him he would send pictures of a completed
job, that did not show mr. suchoplas’ house in order for mr. suchoplas to get
his rebate. he said he wanted to go along with this plan in order to get his
rebate.

he
said he never got his windows. he began to believe that mr. murray never
ordered them. he contacted gentek, and he said he verified that the order was
not made.

he
agreed that he read the back of the contract with the terms and conditions. he
verified that when he signed the contract, doug ford had not been elected. he
vaguely remembered a press release from sawdac. mr. suchoplas said that he was
aware that his windows were ordered from one manufacturer and his order was
switched to gentek.

he
agreed he was told that the windows could not be installed in cold and snowy
weather.

he
agreed that mr. murray told him that he was ill in november of 2018, and that
his illness was affecting the pace of the work being done.

when
asked if the first snowfall had come by november 16, 2018, mr. suchoplas could
not be certain but believed that was correct.

mr.
suchoplas remembered discussing eco energy rebates as an alternative rebate
program for his windows. he said that he expected an auditor to come for that
program, but the auditor did not come.

he
agreed that he was aware that an application had been started for him, and that
there were errors on it that had to be fixed. he never got any rebate funds.

mr.
murray said that he never offered to send in photographs of other homes for mr.
suchoplas.

mr.
murray believed that mr. suchoplas’ home was the subject of an eco energy
audit, but that the home had the wrong kind of furnace.

the
contract references regency windows, which are gentek windows. mr. murray
had a specific recollection that the windows were originally euroseal windows,
and that the contract was switched to gentek. his explanation was that the
contract was rewritten, the windows were changed to gentek windows.

mr.
murray said that he did not believe he backdated the contract, but that the
april date was a date that mr. suchoplas came to get the quote, and he later
came back in june to sign the contract. he said that happened a lot. he said
if the client committed to the quote and the contract was formed, he did not
change the date on the quote to reflect the new date. earlier, he had agreed
that he backdated the contract, along with others, in order to protect the
client’s eligibility for greenon. he later said that he did not think it was
backdated but could not recall. mr. murray clarified that the text message
exchange in december of 2018 with mr. suchoplas regarding photos was that he
had to supply before and after photos to greenon, and he said that he had the
photos taken before the work was to be done.

this
was a contract that mr. murray’s company just could not get to. it is
reasonable to expect that the windows were delayed in coming in after being
ordered, and then the weather and the loss of licence ensured that the work was
not going to be finished.
frank valiquette
– september 14, 2018

this
was not a greenon contract. mr. valiquette sought out mr. murray’s company and
arranged for mr. murray to come to his home. he contracted with ecolife to do
siding, insulation and versetta stone. mr. valiquette said that there were no
details on the invoice, and there was only a total at the bottom for $25,398. 
it never dawned on him that there was little detail. there is a note of a $17,000
deposit, but mr. valiquette said that he did not have that kind of cash and did
not give it to mr. murray. the contract is dated september 14, 2018 and mr.
valiquette said that he accepted that date. there is a second agreement three
weeks later for $18,700. mr. valiquette said he had no idea why there was a
second agreement.

he
said that he paid mr. murray three cheques. he identified a cheque dated
october 19, 2018 n the amount of $7,000, a cheque dated october 22, 2018 for $1,200
and a cheque dated october 26, 2018 in the amount of $10,000. all of the
cheques are payable to ecolife and they total $18,200. he said that mr. murray
asked for the money, and he assumed that he asked for the $1,200 because why
would he send that money. he then took out a snap loan in the amount of $8,398
and signed an equal monthly payment agreement.

he
kept a diary of the dates and times that workers showed up, and he said that
they would leave at 10 a.m. and not come back until the afternoon, or not at
all. the notes are difficult to read and the writing is very small. the notes
reveal that workers showed up between october 22, 2018 and november 26, 2018. he
did not report to mr. murray the workers’ activity because he felt that it
was mr. murray’s job to supervise his workers.

he
said he could have entered into the snap loan, and that the signature looked
like his. he said that mr. murray told him that he was getting more money for
mr. valiquette, but that the money went to mr. murray. mr valiquette said
that he was running out of money. based on his lawyer’s advice he did not make
any payments to snap.

he
said that the workers removed the vinyl siding and put up insulation. they did
not do anything else. mr. valiquette identified the photograph at crown, page
10, in tab 6 of his exhibit book as being the old siding overtop of the insulation. 
there is no siding in that picture.

he
said that he did not know who took the photos.

he
said that most of the work done by mr. murray’s company was removed and redone
by another contractor.

mr.
valiquette said that mr. murray blamed it on greenon and that he never got a
cent from mr. murray. he said he was not sure who did the work in the windows.

the
impression that i was left with regarding mr. valiquette is that he had little
memory of anything.

mr
murray said that mr. valiquette wanted some work done. he asked furoys to come
and look at the soffit job and the blown in insulation that mr. valiquette
wanted, and mr. valiquette was pleased by that. he ultimately entered into two
contracts after he wanted to add work to the first contract. he was not part
of the discussion about the second contract and he remained in the truck. he
said it seemed like a contract that would be done in the spring. the second
contract involved rob, who was the red seal. it involved the block
construction and the crack. he said that mr. valiquette came to the office to
sign the contract.

he
said mr. valiquette was a nice man who seemed to forget things and had to be
told a couple of times.

mr.
murray said 60 percent of the siding was done and 100 percent of the insulation
was done. he said that the weather starting getting bad in november and they
were waiting for it to break, but it got way worse.

mr.
murray denied pushing the snap loan. he said that mr. valiquette told him that
he did not have any money and wanted financing. he said he would go to the
bank. mr. murray said that he could see about financing a zero percent loan,
and mr. valiquette was happy with that.

mr.
murray said that this was not a greenon job, and that if anything it was eco grant. 
when challenged that there was no such program, mr. murray named a person who
would go to the home from barrie and do the audit. he later said that his team
made errors and submitted an greenon application for mr. valiquette and it was
accepted. however, mr. valiquette said that he did not get any money.

he
said nothing was clear with greenon and they were accepting applications that
they should not have accepted, such as valiquette’s. he said that it was not a
completed application. it would have required the certification from the
installer, which was never supplied. it was just the first step of the
application and done in error.

overall,
i cannot rely on mr. valiquette’s evidence as it is unreliable. mr. valiquette
did not have a reliable memory and contradicted himself.

mr.
murray’s evidence was that his employees submitted the greenon application in
error and he corrected that error as soon as he discovered it. his workers
started the job, but the weather got bad and they had to stop. they waited for
better weather, but it never came. by the time he was ready to restart booking
jobs in 2019, he had lost his licence and could not work. i accept all of
that.
paula marshall
– november 29, 2018

this
was not a greenon job. mrs. marshall needed work done on her home for a roof, soffit
and fascia. someone came to her door from mr. murray’s company, and she or her
husband contacted him. she knew mr. murray already. they met on november 29,
2018 to contract for the that work and two windows and a patio door.

the
total contract was for $13,300 and she said she paid a deposit of $10,000. in
return for the larger deposit, she received a discount of $700. she said that
mr. murray told her that they would be one of the first jobs in april of the
next year.

workers
did not show up in april of 2019, so she started calling. she told mr. murray
that she had been hearing rumours about mr. murray having financial problems
and he told her that he was having problems with ex-employees and that he had
gotten behind with the greenon program, but that he still intended to do her
job. she and her husband sent three options to mr. murray, one of which was to
refund their money. mr. murray did not take the options. she continued
hearing about mr. murray’s problems and heard about a protest.

she
said that she assumed that the windows would be done around the same time as
the other work, which was late april or early may. she did not know about mr.
murray losing his licence in april until she heard about it in may. mr. murray
never told her he was not willing to complete the work.

she
said that mr. murray did not tell her that his mother died, but he did tell her
that he had labour problems, and he linked it to the greenon program. she
agreed that the winter was harsh and that the roof could not be done in the
snow.

mr.
murray said that his sales guy was asking him to see this customer, because he
had not been selling jobs or making money, so mr. murray agreed. he said he
knew mrs. marshall but he met with her husband.

he
said he discounted the job when they agreed to take stock items, which would
help him free up cashflow. they talked about possibly doing the job in
december if the weather was good, if not it would be done in the spring. he
said that when he gave mrs. marshall his new number in february of 2019,
he got one digit wrong. that made her husband suspicious, but it was an
error. he never got the work done because his licence was pulled and then he
was charged.

he
identified the windows as low e and said they were euroseal windows. he said
he went back to euroseal because they were better windows for his customers.

there
is nothing controversial about the evidence of either mr. murray or ms. marshall. 
this job was not done because it was not to be started until after mr. murray’s
office reopened. he lost his licence and could not do the work.
joseph ntahortori
– december 10, 2018

this
was not a greenon job. mr. ntahortori wanted to have his roof done and some
windows and a door repaired. he and mr. murray met on january 27, 2019 and
signed a contract for the roof, the door and one window. they sent a $2,000
deposit through etransfer.

mr.
ntahortori said that they spoke in english the day that they met. he did not
speak much english but his wife did. he also said that he did not notice the
date on the contract being december 10, 2018 when they signed but tried to get mr.
murray to come back and fix it. he promised but he did not return and fix it. 
the contract was for $7,900 and he etransfered $2,000 for the deposit on
january 27, 2019.

he
said that mr. murray told him that the work would start as soon as there was no
snow on the roof. mr. murray did not show up to fix the contract or to do the
work.

mr.
ntahortori went to the office a couple of times, but mr. murray was not there. 
on one occasion he was there, and mr. murray seemed nervous. mr. murray was
with someone whose child went to st. benedict school. mr. ntahortori was
teaching this person’s daughter and they talked.

he
believed that mr. murray spoke french to him and he remembered very well that
mr. murray spoke french very well.

he
agreed that there was still snow on his roof in march and then said that he did
not remember but that there was no snow in april and may.

mr.
murray did not ask for any more money. mr. ntahortori spoke with mrs. murray
and she told him that the work would be done.

the
word “drive” appears on the signature line on the contract, and mr. ntahortori
believed that meant that mr. murray did not sign the agreement. his attention
was drawn to the line above, and the word “drive” appears to be a continuation
of the address. he did not accept that.

mr.
murray agreed that they contracted for the work and said that his licence got
pulled before he could do the work.

there
is nothing controversial about the evidence of either mr. ntahortori or mr. murray.
dawn mackelvie
– december 19, 2018

this
was not a greenon job. mrs. mackelvie said that mr. murray and a crew showed
up in the fall of 2018 to fix wind damage. after that damage was repaired, she
and her husband realized that the entire roof needed new shingles so she called
mr. murray. the total amount quoted to them was $12,543, which they
expected. the contract was for december 19, 2018. she said they paid $6,000
which mr. murray’s mother-in-law came to pick up on december 20 or 21, 2018. she
said someone came out in a day or two and removed some shingles. when he left
for the day he said he would be back monday. nobody showed up again. she
insisted that the job was to be done before christmas.

she
said she started making phone calls to find out when someone was going to
return. she said she knew that mr. murray’s mother passed away on december 22,
2018, but in her view that should not have affected the workers. i note that
december 24, 2018 was a monday and christmas was the next day.

she
said that there were multiple texts exchanged, but that no further work was
done. she sent a registered letter to mr. murray and he did not finish the
work. the letter cancelled the contract.

she
said that when the wind caused damage to the roof in the fall, mr. murray
showed up within hours to address it. he never returned for the money to pay
for the patch.

she
said that she never heard that it was not safe to do the roof in the snow, and
that it was snowing when the worker showed up to remove the shingles. she said
that she could see that the weather would have an impact on the work.

her
husband’s signature appears on the contract, but not hers.

she
knew that mr. murray was having a lot problems on the window side, with delays.

she
acknowledged that mr. murray was communicating with her husband and not her. 
she saw the employees when they attended her home to strip the shingles.

mr.
murray said that he considered mrs. mckelvie and her husband to be good friends
when the contract was signed.

he
said that he did a band aid repair to their roof after a windstorm in october
and recommended that they look at doing their entire roof. he said he charged
them $250 but he was never paid for the work. after fixing the roof he said he
did not expect to be replacing their roof, because he told them to go through
their insurance company. he said that mr. antonioni kept bugging him to do the
roof but never made arrangements to have it done. when they finally wanted to
do the roof, it was in late december. mr. murray said he was really ill
at that time. mr. murray said that he only dealt with her husband and not ms.
mackelvie.

mr.
murray said that it was getting too late in the season, but he would ask if
some workers wanted to do the job. he said that the weather got warm and that
they had a short window to do the roof so he sent some workers.

mr.
murray’s mother had fallen and she was in the hospital. mr. murray was staying
around the clock at the hospital with his mother, and he awoke one morning to
his phone buzzing from text messages. he discovered that the crew that he had
sent the day before was reporting that one of the crew did not show up with the
truck and all the equipment. mr. murray said that he had to leave the hospital
and contact the police. he met the police at the worker’s home, where he got
help from the police to recover his truck and tools. while he was dealing with
this, his mother passed away. he said he lost his mother and an installer in
one day.

mr.
murray said mr. antonioni was sympathetic about the loss of his mother, but
mrs. mckelvie was not.

overall,
there is nothing controversial about this evidence. mr. murray sent workers on
very short notice, within a short window of good weather during the christmas
season on a weekend. one worker did not return the next day with all of the
required equipment. that also happened to be the day that mr. murray’s mother tragically
passed away. mr. murray was visibly emotional about his failure to be at her
bedside when she died, because he had to deal with this worker. his office was
then closed for the season, and understandably due to the loss of his mother. 
the weather was unseasonably cold and snowy and icy for the rest of the
season. he lost his licence in april, and could not finish the job.
lynn and richard myher
– february 28, 2019 and
march 2019

this
was not a greenon contract. mrs. myher testified that she and her husband
contacted mr. murray’s company because they definitely had work that needed to
be done. originally they needed cedar shingles to be removed from around their
entryway, but stuff was added later. the first contract was february 28,
2019. that contract involved work on their entryway and garage. she said that
everything on the first contract was completed except for a door. she said
that she was practically sure that everything was done and they were satisfied.

in
court she was shown the backside of the contract but never paid attention to
it.

as
mr. murray’s workers were working on the home, they pointed out more things
that needed some attention. the roof was discussed as well as the window
sills, which needed some work. she said that the discussions were mostly
between mr. murray and her husband richard. the second contract was for the
work pointed out by mr. murray, and it was dated march of 2019. it was for a
total of $15,714. the work started on april 2, 2019. they paid a $6,000
deposit on march 31, 2019 and the balance of $9,714 by bank draft on april 4,
2019.

she
and her husband cancelled their contract and then on april 12, 2019, mr. murray
told her that he was going to lose his licence but that he was going to try to
complete her work. he said that he was going to be transferring the contract
to his wife’s company. she said at this point all his equipment was on their
property, and they felt that this solution was better than nothing.

the
transfer of the work was officially done on april 29, 2019 when the myhers
signed an agreement to transfer their contract and their payment to maple
ridge. pamala facendi went to their home alone, and she copied a new contract
from the original contract with ecolife.

by
this time some work had actually started on the second contract with ecolife. 
she said that they had started on the soffit and fascia and some work was done
around the windows. she said one person came to the worksite after they
signed, and they only did a half-day worth of work and did not return.

mrs.
myher could not remember if she was present when the second contract was signed
and agreed that her signature did not appear on it. she said that she met a
couple of times with mr. murray and ms. facendi, but no one ever came to finish
the work. she understood that mr. murray’s arrangements with his wife and her
company taking over the work was his effort to finish the work. she said he
was definitely making an effort to complete the contract. she confirmed that
she and her husband were not asked to pay any more money, and that mr. murray
recognized that the money paid on ecolife contracts was transferred to maple
ridge.

ms.
myher knew that mr. murray could not do any work under ecolife because his
licence had been revoked in april of 2019. she said when ms. facendi came to
the house regarding the contract with maple ridge, she felt that she had no
other choice but to enter into a contract with maple ridge to get the work
done. she never explained why.

richard
myher testified that the first contract was completed to his satisfaction. he
said that his home needed other work, so he agreed to have mr. murray’s company
do additional work. he said that mr. murray pressed to do the roof and he and
his wife agreed to have the work done. he then said that some of the work on
the first contract was not finished and the photographs entered into evidence
support that claim.

the
text messages also support that mr. murray and mr. myher were in communication
after ecolife’s licence was revoked, but that mr. murray’s company and ms.
facendi’s company never finished the work on the contract.

contrary
to what mrs. myher claimed, mr. myher said that all the work around the front
door was done as part of the first contract. he agreed with his wife that the
soffit and fascia was not finished, and the cladding around the windows was not
done.

he
said that he did not read the terms and conditions on the reverse, and that mr. murray
did not hide them.

he
agreed that he requested that mr. murray quote a job for mr. myher’s daughter,
but mr. murray refused to do it. mr. myher said that he did not care what mr.
murray’s excuses were to not give the quote.

mr.
myher confirmed that ecolife’s equipment including a bender, ladders and saw
horses were left on his property. he said that another contractor who had
worked for mr. murray claimed the saw horses, and he said that the other
equipment simply disappeared. he agreed that the letter sent by his wife said
that they would not release the equipment because they were owed money.

mr.
murray said that he went to speak to them at the urging of his sales guy, shawn
boucher. he said it was a long winter and shawn was not making any money. he mentioned
work on the deck which was a small job. mr.murray said he told them he was not
officially open yet and sat and talked with them. he looked at the job, and it
seemed very simple. he said he could do the job himself. he believed that
they signed the agreement on february 28, 2019. he said that there is no start
date on the contract because they were waiting for the weather to improve. 
during the discussion, mr. myher mentioned other work he wanted done and it was
added to the contract.

mr.
murray said that everything was completed on the first contract, and that was
why they paid in full, and even added more work that they wanted done.

he
said that the second contract was signed in march of 2019. this contract
references the window capping, as well as roofing and flashing as well as the
soffit and fascia. mr. murray believed that no work was started on this
contract.

he
confirmed that he and ms. facendi decided to transfer the work to her company. 
he said that they took time to apply for a licence and arrange for wsib
coverage and other insurance coverage. they incorporated the new company under
the name maple ridge. after the myhers transferred the contract to maple
ridge, mr. murray could talk to them as an employee of maple ridge, and he did
so.

as
maple ridge, mr. murray said that they did work on the soffit and fascia on the
house and garage, some siding work, some capping work, which not completed.

he
said mr. myher wanted mr. murray to do work on his daughter’s home, and mr. murray
said he avoided the request. he then looked at the job with rob, one of his
workers. he said he could not take it, and then around that time he was
charged and could not speak to clients.

mr.
murray identified some of his equipment in the photographs. he identified
places where the work had started in the photographs, but the work was essentially
partially completed.

very
little is controversial about this evidence. mr. murray said that all the work
was finished on the first contract, when there were minor parts that were not. 
however, that was not the central issue. mr. murray clearly sent workers to
this job, while he had other jobs that were not yet finished. he was not asked
about this directly. however, he did say that this was a simple job that he
could do himself. mr. murray had repeatedly given evidence about having
specialized “crews” who were qualified to do steeply pitched or high roofs,
window installations and insulation work. none of the work on this contract
required a specialty crew. as well, mr. myher confirmed that mr. murray’s
equipment went missing and mr. murray said that it was not recovered.
overall ruling

given
my analysis of the objective evidence, the banking records, the business
records, mr. murray’s evidence and the evidence of each of the complainants, i
am left with a reasonable doubt in relation to both the
actus reus
and
the
mens rea,
and, accordingly, i will enter an acquittal on all
remaining charges.
released: november 28, 2025
signed:
justice s. murphy

page 41, crown submissions, para 196.

page 42, crown submissions, para 197.

transcript of evidence june 3, 2025, page 114, lines 5 to 30.

transcript of evidence june 4, 2025 page 14 line 30 to page 15 line 32

june 3, 2025 page 125 line 15