source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj361/2025oncj361.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. snow,
2025 oncj 361
date: 
2025 06 30
court
file no.: central west region 998 47105832
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
todd snow
before
justice j. de filippis
heard
on march 31, april 1 – 2, and june 6, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 30, 2025
mr. k. regimbal.................................................................................. counsel
for the crown
mr. p. boushy.................................................................................. counsel
for the accused
de filippis,
j.:
introduction

the defendant was charged with sexual assault, failure to comply with
probation, and failure to comply with a peace bond. the failure to comply
charges involve failing to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. they are
proven, or not, based on the outcome of the sexual assault allegation. the
crown proceeded by indictment and the defendant elected trial in the ontario
court of justice.

among the orders i issued in this case is a ban on publication of any
information that would identify the complainant. she and the defendant are
strangers. as such, counsel agree that the defendant’s name need not be
anonymized.

i also granted a crown motion that the complainant testify remotely and
with the aid of a support person. i heard from l.h. a social worker who has
been assisting the complainant for the past two years with her fetal alcohol
spectrum disorder (fasd) and homelessness. l.h. explained the impact on the
complainant of being in the same room as the defendant. i concluded that it is probable
that the complainant will not be able to give a full and candid account of her evidence
in the physical presence of defendant. in testifying by cctv, she will not see
the defendant. however, everyone in the courtroom, including the defendant can
see her.

the parties agree to the following facts: the date of the allegation is
september 18, 2024. the defendant was bound by a probation order and peace
bond with terms that included keep the peace and be of good behaviour. the
defendant was arrested on october 20, 2024. photographs taken by police at the
scene of the events and from the defendant’s niche profile are authentic and
accurate. niche is a police records management system.

the defendant was interviewed by police the day following his arrest. the
crown tendered this statement to police for use in cross-examination and as a
fabricated statement providing independent evidence of guilt. the
admissibility of this statement is not challenged by the defence. it is
conceded to be voluntary. the defence does not concede that it is a fabricated
statement. normally a ruling on this point is made after a
voir dire
and
before the defence election to call evidence. in this case, the parties were
content that i decide the issue along with all other matters after final
submissions.

it is not in dispute that the complainant and defendant met and engaged
in sexual activity on the date and place alleged. the complainant asserts that
it involved intercourse, without her consent. the defendant maintains that it
was limited to oral sex and that it was consensual. at the time, both parties
were homeless.

i find the defendant guilty. these are my reasons.
evidence given by the complainant

on the day in question, in the late afternoon, the complainant met the
defendant on the steps of the philpot church at park st in hamilton. he told
her his name was snow and that he was 65 years old. he followed her to her tent,
and they went inside and talked for 45 – 60 minutes. during this conversation,
the defendant asked the complainant to help him set up his tent. she agreed. 
they walked towards sir john a. macdonald high school and stopped at a grassy
area near a big green electrical box. the complainant identified photographs of
this area, later taken by police, and pointed to a knife, pillow, sleeping bag,
and tent poles belonging to the defendant. she also identified a white hoodie
and socks that belonged to her.

the parties discussed setting up a tent for the defendant. suddenly, the
defendant grabbed her by the head, “tore down” her pants, and pushed her in “a
downward dog position”. the complainant added these details:
…that’s when i bent over and i
was like, are you kidding me, you’re 65….he grabbed me by the head and pushed
me down in, face in the dirt, and said, take it like the bitch that you are and
that’s when he vaginally penetrated, yeah.
i’m trying to, like push him
with my hands off, like, forcing, try to get him off me because it’s hard to
when someone’s on your back kind of in the way, right, in that kind of
position. it’s really hard to – tried to kick him, try to get him in the nuts
but i couldn’t.

this
event lasted about 15 minutes. the defendant did not use a condom. the
complainant does not know if he ejaculated. she was not under the influence of
drugs or alcohol – “i was clean as a whistle”.

the
complainant felt “scared, really scared and helpless” during this event. when
it was over, the defendant said, “that was insanely good, now you can go”. the
complainant kicked him and ran away. she said, “i just left everything behind,
and i just grabbed – like i thought they were my pants, but i guess they
weren’t, but i pulled on something and i just ran towards the hub”. the hub
is a drop-in centre for homeless people at the salvation army. on arrival
there she told staff she had been “raped”. the police were called, and she was
taken to hospital “to get the sexual kit done”. she provided a description of
the defendant, including his tattoo.

the
complainant has been previously convicted of assault and a firearms offence.

she
testified that while being penetrated in the downward dog position, she could
not say anything because her face was in the dirt. she could not recall
telling the police she was screaming, “get the fuck off me”. she denied the
suggestion that she and the defendant had consumed crack cocaine and fentanyl
or that she performed fellatio, or that she stole his wallet, containing $300,
after he had passed out.

the
complainant initially testified she did not recall being “beaten up” after this
incident and before going to social worker with a report of sexual assault. when
pressed on this point she said she was attacked on an unknown date but denied
the assailants were punishing her for theft of the defendant’s wallet. she
denied this was the motive to fabricate the sexual assault.

when
defence counsel concluded cross-examination by suggesting the complainant and
defendant had engaged in consensual, mutual, oral sex, she replied, “no, i got
fucking raped”. when counsel pressed this point and added that both parties
had consumed drugs, the complainant said, “you do not understand, he raped me. i
did not consent. get that through your goddam skull. i did not say yes. i did
not say no. i did not steal his wallet”.
other prosecution evidence

pc
trent wright was dispatched to investigate this allegation of sexual assault. while
securing the grassy area in question, at 130 york blvd, he was approached by a
man who identified himself as karnel jack. noting the police presence, mr.
jack asked if “this is about the girl and guy that were back there”. realizing
this man was a witness, pc trent took a statement from him. the officer also
used niche and found a police record showing that the defendant fit the
description given by the complainant, including tattoos. the officer then
proceeded to the hospital and took possession of the sexual assault kit with
respect to the complainant.

pc
dawn spencer is one of the scene of crime officers (soco) who attended at the
area in question. she authenticated the photographs taken of the area,
previously put to the complainant. she pointed to a number of items on the
ground including a white hoodie and socks that the complainant reported
leaving behind when she fled. the officer also located a glass pipe box and
knife on the green electrical box.

pc
spencer received the sexual assault kit from pc wright. it included external
genitalia and vaginal swabs taken from the complainant. she submitted these to
the centre for forensic science. (cfs). the officer subsequently received a
biology report from cfs that revealed the presence of male dna on the external
genitalia and vaginal swabs. accordingly, the officer executed a warrant to
obtain dna from the defendant. in march 2025, one week before the start of
this trial, pc spencer received a biology report from cfs.

at
the time of these events, karnel jack was homeless and living at the salvation
army accommodation nearby. on the day in question, he was “sunbathing at sir
john a mcdonald school on york blvd and drinking beer”. as it “started getting
chilly”, he went to the salvation army to put on warmer clothes and made his
way back to the same spot. he testified, “that is when i saw [pointing at the
defendant in court] mr. snow”. he had seen the defendant before when he was
sunbathing. mr. jack came closer and saw “a lady slouched over with head down
between her legs, her face to the ground, her back exposed and mr. snow sitting
upright”. both were fully clothed, but the woman’s top rode up her back and he
saw a tattoo on her lower back. the green hydro box otherwise obstructed his
view. the defendant told mr. jack to “leave me and my girlfriend alone and go
somewhere else”. the woman said noting and did not move.

in
cross-examination, mr. jack said that when he first saw the defendant with
woman, the latter was “on her stomach” and the former was “sitting on his
butt”. he did not see either person consuming drugs and believed the woman had
done so because she did not move and there is much fentanyl and crack in this
area.

about
20 minutes later, mr. jack returned to the salvation army. the woman he had
seen with the defendant also arrived. she was upset and told a staff member she
had been raped. sometime after, the defendant arrived. mr. jack said that when
“he looked at me it was like he saw a ghost, he was shocked”.

february
19, 2025, dc ryan tweedle executed a dna warrant and took a sample from the
defendant by “finger prick”. this was forwarded to the centre for forensic
services.

kimberly
sharpe is a forensic biologist and qualified as an expert in dna analysis. she
received the sexual assault kit with respect to the complainant containing the
external and vaginal swabs taken from the complainant. she also received the
dna sample taken from the defendant. there is no need to review her report or
trial testimony in detail because the results are not controversial.

ms.
sharpe concluded that the external genitalia swab revealed a mixture of dna
profile from the complainant and one male and that the vaginal swab revealed
male dna. the defendant cannot be excluded as a contributor to the mixture
from the external genitalia swab. the str-dna results are estimated to be
160,000 times more likely if they originate from the complainant and defendant
than the complainant and an unknown person unrelated to the defendant. the
defendant cannot be excluded as the source of male-specific dna profile (y-str)
from the vaginal swab. the y-str dna results are estimated to be 2000 times
more likely if they originate from the defendant than from an unknown male
unrelated to him.

ms.
sharpe testified that 2000 times is the highest available likelihood ratio for
y-str testing and provides strong support for conclusion that the dna is from
the defendant. she noted that sources of dna include blood, semen, saliva,
muscle, skin, and fecal matter. ms. sharpe cannot identify the source of the
male dna in both swab samples. she agreed with the suggestion that the male
dna in this case could be from saliva.
evidence given by the defendant

the
defendant 61 years old. he was born in new brunswick. defence counsel began
his examination in chief by introducing the criminal record. the defendant has
192 convictions. it was noted that none of these convictions is for sexual
assault. the defendant added that “i don’t hit women, i was not brought up
like that”.

according
to the defendant this is “what really happened”:
i was behind the salvation army
and found a bag of fentanyl and saw a girl who i know does fenyanyl and showed
it to her and said do you want it and she said yes and i said i need help
setting up my tent. she does the drug and she slumped over and i shook her and
she said it was good, can i have more and i did and her eyes lit up and she said
‘that stuff makes me horny and i will give you a blow job’. i don’t get a
woman every day so i said yes and we went into the sleeping bag and we had oral
sex and fell asleep. when i woke up and saw that my wallet and fentanyl was
gone. the next day people told me she got beat up real bad

the
defendant clarified that the complainant smoked fentanyl and he smoked crack cocaine.
he insisted that, “i never had my penis inside her once. i did not sexually
assault her. the oral sex was on consent.” the following exchange followed:
defence
counsel: again, you have no sexual assault convictions
defendant: yes, there are so
many girls out there hooked on fentanyl who will do what you want, why would i
need to do this

the
defendant testified that the oral sex lasted “three minutes, it doesn’t take me
long to ejaculate”. he added that he did not see a black guy while he was with
the complainant [i.e. mr. jack]. he acknowledged that he testified to
consensual, mutual, oral sex and that in his statement to police he asserted
that he had not touched her. in explaining this, he said, “i meant i did not
rape her”.

the
crown confronted the defendant with the prior statement in question. during a
40-minute interview conducted the day after his arrest, the defendant repeatedly
asserted he had not touched the complainant. these excerpts are
representative:
q: did you have sex with her?
a: no. i wouldn’t touch her.
q: [so] nothing happened at
all.
a: no. nothing happened.
q: no sexual…
a: nothing happened whatsoever.
q: do you know how dna works?
a: there’s nothing with my dna
on her.

at
trial, the defendant explained his prior statement to the police in these
terms: “i meant i never put my dick inside her…..i never touched her with my
dick….there would be no dna on her from my penis”. when asked why his dna was
found not only on the external genitalia swab but also on the vaginal one, the
defendant replied that he did not know, and then added, “it would be my
saliva”.
submissions

the
defence position is that the complainant traded sex for drugs and that both
parties were intoxicated as they engaged in mutual consensual oral sex. the
complainant then stole the defendant’s wallet and left. the dna found on the
swabs could have been deposited by saliva, thus confirming the defendant’s
version of events. counsel relies on mr. jack as further support for the
defendant’s testimony; he believed the complainant was high on drugs.

defence
counsel also submits that even if the defendant’s testimony is rejected, the
prosecution must fail because the complainant is neither credible nor
reliable. in this regard, there is no dispute that she has been a drug addict and
counsel argues her angry insistence that she was sober at the time should not
be believed. apart from anger, counsel points to the complainant’s demeanour
while testifying as the mark of an untruthful witness; she often looked away,
paused, and fidgeted.

in
arguing that the defendant’s evidence be rejected the crown points to his lengthy
record for crimes of dishonesty and numerous inconsistencies between his prior
statement to police and trial testimony.

the
crown submits the complainant’s testimony ought to be accepted as truthful and
accurate. in this regard, certain statements are markers of truth: she could
not scream because her mouth “full of dirt”. the defendant said, “take this
like the bitch you are” and “that was insanely good”. counsel adds that the location
of the complainant’s pants and socks as depicted by the soco photos is
consistent with the complainant’s account of the forceful removal of her pants.

the
crown added that mr. jack’s testimony undermines that of the defendant and supports
the complainant. he described a woman who was slouched over such that he
could not see her face. this position caused the complainant’s top to ride up
her back and expose a tattoo. the crown submits that mr. jack is honest but mistaken
in his belief the complainant was high on drugs. this belief is based on the
fact she was not moving and because of “the area”. her lack of movement is
consistent with the fact she was pushed face first into the ground by the
defendant. that the complainant was not high on drugs is also supported by the
fact she was able to identify the defendant’s physical characteristics,
including a description of his tattoo.

the
crown also relies on mr. jack’s testimony about the demeanour of the parties about
20 minutes after the events in question. he saw them at the salvation army. 
the complainant was upset and emotional in reporting she had been “raped” and
the defendant was “white as a ghost” on seeing mr. jack.

the
crown submits that the defendant’s prior statement to the police was fabricated
to conceal his involvement with the complainant and deflect attention from
himself. counsel argues that such a finding constitutes independent evidence
of guilt.
analysis

the crown carries the burden of proving guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. this fundamental principle of law means that if the
defendant has called evidence, there must be an acquittal where the testimony
is believed or where the testimony is not believed but raises a reasonable
doubt. an acquittal will follow even if the defence evidence is rejected, but
the remaining evidence fails to convince, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
defendant is guilty (
r. v. w(d),
1991 canlii 93 (scc), 1 s.c.r.
742).

probable guilt is not the criminal law standard
of proof - it is closer to certainty. a reasonable doubt is a doubt based on
reason and common sense which must be logically based on the evidence or lack
of evidence (
r. v. villaroman,
2016 scc 33 (canlii)
). in applying the
standard, i can accept some, part, or none of what a witness states. the
testimony of a witness is assessed based on the person’s sincerity and
accuracy.

the
integrity of the evidence given by the police and expert witness in this matter
is not in question. the defendant’s dna was present in both the external and
vaginal swabs taken from the complainant. the source of that dna is not
identified.

the
defendant claims his dna was deposited on the complainant by saliva through consensual
oral sex. he denies forced sexual intercourse. this cannot be believed for
three reasons.

first,
as a general proposition a prior conviction may bear on credibility. the
defendant’s lengthy criminal record includes 47 convictions for theft, 22 for
fraud, 12 for obstructing police, 2 for contempt of court, and 2 for
impersonation. these many crimes of dishonesty justify a cautious approach to
his testimony.

second,
the defendant’s evidence was internally inconsistent on a material point. he
testified that the complainant offered to trade sex for drugs and explained “i don’t
get a woman every day, so i said yes, and we went into the sleeping bag, and we
had oral sex and fell asleep”. later, in denying the suggestion he sexually
assaulted the complainant, he explained, “there are so many girls out there
hooked on fentanyl who will do what you want, why would i need to do this?”

third,
and most damaging to the defendant’s credibility, are the inconsistencies
between his prior statement to police and trial testimony, as referenced
above. in his prior statement he repeatedly and assuredly declared he had not
touched the complainant. his explanation at trial, faced with the dna
evidence, that what he meant to convey is that he had not touched the
complainant with his penis is stunning. the defendant would have me accept
that performing cunnilingus is not “touching”. this is beyond belief.

the
complainant has two prior convictions. this is of some relevance to her
credibility. the complainant’s testimony was marked by much movement by her
while seated and several pauses in speaking. during cross-examination, she
occasionally expressed frustration and anger. on one occasion she left her chair
and quickly returned. on several occasions throughout her testimony, her
memory was refreshed in reference to a prior statement given to the police. these
actions, which might otherwise dictate a cautious approach to credibility and
reliability, do not unduly trouble me in this case. this conduct is likely due
to the fact the complainant suffers from fasd.

i
agree with the crown’s observations about the credibility and reliability of
the complainant. her version of events is consistent with the evidence
provided by the soco photographs of the area in question. the presence of her
socks and pants on the grassy area near the sidewalk supports the complainant’s
testimony that she abruptly fled the scene.

mr.
jack also supports the complainant’s version of events. there is no doubt he
saw the complainant and defendant at the time of the events in question. he
viewed the scene twice. he first saw the parties when he went to the salvation
army to obtain warmer clothing. he saw the complainant on her stomach with the
defendant seated behind her. on his return, he saw the complainant with her
head between her legs and backside up, such that he could see a tattoo on her
back because her clothing was pulled back. mr. jack saw the complainant soon
after at the salvation army and confirms that she was upset as she reported
being raped. it is not her report that is relevant to my considerations, but
her demeanour.

i
am not concerned by mr. jack’s belief she was high on drugs because it is based
on his quick observation that the complainant was not moving and his knowledge
that there is much drug use in the area. moreover, his assumption is not borne
out by the evidence. soon after the event, the complainant provided a good
description of the defendant.

given
the details provided by the complainant of the defendant’s words and actions
and the evidence provided by the soco photographs and mr. jack, i have confidence
in her account of how she was sexually assaulted. i also conclude that the
defendant’s statement to the police is fabricated and constitutes independent
evidence of guilt.

in
r v wright
2017 onca 560, it was held that:
 it is well
established that our law distinguishes between an exculpatory statement which
is disbelieved and one that is found to have been fabricated or concocted to
avoid culpability. a statement which is merely disbelieved is not evidence that
strengthens the crown’s case. however, if the crown can establish, through
extrinsic or independent evidence, that an exculpatory statement was fabricated
or concocted to conceal involvement in the offence, the statement evidence can
be capable of supporting an inference of guilt: o’connor; r. v. b.(p.),
2015
onca 738, 127 o.r. (3d) 721.
 the distinction
between mere disbelief and a finding of fabrication is based on the fundamental
principle that the onus of proof remains on the crown throughout a criminal
trial and helps ensure that the trier of fact properly applies the burden of proof
where statements from an accused are tendered, or the accused testifies. as
this court noted in o’connor, at para. 19:
the distinction reduces the
risk that the trier of fact may blur the need for the crown to prove the
offence charged beyond a reasonable doubt with the failure of the accused to
provide a credible defence. the distinction also recognizes the danger that a
trier of fact may attach undue weight to the rejection of an accused’s
explanation and may move too readily from mere disbelief to a finding of guilt.

the
extrinsic evidence in the present case that establishes the defendant’s
statement was invented to mask his involvement in the offence is that provided
by the dna.

in
r v paul
2009 onca 443, the court held as follows:
 counsel for the
appellant submits that a single piece of evidence can never provide both the
basis for a determination that an appellant’s statement was false and for the
further determination that it was deliberately fabricated to avoid detection. 
counsel submits that as the dna evidence could not carry the burden of both
factual findings, the trial judge erred in instructing the jury that if it
concluded, based on the dna evidence, that the appellant’s statement was false,
it could further infer, again based on the dna evidence, that the false
statement was made deliberately by the defendant for the purposes of avoiding
detection.
…..
 as indicated in
the leading case of r. v. o’connor (2002),
2002 canlii 3540 (on ca), 170 c.c.c.
(3d) 365 at 377 (ont. c.a.), where a trier of fact is satisfied that an
out-of-court statement made by an accused is false, the circumstances in which
the statement was made and the content of the statement may reasonably permit
the trier of fact to conclude that the statement was not only false but was
fabricated to conceal the accused’s involvement in the offence. the reference
in o’connor and many cases that have followed it to “independent evidence” of
fabrication is intended to emphasize that a finding of fabrication does not
flow automatically from a finding that the statement should be rejected as
false. there must be something more in the evidence that reasonably justifies
the further inference that the false statement was deliberately made for the
purpose of concealing the accused’s involvement in the offence: see also r. v.
hazal (2009), onca 389 at paras. 11-20 (c.a.).
 in this case, the
dna evidence offered a basis upon which the jury could conclude that the
appellant lied when he told the police he had not seen the victim. the
circumstances in which he told the lie provided a further basis upon which the
jury could infer that the appellant lied to cover-up his involvement in the
homicide….

the
timing of the relevant events is important in this matter. one day after his
arrest, the defendant repeatedly and unequivocally asserted that he had not
touched the complainant and added that his dna could not be on her. about five
months later, a sample of the defendant’s dna was taken and compared with the
swabs taken from the complainant. the results were obtained one week before
trial. they reveal the presence of the defendant’s dna outside and inside the
complainant’s vagina. this timeline establishes that the defendant’s prior
statement was purposely fabricated to conceal his involvement in the offence. this
is confirmed by his futile and absurd trial testimony on point.
result

i
reject the testimony given by the defendant. i accept that given by the
complainant. i find that defendant’s statement to police is additional
independent evidence of culpability. accordingly, the crown has proven its
case beyond a reasonable doubt. the defendant is guilty of the three charges.
released: june
30, 2025
signed:
justice j. de filippis