source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj216/2025oncj216.html

ontario
court of justice
citation:
r. v. habte, 2025 oncj 216
date: 2025 04 17
court file no.: peel 998-24-31101844
999-24-31100149
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
henock habte
before justice a.r. mackay
heard on october 7, 8, 9, 10, 2024
ruling on
charter
application - oral reasons
released on february 24, 2025
written reasons released on april 17, 2025
nicholas cooper...................................................... counsel
for the crown, respondent
nadia chaabane............................ counsel
for the accused henock habte, applicant
a.r. mackay j.:
overview

on august 3, 2023, police observed
the applicant, mr. habte parked in the parking lot of a small plaza near the
border of brampton and vaughan. within two minutes of police having made this
observation, mr. habte was detained. shortly thereafter he was subject to
searches of his person and of his vehicle. the initial search conducted by
police revealed baggies, a scale, and a large sum of money. a more thorough
search of his vehicle revealed a firearm and a large quantity of drugs. the drugs
included fentanyl, cocaine, methamphetamine, and marijuana. mr. habte was
charged with several offences related to the firearm, three counts of
possession for the purpose of trafficking and possession of oxycodone.

mr. habte alleges that the
police violated his ss. 9, 8, 10(a), 10(b), and 7
charter
rights and
seeks the exclusion of all evidence that was seized from his vehicle and his
person pursuant to s. 24(2) of the
charte
r. ms. chaabane, mr. habte’s
counsel, alleges that the police investigation was based on racial profiling.
this allegation was not included in her materials and was raised only in
submissions. the crown submits that the police committed a technical s. 10(b)
breach which resulted in only a short delay in the applicant receiving his
rights to counsel. the crown submits the police otherwise conducted themselves
appropriately and did not commit any other
charter
breaches. crown
counsel mr. cooper submits that because the applicant did not raise the issue
of racial profiling until submissions, the crown did not have an opportunity to
explore this issue in his examination of police witnesses, and as a result, the
court should not entertain this allegation.
facts

the following are the
relevant facts.

on the night of the arrest,
cst. murad was on ‘proactive enforcement,’ driving an unmarked dodge charger police
vehicle and was accompanied by a civilian police dispatcher riding along as an
observer. at that time, cst. murad had been on the police force for about three
years.

cst. murad decided to attend
a plaza situated on the york and peel borders to make sure there were no
trespassers or illegal activity taking place. the plaza contained a 24-hour
gym, a grocery store, a shoppers drug mart, a barber shop, and a pizza pizza,
which was located at the opposite end from where cst. murad entered the parking
lot. cst. murad has made many arrests in this plaza, including for offences
such as domestic partner violence, open cannabis and open liquor in a vehicle,
drugs, and cause disturbance. he visits this plaza most nights he is on duty.

when cst. murad entered the
plaza and turned the corner around the gym, he saw the applicant’s vehicle, a
2017 white nissan. it was parked in front of a business that was closed for the
day. when cst. murad first saw the applicant’s vehicle it was about 5 to 15 meters
away. no other cars were around it. mr. habte had reversed parked into the
spot. cst. murad could tell that the vehicle’s engine was on because he could
see the red lights from the rear of the vehicle in the reflection of the glass
of a nail salon.

cst. murad said that people
attending the gym typically park close to it. he noted that, on the night of
the arrest, several parking spots in front of the gym were empty. the applicant
had parked on the north side of the plaza and the gym was on the west side.
cst. murad drove towards the vehicle at about 5 to 10 km/hr. he did not believe
the windows were tinted. it was dark around the vehicle. cst. murad said the applicant’s
vehicle caught his attention because it had reversed into the parking spot
where it was located. he ran a query on the license plate as he drove towards
the vehicle. he determined that the owner was unlicensed. at this point, he and
the appellant made eye contact. however, cst. murad said he did not get a clear
look at mr. habte’s face but noted the male in the driver’s seat as being “darker
skinned”. cst. murad observed the applicant start reaching under his seat three
or four times. he saw his back lean forward, his arms fumbling and his forehead
almost touching the steering wheel.

cst. murad said he noticed
from the reflection in the nail salon window behind the applicant that he had
shifted his gear to drive, and that he could then see the vehicle accelerate
slightly. cst. murad then quickly moved his police cruiser in front of the
applicant’s vehicle and boxed it in. he did so because he thought the applicant
was leaving. cst. murad admits that he boxed the applicant in deliberately.

based on mr. habte’s
actions, cst. murad “felt” that he was hiding a weapon, drugs, or other
contraband. the stated purpose of his investigation was to see if any of these
things were true and whether the applicant was impaired. he testified that once
mr. habte began to drive his vehicle, he could investigate him under the
highway
traffic act
(
hta
).

cst. murad seemed to have a myriad of
different reasons to stop the applicant.

cst. murad first testified
that he used his vehicle’s emergency lights once mr. habte’s vehicle shifted forward.
the body-worn camera footage reveals that mr. habte’s vehicle was still fully
in the parking spot when he activated his emergency lights, and that the
applicant never had the opportunity to move his vehicle. rather, the officer
acted upon seeing the brake lights go off.

after boxing in the
applicant’s vehicle, cst. murad exited his cruiser and told the applicant to
show him his hands while approaching the applicant’s vehicle. he told the
applicant to show him his hands because he did not know what mr. habte was
fumbling with under his seat. the applicant was compliant. cst. murad then
tried to open the driver’s door. when he realized it was locked, he ordered the
applicant to unlock it. mr. habte complied and cst. murad opened the door. 
cst. murad told him to step out of his vehicle and engaged the applicant in
conversation.

the body-worn camera footage
reveals the aggressive nature in which the applicant was detained. cst. murad
immediately drove up to the applicant’s vehicle, blocked him in, got out of his
vehicle and walked towards mr. habte while ordering him to show him his hands.
he can be heard saying the following: “show me your hands man,” repeated, and
then “keep your hands up… hands up” before he even speaks to mr. habte or gets
close to him. cst. murad then walked to the driver’s side of the applicant’s
vehicle, told him to unlock the car, and opened the driver’s door.

cst. murad testified he
immediately smelt a heavy odour of cannabis. when he looked in the vehicle, he
saw a plastic bag on the passenger seat, and he believed it contained cannabis.
he did not ask the applicant what was in the bag. he told the applicant to exit
the vehicle and immediately asked him if he had anything in his pockets that
would hurt him. the applicant responded that he had a pocketknife and then cst.
murad patted him down for officer safety. when the crown asked him why he did this,
cst. murad said it was because he believed that the applicant was hiding
something. in addition, he stated that he always does a pat down to make sure
that he is safe.

cst. murad asked mr. habte
what he was doing in brampton given he was from toronto. the applicant replied
that he decided to take a drive. cst. murad asked mr. habte these questions
because it was 12:30 at night. he also stated that during a pat down search he
likes to have a conversation with the individual because if they were to move suddenly,
he would hear it in their voice.

cst. murad told the
applicant he had open cannabis in his vehicle. however, he did not give mr.
habte a chance to reply, nor did he caution him. cst. murad testified that this
was a mistake. he stated that his main concerns at that juncture were that the
applicant was hiding something and that he had a knife in his pocket. while
this is illegal, it is commonplace. he was never charged for possession of the
knife. he did not read mr. habte his rights to counsel at this point. cst.
murad then asked the applicant if he had any more cannabis in the vehicle and
had him wait near the rear of his vehicle.

cst. murad returned to the driver’s
side door of the applicant’s vehicle, which the officer had left open earlier, and
saw a scale and a large amount of baggies inside the door pocket. he estimated
there to be around 100 rolled-up baggies. from the body-worn camera footage, the
package of baggies was small enough to fit inside the palm of a hand. cst.
murad stated these items were in plain view once the applicant’s car door was
open. he then proceeded to search under the driver’s seat and found a large
amount of cash. what is of note is that he never picked up the bag containing
the tobacco-like substance which he believed and alleged to be marijuana. it in
fact turned out to be a tobacco substance and not marijuana. he never seemed
interested in investigating the applicant for contravening the
cannabis
control act. the cash was rolled up in three or four bundles and looked to
be about 40 to 50 thousand dollars. the actual amount was $20,809.00.

after finding the bundles of
cash, cst. murad arrested mr. habte for possession of drugs for the purpose of
trafficking. he believed he had grounds for the arrest based on the
paraphernalia and the large sum of money. after the arrest, he continued his
search of the applicant. he asked for another sergeant to attend and then put
the applicant in the rear of his cruiser.

mr. habte was arrested at 12:39
am. he was placed in cst. murad’s cruiser at 12:40:47 a.m. at 12:44 a.m., cst.
murad obtained the applicant’s name and date of birth and was about to give mr.
habte his rights to counsel. however, cst. kandola called him over and he
exited his cruiser.

cst. kandola was the second
officer to attend the scene. he arrived at approximately 12:40 a.m., at which
time he took over the search of the applicant’s vehicle.

within a minute or two of
arriving, cst. kandola located a firearm in the vehicle and advised cst. murad.
prior to giving the applicant his rights to counsel, cst. murad left his
vehicle and went over to look at the firearm at 12:46:20 a.m. within a few
minutes, cst. murad returned to his cruiser and gave the applicant rights to
counsel for possession of the firearm and possession for the purpose. the
applicant’s responses to cst. murad’s questions of whether he understands his
rights, and whether he wanted to contact a lawyer, are inaudible in the body-worn
camera footage.

cst. murad then exits his
cruiser, leaving the applicant inside. the footage shows him muting his body-worn
camera while he speaks to other officers who have since arrived at the scene. he
then returns to his vehicle and drives mr. habte to the police station.

much later, another officer
advises that a further search of the vehicle resulted in police finding large
amounts of methamphetamine, fentanyl, cocaine, some pills and marijuana. cst.
murad gave the applicant his rights to counsel for the charges related to these
drugs at 1:21 am.

turning now to assess
whether the applicant’s
charter
rights were breached, commencing with section
9.
was there a breach of the
applicant’s
charter
rights?
section 9

section 9 of the
charter
affords
everyone the constitutionally enshrined right not to be arbitrarily detained or
imprisoned.

section 9's prohibition of
"arbitrary detention" is meant to protect individual liberty against
unjustified state interference. it’s protections limit the state's ability to
impose intimidating and coercive pressure on citizens without adequate
justification.


an analysis of whether an
applicant’s s. 9
charter
right has been breached proceeds in two stages.
the first stage consists of an inquiry into whether the applicant was detained
at all. if it is found that a detention did occur, the second stage inquires
into whether that detention was arbitrary

was the applicant detained?

the supreme court of canada has
adopted the general principle that a person is detained where he or she submits
or acquiesces in the deprivation of liberty and reasonably believes that the
choice to do otherwise does not exist.

this includes not
only physical constraint, but also psychological constraint. detention will be found
where a reasonable person in the subject's position would feel compelled to
comply with a restrictive or coercive demand.

the court in
grant,
suberu,
and
le
confirmed
that determining
whether an individual has been psychologically detained is an objective test.


section
9 of
the charter
does not dictate
that police abstain from interacting with members of the public until they have
specific grounds to connect the individual to the commission of a crime. not
every police encounter, even with a suspect, triggers an individual's right to
counsel under s. 10 (b).


in
grant, the
court summarized the factors that may assist in determining whether a
reasonable person in the individual's circumstances would conclude that they
have been deprived by the police of the liberty of choice:
(a) the
circumstances giving rise to the encounter as they would reasonably be
perceived by the individual: whether the police were providing general
assistance; maintaining general order; making general inquiries regarding a
particular occurrence; or singling out the individual for focussed
investigation.
(b) the
nature of the police conduct, including the language used; the use of physical
contact; the place where the interaction occurred; the presence of others and
the duration of the encounter.
(c) the
particular characteristics or circumstances of the individual where relevant,
including age; physical stature; minority status; level of sophistication.


applying these legal
principles, it is my view there can be no question that there was a
psychological and physical detention in this case. the facts in this case make
it clear that mr. habte was detained the moment he was boxed in by cst. murad’s
police cruiser, ordered to keep his hands up and to get out of his vehicle. a reasonable
person in the applicant’s position “would feel so obligated" to comply
with these demands and would "conclude that he or she was not free to go."


given it was clear that the
applicant was detained, the second stage of the section 9
charte
r
analysis inquires into whether the detention was arbitrary.

was the detention
arbitrary?

for a detention to be
reasonable it must be “authorized by law; the authorizing law itself must not
be arbitrary; and the manner in which the detention is carried out must be
reasonable.”


the grounds for the initial
detention of the applicant, as submitted by the crown are as follows:
(i)
cst. murad had run a query of the applicant’s
license plate which revealed that the owner was unlicensed, and that pc murad
therefore had “reasonable grounds to detain the applicant to determine whether
he was driving without a license.”
(ii)
cst. murad, upon seeing the applicant idling his car “at night
in a plaza the businesses of which were closed,” had grounds to detain and
investigate the applicant for trespassing.
(iii)
cst. murad observed the applicant shuffle around after he
noticed the presence of cst. murad’s vehicle. given cst. murad’s experience
investigating firearm and drug offences “in that area” he had reasonable
grounds to suspect the applicant was involved in a weapon or drug offence.

for the reasons set out
below, i find that cst. murad did not have the reasonable suspicion required to
detain the applicant for investigative purposes.
investigative detention

the police may detain a
person for investigative purposes if they have reasonable grounds to suspect
that the person is connected to particular criminal activity and if the
detention is reasonably necessary in the circumstances.

an individual may
be detained for investigative purposes if the police are acting in the exercise
of their duty and the detention is justified as reasonably necessary in the
totality of the circumstances.

as the supreme court explained
in
mann:
the
detention
must
be viewed as reasonably necessary on an objective view of the totality of the
circumstances, informing the officer's suspicion
that there is a clear nexus
between the individual to be detained and a recent or on-going criminal offence.
reasonable grounds figures at the front-end of such an assessment, underlying
the officer's reasonable suspicion that the particular individual is implicated
in the criminal activity under investigation. the overall reasonableness of
the
decision to detain, however, must further be assessed against all of the
circumstances,
most notably the extent to which the interference with individual liberty is
necessary to perform the officer's duty, the liberty interfered with, and the
nature and extent of that interference
[emphasis added].


the police cannot use
investigative detention as an excuse for holding suspects while the police
search for evidence that might justify the arrest of the suspect. nor does investigative
detention mean that the police can detain suspects indefinitely while they
carry out their investigation.


in this case, cst. murad was
not justified in detaining the applicant to question him about where he was
going, why he was in a parking lot and whether he had drugs in his vehicle. there
was nothing the applicant was doing that could have provided cst. murad with
grounds to believe he was involved in criminal activity. being parked in a
parking lot is not a crime, particularly when a 24-hour gym and a pizza place
which shared the parking lot were still open. where mr. habte parked was only a
short walk to the gym. even if cst. murad saw the applicant bobbing his head as
if he was doing something below the steering wheel or under his seat, this is
not a crime. he could have dropped something and was trying to retrieve it; he
could have been changing his shoes or adjusting the position of his seat.

further, cst. murad had no grounds
to investigate mr. habte under the
trespass to property act.
he simply
saw the applicant’s vehicle parked with its engine running and within a minute’s
time spent observing the vehicle, saw the applicant put it into gear. it is not
the case that cst. murad was responding to a complaint of a suspicious vehicle
or that he watched the vehicle stopped for a prolonged period of time.

while it was submitted that cst.
murad ran the applicant’s plate as he was approaching him and discovered that
the owner of the vehicle was unlicensed, this was not something cst. murad was
concerned about. upon detaining the applicant by boxing him into the parking
spot, pc murad took no further investigative action regarding the suspended
license. he made some queries which are arguably related to the offence of
trespassing as well as some queries regarding ownership of the vehicle, but
this was after he had ordered the applicant to exit his vehicle and while he
was conducting a search of the applicant’s person. cst. murad testified that
the reason why he was speaking with the applicant during the search was to be
able to observe fluctuations in the voice which could indicate movement. i do
not accept that cst. murad was making small talk; at this junction he was in
fact interrogating the applicant.

the proposition that cst. murad
possessed three distinct grounds on which he could lawfully detain mr. habte: (1)
his “feeling” that the applicant was hiding something; (2) driving with a
suspended license; and (3) for trespassing, does not concord with his responses
to mr. habte asking him why he was being detained:
umm,
you’re
looking
a little bit sketch, okay? umm, i pulled up to you, you tried to leave the
minute i approached you.. i don’t know, i, i, know i’m driving in an unmarked,
but i mean, yeah and when you tried to drive away when we hadn’t even had a
conversation first, kinda throws me off too, right? so.


when mr. habte asked again, after he was
searched why he was being detained, cst. murad replied: “again like, i was
approaching you, you were about to drive off, that’s why i pulled you over and
then umm i uhh approached your car, i saw all the cannabis inside the car, and
it reeks like weed in there. i don’t know
how
long ago you smoked. you
don’t seem too impaired to me, so i’m not concerned about you driving away…”


officers have wide powers to
police communities. however, the conduct of cst. murad exceeded the norms of
community policing. cst. murad had no legal authority to box mr. habte into
the parking spot or to order him to hold his hands up. cst. murad was not
called to provide general assistance, maintain order or to respond to unfolding
events. there was no specific complaint from a third party about trespassing
or a suspicious vehicle.

he never told mr.
habte, that i am investigating you because i think when you saw my vehicle
(which was unmarked) that you were hiding something under your seat. if cst.
murad was investigating the applicant for trespassing, as far as he knew the
applicant was only parked at the mall for less than a minute before he
approached him. in addition, if cst. murad was concerned with any purported
trespassing, seeing the applicant prepare to leave should have been the end of
his investigation.

considering the circumstances
in this case there was nothing that could give rise to reasonable suspicion
that mr. habte was engaged in any criminal activity, and i conclude therefore,
that the detention was arbitrary; mr. habte’s s. 9
charter
right was
breached. cst. murad never expressly communicated to mr. habte why he blocked
him in. the supreme court held in
le
that a suspect's presence in a
so-called “high crime area” is not by itself a basis for detention.


r. v. thompson

is particularly relevant to the
case at bar.
in
thompson,
the accused was sitting in a parked but
running motor vehicle in a parking lot at night. two police officers had driven
to the parking lot after receiving an anonymous tip about drug dealing that was
taking place out of a car. they found the accused's vehicle parked with its
engine running. although police had no basis to believe the car's occupants
were engaged in criminal activity, they parked two police cruisers directly
behind it, boxing in the accused's vehicle so that he could not drive away. the
officers approached the vehicle from both sides and one officer smelled burnt
marijuana from the open driver-side window. the accused was arrested for
possession of marijuana and when the car was searched, cash and other drugs
were found. jamal j. found that the accused had been arbitrarily detained
when the police cruisers were used to block his vehicle's path.

the facts
in
r. v. le
are
not dissimilar to the case at bar. in
le
the police walked into a
residential complex and then into a backyard without grounds and without
permission. several men were in the yard socializing. the supreme court found
that if there was some concern about trespassing that the police should have
made inquiries by remaining on their side of the fence. the court found the
police had no communicated purpose and immediately engaged with the occupants
in a manner that demonstrated that they were not free to leave.

in the case before me, cst. murad
should have parked beside the applicant and made inquires in this manner.

turning now to determine
whether there was a breach of the applicant’s s. 8
charter
right.
section 8 search

section 8 of the
charter
declares: “everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or
seizure.”

the constitutional
protection in s. 8 rests on the fundamental belief that privacy is an
essential precondition to individual liberty and security of the person. any
law authorizing an intrusion must be reasonable and the manner in which the
intrusion is effected must be reasonable.


in some circumstances,
police can conduct safety searches as an incident of the exercise of their duty
to investigate. where a search is reasonably necessary to eliminate an
imminent threat to the safety of the public or the police, the police have the
power to conduct a search to ensure they are safe.


a warrantless search is presumptively unreasonable and
contrary to s. 8 of the
charter.
in the absence of a
warrant, the crown must establish on a balance of probabilities that the search
was authorized by law, that the law itself is reasonable and that the manner in
which the search was carried out is reasonable.


section 12 of the
cannabis
control act
(
cca
)

prohibits the
transportation of cannabis within a vehicle unless it is in its original
packaging, which has not been opened, or is packed in baggage that is fastened
closed or is not otherwise readily available to any person in the vehicle.
subsection 12(3) authorizes a police officer who has reasonable grounds to
believe that cannabis is being contained in a vehicle contrary to s. 12(1), to
enter and search, at any time, without a warrant, the vehicle, and search any
occupants of the vehicle.

based on the testimony of cst.
murad and cst. kandola and the body-worn camera footage, i conclude that he was
not interested in finding marijuana. in cross examination he said he wanted to
look under mr. habte’s seat. when cst. murad first opened the driver’s side
door of mr. habte’s vehicle,
he
pointed to a bag on the passenger seat and said, “you’ve got a bunch of
cannabis there”.

the substance was actually tobacco. cst. murad took no investigative steps to
confirm if the substance was cannabis. nor did he give the applicant the
opportunity to respond.

cst. murad said he could not
tell if what he smelled was burnt or fresh marijuana. cst. kandola stated in
cross-examination that he could not recall whether he detected any smell of
cannabis in the vehicle and admitted he made no mention in his police notes of
having detected any smell of cannabis although he conceded this would have been
an important observation. further, the small amount of cannabis that was
located in the vehicle was found sealed inside a zip lock bag which was inside
another bag located on the floor of the front passenger area. the above is
inconsistent with cst. murad’s statements to the applicant at the scene that it
“reek[ed] like weed” in the applicant’s vehicle. it is also inconsistent with
his testimony that he smelled a heavy odour of cannabis once the applicant
rolled down his window. the body-worn camera footage shows that the applicant
did not roll down the window, he was complying with cst. murad’s order to keep
his hands in the air. it was cst. murad who opened the driver’s door after
instructing the applicant to unlock it. i conclude therefore, that he did not
have grounds to search under the
cca
as he did not have reasonable
grounds to believe that cannabis was being stored in the vehicle contrary to s.
12(1) of the
cca.

plain view

another possible argument
for the police to have grounds to search the vehicle is that items thought to
be connected to trafficking were found in plain view.

the plain view doctrine,
which exists at common law and has been codified in
s. 489
of the
criminal
code
provides authority for a peace officer to seize evidence of a crime,
which the officer observes in the course of the execution of his or her lawful
duties. the following four conditions must be satisfied before the doctrine applies:
(i)
the police officer must be lawfully in the place where the search is
being conducted;
(ii)
the
nature of the evidence must be immediately apparent as constituting a criminal
offence;
(iii)
the
evidence must have been discovered inadvertently; and
(iv)
the plain
view doctrine confers a seizure power not a search power; it is limited to
those items that are visible and does not permit an exploratory search to find
other evidence of other crimes.

evidence immediately apparent, and discovery inadvertent?

the final
jones
condition is that
the plain view doctrine confers a seizure power and not a search
power. even where an officer sees evidence in plain view that
does not, on its own, justify a search to find evidence of other crimes.

finding the baggies and the scale
did not give cst. murad the authority to search under the applicant’s driver's seat.

the baggies and scale were
not immediately apparent and discovered inadvertently. cst. murad had to shine
his flashlight down the driver’s door, into the lower door pocket. furthermore,
it was cst. murad who opened the applicant’s door and ordered him to step out
of the car in the first place.

in my view none of the four
requirements for the application of the plain view doctrine have been
established in this case. first, the officer had no authority to search the
vehicle. i find that cst. murad used s. 12(3) of the
cca
as a ruse to
search mr. habte and his vehicle. i find this to be the case given the several
reasons cst. murad provided for detaining mr. habte, and more importantly how
he admitted in cross examination that his intention was to search under mr.
habte’s driver’s seat for drugs, guns, or other contraband prior to speaking to
him. in addition, when cst. murad had the applicant outside his vehicle he
stated on the body-worn camera footage that he was not worried about mr. habte
being impaired.

the crown submits that the
initial search of mr. habte was justified pursuant to the
cannabis control
act. however, in the case before me the alleged
cca
violation was
used as pretext to search. the substance the officer saw next to mr. habte was
not marijuana. the reason i conclude that the
cca
search was not genuine
is because cst. murad provided a number of different answers with respect to
his grounds to detain and investigate the applicant. these grounds included
that he was investigating the applicant for trespassing; that when he ran the applicant's
plate, he saw that the registered owner was unlicensed; his prior experiences
making arrests for possession of drugs in this parking lot; and that he
believed the applicant was attempting to hide something under his seat.

the most important ground
for cst. murad, however, was that he saw the applicant appear to be doing
something under his steering wheel or his seat. cst. murad admitted without
hesitation that he had made up his mind before he incorrectly concluded the bag
of tobacco was marijuana, that he was going to search the applicant’s vehicle
and that he wanted to look under the applicant’s seat. the fact that he
provided various reasons to detain and investigate the applicant affected his
credibility. in addition, the way he described the positioning of the applicant’s
vehicle during examination-in-chief made it sound like the applicant’s vehicle
was no where near the gym which was open at the time. however, mr. habte was
parked just a short walk from the gym. he also led the court to believe that
mr. habte was parked when no other vehicles were around. on the body-camera
video four vehicles can be seen parked in the lot, and this was only a small
section captured by the camera. when this was pointed out to cst. murad, he
said that the other cars were not in his direct view.

cst. murad agreed that there
would be no way he could see what the applicant was doing in his car because he
could not see below mr. habte’s chest, yet he wrote in his notes that the applicant
was actively hiding things under his seat. cst. murad never mentioned that he
smelt marijuana when he first had the applicant exit his vehicle, he showed
absolutely no interest in checking to see if the bag on his driver’s seat contained
marijuana, instead he went right to searching his vehicle.

i do not accept that the
officer smelt marijuana when he opened the door. instead, he pointed to the bag
of tobacco and said, “i see you have marijuana there”. admittedly from a
distance, the tobacco could have appeared to look like marijuana. when the body-camera
video was shown to the court on a zoom screen, from a distance it appeared to
be marijuana. officer kandola looked at the substance and concluded it to be
tobacco. later when being asked again by the applicant as to why the officer
detained him, cst. murad said for the first time that it smelt of marijuana in
his vehicle. it appeared that the officer was speaking for the camera as he
realized he did not have grounds to detain and search the applicant.

further, in the process of searching the applicant’s
person, cst. murad asked him how much marijuana he had in the car and the applicant
replied about three grams. cst. murad never asked him how it was stored or
where it was located. cannabis can be stored if it is in its original packaging
or is packed in baggage that is fastened closed and not readily available to
anyone in the vehicle. instead, cst. murad went right to searching the vehicle
in other places and never once picked up the bag of tobacco on the passenger
seat. the caselaw holds that a smell of marijuana alone is not enough for
reasonable grounds to believe that an individual is in possession of marijuana.


in addition to the search of
his vehicle, mr. habte was subject to a “pat down” search by cst. murad. the
waistband on his pants was pulled so cst. murad could take a quick look and his
hoodie was lifted showing his bare stomach. cst. murad then took out the applicant’s
wallet and then thumbed through the bills inside it.

certainly, in some cases
such a search of a person could be justified where the officer has a reasonable
suspicion to believe that an accused may have a weapon on him as was
the case in
mcguffie.

in that case, the court of appeal found that an officer
was justified in conducting a pat down search of the appellant because he had
sufficient grounds to believe there was an imminent threat to his safety based
upon receiving evidence from an employee at a bar that the defendant was seen
handling a firearm. in the case at bar, when asked by cst. murad prior to the
search if he had anything on him that could hurt the officer, mr. habte replied
that he had a small pocketknife.

the pat down search after
ordering the applicant to exit his vehicle was not reasonable as the officer
had no reason to detain mr. habte for investigative purposes or believe that he
was a threat to himself or to the public.

both the objective and
subjective elements of reasonable grounds were absent in this case. the searches
were unlawful and unreasonable within section 8 of the
charter.
i conclude therefore that mr. habte’s s. 8 rights were breached.

turning now to an analysis
of whether the applicant’s ss. 10(a) and 10(b)
charter
rights were breached.
section
10(a)

section 10(a) of the
charter
provides
that everyone has the right on arrest or detention to be informed promptly of
the reasons therefor. a person must be advised of the basis for their
detention
immediately
under s. 10 (a).


as discussed above, cst.
murad never told the applicant that he was being investigated under the
cca,
and that this was the reason he was being detained, despite being asked twice
by mr. habte why he was being stopped. i find that his 10(a) right was
violated.
section 10(b)

section 10(b) of the
charter
reads:
“everyone has the right on arrest or detention [...] (b) to retain and instruct
counsel without delay and to be informed of that right.”

section 10(b) creates the
right to retain and instruct counsel without delay, and the right to be
informed of that right without delay. if a detained person, having been advised
of his right to counsel, chooses to exercise that right, the police must
provide the detained person with a reasonable opportunity to exercise that
right and must refrain from eliciting incriminatory evidence from the detained
person until he has had a reasonable opportunity to consult with counsel.


in
suberu,
the
supreme court held that s. 10(b) mandates that an individual be
advised of his right to retain and instruct counsel
immediately upon being
detained.

as
described
in
thompson,
supra, the test is not "as soon as
practicable".

in
suberu, at
para.
40, the court described the rationale for the rights guaranteed
by s. 10(b):
[t]he purpose
of s. 10(b) is to ensure that individuals
know of their right to counsel, and have access to it, in situations where they
suffer a significant deprivation of liberty due to state coercion which leaves
them vulnerable to the exercise of state power and in a position of legal
jeopardy. specifically, the right to counsel is meant to assist detainees to
regain their liberty, and guard against the risk of involuntary
self-incrimination.

the right to counsel is also
important in providing "reassurance" and advice on such questions as
how long the detention is apt to last, and what can or should be done to regain
liberty.

as doherty j.a. explained
in
r. v.
rover:
the right to counsel is a lifeline for detained persons. through that lifeline, detained
persons obtain, not only legal advice and guidance about the procedures to which they will be subjected, but also the sense that they are not
entirely at the mercy of the police while detained. the psychological value of
access to counsel without delay should not be underestimated.


there are exceptions to the
immediacy requirement for concerns regarding public safety.


in this case there were no
safety concerns. the applicant was handcuffed in the back of the police
vehicle. there was no one else in mr. habte’s vehicle. rather, cst. murad chose
to disregard mr. habte’s rights because he could not wait to continue to search
his vehicle. in addition, he wanted to speak with the civilian ride along and
have her watch while he searched the applicant’s vehicle. even when a second
officer arrived, ready and willing to search the vehicle, mr. murad continued
for another minute to search the applicant’s vehicle.
a
cannabis control
act
(
cca
)
search

there are a number of
cases which have held that in a
cca
investigation, s. 10(b)
charter
rights can be suspended.

however, as i found
earlier in my reasons, this was not a
cca
investigation but rather a
police officer simply wanting to search the applicant and his vehicle on a
hunch or because he thought the applicant was acting “sketch,” in the constable’s
words, with no reasonable basis for this opinion.

i find that there was a
clear violation of mr. habte’s s. 10(b)
charter
right. there was no
justifiable excuse to arrest mr. habte on serious criminal charges and leave
him sitting in the back of the police cruiser because cst. murad wanted to
continue his search. the applicant was under the control of the police, subject
to an unconstitutional detention and to unreasonable searches which yielded
incriminatory evidence. he was in serious legal jeopardy and needed legal
advice. he was constitutionally entitled to it, without delay.


looking at the body-camera
footage the primary caution was given at 12:40 a.m. and his rights to counsel
began at 12:47 a.m.
section 10(b) implementational

it is not clear from the
audio of the body-worn camera footage whether the applicant wished to avail
himself of his right to speak to counsel when finally asked by the officer.

one of the s. 10(b)
implementational duties imposed on police is “to refrain from eliciting
incriminatory evidence from the detainee until he or she has had a reasonable
opportunity to reach a lawyer.”


in
r. v.
palme
r,
the court held that making “small talk” with a detainee without first providing
s. 10(b) rights was a fairly serious breach of those rights.

cst. murad made what appeared to be “small talk”
with the applicant before and after his search of the applicant’s person and
prior to the provision of his rights to counsel. he told mr. habte that he knew
he was from toronto, and asked him, among other things, what he was doing in
brampton and if he had anything in his car that would hurt him. as noted above
this was not “small talk” but an interrogation.
section 7
charter
breach - muting of the body-worn camera video

counsel for mr. habte
alleges that his s. 7
charter
right was breached as a result of the
officers’ deliberate muting of their body-worn cameras when interacting with
one another and not within ear shot of the applicant.

section 7 of the
charter
provides
that "everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person
and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the
principles of fundamental justice."

the principles of
fundamental justice encompass many principles, including the important right to
make full answer and defence. this right includes a duty on the crown to make
full disclosure of evidence in their possession or control and a duty on police
to preserve relevant material in their possession or control so that the crown
can disclose it.
where an applicant
shows disclosable evidence has been lost, this violates s. 7 unless the crown
can explain the loss and show it did not occur through unacceptable negligence
(the loss may also amount to abuse of process, but this is not necessary to
show a violation of s. 7).


there is no common law or
constitutional right to have the state create evidence or record what is
relevant in a particular way.

while the courts
have acknowledged that there are many significant benefits to the recording of
certain proceedings in police investigations, such as the interrogation of
suspects, they have declined to mandate that it be done.

however, where a failure to record occurs in
circumstances where police interrogate a suspect, having the recording
equipment readily available, it will invariably render the unrecorded
interrogation suspicious.


an accused does not have a
freestanding constitutional right to an adequate investigation of the charges
against him or her. inadequacies in an investigation may lead to the ultimate
failure of the prosecution, to a specific breach of a
charter
right or
to a civil remedy. those inadequacies do not, however, in-and-of-themselves
constitute a denial of the right to make full answer and defence. an accused
also does not have a constitutional right to direct the conduct of the criminal
investigation of which he or she is the target.


there is no constitutional
requirement for the police to use a body-worn camera.

a failure of police to record
conversations with each other, even in situations where it is deliberate and
selective, without more, does not violate s. 7 of the
charter.


there must be a link to the
right to make full answer and defence in order to engage
section 7. that link is not established here
because no evidence was lost.

in conclusion i do not find
that there was a s. 7
charter
violation.
racial
profiling

mr. habte is a racialized
young man. he was approximately 24 years old at the time of his arrest. the
manner in which cst. murad approached him, ordering mr. habte to put his hands
up, and the speed in which he detained and searched mr. habte provides some
support that racial profiling was a factor here. the officer had no grounds
whatsoever to stop, investigate and search mr. habte. cst. murad testified that
he noticed when he first drove towards mr. habte that he is dark skinned.
simply because the applicant put his car in gear without moving his vehicle out
of his parking spot, cst. murad believed that the applicant was “acting sketch”.

however, the allegation of
racial profiling was not raised in the applicant’s factum or explored in the
examination of the witnesses. a racial profiling claim is rarely proven by
direct evidence, it is often done by inference drawn from circumstantial
evidence.

still, absent a
more detailed account of the allegation of racial profiling in this case and without
the corresponding opportunity for the crown and witnesses to respond to such
allegations, i do not have a proper record on which to conclude one way or
another whether racial profiling was at play in the conduct under scrutiny in
this application.
24(2) analysis

section 24(2) of
the
charter
provides that,
where evidence was obtained in a
manner that breached a right guaranteed by the
charter, the evidence
shall be excluded if it is established that, having regard to all the
circumstances, its admission would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute.
obtained
in a manner

the threshold stage of the s.
24(2) analysis consists of a determination of whether the impugned evidence was
“obtained in a manner” that breached the applicant’s
charter
rights.

given
my findings that the applicant’s rights under sections 9, 8 and 10 of the
charter
were breached by the police, i must now determine whether the evidence was
obtained in a manner sufficiently connected to those breaches.

evidence
will be “obtained in a manner” that infringed a
charter
right if, “upon
review of the entire course of events, the breach and the obtaining of the
evidence can be said to be a part of the same transaction or course of
conduct.”


a
causal connection between a breach and the evidence is not required.

the connection can be causal,
temporal, contextual or a combination of the three.

a connection that is remote or
tenuous will not trigger s. 24(2). there is “no hard and fast rule for
determining when evidence obtained following the infringement of a
charter
right becomes too remote.”


based on an examination of the
chain of events giving rise to this application, it is clear that the impugned
evidence was obtained in a manner that breached the applicant’s ss. 9, 8 and 10
charter
rights. the evidence is connected contextually to the s. 10
breaches, and causally to the s. 9 breach and the s. 8 breaches.
would
admission of the evidence bring the administration of justice into disrepute?

the next
question that must be answered by courts in an application for the exclusion of
evidence under s. 24(2) is not whether the evidence should be excluded, but
rather: “whether the administration of justice would be brought into disrepute
by its admission.

if admission of the evidence would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute, then s. 24(2) of the
charter
requires that the evidence be excluded.

in
grant,
the supreme
court of canada set out the analytical framework to be used in determining
whether the admission of evidence obtained in breach of the
charter
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. this framework
consists of three lines of inquiry: (1) the seriousness of the
charter
-infringing
state conduct; (2) the impact of the breach(es) on the
charter
-protected
interests of the accused; and (3) society’s interest in the adjudication of the
case on its merits. the court must then “balance the assessments under each of
these lines of inquiry to determine whether, considering all the circumstances,
admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute”.

seriousness
of the
charter
-infringing state conduct

under this line of inquiry,
the court must assess whether admitting the evidence would convey to the public
the message that the courts condone the
charter
-infringing state conduct
at issue. this is supported by the idea that courts, as responsible for the
administration of justice, should distance themselves with state conduct that
is not
charter
compliant.

in my view, the
violations of the applicant's constitutional rights in this case were very
serious. cst. murad used the pretext of searching the vehicle for illegally
transported cannabis under the
cannabis control act
to launch
into a drug and or gun investigation without any regard to the ss. 8, 9 or ss.
10(a) and (b) rights of the applicant.

there was no authority to
conduct a
cca
search. the applicant's detention
was
arbitrary from
the moment cst. murad blocked him in with his vehicle. the detention continued
for the purpose of conducting a criminal investigation. then mr. habte’s vehicle
was searched without reasonable grounds. the officer looked down mr. habte’s pants,
pulled up his shirt and searched his wallet. his right to be informed of the
right to counsel upon detention was violated. his right to speak to a lawyer
without delay was disregarded. i would characterize these violations as a “major
departure from
charter
standards” and “clear violations of well-established
rules governing state conduct”


the seriousness of the
violations and their cumulative effect weighs heavily in favour of exclusion of
the evidence obtained. this is not a case, as was
discussed in
r. v.
zacharias,
where one
charter
breach led to a series of cascading breaches which
were, but for the initial breach, otherwise
charter
compliant. the ss. 9, 
10(a), 10(b), and 8 breaches, although related to the initial s. 9 breach, were
in violation of the
charter
in their own right.
impact
on the charter-protected interests
of the accused

mr. habte’s
liberty interests were negatively impacted by the s. 9 breach. his freedom
to choose to walk away was severely impacted from the outset of the
transaction. in fact, it was the alleged attempt by the applicant to exercise
this freedom to drive away, (from an unknown vehicle approaching him at night)
which was offered by cst. murad as one of the reasons why he was detained in
the first place.

mr. habte’s dignity was moderately impacted by the
invasiveness of the search of his person. he was also prevented a
constitutional lifeline, that is to be told that he has a right to speak to a
lawyer. this was done while the applicant was illegally detained and searched. the
cumulative breaches in this case had a very significant impact on the applicant’s
charter
-protected interests.
society's interests in an adjudication on the merits

this line of inquiry asks,
“whether the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process would be
better served by admission of the evidence, or by its exclusion.”

this third line of inquiry typically pulls
towards inclusion of the evidence.
in
r. v. mcguffie, justice
doherty wrote that “[i]f the first and second inquiries make a strong case for
exclusion, the third inquiry will seldom, if ever, tip the balance in favour of
admissibility”.

the following passages from the supreme court confirm that
society’s interest in having a trial on the merits does not trump the long-term
repute of the justice system. chief justice mclachlin and justice charron held,
writing for the majority of the court in
grant, at para:
in our view, while the seriousness
of the alleged offence may be a valid consideration, it has the potential to
cut both ways. failure to effectively prosecute a serious charge due to
excluded evidence may have an immediate impact on how people view the justice
system. yet, as discussed, it is the long-term repute of the justice system
that is s. 24(2)'s focus. as pointed out in
burlingham, the goals
furthered by s. 24(2) "operate independently of the type of crime for
which the individual stands accused" (para. 51). and as lamer j. observed
in
collins, "[t]he charter is designed to protect the accused from
the majority, so the enforcement of the charter must not be left to that
majority" (p. 282). the short term public clamour for a conviction in a
particular case must not deafen the s. 24(2) judge to the longer-term repute of
the administration of justice. moreover, while the public has a heightened
interest in seeing a determination on the merits where the offence charged is
serious, it also has a vital interest in having a justice system that is above
reproach, particularly where the penal stakes for the accused are high.


the supreme court restated
this principle in
le,
where justices brown and martin (karakatsanis j.
concurring) wrote at para. 158:
while disrepute may result from
the exclusion of relevant and reliable evidence (
grant, at para.
81
),
so too might it result from admitting evidence that deprives the accused of a
fair hearing or that amounts to “judicial condonation of unacceptable conduct
by the investigatory and prosecutorial agencies” (
collins, at p. 281).
an “adjudication on the merits”, in a rule of law state, presupposes an
adjudication grounded in legality and respect for longstanding constitutional
norms.

the officer's
violations of the applicant's
charter
rights were very
serious and amounted to abuse of police authority. cst. murad used the pretext
of the smell of cannabis to conduct a warrantless search. the applicant—a
racialized young man—was arbitrarily detained at the roadside and subjected to unlawful
searches of his vehicle and of his person. he should have been promptly
informed of his right to counsel. he was not. he was interrogated, arrested, searched,
and placed in a cruiser while officers continued to search his vehicle and
chose to delay the provision of his rights to counsel.

i have given great
consideration to the fact that the charges mr. habte is facing are extremely
serious and that the evidence seized is also highly reliable. a number of
decisions from the supreme court have held that the seriousness of the offences
is not the controlling consideration in the decision whether to exclude.

in
harrison,
35
kg of cocaine were excluded on appeal. the supreme court upheld and cited the
court of appeal’s decision on this point:
as cronk j.a. put it, allowing the
seriousness of the offence and the reliability of the evidence to overwhelm
the
s. 24(2)
analysis “would deprive those charged with serious
crimes of the protection of the individual freedoms afforded to all canadians
under the charter and, in effect, declare that in the
administration of the criminal law 'the ends justify the means.’”


while society's
interest in an adjudication on the merits is great, especially given the large
quantities of drugs that were seized along with a deadly weapon, a firearm, i
conclude that the admission of the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute given the serious, and cumulative disregard of the
applicant’s
charter
-protected rights. the violations in this case
were clear and were of well-established rules.

they had a significant impact on the accused's
liberty interest.
i find the seriousness of these breaches to be of such weight, and the
effect that they had on mr. habte’s
charter
-protected interests so significant that the court must
dissociate itself here from the actions of the police. to allow the crown to
rely on this illegally obtained evidence would be sending a message to the
public that the police can stop and search a person or their vehicle without grounds
and then attempt to justify the search afterwards on the basis of what they
find and seize.

to detain and arrest an
individual, and proceed to a warrantless search and seizure, in the clear
absence of the necessary grounds to do so— is a marked deviation from the rule
of law. if police officers were permitted to arrest people at random, on a
hunch or because they took offence to their conduct or appearance, the
administration of justice would fall into disrepute.
conclusion:

for these reasons, the
application is granted, and the evidence excluded.
released:
april 17, 2025
signed: justice a. r. mackay

highway traffic act,
rso 1990, c h.8.

this evidence came from exhibits officer, cst. jeff hepton.

r. v.
grant,
2009 scc 32, at para.
20;
r. v. zacharias,
2023 scc 30;
r. v. le,
2019 scc
34
at para
25.

r. v. le,
at para.
29

grant
at para. 28;
r. v.
suberu,
2009 scc 33

suberu, at para.
22;
le, at para. 25.

grant
at paras. 30-32,
suberu
at para. 28,
le
at para. 121.

suberu,
at para.
3.

grant
at para. 44.

le,
at para. 25.

le,
at paras. 29-31.

le,
at para 124;
grant,
at paras 54-56.

r. v.
mann,
2004 scc 52,
 3 s.c.r. 59
at para.
45;
r. v. mackenzie,
2013 scc 50,
 3 s.c.r. 250

mann,
at para.
34;
mackenzie,
at para.
35.

mann,
at para
34.

r.
v. mcguffie,
2016 onca 365, at para.
38.

12:37 a.m. (01:40 of body-worn camera video)

12:38 a.m. (02:38 of the body-worn camera
video)

this reasoning was
applied in
r.
v. le,
at para.
35, where a group of young black men were
detained in a backyard without reasonable suspicion.

le,
at para 60.

2020
onca 264.

le,
para. 41.

r. v. fearon,
2014 scc 77,
 3 s.c.r. 621 (s.c.c.), at para.
12;
r. v. aucoin,
2012 scc 66,
 3 s.c.r. 408 (s.c.c.),
at para.
30;
r v mcguffie,
2016 onca 365
at para.
49.

r. v. macdonald,
2014 scc 3,
 1 s.c.r. 37, at paras.
40, 44.

r. v.
collins
1987 canlii 84 (scc),
 1 s.c.r. 265
at para.
23.

2017,
so 2017, c 26, sch 1.

12:36:51 a.m. (00:54 of the body-worn camera
video)

section 12 of the
cca
has
been held to be constitutionally valid in
r. v. nzita,
2020 o.j.
no. 3109
and again
in
r. v. tully,
2022 onsc 1852. mr. habte
did not challenge the validity of the
cca
in the proceedings
before me.

r. v.
jones,
2011 onca 632.

r.
v. young,
2019 onsc 3563, at para.
53.

r. v. mckenzie-walcott,
2022 onsc 1350, at paras.
12, 13;
r. v. polashek,
1999 canlii 3714 (on ca),
 o.j. no. 968, at paras.
10-14.

2016 onca 365, at para.
52.

r.
v. palmer,
2023 onsc 4842, at para.
71.

suberu, at para.
38;
grant, at para. 58;
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc
50,
 2 s.c.r. 495
(s.c.c.), at paras.
20-26;
mcguffie.

suberu,
at para.
42.

r.
v.
debot,
1989 canlii 13 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 1140, at p. 1144;
suberu, at para.
41.

2018 onca 745,
143 o.r. (3d) 135, at
para.
45.

suberu, at para.
42

graham,
2018 onsc 6718, at para.
52;
tully, at para.
146-147;
r. v. grant,
2021 oncj 90 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 744, at paras.
128-131;
r.
v. kanneh,
2022 onsc 5413, at para.
60;
palmer, at para
80.

r. v. mcguffie
2016 onca 365, at paras.
41-44.

suberu, at para
38.

2023 onsc 4842

r. v. aim,
2023 canlii 98377 (on sc)
at para.
48,
citing
r. v.
la,
1997 canlii 309 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 680, at paras.
20-22;
r. v. hersi,
2019 onca 94,
373 c.c.c. (3d) 229, at para.
30;
r. v. janeiro,
2022 onca 118
at para.
107.

ibid, at para. 49.

ibid,
citing
r. v. oickle,
2000 scc 38
at para.
46.

ibid,
citing
r. v. moore-mcfarlane,
(2001)
2001 canlii 6363 (on ca),
160 c.c.c. (3d) 493
at paras.
61-65.

ibid,
citing
r. v. darwish,
2010 onca 124;
r. v. barnes,
2009 onca 432
at
para.
1.

ibid,
at paras. 48-56.

ibid, at paras. 56.

r.
v. bailey,
 o.j. no. 1664, at para 43,
citing
peart v. peel
regional police services,
2006 canlii 37566
at para
95
citing,
r. v.
brown,
2003 canlii 52142,
 oj no 1251, at paras.
44-45. see
r. v.
bailey
at para 46-47 for a summary of the ontario court of appeal’s
instructions to trial judges for when an allegation of racial profiling is
alleged (
r. v. sitladeen
2020 onca 303, at para
54
).

r. v. plaha,
2004 canlii 21043 (on ca),
 oj no 3484 (ql),
at para.
45.

r. v. strachan,
1988 canlii 25 (scc),
 2 scr 980
at p. 1005;
plaha
at para.
45.

r.
v. tim,
2022 scc 12
at para.
78,
plaha
at para 45.

tim
at para. 78,
citing
strachan, at p. 1006.

le
at para.
139,
citing
taylor, at para.
42.

grant
at para 71.

r. v. paterson,
2017
scc 15,
at para.
44;
see also
r. v. harrison,
2009 scc 34., at
paras. 24-25.

grant
at para 79.

2016 onca 365, at para.
63; see also
le, at para. 142

grant,
para. 84.

le,
at para 142;
paterson, at para
56.

r.
v. harrison,
at para.
40.

“
the supreme court recently acknowledged
in
r.
v.
tim,
2019 onsc 935, at para.
85, that ‘[e]ven
where the
charter
infringement is not deliberate or the
product of systemic or institutional abuse, exclusion has been found to be
warranted for clear violations of well-established rules governing state
conduct'” (
paterson, at para.
44;
see also
harrison, at
paras.
24-25
). (
r. v. vieira,
2024 oncj 55, at para.
139
).