source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj632/2025oncj632.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. el achqer,
2025 oncj 632
date: 
2025 12 03
court
file no.: hamilton 22-47104591
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
soufiane el
achqer
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
heard
on may 7 and 9, 2025
reasons
on
charter
application (ss. 8, 9, 10(b) and 24(2))
released
on december 3, 2025

tessa moran........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
matthew campbell-williams................... counsel
for the accused soufiane el achqer
fiorucci j.:
overview

in november 2022, hamilton police applied for
and were granted search warrants for multiple addresses. the police planned to
execute these search warrants simultaneously. noah braun was a target of the
police investigation for two of the addresses. the accused, soufiane el achqer,
was not a target of the investigation.

one of the two addresses associated to mr. braun
was 151 hughson street south, unit 1201, in hamilton. this was a residential apartment
unit in a high-rise apartment building. the police believed this unit was a
stash house for a drug trafficking enterprise.

three days before the execution of the search
warrants, during police surveillance, the accused was seen in the company of
mr. braun in the vicinity of 151 hughson street south. at one point, they
exited the apartment building together.

on november 22, 2022, teams of police officers
coordinated to execute the search warrants on the multiple addresses at the
same time. prior to the execution of the warrants, the team assigned to 151
hughson street south conducted surveillance outside the apartment building. the
accused was again seen exiting the front doors of the apartment building with
mr. braun. the accused was carrying a knapsack and black satchel. the accused
returned to the apartment building a short time later and entered the front
doors, again carrying a black knapsack and black satchel.

when police units were in place at each of the
multiple locations where search warrants were being executed, and were ready to
execute the warrants, the team of police officers assigned to 151 hughson
street south attended at the front doors of the apartment building. as the
police officers were entering the front doors, the accused was exiting the
apartment building.

a police officer detained the accused and asked
him what apartment he was coming from which elicited an incriminating response.
the police then took the accused up the elevator with them to the twelfth floor.
the police entered unit 1201 pursuant to the validly issued judicial
authorization. they located controlled substances and cash as well as other
items of evidentiary value to this prosecution. the accused was arrested and
given his right to counsel and caution for the first time. the accused was
detained for approximately six minutes without being advised of his right to
counsel.

the accused is charged with possession of three
schedule i substances for the purpose of trafficking and proceeds of crime over
$5,000. he brought a
charter
application at the outset of the trial
alleging violations of ss. 8, 9 and 10(b). he asserts that he was arbitrarily
detained and subjected to an unconstitutional search and seizure when the police
officer asked him what apartment he was coming from. as the police did not
convey to him immediately upon his detention that he had the right to counsel,
the accused claims an infringement of the informational component of s. 10(b).

the accused did not challenge the issuance of
the search warrant for unit 1201. however, he seeks exclusion of the evidence
found within the apartment contending that the multiple constitutional
violations are sufficiently connected to the acquisition of this evidence, and
that the admission of this evidence would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute.

the crown submits that no
charter
violations
occurred. in the alternative, if the court finds any infringement of
charter
rights, the crown says it should not result in the exclusion of evidence
obtained pursuant to a validly issued search warrant.

the crown has made concessions. the crown undertakes
not to rely on the accused’s answers to police questioning while under
detention to connect him to unit 1201. therefore, the crown will not adduce at
trial, and asks me to disabuse my mind of, the accused’s utterance to police
that he was a tenant in unit 1201. furthermore, at some point during the
accused’s detention or arrest, the police seized a key for unit 1201 from him.
the crown has undertaken not to adduce evidence at trial regarding the seizure
of this key from the accused.

on the
charter
voir dire,
the
crown called the officer who detained the accused, pc ryan blake, and
another officer who transported the accused to the police station and
facilitated his call with duty counsel. upon hearing from the transport officer,
the accused conceded that there was no violation of the implementational
component of s. 10(b). the accused did not testify on the
voir
dire.

these reasons explain why i find no violation of
s. 9 of the
charter
but do find violations of ss. 8 and 10(b).
however,
these reasons also explain why these breaches do not result in exclusion of the
evidence located in unit 1201.
the facts and the evidence of pc
ryan blake

a drug investigation led the police to identify
151 hughson street south, unit 1201 in hamilton to be an address of interest. 151
hughson street south was an apartment building with multiple residential units.
unit 1201 was one of the residential units on the twelfth floor of the building.
this unit was believed to be a drug stash house associated to mr. braun, one of
the targets of the investigation.

the police investigation included physical
surveillance, a tracking warrant for mr. braun’s phone and
a cell phone extraction. on november 15, 2022, police conducted
surveillance. using the tracker, the surveillance team located mr. braun at
2:05 p.m. at the big bee food mart at john street south and young street in
hamilton. at 2:10 p.m., police observed mr. braun and a male wearing a
distinctive camouflage jacket to walk together westbound on young street before
proceeding to the area of hughson street south and haymarket street.

when the police made their surveillance observations on november
15, 2022, they did not know who the male in the camouflage jacket was.
they did not know his name and he was not a target of the
drug trafficking investigation. they took photos of him in the company of mr.
braun on november 15.
the police first learned that this male was the
accused, mr. el achqer, when pc blake encountered him in the lobby of the
apartment building on november 22, detained him, and asked him who he was and
what apartment he was coming from.

on november 15, at 2:14 p.m., mr. braun and the accused arrived
at, and walked to the front doors of, the apartment building at 151 hughson street
south. at 2:52 p.m., mr. braun and the accused exited the building.

police
later viewed video from inside the apartment building for november 15, 2022,
which showed mr. braun entering the building at 2:14 p.m., wearing a backpack
described as “very full”. he got off the elevator on the twelfth floor. he
walked to the left, where there were only three apartments, units 1201, 1202,
and 1203. when mr. braun exited the building at 2:52 p.m., the police observed
that his backpack was noticeably less full. police made other observations of
mr. braun on november 15 and 17.

the search warrant for unit 1201 was issued on november
18, 2022. it was valid until november 22 at 11:59 p.m. police had also been
granted search warrants for other locations of interest in the investigation.

i
find that pc blake was a credible witness who gave reliable evidence about his
limited involvement in the investigation prior to november 22, and regarding
the events of november 22.

pc blake testified that the morning of november
22, the officer in charge briefed him about the investigation and advised him
that search warrants had been granted for numerous locations. pc blake was
tasked to take a team of officers to execute the search warrant at 151
hughson street south, unit 1201. he learned during the
briefing that this was suspected to be a stash location where mr. braun would
attend and leave controlled substances, or money, or other evidence of drug
trafficking. mr. braun was not suspected to reside at unit 1201 and pc blake
does not believe that the police had any information at the time of the
briefing about a possible tenant for that unit.

shortly after being briefed by the officer in charge, pc blake
briefed his team, which included four other police officers. pc blake
and his team then attended the area of 151 hughson street south. on the
voir
dire, he testified, “our primary objective was to safely execute search
warrants in a, like, a concise manner, where i believe there were three that
were being done more or less simultaneous”.

pc
blake explained that his team stood by in the area of the apartment building
and waited to execute the warrant. while doing so, at 2:25 p.m., pc blake
observed mr. braun exit the front doors of 151 hughson street south with the
male who he would later learn was the accused. the accused was wearing a white
and grey camouflage jacket, dark pants, a baseball cap, and he was carrying a
black knap sack and black satchel. the police did not follow the men, but they
were last seen eastbound on young street towards john street south.

pc
blake testified that the accused later returned without mr. braun. the accused
was wearing the same clothing and was carrying a black knapsack and a black
satchel. he entered the front doors of the apartment building with a bicycle.

pc
blake testified that prior to making these observations of mr. braun and the
accused on november 22, he had seen surveillance photographs of both men. he
testified that he had seen the november 15 surveillance photographs which
depicted the accused and mr. braun together. these two photographs are exhibits
3 and 4 on the
voir dire.

pc
blake testified that, on november 22, at 4:13 p.m., he learned that “the other
teams that had been given other locations were in a position to safely arrest
the targets of their investigations and execute the warrants”. pc blake
attended the building management office for 151 hughson street south and was
provided with a master key for the building.

the
search team attended at the front of 151 hughson street south at about 4:20
p.m. and as the team was entering the front doors of the building, they
observed the accused exiting the building with a black dog. at this time, he
was not wearing the camouflage jacket. pc blake stopped the accused, asked him
what apartment he was coming from and who he was. pc blake testified that the
accused, “provided his information, his name, soufiane el achqer with his date
of birth. and then stated that he was a tenant in apartment 1201 at the
apartment building”.

the
following exchange occurred between crown counsel and pc blake:
q.... and what was the reason for your stopping the
gentleman and making those inquiries?
a. well, so at this time multiple search warrants
were being executed. mr. el achqer had been seen with mr. braun earlier in
that day. he had also been seen with him days prior. based on their
activities i believed that, that he was involved in, in some type of drug
trafficking with mr., mr. braun. we also believed that 151 hughson street
south was a stash location. earlier in that day we had seen mr. el achqer
leave and then come back to the residence with a knapsack and the satchel after
being with mr. braun. at that point in time, i detained him for, for drug
trafficking offences and told him that we would need him to come up to
apartment 1201 with us.

pc
blake and the search team took the accused up the elevator to the twelfth floor.
at 4:24 p.m., the team entered unit 1201 with the master key for the apartment.
pc blake believes that the accused was in the hallway just outside the door
when the team entered the apartment.

the
apartment was cleared. no one was found inside. pc blake observed what he
believed to be a white cocaine rock on the table in the main common area. he
arrested the accused at 4:25 p.m. for s. 4(1)
cdsa
cocaine. at 4:26
p.m., pc blake provided the accused with his right to counsel and caution for
that offence. pc blake then learned that officers had located multiple bags of
suspected fentanyl and methamphetamine in a black bag in the living room. at
4:28 p.m., pc blake arrested the accused for s. 5(2)
cdsa
for these
controlled substances and provided him with rights to counsel and caution.

within
unit 1201, the police located and seized 128 grams of methamphetamine, 30.33 grams
of fentanyl, and 109.72 grams of cocaine, as well as $16,200 in cash. these
items were located primarily in a black knapsack and a black satchel. police
believed them to be the same knapsack and satchel they observed the accused to
be wearing earlier in the afternoon as he entered the apartment building. during
the search of the apartment, the police also located a camouflage jacket that appeared
to be the jacket the accused was seen wearing when police observed him during
surveillance on november 15 and earlier in the afternoon of november 22.

during
cross-examination, pc blake agreed with defence counsel that his detention of
the accused as he exited the front doors of the apartment building on november
22 was an investigative detention. he stated, “part of our…investigation was
into drug trafficking, and he was detained as part of that investigation”. pc
blake testified that he did not know who the accused was or where he lived
before encountering him at the front doors of the building on november 22.
however, the officer stated that he was aware of the accused before november 22
and “knew that he was an individual that had popped up throughout the
investigation”.

when
defence counsel questioned pc blake about the november 15 surveillance
photographs, the following exchange occurred:
q. right. and you'd agree in those pictures that
there's no evidence in those pictures of him committing any criminal offence,
right?
a. what, in those stills?
q. yeah.
a. no. no, i, i would, i would - sorry, not no. in
the stills i would agree with you but my understanding was that mr. el achqer
was, was meeting up with mr. braun and mr. braun was actively participating in
what appeared to be drug trafficking transactions.
q. right.
a. so, in the stills itself? no. i would agree with
you that there's no - or that there was no crime being committed in those
stills. however, their interactions coming to and from 151 hughson and then
mr. braun's corresponding actions did, led me to believe that there was some
criminal activity going on.
q. and you'd agree that the information is that mr.
braun is conducting these activities on his own, right, that mr. el achqer
wasn't with him?
a. again, i didn't know anything about mr. el achqer.
q. sorry, even the person that you knew was with
him. it's your understanding that mr. braun was, was by himself when he's
conducting these transactions?
a. well, predominantly, yes. i knew that mr. el achqer
had showed up on, i believe it was the 15th of november 2022. i know mr. braun
was the focus of the investigation, but between mr. el achqer showing up on the
15th and then what we observed on the 22nd, he did, you know, exhibit some
behaviours or some, he was participating in what appeared to be some activities
that were criminal in nature.
q. and you're, you're speaking about mr. braun or mr.
el achqer when you say he?
a. mr. el achqer. what i'm saying is that mr. braun
was the focus of our investigation. he was the, the prominent person in the
investigation. mr. el achqer kind of fell into the investigation as we
continued investigating closer to the end of november of 2022.
q. right. and there was something you said and that
you, you had some indication that, you said that he was engaged in some
criminal activity. who do you mean by he?
a. so, i was speaking about both of them. i'm saying
the, the prominent person in this investigation was mr. braun. mr. el achqer
started coming into the fold near the end of the investigation.
q. okay. and what criminal activity is that?
a. we believed it was drug trafficking.

the
following exchange occurred between defence counsel and pc blake regarding the
decision to detain the accused:
q.... so, upon seeing him that day, you knew you
were going to detain him when you saw him coming out of the building?
a. yes. well, i, i hadn't, i hadn't planned, i
didn't know i was going to run into mr. el achqer. but, yes, when we entered
the building and we, and we coincidentally came across him, then, yes, he - i
knew at that point in time that i would be detaining him.

during cross-examination, defence counsel asked
pc blake his understanding of when police are to give someone their right to
counsel and he replied, “as soon as practicable”. when defence counsel asked pc
blake why he did not provide the accused with his right to counsel when he
detained him at 4:20 p.m., he replied:
a. there was. as mentioned there were a lot of
moving parts; this was a dynamic situation. we didn't plan on running into mr.
el achqer at the front door….once we learned that… sorry, let me just refer to
16:13 hours that it was safe to execute the search warrants different teams
were in different places throughout the city. i, i went and got a key for the
building. again, this was all happening within seven minutes. one of the
individuals kind of on a similar path to this investigation, one of the
executions we actually drove through. he was arrested. so, there were - and
we believed that 151 hughson apartment 12
[sic]
was a stash house. so,
there was a lot of things going on, not only in the immediate area but it was
simultaneously. my concern was if we, we stood in the hallway - i didn't know
who was upstairs. again, i didn't know mr. el achqer. my concern was us being
in such an open area, if there was somebody upstairs and there was a camera in
the hall, or somebody saw something - and there was a, a lot going on in that
area - that somebody upstairs could have been tipped off or notified and the
stash could have very easily, we could have had a, a loss of evidence, keeping
in mind i had a, a small team of, i believe five or six to do this. i made a
decision at that point in time to detain him, advise him why he was being
detained, gather his information and then bring him upstairs to the unit where
we could clear the unit. and then at that point in time, as soon as possible,
provide him his rights to counsel and caution. that was my thought process at
the time. also, keeping in mind that this was all, you know, some of it was
unfolding in a dynamic way where we hadn't planned and we were just coming
across this as it happened.

the cross-examination on this issue also
included the following exchange:
q. so, i understand what you're saying about, you
know, you didn't necessarily need, want to facilitate a call because people
have been watching from the cameras and, you know, it's a dynamic situation. 
what's the reason for not telling him at all that he has a right to counsel?
a. sorry, what, when, when, like, when we're
downstairs, like....
q. yes. why didn't you just spend a few seconds and
tell him you're being detained, he has a right to counsel?
a. well, so, what i was trying to do is advise him of
the reason, the reasons for detention, bring him upstairs. and then at that
point, once the entry had been made and there was a controlled environment i
was planning on doing that and, and making sure that he understood that. my,
my reasoning for it was, i didn't believe at the time we the time to sit
there. if i, you know, if i got into a conversation with him about the reason
for detention, rights to counsel and caution and, you know, he didn't
understand or, or there was some type of complication there, i just didn't feel
that in that moment we had the time with everything that was going on. so, i
made a judgment call, at that point, to bring him upstairs, very briefly delay
that, make sure we safely entered and the apartment was clear and then at that
point, facilitate it.

pc blake gave evidence that he thought about the
possibility of staying downstairs with the accused to provide his right to
counsel but again explained why he did not:
q. okay. did you ever turn your mind to the
possibility of all of you staying down there with him, reading the rights to
counsel, letting him know he has a right to counsel, maybe telling him we'll
call a lawyer for you later and then going up?
a. so, i, i did. i, i thought of these things in the
moment, however, like i explained, i made a decision, us believing that that
was going to be a stash unit, as a result of, as a result of what we believed
in this investigation, to go upstairs, clear the unit and then do that, that
kind of thing. controlled substances as commonly known, they're, they're not -
they can very easily be, be destroyed or something can happen to them. like,
they can - i've been involved in cases where they're flushed down the toilet,
they're thrown over balconies, things can happen. the - in my opinion,
especially with the takedown that was happening outside, and then us coming
across mr. el achqer in the hallway, i wanted to mitigate the risk of that, so
i delayed until we got upstairs.

pc blake acknowledged that he did not know if
there were cameras in the lobby of the apartment building. he also acknowledged
that asking someone where they live is different than asking them where they
are coming from. then the following exchange occurred between defence counsel
and pc blake:
q. okay. so, that's my question. what was the
purpose of asking him what unit he's coming from?
a. well, it was, it was part of our investigative
detention, right? like, he's being detained because i'm furthering this
investigation. those - so the two questions i asked him was, who are you and
where are you coming from?
section 9: the investigative
detention of the accused was lawful

as the authors of
detention, arrest, and the
right to counsel
state:
to invoke an investigative detention,
the officer must reasonably suspect that the person to be detained is engaged
in criminal behaviour. reasonable suspicion is about the reasonable
possibility
of criminal conduct.


reasonable
suspicion is a lower standard than reasonable and probable grounds, “as it
engages the reasonable possibility, rather than probability, of crime.”

reasonable suspicion is “assessed against the totality of the circumstances”.

this “inquiry must consider the constellation of objectively discernible facts
that are said to give the investigating officer reasonable cause to suspect
that an individual is involved in the type of criminal activity under
investigation”.

it “must be fact-based, flexible, and grounded in common sense and practical,
everyday experience”.


in
r. v. mann, the supreme court of
canada (scc) held that “
police officers may
detain an individual for investigative purposes if there are reasonable grounds
to suspect in all the circumstances that the individual is connected to a
particular
crime and that such a detention is necessary”.

this means that, “[i]t is not enough for an officer to suspect that a person is
generally
implicated in criminal activity”.


in
mann, the scc said that, in addition
to the reasonable suspicion requirement for an investigative detention, “[t]
he detention must be viewed as reasonably necessary on an
objective view of the totality of the circumstances, informing the officer’s
suspicion that there is a clear nexus between the individual to be detained and
a recent or on-going criminal offence”.

the
authors of
detention, arrest, and the right to
counsel
say this about the reasonably necessary requirement:
the necessity analysis is not as
rigorous as the reasonable suspicion analysis. there are two reasons for this.
first, the necessity requirement is not siloed from the reasonable suspicion
analysis. a detention might be reasonably necessary
because
an officer
reasonably suspects a clear nexus between the individual to be detained and a
recent or ongoing criminal offence. after all, police officers are duty bound
to preserve the peace, prevent crime, and protect life and property. if a
police officer reasonably suspects a person’s involvement in a recent criminal
offence, then the officer is obliged to act; the necessity to detain flows from
the grounds to detain.


in the accused’s case, the police had amassed information regarding
mr. braun’s suspected drug trafficking activities that resulted in a search
warrant being granted for unit 1201. the accused had been seen by police in the
company of mr. braun on november 15, 2022. the two men were seen arriving at
the front doors of the apartment building at 2:14 p.m. video from inside
the apartment building showed mr. braun entering the building at this time
wearing a backpack described as “very full”. he got off the elevator on the
twelfth floor and walked in the direction of unit 1201. when mr. braun exited
the building at 2:52 p.m. with the accused, the police observed that his
backpack was noticeably less full.

i
accept pc blake’s evidence that he saw the surveillance photographs of mr.
braun and the accused that the police took on november 15 before attending at
the apartment building with the search team to execute the warrant on november
22. i also accept his evidence that these observations led police to suspect
that the accused was involved in the drug trafficking activities of mr. braun.

the
information pc blake had received from other officers about the accused’s
possible involvement was supplemented by his own observations on november 22.
he observed the accused again in the company of mr. braun, exiting the front
doors of the building. the accused was carrying a black knapsack and black
satchel. the accused returned to the building alone sometime later carrying a
black knapsack and a black satchel and he entered the front doors of the
apartment building with a bicycle.

the
totality of the circumstances known to pc blake when the accused exited the
building at 4:20 p.m., as the search team was going in to execute the warrant,
provided a constellation of objectively discernible facts that gave pc blake
reasonable cause to suspect that the accused was involved in the criminal
activity under investigation.

furthermore,
the
detention was reasonably necessary on an
objective view of the totality of the circumstances. pc blake had a reasonable
suspicion that there was a clear nexus between the accused and a recent or
on-going criminal offence being committed in unit 1201. i accept pc blake’s
evidence that he had a concern about the possible loss of evidence when he
encountered the accused at the front doors of the apartment building. part of
the totality of the circumstances was the fact that the police were executing
search warrants at multiple addresses simultaneously and the timing of the
entry to unit 1201 was coordinated with other teams of officers. to simply
permit the accused, an individual suspected of being involved in mr. braun’s
drug trafficking activities, to go on his way posed the risk that he would
alert others in unit 1201 that a team of police officers had entered the
building, and possibly prompted the destruction of evidence within the unit. no
evidence was led about how the other officers were dressed, that is, whether
they were in uniform or identifiable as police officers, but i infer from the
evidence of pc blake that the search team entered the building together when
they encountered the accused.

furthermore, the investigative detention was carried
out in a relatively non-intrusive manner. the police escorted the accused up
the elevator to the twelfth floor to await the police entry to the apartment.
the time between the start of the investigative detention and the accused’s
arrest was approximately five minutes, with pc blake conveying to him his right
to counsel and caution about a minute later.

defence counsel relied on the british columbia supreme
court decision in
r. v. gelowitz.

in
gelowitz, the court dealt with a challenge to the facial validity
of an ito used to obtain search warrants for five locations, two of which mr.
gelowitz had standing to challenge. this was not an investigative detention
case. the standard the court was required to apply was whether the totality of
the information disclosed in the ito provided reasonable grounds for believing
that an offence had occurred and that evidence of the offence, namely drugs or
drug-related items, would be found in the place to be searched.

ultimately, the court found that the evidence
fell short of meeting the threshold for a reasonable belief or credibly based
probability that mr. gelowitz had committed an offence or that evidence of that
offence would be found at the specific locations searched, one of which was his
residence. the court made this finding by weighing the totality of the
information, including information received from informers.

defence counsel pointed to the fact that the
court invalidated the warrant notwithstanding that mr. gelowitz was seen making
multiple short duration stops at various locations, was seen interacting with
two persons on separate occasions shortly before each of those persons was
found to be in possession of a reasonably sizable amount of cocaine, was seen
making multiple short duration stops at four locations that were the subject of
the search warrant, sometimes carrying a bag in or out of the place he stopped,
and was seen having a short duration interaction with an individual who had
been described as a drug dealer by one of the informants.

gelowitz
does not
assist the accused in advancing his argument that the police lacked grounds for
an investigative detention. as stated, the standard the court was applying was not
a reasonable
possibility
of criminal conduct. i note the court’s finding
that “the evidence in the ito provides good reason to suspect that mr. gelowitz
may be involved in drug trafficking, and it might even be characterized as a
strong suspicion”.


i find that pc blake’s investigative detention
of the accused was lawful. there was no breach of the accused’s s. 9
charter
right not to be arbitrarily detained.
section 10(b): the delay in
conveying the informational component was a breach

the accused claims that the police failed to
convey the right to counsel immediately upon his detention. the accused’s
complaint, therefore, is that the police failed to comply with the
informational component of s. 10(b).

the police must convey the informational component
of s. 10(b) immediately upon the person’s detention or arrest.

in
r. v. suberu,
the
scc said that the “immediacy of this obligation is only subject to concerns for
officer or public safety, or to reasonable limitations that are prescribed by
law and justified under s. 1 of the
charter
”.

the scc said that the
right to counsel is meant to assist detainees to regain their liberty, and to “guard
against the risk of involuntary self-incrimination”.


pc blake testified about the reasons he delayed
conveying to the accused that he had the right to counsel. the officer said he was
concerned that if he and the search team stood in the hallway, in an
open area, there may be cameras in the hallway, and someone upstairs might be
tipped off or notified and the drug evidence could be lost. he acknowledged in
cross-examination that he did not know if there were cameras
in the lobby of the apartment building. pc blake also spoke of the dynamic
nature of the situation and how the police did not expect to run into the
accused in the lobby.

pc blake’s evidence that he believed police are
required to give a detainee their right to counsel “as soon as practicable” is
concerning as it shows that the officer may not know that the informational
component of s. 10(b) requires immediacy with only limited exceptions. while i
accept pc blake’s testimony that he delayed providing the right to counsel because
of the dynamic nature of the situation and his concern about the potential loss
of evidence, he could have conveyed the essence of the informational component
while escorting the accused up the elevator, and later reading the standardized
right to counsel card from his notebook if the detention continued.


there were no concerns for officer or public
safety which justified providing no information whatsoever to the accused about
his right to counsel from the time he was detained in the lobby to the time
when the police entered the apartment and developed grounds to arrest him.

i find an infringement of the informational
component of s. 10(b) of the
charter.
section 8: the questioning of the
accused and his response during the investigative detention was an unlawful
search and seizure

in support of the s. 8 issue, defence counsel
provided
r. v. mckinnon,

an ontario superior court of justice decision of justice henderson. in this
decision, justice henderson referred to and relied upon justice doherty’s
decision in
r. v. harris,

which i find contains the applicable principles to assess the accused’s s.
8 claim.

mr. harris was a passenger in a motor vehicle
stopped by police after the driver failed to signal a left turn. the officer
asked all of the occupants, including mr. harris who was sitting in the front
passenger seat, to identify themselves. mr. harris did so and a search of cpic
revealed a breach of a curfew bail condition. mr. harris was arrested and searched,
and police located a quantity of crack cocaine in his waistband. he was charged
with possession of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking.

one of mr. harris’s
charter
claims was
that he was subject to an unconstitutional search when he was asked to identify
himself while he was detained in the vehicle. justice doherty agreed with the
trial judge’s finding that the officer’s request that mr. harris identify
himself constituted an unreasonable search and seizure, but he would not
exclude the cocaine from evidence pursuant to s. 24(2).

justice doherty reviewed the trial judge’s
finding that mr. harris’s s. 9
charter
right not to be arbitrarily
detained was infringed. he found that the trial judge was in error. although mr.
harris was detained when the officer asked him to identify himself, his
detention was not arbitrary. he was detained “
by
virtue of the lawful stopping of the vehicle, the ongoing investigation of the
highway
traffic act
violation, and [the officer’s] lawful assuming of control over
the movements of the passengers in the vehicle
”.


however, justice doherty went on to find that the officer did not
ask mr. harris for identification in relation to any potential
highway
traffic act
violation, but rather “wanted the information so that he could
conduct a cpic search to determine, among other things, whether harris was on
bail or any other form of judicial order”.

the officer also used the identification information “in a more general way to
gather and record information about the movements of individuals who happen to
be detained in the course of
highway traffic act
stops”.


in assessing mr. harris’s claim that the request for
identification infringed s. 8 of the
charter, justice doherty said the
following:
a seizure is a non-consensual taking by a state agent
of anything in which the person asserting a s. 8 right has a reasonable
expectation of privacy. the thing taken may be tangible or intangible. information
can be seized. at its most fundamental, s. 8 preserves an individual zone of
privacy against state intrusion. the state can enter into that zone if the
intrusion meets a reasonableness standard: see
r. v. colarusso
(1994),
1994 canlii 134 (scc), 87 c.c.c. (3d) 193 (s.c.c.), at 233.


justice doherty went on to say:
answers to police questions may or may not give rise
to a s. 8 claim. as with other aspects of the s. 8 inquiry, a fact-specific
examination of the circumstances is necessary.
where the subject of the
questioning is under police detention and reasonably believes that he or she is
compelled to provide the information sought
in the questions, i do
not think it distorts the concept of a seizure to describe the receipt of the
information by the police as a non-consensual taking of that information from
the detained person.


the accused was under investigative detention
when pc blake asked him what apartment he was coming from. pc blake acknowledged in his testimony that his purpose in asking
the accused this question “was part of our investigative detention” and that
the accused was “being detained because i'm furthering this investigation”.

although the accused did not testify on the
voir dire, i
find that it can reasonably be inferred from the totality of the evidence that
he felt compelled to respond to this question put to him by pc blake. pc
blake’s evidence suggests that he and the entire team of searching officers
were entering the building when they encountered the accused, at which point pc
blake immediately detained him. the presence of five police officers and the
fact that pc blake asked the question when the police had assumed physical
control over the accused’s movements, leads me to make the finding that the
accused felt compelled to respond to the question, which pc blake acknowledges
was asked to further the investigation.

in
harris, justice doherty said the following, which i
find to be applicable to the accused’s case:
a person under police detention who is being asked to
incriminate himself has more than a reasonable expectation of privacy with
respect to the answers to any questions that are put to him by the police. that
person has a right to silence unless he or she makes an informed decision to
waive that right and provide the requested information to the police:
r. v.
hebert
(1990),
1990 canlii 118 (scc), 57 c.c.c. (3d) 1
(s.c.c.). in the
circumstances, harris’s identification in response to the officer’s question
constitutes a seizure and attracts s. 8 protection.


i conclude that the accused was subject
to a seizure when he responded to pc blake’s question regarding what apartment
he was coming from. i find that there was a s. 8 violation arising from this
warrantless seizure of information. as stated, although the crown did not
concede a breach of any of the accused’s
charter
rights, the crown
undertook not to rely on the accused’s response to the question as evidence
connecting him to unit 1201.

the search of the apartment was pursuant to a
validly issued warrant which the accused did not challenge. as the evidence of
pc blake discloses, and as conceded by the accused, the police would have executed
the search warrant regardless of the accused’s answer to pc blake’s question or
any other breaches of the accused’s
charter
rights during the brief
investigative detention. there was no s. 8 violation arising from the execution
of the search warrant at the apartment.
section 24(2)

the accused applied for the exclusion of the
evidence that the police found within unit 1201 pursuant to s. 24(2). since i
have found section 8 and 10(b)
charter
infringements, i must engage in
the s. 24(2) analysis.

before the evidence found within unit 1201 can
be considered for exclusion under s. 24(2), the accused must prove, on a
balance of probabilities, having regard to all the circumstances, that the evidence
was “obtained in a manner” that infringed or denied a
charter
right. if the accused succeeds in establishing the “obtained in a manner”
threshold, to obtain an order excluding the evidence, he must also prove, on a
balance of probabilities, that “after considering, weighing, and balancing the
three
grant
factors, the admission of the evidence would be more harmful
to the long-term repute of the administration of justice than would its
exclusion”.

obtained in a manner that
violates the charter

the “obtained in a manner” threshold test
requires the accused to establish, on a balance of probabilities, that:
(a)
viewed from a “generous approach”

and considering the “entire
chain of events”;

(b)
a violation of the accused’s own
charter
rights;

(c)
and the acquisition of evidence sought to be
adduced at trial;

(d)
are connected, whether causally, temporally,
contextually, or a combination thereof;

(e)
within the same investigative transaction or
course of state conduct;

and
(f)
that connection is not too tenuous or remote.


the acquisition of the evidence from unit 1201
was not
caused
by the breaches of the accused’s ss. 8 and 10(b)
charter
rights. as stated previously, the police had already applied for and been
granted judicial authorization to search the apartment. they acted on that
validly issued warrant to gain entry to the apartment. it cannot be said that
the evidence would not have been discovered “but for” the breaches of the
accused’s
charter
rights.

the infringements of the accused’s
charter
rights
occurred within the approximately six-minute period that he was detained for
investigative purposes. the scc said this in
r. v. strachan:
a temporal link between the infringement of the
charter and the discovery of the evidence figures prominently in this
assessment, particularly where the charter violation and the discovery of the
evidence occur in the course of a single transaction. the presence of a
temporal connection is not, however, determinative. situations will arise where
evidence, though obtained following the breach of a charter right, will be too
remote from the violation to be “obtained in a manner” that infringed the
charter. in my view, these situations should be dealt with on a case-by-case
basis. there can be no hard and fast rule for determining when evidence
obtained following the infringement of a charter right becomes too remote.


the fact that the
charter
infringements
happen around the same time as the seizure of the evidence “
does not make those events temporally connected for the
purposes of this analysis
”.

in the accused’s case, the ss.
8 and 10(b)
charter
infringements occurred prior to the execution of the
search warrant on unit 1201. the infringements did not impact on the obtaining
of the search warrant nor on the execution of it. in my view, the evidence
located within unit 1201, though obtained following the breach of the accused’s
charter
rights, is too remote from the violations to be “obtained
in a manner” that infringed the
charter. i reiterate that the evidence
was obtained pursuant to a validly issued search warrant, the validity of which
has not been challenged by the accused. furthermore, the information that the
police obtained from the accused in violation of his ss. 8 and 10(b) rights had
no bearing on their ability to execute the warrant. the police were going to
and were lawfully entitled to execute the warrant regardless of whether they
saw the accused and learned his apartment number.

if i am in error in finding that the evidence was not “obtained
in a manner”, i will go on to address the
grant
factors to determine
whether admission of the evidence would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute.
would admission of the evidence
bring the administration of justice into disrepute?

at this stage, i must balance the
grant
factors
and “arrive at a conclusion about whether the admission or the exclusion of the
evidence would better serve the long-term reputation of the administration of
justice in the eyes of informed members of the public”.

(a)
seriousness of the charter-violating
conduct

i find that pc blake did not act in bad faith
when he elicited incriminating evidence from the accused and when he did not
convey the right to counsel to the accused immediately upon detaining him for
investigative purposes. however, the absence of bad faith does not equate to
good faith.

good faith requires police officers to have an honestly held and
reasonable
belief that their conduct was lawful.


in
r. v. buhay,
the scc cited
sopinka,
lederman and bryant,
the law of evidence in canada, 2nd edition,
toronto: butterworths, 1999, at p. 450 when it held that,
"good
faith cannot be claimed if a
charter
violation is committed on
the basis of a police officer's unreasonable error or ignorance as to the scope
of his or her authority".


pc blake’s conduct fell somewhere between good faith and bad
faith when he failed to provide the accused with his right to counsel immediately
upon detaining him for investigative purposes and when he asked a question
which could incriminate the accused and did so to further the drug trafficking
investigation. as the scc said in
grant,
“
ignorance
of
charter
standards must not be rewarded or encouraged and negligence
or wilful blindness cannot be equated with good faith”.


pc blake did not intentionally disregard the
charter.
however, his conduct demonstrated ignorance of the scope of his authority when
he placed the accused under investigative detention. ignorance of well-established
charter
standards, such as the need to provide rights to counsel
immediately upon detention, can underpin a finding that a breach is serious.


however, examining the totality of the
circumstances that presented themselves to pc blake when he encountered the
accused unexpectedly in the lobby, i find that the seriousness of the officer’s
charter
-infringing conduct is significantly attenuated. i accept pc
blake’s evidence that he was not expecting to encounter the accused as he and
his search team entered the building and that he was dealing with a “dynamic”
situation. as he said in his testimony, his primary objective that day, and
that of his entire team, was to safely execute the search warrant at unit
1201, knowing that other search warrants were being executed, more or less
simultaneously, at various locations as part of the same investigation.

i also accept pc blake’s evidence that he turned his mind to providing
the accused with his right to counsel in the lobby but was concerned about the
potential loss of evidence if he and his team remained in the lobby and someone
in unit 1201 became aware of their presence in the building. i found pc blake
to be a credible and reliable witness. i find that pc blake was presented with
a dynamic and unexpected situation in the course of executing the search
warrant and acted out of a belief in the urgent need to preserve evidence.

although this does not excuse his apparent lack of understanding
of the scope of his authority when he commenced his investigative detention of
the accused, it is part of the totality of the circumstances. i find that the
charter
violations are less serious because pc blake reasonably believed there was
an urgent need to execute the search warrant by entering unit 1201 as soon as
possible to preserve evidence. the entire interaction between pc blake and the
accused prior to the execution of the search warrant was approximately
four-to-five minutes, during which pc blake and his search team were
understandably focused on the safe execution of the warrant at unit 1201.

the first prong of the
grant
analysis only
minimally weighs in favour of exclusion of the evidence the police seized in
unit 1201.
(b)
impact
of the violation on charter-protected interests of the accused

the accused’s application deals only with
exclusion of the evidence discovered in the apartment. as stated, the crown
undertakes not to rely on the accused’s answers to police questioning while
under detention, which i have found to constitute a s. 8 breach, to connect him
to unit 1201. furthermore, the crown will not adduce at trial any other
evidence seized from the accused during his detention or arrest, including the
key for the apartment.

the authors of
charter
remedies in criminal cases
state:
the presence or absence of a causal connection between
the
charter
violation and the evidence to be excluded is an important
consideration in assessing the impact. if the violation did not meaningfully
contribute to the acquisition of the evidence, then the impact of the violation
is less.


in
grant, the scc addressed
the concept of discoverability and its relevance to the second prong of the s.
24(2) analysis:
discoverability retains a useful role, however, in
assessing the actual impact of the breach on the protected interests of the
accused. it allows the court to assess the strength of the causal connection
between the
charter
-infringing self-incrimination and the resultant
evidence. the more likely it is that the evidence would have been obtained even
without the statement, the lesser the impact of the breach on the accused’s
underlying interest against self-incrimination. the converse, of course, is
also true. on the other hand, in cases where it cannot be determined with any
confidence whether evidence would have been discovered in absence of the
statement, discoverability will have no impact on the s. 24(2) inquiry.


there is no connection between the s. 8
charter
violation, which resulted in the seizure of evidence connecting the accused
to unit 1201, and the resultant evidence discovered within the apartment. the
accused’s statement to pc blake that he was a tenant in unit 1201 did
not cause the police to enter and search the apartment. the police would have
executed the search warrant whatever response the accused gave to pc blake’s
question “what apartment are you coming from?”.

similarly, it cannot be said that the police would not have
discovered the evidence in the apartment “but for” the violation of the
informational component of s. 10(b) of the
charter. in
grant,
the
scc said, “[t]he failure to advise of the right to counsel undermines the
detainee’s right to make a meaningful and informed choice whether to speak, the
related right to silence, and, most fundamentally, the protection against testimonial
self-incrimination”.

while the violation of the accused’s s. 10(b) right may have resulted in his
self-incriminatory statement that he was a tenant at unit 1201, that is not the
evidence the accused seeks to have excluded on this application. no causal
connection exists between the s. 10(b) infringement and the discovery of the
evidence within the apartment after the lawful execution of the search warrant.

the impact of the violations of the accused’s ss.
8 and 10(b)
charter
rights was minimal. while the accused was left
uninformed of his right to seek the lifeline of legal advice, that breach only
lasted approximately six minutes during the time that he was lawfully detained
for investigative purposes. he was then informed of his right to counsel. the
crown undertakes not to rely on any evidence obtained during that brief
detention and his subsequent arrest to connect him to the evidence found in
unit 1201. the second prong of the
grant
analysis weakly supports
exclusion of the evidence located in unit 1201.

(c)
societal
interest in a trial on the merits

th
e public has
an interest in having cases adjudicated on their merits. society’s interests
focus on the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial.

at this stage of the analysis, the
court considers factors such as the reliability of the evidence, the importance
of the evidence to the crown’s case, and the seriousness of the alleged offence.

in
grant,
the scc
recognized that the seriousness of the charge cuts both ways, saying that, “while
the public has a heightened interest in seeing a determination on the merits
where the offence charged is serious, it also has a vital interest in having a
justice system that is above reproach, particularly where the penal stakes for
the accused are high”.

therefore, the seriousness of the charge is a proper consideration but it must
not be given undue weight in the analysis.

the items found within unit 1201 can
all be characterized as highly reliable evidence and essential to a
determination of the accused’s charges on the merits. the charges are very
serious. they involve substantial quantities of controlled substances alleged
to be in the accused’s possession for the purpose of trafficking. the hard
drugs located within the apartment have caused
devastating consequences
to communities plagued by addiction, adverse health effects and death by
overdose, as well as various recognized indirect effects.


in the accused’s case, society’s interest
in a trial on the merits is high, and the
truth-seeking
function would be undermined by exclusion of the reliable evidence which is
essential to the crown’s case.

this prong of the
grant
analysis
pulls strongly toward admission of the evidence found within
unit 1201.
(d)
the
balancing

to sum up, the police conduct was not egregious
and only minimally weighs in favour of exclusion of the evidence located within
unit 1201. the impact of the
charter
breaches on the accused’s protected
interests was minimal, weakly supporting exclusion of the evidence. finally,
the evidence is reliable, and its value is considerable to a determination on
the merits of the very serious charges, which weighs strongly in favour of
admission.

taking a long-term view of the repute of the
administration of justice, the balance favours admission of the evidence in
this case. in the eyes of informed members of the public, the repute of the
administration of justice would be tarnished if the evidence, which was
obtained as a result of the execution of a validly issued search warrant, was
excluded at trial due to the violations of the accused’s ss. 8 and 10(b)
charter
rights that i have found in this case.
conclusion

i find that there were infringements of the
accused’s ss. 8 and 10(b)
charter
rights but that those breaches do not result
in exclusion of the evidence that the police located when they executed the
search warrant at 151 hughson street south, unit 1201, in hamilton. the
evidence is admissible at the trial of the accused.
released: december 3, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci

on august 8, 2025, i dismissed the accused’s
charter
application and
advised that i would provide written reasons. these are my written reasons.

detention, arrest, and the right to counsel,
davin michael garg and anil
kapoor,
toronto, ont.: emond montgomery publications limited,
2025,
chapter 3, p. 85.

r. v. chehil,
2013 scc 49, at para.
27.

ibid, at para. 29.

ibid, at para. 29.

ibid, at para. 29.

r. v. mann,
2004 scc 52, at para.
45
(emphasis added).

detention, arrest, and the right to counsel, supra,
chapter 3, p. 87.

r. v. mann, supra,
at para.
34.

detention, arrest, and the right to counsel, supra,
chapter 3, p. 88
(citations omitted).

r. v. gelowitz,
2023 bcsc 1170.

ibid,
at para. 129.

detention, arrest, and the right to counsel, supra,
chapter 10, p. 344.

r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33, at para.
2.

ibid,
at para. 40.

see
detention, arrest, and the right to counsel, supra,
chapter 10, pp.
346-347.

r. v. mckinnon,
2016 onsc 6143.

r. v. harris,
2007 onca 574.

ibid,
at para. 26.

ibid,
at para. 32.

ibid,
at para. 32.

ibid,
at para. 33.

ibid,
at para. 34 (emphasis added).

ibid,
at para. 40.

charter remedies in criminal cases, second edition,
matthew asma and matthew
gourlay,
toronto, ont.: emond montgomery publications limited,
2023,
chapter 2, p. 31.

r. v. plaha
(2004),
2004 canlii 21043 (on ca), 188 c.c.c. (3d)
289 (ont. c.a.), at para.
46;
r. v. pino,
2016 onca 389, at paras.
56 and 72.

r. v. strachan,
1988 canlii 25 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 980 at para.
55;
r. v. plaha, ibid,
at
para.
45;
r. v. pino, ibid,
at paras.
52 and 72.

see s. 24(1) of the
charter;
r. v. persaud,
2016 onsc 8110, at para.
200.

see s. 24(2) of the
charter;
r. v. alcantara,
2015 abca 259, at para.
267.

r. v. plaha, supra,
at para.
45;
r. v. pino,
supra,
at paras.
54 and 72.

r. v. strachan, supra,
at para.
55;
r. v. plaha, supra,
at para.
45;
r. v. pino, supra,
at paras.
52 and 72.

r. v. plaha, supra,
at para.
45;
r. v. pino, supra,
at paras.
55
and 72. the summary of the “obtained in a manner” threshold from footnotes 26
to 32 is taken from
charter remedies in criminal cases, second edition,
supra,
chapter 2, pp. 33-34.

r. v. strachan, supra,
at para.
55.

r. v. daye,
2022 onca 675, at para.
8. see also
r. v. do,
2019
onca 482.

charter remedies in criminal cases, second edition, supra,
chapter 2,
pp. 30-31.

r. v. caron,
2011 bcca 56, at paras.
41-42
(summarizing a series of scc
decisions).

charter remedies in criminal cases, second edition, supra,
chapter 2,
pp. 45-46;
r. v. caron, ibid,
at paras.
41-42.

r. v. buhay,
2003 scc 30, at para.
59.

r. v. grant,
2009 scc 32, at para.
75.

r. v. booth,
2019 onca 970, at para.
121.

charter remedies in criminal cases, supra,
chapter 2, p. 52, citing
r.
v. grant, supra, at para
122.

r. v. grant, supra,
at para.
122.

ibid,
at para. 95.

r. v. zacharias,
2023 scc 30, at para.
75.

charter remedies in criminal cases, supra,
chapter 2, p. 55.

r. v. mccolman,
2023 scc 8, at paras.
69-73.

r. v. grant, supra,
at para.
84.

r. v.
parranto,
2021 scc 46, at
paras.
73 and 87-92.