source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj563/2025oncj563.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. mbah, 2025 oncj 563
date: 
2025 10 27
court
file no.: toronto 4811-998-25-48108034-00
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
joel mbah
before
justice christine mainville
heard
on september 25-26 and october 2, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on october 27, 2025
geocelyne meyers............................................................................. counsel
for the crown
emily dixon...................................................................................... counsel
for the accused
mainville j.:

the accused mr. mbah
sprayed a substance from an
aerosol can onto a person
who resided in the same building as his mother,
and who was known to him. the spray was believed to be some sort of bug spray.
it clouded around the complainant, ms. long, and got into her eyes. this
occurred outdoors on a neighbourhood street, where ms. long was engaged in
conversation with another person from the neighbourhood, mr. recchia. mr.
recchia was accordingly a witness to these events.

as a result of this incident, mr. mbah was charged not with assault, but
with
administering a noxious substance with intent to
aggrieve or annoy.
he was also charged with two counts of breaching the
peace, as it relates to a peace bond and probation order he was bound by at the
time.

the defence concedes that mr. mbah directed the spray at ms. long and
thereby assaulted her. accordingly, it also concedes that he breached the
peace, contrary to the court-imposed terms he was bound by. however, it argues
that the facts do not make out the offence of administering a noxious substance,
which is a specific intent offence aimed at a particular type of conduct.

the
defence argues that both the
actus reus
and
mens rea
of this offence have not been proven beyond a reasonable
doubt.
the crown argues that it has discharged its burden on this count as
well.
the principles to be applied

several admissions were made over the course of this trial, including
that mr. mbah committed the offence of breaching a court order to keep the
peace.

on the remaining offence, however, mr. mbah is presumed innocent. there
is no obligation on him to do anything to establish his innocence. the
presumption of innocence remains in place, unless and until the crown has
proven each essential element of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.

reasonable doubt is based on reason and common sense. it is logically
connected to the evidence or lack of evidence. it is not enough for me to
believe that mr. mbah is probably or likely guilty. reasonable doubt requires
more than mere probability. although it cannot be described with mathematical
precision, reasonable doubt is a high standard, consistent with its role as a
safeguard against wrongful convictions. at the same time, reasonable doubt does
not require proof beyond all doubt, nor is it proof to an absolute certainty.

many facts are not in dispute, including mr. mbah’s
identity as the person who sprayed ms. long. it is also conceded that he did
target her. the case largely turns on how to interpret and
apply the elements of the offence of administering a noxious substance to the
facts of this case.

there are, however, some areas of factual dispute that
turn on the credibility and reliability of the two witnesses who were
called to testify: the complainant ms. long and the third-party witness, mr. recchia.
the accused did not testify.

credibility
relates to the honesty of the witness, including whether the witness was trying
to tell the truth and if the witness was candid, sincere, biased, evasive or
prone to exaggeration or minimization. reliability relates to the accuracy of a
witness’ testimony and involves a consideration of the person’s ability to
accurately observe, recall and describe the events in issue. any witness whose
evidence on an issue is not credible cannot give reliable evidence on the same
point. however, credibility alone does not establish reliability, as a truthful
witness may give unreliable evidence.

testimony
can be assessed through a non-exhaustive list of factors including the
plausibility of the evidence; the presence of independent supporting or
contradicting evidence; the internal and external consistency of the evidence;
the witness’ apparent willingness to be fair and forthright without any
personal motive or agenda; and to a limited extent, the witness’ demeanour
while testifying.

the defence acknowledges that mr. recchia’s testimony was credible
and reliable. it argues however that ms. long’s evidence was not so, in
particular because of her animus towards the accused and his family.
findings of fact

i
agree with the defence that i must exercise caution before accepting aspects of
ms. long’s testimony that are not confirmed or corroborated by mr. recchia’s
evidence. the crown acknowledges that there were issues with her testimony.

there
is a history between the parties that informs this caution – one that ms. long
was not forthright about in her evidence.

indeed,
she portrayed herself as well-intentioned and looking out for mr. mbah’s best interests,
and minimized the level of past interactions between herself and the accused, including
a prior conflict. it became apparent over the course of cross-examination that she
had significant animus towards the accused, his brother and his mother, and that by the time of this incident, she wanted mr. mbah in particular
to move away from the building where she resides. ms.
long very clearly saw him as a nuisance and while she
did not lie about the entire incident, she had a motive to exaggerate its
circumstances.

in
addition, ms. long was often not responsive to the questions asked. she
repeatedly sought to justify her conduct, cast blame on others, and deflect. for
instance, ms. long sought to distance herself from a neighbourhood rumour and a
name used in the neighbourhood to refer to the accused. but i
find that she was not candid with the court in this regard, and that she very
much held the same views.

more
significantly, when asked whether she had poured water on mr. mbah’s brother
and another individual who were smoking outside underneath her window, she
suggested that the ac units should be checked, before eventually admitting that
she did chuck water out her window. this admission completely contradicts her
assertion to the police – who were called at the time in response to this
incident – that she had done no such thing. not only was she not forthright
with the police, but she was also not forthright with the court about this
incident.

i
certainly cannot say that ms. long testified in a fair and balanced manner. she
was not candid in her answers or trying as best she could to assist the court
in arriving at the truth. these issues cause me to approach her evidence with
great caution.

this
informs my analysis of whether the crown has proven all essential elements of
the offence charged.

still,
as indicated, there is no dispute that mr. mbah approached ms. long on the
street and sprayed her with an aerosol can.

ms.
long described how the accused reached around her and pointed the can directly
in her face as he sprayed it, the spray landing in her right eye.

i
prefer mr. recchia’s evidence on this point, who instead described the accused as
holding the can upside down at his hip level. the spray went towards ms. long’s
upper body. he explained that the spray did “cloud up in the air”, “dispersing
like a cloud” and going all over ms. long, including on her face. he said it
was “shocking” how quickly it went from the hip to surround ms. long’s body.

more
specifically, mr. recchia indicated that it went “onto [ms. long] and the
surrounding area, sorta near her head, but like i said, it clouded up”. the man
“pointed the can in her area and it basically went from head to toe”. it went
all over her, including her face, though he did not point the can in her face. mr.
recchia did clarify that from his perspective, it was deliberately sprayed to
ms. long from the hip.

he
explained that this happened as the accused came up from behind ms. long on the
sidewalk, and as soon as he was parallel with her, he dispersed the can. this
was in close proximity to her though mr. recchia did not provide a specific
distance, other than indicating that they were both on the sidewalk. he agreed
that the accused was not behind ms. long, but parallel to her when this
happened.

mr.
recchia indicated that it looked intentional though it happened so fast, and
the accused just continued to walk and indeed continued to spray. there was
little to no reaction from the accused.

ms.
long also could not attribute any words or particular demeanour to the accused,
other than perhaps the word bug. she indicated that he was agitated but she
didn’t make out what he was saying.

i
accept mr. recchia’s characterization of what happened. i do not accept ms.
long’s evidence that mr. mbah aimed the can at her face or her glasses from
behind.

mr.
recchia described ms. long as being “very frantic” right after this happened.
he said that she had aerosol in her face, “so there was immediate discourse” and
she proclaimed that this was a continuing thing with the accused.

ms.
long indicated that the spray went on her glasses and into her right eye. she
did not think anything got in her left eye. she rinsed her eyes but did not suffer
any injuries or consequences. she wasn’t sure what the substance was and
worried it would cause damage to her eyeglasses, so she rinsed them out too.
she was scared and upset and took a breather in a nearby store. she asked mr.
recchia to speak to the police about the incident. she explained being more
rattled than injured.
administering a noxious substance with intent to
aggrieve or annoy

mr.
mbah is charged with administering a noxious substance with intent to aggrieve
or annoy under
s. 245(1)
(b) of the
criminal code.

the
defence argues that the act of spraying the aerosol can towards ms. long does
not constitute “administering” the substance. it further argues that the crown
has not discharged its burden of proving that what was sprayed was a noxious
substance. finally, it argues that the crown has not proved the specific intent
to aggrieve or annoy.

i
turn to each of these essential elements of the offence charged.
“administering”

the
term “administering” is not defined in the
criminal code. in the face of
sparse case law on the point, the crown argues that i should accept the
definition adopted by the alberta court of appeal in
r. v. clark,
2008
abca 271.

that
case is certainly most akin to the facts at issue here, where a substance was
applied to a person’s body. in most cases, the impugned substance was
“administered” to a person through a syringe, or a person was otherwise made to
ingest the substance. those cases more straightforwardly constitute
“administering” a substance.

there
are cases where the accused was too removed from the ultimate act to make out
this element of the offence. in those cases, the accused did not directly
“administer” the substance. in one, a doctor provided a prescription for a
narcotic; in another, the accused provided a syringe and drugs to another who
then administered it themselves. see, for instance,
r. v. giles,
2013
onsc 822;
r. v. verma,
1996 canlii 606 (on ca), o.j. no. 4418 (c.a.) and
r. v. tan
(1984),
1984 canlii 2418 (sk ca), 35 sask. r. 74 (c.a.). this is different from the current situation. those
cases are also distinguishable as they related to the definition of the term
“administer” in the context of the offence of trafficking under the
narcotics
control act, or some other offence such as assisting suicide. these involve
a different legal framework.

i
do not find these cases to be of great assistance in interpreting the term
“administering” in the context of the present case, as the courts were focused
on whether there was a direct action or “active involvement” of the accused in
causing the victim to take the substance. it is in this context, for instance,
that the court in
tan
spoke of the need for a narcotic to “enter the
recipient’s system parenterally or otherwise” for it to be administered: cited
in
giles, at para.
8.

we
are not here dealing with a narcotic that is typically ingested in some way or
another, or with a removed action on the part of the accused. in the present
case, there was no intervening person or action as between the accused and
complainant.

in
clark, the accused had poured motor oil onto the complainant’s face
while she was lying on her back. he was charged under the same
criminal code
provision as here. in that context, the court of appeal relied on the
dictionary definition of the term “administer” as including “give, apply”:
para. 7. it rejected the accused’s argument that to be administered, the
accused must intend for the substance to be “taken internally or perhaps
absorbed through the skin”: paras. 9-11.

leaving
aside the issue of intent that must be established (which, as the court pointed
out, is the intent to annoy or aggrieve, not to have the substance be taken
internally), the court found that the term “administer” is “broad enough to
include a harmful substance being brought into contact with a person’s skin”. pouring
motor oil onto the complainant’s face was found to be “administering” the oil:
para. 13.

of
course, the trial judge had also found that the substance was “noxious”, stating
that “a substance intended as a lubricant for automobiles or machines and
certainly not intended to be applied to an individual’s person is a noxious
substance when thrown in the face deliberately”: para. 5. this was the case
even though it was pointed out that motor oil will not infrequently make
contact with mechanics’ skin in the ordinary course of their work.

bug
spray is different to some extent, depending on the type of spray. but i
address below whether the spray here constituted a “noxious substance”. for the
purpose of determining whether it was “administered” by the accused, i accept
that there is no need for it to enter the body. it suffices that it be
“applied” onto another person, and that it come in contact with their skin. the
dictionary definition of “administer” is indeed broad, and the alberta court of
appeal’s reasons on this point are persuasive.

in
r. v. cogswell,
2021 cm 2017, the court martial also considered the
dictionary definition of “administer” which it noted as including – based on
the context of the case before it – “dispensing” or “distributing”: see para.
223.

by
directing the aerosol can at ms. long and spraying it, the accused clearly did
“administer” the spray onto her. contrary to the defence’s submission, i do not
accept that the crown had to prove that the spray was directed at and got into
ms. long’s eye for this element to be made out. i do not
believe the location of the body where the substance is applied is of much import,
nor, as indicated above, do i accept that it must penetrate the skin or enter
the body. the content of the aerosol can in this case was sprayed onto
her skin, and that suffices to meet the broad definition of “administering”
under s. 245 of the
code.

before considering whether the substance administered here was
“noxious”, i first consider the accused’s intent given the fact that the
analysis of what is “noxious” under
s. 245(1)
accounts for all the
circumstances relating to the manner in which the substance was administered.
intent to aggrieve or annoy

as set out in
r. v. burkholder
(1977),
1977 altascad 8 (canlii), 34 c.c.c. (2d)
214 (alta. c.a.), at para.
28: “the nature of the
mens rea
required to support a conviction is found in the intent that accompanies the
act of administration of the noxious substance, and requires that the act of
administration be accompanied by the intent to cause the particular harm
described in the section.” it does not encompass recklessness: para. 31. the intent
must specifically be to annoy or aggrieve: para. 31.

certainly, “the natural consequences of the act might, if nothing
else was proved, be said to show the intent with which it was done”:
r. v.
steane,
32 cr. app. r. 61, at pp. 65-66, cited in
burkholder, at
para.
33. the requisite intent can also be inferred from the consequence being
suffered, or if it is established that the amount administered would have
caused this consequence in the normal course of events, even if the consequence
did not follow:
burkholder, at para.
41. see also
cogswell, at
paras.
228-33.

the case of
cogswell, at para.
232, also references the
dictionary definitions of “aggrieve” (distress) and “annoy” (make slightly
angry), which are also not defined in the
code.

i certainly accept that ms. long was annoyed and aggrieved. unexpectedly
spraying a substance at a person, in circumstances such as the ones that
existed here, would also be expected to cause this consequence in the normal
course of events.

moreover, based on the history between mr. mbah and ms. long, and
the fact that he targeted her with the spray, i accept that he sprayed her with
the intent at minimum to annoy her.

though he continued to spray the aerosol can up along the roadway
and there was nothing clearly said to support this intent, the defence
admission that he directed the spray at ms. long, in conjunction with their
history, suffices to infer the specific intent to annoy or aggrieve. mr. mbah
did not have any expression or reaction and simply went on his way, but as
pointed out by the crown, that fact is also indicative of a purposeful intent
considering that there were no words to suggest the spraying was an accident or
to offer any other explanation, despite the fact that ms. long immediately
reacted to the spray.

this element of the offence is therefore met.
noxious substance

the “noxious thing” in this case is particularized in the charge as
an “unknown spray”. the crown takes the position that although the spray
was likely bug spray, this is of no matter.

the
defence argues that spraying bug spray from the hip toward
someone does not meet the test for administering a noxious substance. it
argues that in the context of not knowing what the substance in fact was, the effects described are insufficient to prove that it was noxious.

whether a substance is noxious will depend on the circumstances of
its administration. a non-toxic substance can be noxious, depending on the
case.

for
instance, the court in
burkholder, at para.
25, found that water or
aspirin could be “noxious” in certain circumstances, such as where water is
injected into a person’s body or an excessive amount of aspirin is administered
to a person.

indeed,
in
burkholder, at para.
24, the alberta court of appeal noted the
dictionary definition of “noxious” as being “injurious, hurtful, harmful,
unwholesome” or “not beneficial to mortals”. but it held that whether a
substance is noxious will be determined “in light of all the circumstances attendant
on its administration”. relevant circumstances include its inherent
characteristics, the quantity administered and the manner in which it is
administered. the court will consider if, based on those circumstances, “it is
capable of effecting a consequence defined in the section”, that is, “aggrieve
or annoy”: para. 25.

this
definition was adopted in
clark, at paras.
8 and 14. it reiterated that
“context is all-important in determining whether a substance is noxious”.

in
the case of
cogswell, a member of the canadian armed forces was found to
have administered a noxious substance by putting cannabis in cupcakes ingested
by other members prior to a fire exercise. these members did not know they were
ingesting marijuana and all experienced after-effects of
ingesting the substance.

although many use cannabis recreationally and will consider its
effects as pleasant, the court martial concluded that in the circumstances that
existed in that case, where the members displayed symptoms including “the impairment
of cognitive abilities, lethargy and drowsiness which were incompatible with
their tasks that day” and based on expert evidence regarding the effects of
cannabis, the substance was noxious: see para. 219-222.

the court pointed to a dictionary definition of “noxious” as being
“harmful, poisonous or very unpleasant”: para. 214. it otherwise endorsed the
holding in
burkholder
regarding the relevance of context: paras. 215-16.
it focused in particular on whether the substance, “in light of all of the
circumstances attendant upon its administration”, “is capable of effecting, or
in the normal course of events will effect, a consequence defined” at
paragraph
245(1)
(b), that is, aggrieve or annoy the person: paras. 215-16.

the crown submits that even though bug spray may be administered to
a person in a non-toxic way, the manner in which it was administered here made
it – at minimum – “very unpleasant” and was “capable of” aggrieving or annoying
a person.

i do not accept that this suffices to render a substance “noxious”
for the purpose of s. 245 of the
code. after all, water sprayed onto a
person – in the manner the accused did here – could also be “very unpleasant”
and “aggrieve or annoy” a person. yet that is not akin to the example given in
burkholder
of injecting water into a person’s body.

the starting point of the analysis in
burkholder
was
the dictionary definition of “noxious” as being “injurious, hurtful, harmful,
unwholesome”. while a substance does not need to possess those inherent
characteristics, the manner in which it is used must still amount to being
“noxious”. that is the point of factoring in the surrounding context. it cannot
merely be that the substance is capable of “aggrieving” or
“annoying”, as any substance can do that. the manner of use, if not the
substance itself, must be “noxious”.

while
the definition of “noxious” can include something that is “very unpleasant”,
the prevalent meaning of the word relates to it being “physically harmful or
destructive to living beings” or “unwholesome” in the sense of being “harmful
especially to health”: merriam-webster dictionary, online, 2025,
www.merriam-webster.com/disctionary/noxious.

based
on the cambridge dictionary, a noxious thing is something, “especially a gas or
other substance” that is “poisonous or very harmful”, or that is ”harmful
and
unpleasant”: cambridge academic content dictionary, cambridge university press,
2025,
www.dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/noxioous
[emphasis added]. see also:
www.dictionary.com/browse/noxious
(“harmful or injurious to health or physical well-being”); collins cobuild
advanced learner’s dictionary, harpercollins publishers,
www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/noxious
(“poisonous or very harmful” or “extremely unpleasant”, also referencing
penguin random house llc, which refers to “harmful or injurious to health or
physical well-being”).

i
also note the seemingly clearer terminology used in the french version of the
code,
which refers to “un poison ou une autre substance destructive ou délétère” –
that is, “a poison or other destructive or deleterious substance” [translation
mine]. “délétère” can also be translated in english as “injurious” or
“harmful”. in french, this means toxic, harmful, or detrimental to health or
life.

the
above considerations are sufficient to persuade me that the quality of
“noxiousness” under section 245(1)(b) requires more than mere unpleasantness as
submitted by the crown. however, if there were any residual ambiguity in the
meaning of this term as applied to these facts, i would find that the principle
of strict construction in the criminal law would resolve the interpretative
exercise in favour of the defence:
r. v. hasselwander,
1993 canlii 90 (scc), 2 s.c.r. 398,
at p. 413;
r. v. mcintosh,
1995 canlii 124 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 686 at p. 702.

in the circumstances of the present case, therefore, i am unable to
find that the substance was noxious.

first,
i cannot make clear findings on the “inherent characteristics” of the spray
given that it is not known what the substance in fact was. the
can, which was not located, was described as a very large one, like raid bug
spray. mr. recchia believed it could be a bee spray, but it is unclear whether
it was a repellent spray for topical use to be applied to skin, or a bug killer
spray not intended for personal use. although ms. long described a bug spray-like
smell, mr. recchia did not describe any odour.

i
must instead draw inferences based on the description of the spray and in
particular its effects or lack thereof on ms. long. leaving aside the emotional
impact of being unexpectedly assaulted, the physical effect of the spray was
minimal if non-existent.

indeed,
the impact was that ms. long was rattled and became frantic. she was upset. she
was concerned about the spray damaging her eyeglasses, but this concern does
not appear to have materialized. she rinsed her glasses and her eye – not
because it was burning – but because she didn’t know what the substance was.
indeed, i understand the evidence to be that ms. long rinsed her eye as a
precautionary measure, once she got home. she did not say that the spray
impacted her vision prior to rinsing, even temporarily or partially. she first
took a breather in a nearby store.

in
fact, ms. long did not describe any sting or burning sensation to her eye. nor
did she attribute any redness or irritation to the spray. she indicated that
her eye was a little bit red but that that could have just been from rinsing it
out.

it is also notable that although mr. recchia was in conversation
facing ms. long, he did not experience any contact with the spray or its
effects at all.

as
for the manner in which the spray was administered, it was sprayed from the hip
level, next to ms. long. it dispersed in a cloud-like manner
around her. it certainly was aimed in her direction, though not in her
face. ms. long was certainly annoyed if not aggrieved by being sprayed, and i
accept that it was intended to annoy her.

but
i also cannot say exactly how much was administered, though it was enough for
the spray to cloud up around ms. long. still, the gesture was brief, and the
accused proceeded on his way.

based
on all these circumstances, i cannot find that the substance was “injurious,
hurtful, harmful, unwholesome”, or otherwise sufficient to meet the definition
of noxious.

this
conclusion might have been different if the spray had been administered
directly into ms. long’s eye, in particular if she had felt notable effects
from it. but i am unable to find that this was the case. the spray dispersed as
a cloud around her, and that is how some landed on her face. she did not appear
to suffer any direct effects from the spray itself.

this
element of the offence has thus not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.

i
was not asked to consider whether the offence of assault is a lesser included
offence to the one charged. an acquittal will therefore follow on count one.
breaches of the peace

as
indicated, these are conceded by the defence. given that the two counts relate
to an identical term of keeping the peace, the defence asks that one be stayed
pursuant to the principles set out in
kienapple v. r.,
1974 canlii 14 (scc), 
1 s.c.r. 729. the crown takes no issue with this request.
conclusion

an
acquittal will therefore be entered on count 2. findings of guilt will be
entered on counts 3 and 4, but count 4 (breach of probation) will be stayed
pursuant to
kienapple.
released: october
27, 2025
signed:
justice c. mainville