source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj343/2025oncj343.html

warning
the court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the judg­ment/file:
a
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
criminal code.
this subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
criminal code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1),
read as follows:
486.4 order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any
of the following offences:
(i) an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii) any
offence under this act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a).
(2)
mandatory
order on application
— in proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
) at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order....
486.6 offence
— (1) every person who
fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or
subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary
conviction.
this hearing is governed by
section 278.95
of the
criminal code:
publication prohibited
278.95
(1)
a
person shall not publish in any document, or broadcast or transmit in any way,
any of the following:
(a)
the
contents of an application made under subsection 278.93;
(b)
any
evidence taken, the information given and the representations made at an
application under section 278.93 or at a hearing under section 278.94;
(c)
the
decision of a judge or justice under subsection 278.93(4), unless the judge or
justice, after taking into account the complainant’s right of privacy and the
interests of justice, orders that the decision may be published, broadcast or
transmitted; and
(d)
the
determination made and the reasons provided under subsection 278.94(4), unless
(i)
that
determination is that evidence is admissible, or
(ii)
the
judge or justice, after taking into account the complainant’s right of privacy
and the interests of justice, orders that the determination and reasons may be
published, broadcast or transmitted.
offence
(2)
every
person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. w.d., 2025 oncj 343
date: 
2025 06 02
court
file no.: hamilton 21-8993
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
w.d.
before
justice j.p.p. fiorucci
section
278.94
criminal code
hearing held on may 9, 2025
ruling
on admissibility of s. 276 evidence released on june 2, 2025
approved
for publication on june 24, 2025:
s. 278.95(1)
(c) of the
criminal code
kayla mclaren.................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
geoffrey read.................................................................. 
 counsel for the defendant w.d.
mercedes perez............................................................. 
counsel for the complainant k.f.
fiorucci j.:
introduction

the defendant, w.d., is charged with sexual
assault and sexual exploitation of k.f. the defendant is the ex-partner of j.f.
who is k.f.’s mother. according to k.f., the defendant was a father figure to
her.

on august 26, 2021, the defendant was temporarily
living in the same home with k.f., j.f., and k.f.’s three siblings. k.f. was 16
years old at the time. k.f. alleges that the defendant came into the bathroom
when she was in the shower. he first poked her through the shower curtain and
then opened the curtain and rubbed his hand up and down her naked body. within
moments, k.f. reported the incident to her mother. j.f. confronted the
defendant and called the police. the defendant was arrested that same night.

k.f. and j.f. gave statements to the police. during
their police statements, they both mentioned that k.f. had been sexually
assaulted by her biological father as well. k.f. said that the sexual touching
by her biological father happened when she was four years old.

the defendant applied under
s. 276
of the
criminal
code
to adduce evidence of a purported recantation by k.f. of the allegation
she made against her biological father. the defendant claims that, about a
month before he was charged, k.f. told him and j.f. that she had lied about her
father touching her.

at stage one, the crown conceded that the
evidence was capable of being admissible under s. 276(2). a stage two hearing
was conducted under s. 278.94 to determine the admissibility of the evidence. this
ruling explains my reasons for finding that evidence of k.f.’s allegation against
her biological father and her purported recantation of that allegation is
admissible on the defendant’s trial.

pursuant to
s. 278.3
of the
criminal code,
the defendant also applied for production of child protection
records relating to k.f.’s sexual assault allegation against her biological
father which are in the possession of hamilton child and family supports (formerly
the hamilton children’s aid society or “cas”). the s. 278.4 hearing to
determine whether the records will be produced to the court for review is
scheduled for june 2, 2025.

particulars of the section 276
application

the defendant’s form 1 application states that
the proposed s. 276 evidence does not run afoul of the prohibition on twin-myth
inferences contained in s. 276(1) and is relevant because “it provides an
evidential foundation for the court to determine that it cannot rely upon the
allegations of [k.f.] that [the defendant] committed these offences against her
because she has previously made similar allegations against her own father and
subsequently recanted them”. the defence says that the proffered evidence demonstrates
“a willingness to make false complaints of this kind”.

on august 27, 2021, detective philip hedgcock of
the hamilton police service interviewed k.f. and j.f. the following exchange
occurred between the detective and k.f.:
k.f.: it’s not the first time with a
guy.
det. hedgcock: with him?
k.f.: with him, it’s the first time,
yes. with my biological father, i was four, but he got to walk. so, there was,
they didn’t want to put me on the stand ‘cause i was four, so….
det. hedgcock: okay.
k.f.: …there wasn’t enough evidence.
det. hedgcock: okay.
k.f.: yeah
det. hedgcock: we’re not gonna get
into that one.
k.f.: that’s case closed.
det. hedgcock: like that’s already
done, we’re not gonna get into that, okay.

in her interview with detective hedgcock, j.f. described
how she first learned about k.f.’s allegation against the defendant when she
received a text message from k.f. and mistakenly thought that k.f. had again
been sexually assaulted by her biological father:
det. hedgcock: okay. did you get, so what was in the
text message that you got?
j.f.: she sent it here. and it says, “i’m scared. dad
said he felt like he had to pooh, then came in while i was in the shower and
sat on the toilet, and i was just starting my shower and he opened the curtain,
and started touching my body. i pushed his hands off of me, but he kept putting
his hands on me. i thought he was dad.” so, i’m like, i have a vision of her
biological father ‘cause her biological father has sexually assaulted her. and
then she says, “[w.d.],” ‘cause i said to her, well, i sent her a message,
“what are you talking about?” and that was at 9:59, and she’s like, “[w.d.]”
came in and i started my shower and he kept, he kept trying to open the curtain
and look and touch me”…


during her interview with det. hedgcock, j.f. did not mention
anything about k.f. recently recanting her allegation against her biological
father. j.f. did not say that k.f. told her and the defendant that she had lied
about her father touching her when she was a child.

the defendant filed an affidavit in support of
his s. 276 application. crown counsel cross-examined the defendant on the
contents of the affidavit. the defendant’s affidavit contains the following
assertions:
para. 3: i dispute that
the conduct that is the subject-matter of the charge
occurred as alleged or that it constitutes the offences with which i am
charged.
para. 9: i began living with [j.f.] and her two
children, [k.f.] and [m.], about twenty years ago.
para. 10: a couple of years or so later, [k.f.] did
not want to visit her father, named [b.s.], but [j.f.] was insisting that she
visit him. [k.f.] then complained that he had touched her private area, so [j.f.]
reported that to her cas worker.
para 11: the cas investigated the report but i was not privy to the details
of that investigation because i was not [k.f.]'s biological father, nor was i …informed
of the outcome of that investigation. however, i do know that cas said [k.f.]
was to be kept from her father and instead arranged for her to have supervised
visits with him at the cas facility…
para 12: about a month before i was arrested on august 27, 2021, [k.f.] told [j.f.]
and me at our house that she wanted to see her father and said that he did not touch
her but that she had lied because she …didn't want to visit him.

when cross-examined by crown counsel on his
affidavit, the defendant said he thinks the recantation happened when he, k.f.
and j.f. were sitting in the backyard of the home. according to the defendant,
k.f. said “i lied. my dad did not touch me” which prompted him to ask “what?”.
k.f. then repeated, “i lied. he never touched me”.

the defendant initially said that he did not
know how this conversation came about. however, at a later point in the
cross-examination, the defendant said he did remember how the conversation came
about. k.f. said she wanted to visit her father. the defendant and j.f. asked
her, “why the hell would you want to go visit your dad? he touched you”, which prompted
k.f. to say, “he didn’t touch me, i lied”. according to the defendant, k.f. was
upset that she didn’t get to see her father.

the defendant testified that j.f. “kind of
laughed” when k.f. said she had lied about her father touching her. when crown
counsel asked the defendant what he did after hearing the recantation, he
replied, “went about my day”. the defendant said that he had no discussions privately
with j.f. about k.f.’s recantation. he also testified that j.f. told the cas
about the recantation at one of their scheduled visits to the home a couple of
days later. this detail was not included in his affidavit.
the legal principles

section 276(1) only prohibits the use of
evidence of the complainant’s past or other sexual activity when it is offered to
support one of the “twin myths”, namely that the complainant is more likely to
have consented to the sexual activity that forms the subject-matter of the
charge or that she is less worthy of belief “by reason of the sexual nature of
activity she once engaged in”.

there are no circumstances under which “twin myth” reasoning is permitted.
section
276
applies to all sexual activity, whether with the accused or with someone
else.

it also applies to non-consensual sexual activity as well as consensual sexual
activity.


evidence of the complainant’s other sexual
activity
may
be admissible if it is “proffered for its non-sexual
features”.

section 276(2) applies to sexual activity evidence relating to a complainant
that is sought to be adduced by or on behalf of the accused. at stage two (the s.
278.94 hearing), an accused who seeks to adduce presumptively inadmissible
evidence of a complainant’s other sexual activity bears the onus of
establishing its relevance and admissibility in accordance with the criteria
set out in s. 276(2)(a) to (d), having regard to the factors set out in s.
276(3).

the four criteria in s. 276(2) that must be met for
the evidence to be ruled admissible are: (a) the evidence is not being adduced for
one of the twin myth inferences in s. 276(1); (b) the evidence is relevant to
an issue at trial; (c) the evidence is of specific instances of sexual
activity; and (d) the evidence has significant probative value that is not
substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper
administration of justice.

the factors in s. 276(3) that the judge must
consider in making the admissibility determination under s. 276(2) are:
(a) the interests of justice, including the right of
the accused to make a full answer and defence;
(b) society's interest in encouraging the reporting of
sexual assault offences;
(c) whether there is a reasonable prospect that the
evidence will assist in arriving at a just determination in the case;
(d) the need to remove from the fact-finding process
any discriminatory belief or bias;
(e) the risk that the evidence may unduly arouse
sentiments of prejudice, sympathy or hostility in the jury;
(f) the potential prejudice to the complainant's
personal dignity and right of privacy;
(g) the right of the complainant and of every
individual to personal security and to the full protection and benefit of the
law; and
(h) any other factor that the judge, provincial court
judge or justice considers relevant.

in
r. v. darrach, when the supreme court
of canada addressed the constitutionality of the procedure to introduce
evidence of prior sexual activity, the court said:
it is a basic rule of evidence that the party seeking
to introduce evidence must be prepared to satisfy the court that it is relevant
and admissible. lamer c.j. described the burden of proof on a
voir dire
to introduce evidence (in that case prior inconsistent statements) as being “on
the balance of probabilities,
the normal burden resting upon a party seeking
to admit evidence
” in
r. v. b. (k.g.),
1993 canlii 116 (scc), 1 s.c.r. 740 (s.c.c.),
at p. 800 (emphasis added). prior sexual activity is, like hearsay, character
evidence and similar fact evidence, restricted in its admissibility. if the
defence seeks to adduce such evidence, it must establish that it supports at
least some relevant inference. parliament has specified criteria for
admissibility in s. 276(2) to guide the discretion of trial judges in this area.


at stage two, the s. 278.94 hearing, an
affidavit with detailed particulars must be filed by someone with relevant and
personal knowledge of the facts who can personally testify to the truth of what
is being asserted.

the affidavit must “establish a connection between the complainant’s sexual history
and the accused’s defence”.

it need not be the accused himself who presents the evidence on the
voir
dire.


an affidavit is necessary “because part of the
purpose of the
voir dire
is to cross-examine the affiant”.

the basic rules of evidence
require that the affiant, whether it be the accused or someone else, “submit to
cross-examination because the right to cross-examine is essential to give any
weight to an affidavit”.

in
darrach,
the scc explained the purpose of cross-examination on the
affidavit:
the crown’s right to cross-examine on the affidavit
under
s. 276
is essential to protect the fairness of the trial.
cross-examination is required to enable the trial judge to decide relevance by
assessing the affiant’s credibility and the use to which he intends to put the
evidence. the trial judge correctly found that the legislation itself requires
“some weighing and some assessing of the evidence” before it can be admitted [citation
omitted]. without cross-examination, “the court can not attribute much, if any,
weight to such evidence” because it is impossible to assess its probative value
and prejudicial effect as the legislation requires.


the scc placed limits on the crown’s right to
cross-examine. the defence is required to produce an affidavit that shows how
the prior sexual activity is relevant to the allegation of sexual assault made
against the accused. the crown has “
the
opportunity to cross-examine on whatever aspects relevant to the charge that
the accused chooses to raise”.

however, the scc
in
darrach
held that the trial judge was correct in
finding that the cross-examination must be “
confined to what is
necessary to determine... whether the proposed evidence is admissible”.


the scc likened the
s. 276
voir dire
to the procedure in a
corbett
application. the accused “reveals the evidence he intends to
call for his case, which allows the trial judge properly to apply the factors
relevant to his request”.

this does not provide the crown with “an excuse…to deeply probe the case for
the defence”.

rather, “[t]he point is to provide the trial judge with the information he or
she needs to make an informed decision, but the crown has no right to require
more than that”.

application of the legal principles
issues

the two questions to be determined on this
application relate to the requirements for admissibility in subsections
276(2)(b) and (d):
(i)
is the evidence of k.f.’s allegation against her
biological father, and her purported recantation of that allegation, relevant to
an issue at trial? and
(ii)
does this evidence have significant probative
value that is not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the
proper administration of justice,
having regard to the general concerns and
interests of justice outlined in s. 276(3)?

i answer yes to both questions. there was no
dispute regarding subsections 276(2)(a) and (c). neither the crown nor k.f.’s
counsel argued that the defendant had failed to establish either of these requirements
for admissibility. the proffered evidence is not being adduced for one of the
twin myth inferences in s. 276(1) and is of a specific instance or instances of
sexual activity.
the evidence on the voir dire

counsel for the crown and k.f. argued that the
defendant lacks credibility and that i should doubt the veracity of his evidence
regarding k.f.’s recantation. they pointed to the fact that he raised this
issue for the first time on the day his trial was scheduled to commence, which
was three years after the purported recantation.

they also emphasized the
absence of any corroborating evidence from j.f. on the
voir dire, notwithstanding
the defendant’s claim that j.f. was present when k.f. said she lied about her
biological father. furthermore, neither k.f. nor j.f. said anything to det.
hedgcock about k.f.’s recantation although they both mentioned the prior
assault by k.f.’s biological father in their police statements.

i note that crown counsel did not cross-examine
the defendant about the veracity of his evidence that k.f. recanted the allegation
or about his delay in raising the issue. crown counsel did not suggest to the
defendant that he had fabricated his account of k.f. telling him and j.f. that
she had lied about her biological father touching her. the defendant’s evidence
about the recantation was left unchallenged during cross-examination. the
defendant has satisfied his obligation to “reveal the evidence he intends to
call for his case” which is that he himself and j.f. heard k.f. recant a prior
allegation of sexual assault.

based on the evidence tendered on the
voir
dire, i do not find that the defendant’s assertion that k.f. recanted her prior
allegation of sexual touching is so lacking in credibility that it fails to
meet the substantial probative value requirement for admission in s. 276(2). i
make this finding recognizing that the absence of evidence from j.f. on the
voir
dire
and the fact that neither k.f. nor j.f. mentioned the recantation to
the police detective are factors which could cumulatively affect the
credibility of the defendant’s claim that k.f. recanted her allegation against
her father.

the assessment under s. 276(2) does not require
me to make a finding of fact that k.f. did indeed recant her prior allegation of
sexual abuse as the defendant claims. the issue to be determined on this
application is whether the defendant is permitted to confront k.f. with his claim
that she recanted, elicit evidence from j.f. about the recantation and/or
testify himself about the recantation should he elect to give evidence at his
trial. i turn next to relevance.
relevant to an issue at trial

each piece of evidence must satisfy three
requirements before it is received in a criminal trial: relevance, materiality,
and admissibility.

in
r. v. t.(m.), the ontario court of appeal succinctly described each
of these requirements:
relevance
is a matter of everyday experience
and common sense, not an inherent characteristic of any item of evidence.
relevance exists as the relationship between an item of evidence proposed for
reception and the proposition of fact the party tendering the evidence seeks to
establish by its introduction. we assess the relevance of individual items of evidence
in the context of the case in which the evidence is offered and the positions
of counsel. an item of evidence is relevant if it makes the fact it seeks to
establish slightly more or less probable than that fact would be without that
evidence, through the application of everyday experience and common sense:
r.
v. luciano,
2011 onca 89, 267 c.c.c. (3d) 16 (ont. c.a.), at paras.
204-205.
materiality
is a legal concept. evidence is material if it is offered to prove or disprove
a fact in issue. what is in issue is a function of the allegations contained in
the indictment and the applicable substantive and procedural law:
luciano,
at para.
207.
admissibility
is also a legal concept. its rules, which are negative and exclusionary, are
grounded in policy considerations that we regard as sufficiently important to
justify the exclusion of evidence that is both relevant and material.
admissibility rules are not unforgiving. they cede ground, occasionally
admitting evidence by exception:
luciano,
at para.
209.


as in most sexual assault trials, the
credibility of the complainant, k.f., is of critical importance. the defendant
denies k.f.’s allegation that he sexually assaulted her by touching her body
when she was in the shower. k.f. made this allegation about the defendant,
someone she considered to be a father figure, at a time when he was temporarily
living in the home with k.f. and her family. the material fact in issue in this
case is whether the sexual touching occurred.

the defendant says that, about one month before
k.f. made her allegation against him, k.f. told j.f. and the defendant that she
wished to see her biological father, a man against whom she had made a sexual
complaint when she was a child. the sexual assault allegation she made as a
child resulted in k.f. having limited contact with her biological father. the
defendant claims that k.f. recanted the allegation against her biological
father during the same conversation in which she expressed a desire to see him.
k.f.’s allegation against the defendant resulted in the defendant having to leave
the home.

generally, “one cannot impugn a witness’s
credibility by contradicting the witness on matters which are collateral even
in a case where the ‘core’ issue is credibility”.

courts have found that evidence of other allegations of sexual assault made by
a complainant are a collateral issue and thus inadmissible.

the rationale for this rule is to guard against reasoning based on myths and
stereotypes, such as “a single victim is unlikely to be sexually assaulted by
more than one person”,

or “a victim who accuses more than one person of sexual impropriety occurring
in different circumstances is more likely to be lying about either or both
occurrences than a victim who accuses only one person”.


there is a limited exception to this rule. in
r. v. riley,

the accused who was charged with sexual offences sought to cross-examine the
complainant about a complaint of sexual assault she made against another person,
roswell. the accused also proposed to call roswell as a witness to give
evidence that the complainant’s allegations against him, which were similar to
the allegations made against the accused, were false, and that he had been acquitted
at his trial. the trial judge refused to permit the accused to cross-examine
the complainant about her allegations against roswell and refused to permit roswell
to give evidence that he denied the allegations and that he was acquitted.

the ontario court of appeal upheld the trial judge’s decision. in
doing so, the court said:
the only legal basis of which we are aware that would
justify the cross-examination of this complainant along the lines suggested
would be in order to lay the foundation for a pattern of fabrication by the
complainant of similar allegations of sexual assault against other men. this
should not be encouraged
unless the defence is in a position to establish
that the complainant has recanted her earlier accusations
or that they are
demonstrably false.
there is no indication that she was prepared to
recant that allegation. the problem of proving falsity in these
circumstances is considerable. to have roswell testify that her complaint to
the authorities about him was false, would only introduce a collateral issue of
credibility which would be as difficult to resolve as those contained in the
complaints of which the trial judge was seized. even if we had a proper record
of roswell’s trial, a not guilty verdict, standing by itself, could not
establish that the prosecution was based on fabricated testimony by the complainant
[emphasis added].


i find that, unlike the facts in
riley, the defendant has
led evidence on the
voir dire
that k.f. recanted her earlier allegation.
the evidence presented on the
voir dire
raises the prospect that k.f.’s
allegation of sexual touching against her father “might be false”.

if k.f. were to acknowledge making a false allegation of sexual assault against
her biological father in the past, it would be relevant in the assessment of
her general credibility, and relevant to assessing the credibility and
reliability of her claim that the defendant touched her, especially since k.f.
also saw the defendant as a parental figure.

this evidence fits squarely within the exception in
riley.

the defendant’s case is unlike other cases relied on by the crown
and k.f.’s counsel in which the accused persons were unable to point to
evidence that the complainant had recanted prior allegations or that the prior allegations
were proven to be demonstrably false.

as i stated earlier in this ruling, based on the defendant’s evidence on the
voir
dire, i am unable to find that his claim that k.f. recanted her prior
complaint is so lacking in credibility that it fails to satisfy the test for
admission in s. 276(2).
the context of the defendant’s case, including
the defendant’s denial that any sexual touching occurred, makes the evidence of
k.f.’s purported recantation, one month before her allegations against the
defendant, relevant.
significant probative value not
substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice

in
darrach,
the scc said that “[t]he requirement of
‘significant probative value’ serves to exclude evidence of trifling relevance
that, even though not used to support the two forbidden inferences, would still
endanger the ‘proper administration of justice’”.

an assessment of probative value involves consideration of “the extent to which
the evidence actually assists in establishing the proposition for which it is
tendered”.

the evidence must be “directed toward a material fact”.

assessing probative value considers “the strength of the inference relied upon
and the importance of the issue to which the evidence is relevant”.


section 276(3)(a) requires me to consider the interests of
justice, including the right of the accused to make full answer and defence. the
evidence of the other sexual activity, k.f.’s complaint against her biological
father, is necessary for the accused to put the recantation to k.f. and to suggest
to her that it was, therefore, a false complaint of sexual touching. without
this evidence of other sexual activity, the defendant would be deprived of the
opportunity of demonstrating that k.f. is a witness who can make false
complaints of sexual touching. this evidence has significant probative value
because the defendant denies touching k.f. in the shower.

if k.f. were to acknowledge that she recanted the prior
allegation, and that her complaint against her father was false, or if evidence
of the recantation is accepted by the trier of fact, there is a reasonable
prospect that the evidence will assist in arriving at a just determination of
the case, the factor set out in s. 276(3)(c). it would call into question
k.f.’s general credibility and the reliability of her complaint against the
defendant. for evidence to have significant probative value, it “does not have
to be capable of raising a reasonable doubt on its own-only in the context of
all the other evidence”.


the parameters of the proposed questioning of the complainant are
relevant to assessing the danger of prejudice to the proper administration of
justice and the other factors in s. 276(3). the defendant wants to ask k.f. limited
questions about her prior complaint. in essence, the defendant wants to ask the
following questions: (i) when you were young, did you make an allegation of
sexual touching against your biological father? (ii) did you make this
complaint because you didn’t want to visit your father? (iii) did you admit to
w.d. (the defendant) and your mother, j.f., that you had lied about your father
touching you? and (iv) did you recant the allegation against your biological
father because you changed your mind, and you did want to visit your father?

k.f. was a child when she made the complaint of sexual touching
against her father. she believes she was four years old at the time. while it
is the defendant’s position that k.f. recanted the allegation against her
father, k.f. may take a different position. she may deny the recantation and
maintain that she was victimized by her father. it is important to recognize
that cross-examining a victim about previous sexual victimization, especially a
child victim, can cause great harm to their personal dignity and privacy. the
questioning proposed by the defendant may cause prejudice to k.f.’s personal
dignity and right of privacy (s. 276(3)(f)). however, i find that the potential
prejudice can be minimized by prohibiting questioning about the details of the
sexual touching by her father.

similarly, given the limited questioning that will be permitted
in this area, i find that society’s interest in encouraging the reporting of
sexual assault offences (s. 276(3)(b)) will be minimally impacted by admission
of the evidence.

the admission of the evidence does not risk insertion into the
fact-finding process of any discriminatory belief or bias (s. 276(3)(d)). the
fact that k.f. may have been the victim of a sexual assault by her biological
father in the past does not, in and of itself, affect her credibility or
diminish the reliability of her complaint against the defendant.

although this is a judge alone trial, admission of the evidence
does not engender sentiments of prejudice, sympathy, or hostility (s.
276(3)(e)). the admission of the evidence and the limited questioning permitted
will not unduly compromise the complainant’s right to personal security (s.
276(3)(g)).
conclusion

having considered the factors in s. 276(3), for the reasons set
out above, i find that the evidence of k.f.’s prior complaint of sexual
touching against her biological father is relevant and has significant
probative value that is not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice
to the proper administration of justice.

the defendant is permitted to cross-examine k.f. about:
(i)
whether she made an allegation of sexual touching against her biological
father when she was young? the defendant will not be permitted to question k.f.
about the details of the sexual touching by her biological father;
(ii)
whether she made this complaint of sexual touching because she didn’t
want to visit her biological father?
(iii)
whether she admitted to the defendant and her mother, j.f., that she had
lied about her father touching her? the defendant will be permitted to question
k.f. about the circumstances of the purported recantation which occurred at the
family home; and
(iv)
whether she recanted the allegation against her biological father
because she changed her mind, and she did want to visit him?

the defendant will also be permitted to elicit evidence from j.f.
(whether by way of examination-in-chief or cross-examination), and to testify
himself, should he elect to testify, about k.f.’s purported recantation of her
sexual touching allegation against her biological father.
released: june
2, 2025
signed:
justice j.p.p. fiorucci

the defendant filed a joint application in form 1 which
addresses both the
s. 276
application and the
s. 278.3
production application.
the parties agreed that these applications would be heard and determined
separately.

in this passage, i have redacted the name by which k.f. referred to the
defendant and have replaced it with “w.d.”.

r. v. darrach,
2000 scc 46, at para.
32.

ibid,
at para. 33.

ibid,
at para. 33.

ibid,
at para. 35.

ibid,
at para. 46. see also
prosecuting and defending sexual offence
cases,
third edition, daniel brown and jill witkin, emond
montgomery publications limited, 2024, toronto, on, chapter 13, p. 416, wherein
the authors state that the accused must call evidence to establish each of the four
criteria in s. 276(2)
on a balance of probabilities.

ibid,
at para. 53.

ibid,
at para. 56.

ibid,
at para. 53.

ibid,
at para. 53.

ibid,
at para. 61.

ibid,
at para. 63.

ibid,
at para. 64.

ibid,
at para. 64.

ibid,
at para. 65.

ibid,
at para. 65, quoting from
r. v. underwood,
1998 canlii 839 (scc), 1 s.c.r.
77, at para.
10.

ibid,
at para. 65, quoting from
r. v. underwood, supra,
at para.
10.

the case was scheduled for trial on june 13 and july 17, 2024.
on june 13
th, defence counsel advised that his client had provided
him with new information that morning (regarding the recantation), that required
him to bring the s. 276 and s. 278.3 applications.

r. v. t.(m.),
2012 onca 511, at para.
35.

ibid,
at paras. 36-38.

r. v. b.(a.r.),
1998 canlii 14603 (on ca), o.j. no. 3648 (ont. c.a.), at para.
13.

r. v. b.(a.r.), ibid;
r. v. riley,
1992 canlii 7448 (on ca), o.j. no. 4072 (ont. c.a.);
r.
v. d.k.,
2020 onca 79.

prosecuting and defending sexual offence cases,
third edition, daniel brown and jill witkin, emond montgomery publications limited,
2024, toronto, on, chapter 13, p. 425.

ibid,
at p. 425, citing
r. v. t.(m.),
supra.

r. v. riley, supra.

ibid,
at paras. 9-10.

r. v. w.(b.a.),
1992 canlii 24 (scc), 3 s.c.r. 811 (s.c.c.), at para.
3.

r. v. green,
2013 onca 74, at para.
4.

r. v. d.k., supra,
and
r. v. b.(a.r.), supra.

r. v. darrach, supra,
at para.
41.

modern criminal evidence,
matthew gourlay, brock jones, jill makepeace,
glen crisp, justice renee pomerance, emond montgomery
publications limited, 2022, toronto, on, chapter 1, p. 12.

ibid,
chapter 1, p. 12.

prosecuting and defending sexual offence cases,
third edition, daniel brown and jill witkin, emond montgomery publications limited,
2024, toronto, on, chapter 13, p. 435.

ibid,
chapter 13, p. 434.