source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj261/2025oncj261.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r.
v. piccin,
2025 oncj 261
date: 2025 05 12
court file no.: windsor
23-81102917
between:
his majesty the
king
— and —
tyler
piccin
before justice s.
g. pratt
heard on 17
january and 31 march 2025
reasons for
judgment released on 12 may 2025
zach battiston...................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
alyssa jervis................................................................................ 
 counsel for the defendant
pratt j.:

on
17 january 2025, the offender tyler piccin pleaded guilty to impaired operation
of a conveyance. i ordered the preparation of a pre-sentence report (psr) and
received sentencing submissions on 31 march.

counsel
for the offender has brought an application seeking to have s. 320.19(1)(a)(i)
declared unconstitutional and of no force or effect in the present case. it is
argued that the minimum penalty of a $1,000 fine is grossly disproportionate as
it makes the offender ineligible for a discharge.

it
was agreed between the parties, and accepted by the court, that i would hear
submissions and consider an appropriate sentence. only if i found a discharge
to be appropriate would we then move on to arguing the charter application. 
this approach follows the process used by my brother justice donald
in the case
of
r.
v.
bressette
2020 onca 767 (canlii),
 o.j. no. 5287 (c.j.). at paragraphs 2
and 3 of that decision, his honour laid out the suggested path:
2 by way of
agreement, counsel propose that i first determine the appropriate sentence for
ms. bressette and then having done so, should the appropriate sentence fall
below the floor set by the statutory framework made out in the
criminal code, i
would move on to hear and consider the charter application that could provide
me with a conduit through which i could impose such a sentence.
3 for the sake of
clarity in deciding the issue at hand, i am open to the possibility of granting
a conditional discharge as sought by the defence. i understand that the crown
is opposed to the imposition of a discharge. they suggested that a fine, one
above the minimum, be appropriate in light of ms. bressette's personal
circumstances as a whole.

this
procedure was adopted in
r.
v.
bruzas
 o.j. no. 60 (c.j.),
and follows the reasoning set out in
r.
v.
r.k.
2005 canlii 21092 (on ca),
 o.j. no.
2434 (c.a.)
where justice doherty affirmed that “courts should not decide
issues of law, particularly constitutional issues, that are not necessary to
the resolution of the matter before the court”.

in
the present case, i am open to consider the notion of granting a discharge. i
recognize that sentence has been imposed by other courts in appropriate
circumstances. for the purpose of this first stage of the sentencing, i
include a discharge in the realm of potential penalties.
facts

on
28 june 2023, at approximately 214pm, windsor police were dispatched to the
3400 block of mckay boulevard. they were advised of a potential impaired
driver, standing outside his vehicle and urinating on the ground. when they
arrived at 216pm, they found a black ford escape with a person sitting in the
driver’s seat. the door was open, the person had one foot outside the vehicle,
and a hand on the steering wheel. i was not told if the engine was running.

out
of caution, the police parked their cruiser in front of the escape. officers
tried to speak with the male, later identified as the offender, but to no
avail. the offender was struggling to speak and had an odour of alcohol on his
breath. he ignored police demands and tried to fully enter the escape. his
eyes were glazed and he did not appear to have control over his body. police
were concerned he would try to leave the scene and so had to take physical
control of him. they formed an opinion that his ability to operate a
conveyance was impaired by alcohol and placed him under arrest. he was taken
from the scene to police headquarters.

in
the breath testing room, the offender told the intoxilyzer technician, “you
know i will blow over”. indeed, he did. the first sample registered 447mg of
alcohol per 100ml of blood. there was no second sample. that is not because
the offender refused to provide it, but because police immediately called an
ambulance to bring him to hospital given the reading.

the
3400 block of mckay boulevard is a residential area. it is about a block away
from st. gabriel grade school, though i note that school had let out for the
summer by the 28
th. still, a residential area within easy walking
distance of a school would certainly be home to families and to children just
off on summer vacation.
the pre-sentence report

the
psr in this case was completed by probation officer michael williams. it is largely
positive. the offender comes from a close, supportive family. he is a high
school graduate who currently operates his own business. while he has been
diagnosed with certain mental health challenges, he is addressing them. he has
plans for the future.

the
one stumbling block in his life has been his substance abuse. he began
drinking alcohol at the age of 12. he has used cocaine, ecstasy, psylocibin,
opiates, and lsd. while he says he no longer consumes these drugs, he does
still use cannabis marijuana on a daily basis.

his
alcoholism is what has brought him before the court. at his worst, he was
consuming 60 ounces of vodka per day. the psr states that he has been sober
since october 2023 and that he completed an inpatient rehabilitation program at
westover treatment centre in december 2023. he is interested in returning to
westover to engage in their recovery and relapse prevention program in the
future.

regarding
his mental health, the offender is taking medication for depression, bipolar
disorder, and adhd. he has also been prescribed medication for anxiety but
does not take it owing to its side effects. he has been suicidal in the past
but said those thoughts have been absent ever since he completed
rehabilitation.

to
mr. williams, the offender was polite and co-operative. he expressed remorse
for his actions and acknowledged the risk he posed to public safety. he is
willing to accept whatever sentence the court imposes, and will undertake
further counselling if required.

overall,
i find the psr to be positive. while it discloses a level of alcohol addiction
seldom seen in these courts, it also discloses the steps the offender has taken
to get that addiction under control. if he continues his hard work, his future
is bright.
aggravating and mitigating factors

the
aggravating factors in this case are clear. foremost is the staggering breath
reading. i have worked in the criminal courts, as a lawyer and then as a
judge, for 25 years. the offender’s reading is the highest i’ve ever seen. 
the police should be commended for foregoing the second sample and putting the
offender’s health ahead of their investigation.

as
i noted above, the reading obtained was 447mg/100ml. according to the website
of the cleveland clinic, this is a potentially fatal level of intoxication that
puts the individual “at risk of coma and death from respiratory arrest” (see:
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/16640-alcohol-poisoning
).

the
minimum punishment for offences under s. 320.14(1) is a $1,000 fine. parliament
has instituted increased minimum fines for high blood alcohol readings when a
person is convicted under s. 320.14(1)(b). the minimum increases to $1,500 at
readings of 120mg/100ml, and to $2,000 where readings are 160mg/100ml or over. 
while those minimums do not apply to the offence before me, they are
nonetheless instructive and point to parliament’s clear desire to punish higher
levels of intoxication more severely.

crown
counsel observed that the legislation provides for a $500 increase for every
additional 40mg. for the offender’s reading of 447, that would extrapolate to
a fine of $5,500. this would be more than the maximum punishment available
when the crown proceeds summarily. this underscores the exceptionality of the
offender’s blood alcohol concentration.

further
aggravating the situation is the location where the offender was found. while
there is certainly no safe roadway for someone in his condition, the fact that
he was in a residential area on a wednesday afternoon in the summer increases
the risk he posed to the public. so too does the fact that he tried to fully
enter his vehicle when approached by police and had to be physically grounded
to prevent him from doing so. he was a clear, ongoing, and deadly danger to
the public when he was arrested.

as
clear as the aggravating factors are, so too are the mitigating features.

the
offender has pleaded guilty. while it is not an early plea, i was advised that
he was in mental health court for an extended time and that his counsel tried
valiantly to reach an alternative resolution with the crown. this process included
several crown pre-trials and at least one judicial pre-trial. it is obvious
that from the start, the offender intended to resolve this charge. i do not
hold the passage of time from arrest to guilty plea against him. his plea is a
genuine sign of remorse.

he
also has a very supportive family. this is mitigating in that it increases his
chances of success in the future. his risk of re-offending is lower, thanks to
his family’s unwavering support. there is no question that addiction takes a
toll far beyond the addict themselves. the offender’s family has endured his
years of alcohol and substance abuse. i suspect it is largely because they
have stood by him that he is sober today. they are to be congratulated. i
hope the offender understands the blessing his family is to him.

the
most salient mitigating factor is the rehabilitation the offender has
undertaken since his arrest. he has gone from consuming 60 ounces of alcohol
every day to 533 days of sobriety as of sentencing submissions, which i believe
now stands at 575 days. that is truly remarkable. it is a testament to what
the offender is capable of. he should be proud. the court congratulates him
and wishes him continued success in his recovery.

i
would also note that since completing the program at westover, the offender has
referred three other people to their services. paying it forward in this way
shows the offender understands the nature of the problem addiction poses, and wants
to help others get through it. that’s outstanding.
analysis

as
set out above, the minimum penalty for impaired operation is a $1,000 fine. 
there is also a mandatory one-year driving prohibition, but that order is not
disputed.

in
addressing driving offences, parliament set out the following at s. 320.12:
320.12
it is recognized and declared that
(a)
operating a conveyance is a
privilege that is subject to certain limits in the interests of public safety
that include licensing, the observance of rules and sobriety;
(b)
the protection of society is well
served by deterring persons from operating conveyances dangerously or while
their ability to operate them is impaired by alcohol or a drug, because that
conduct poses a threat to the life, health and safety of canadians;

the
carnage that continues on our highways, despite decades of public education,
shows how intractable a problem impaired driving is. all parliament can do is
increase penalties in the hope that stiffer sentences will discourage impaired
drivers. courts have taken up this approach and imposed significant
penitentiary sentences, sometimes in the double digits, when impaired driving
results in death or bodily harm.

in
all cases, denunciation and deterrence must be the guiding sentencing
principles. rehabilitation cannot be ignored, but it must be subordinate to
the protection of society.

the
bruzas
decision,
supra, is strikingly similar to the present
case, and is helpful.

ms.
bruzas was found by police passed out behind the wheel of her vehicle in sault
ste marie. she was clearly impaired by alcohol. she was arrested and provided
two samples of her breath, both resulting in readings of 390mg/100ml. she
pleaded guilty to “over 80” contrary to the former s. 253(1)(b).

following
her arrest, she undertook significant rehabilitative efforts. a volume of
letters and certificates were filed on her behalf at sentencing, documenting
her participation in counselling and treatment in sault ste marie and ottawa. 
the pre-sentence report outlined a very, very difficult upbringing. ms. bruzas
was indigenous and had been both witness to and victim of abuse and violence
while growing up. despite these challenges, she obtained a nursing degree and
worked in british columbia and the northwest territories. she was working in
the yukon at the time of her arrest, but was on stress leave.

in
the result, justice condon denied ms. bruzas a conditional discharge and
instead imposed a $2,000 fine.
would a conditional discharge be an
appropriate sentence?

section
730 sets out the requirements for imposing a discharge rather than entering a
conviction on a finding of guilt. the test is three-fold and well known:
(1)
is
the underlying offence punishable by a minimum sentence, or by a maximum
sentence of 14 years or life imprisonment?
(2)
is
a discharge in the offender’s best interest?
(3)
is
a discharge contrary to the public interest?

all
these requirements must be met before a court can elect to impose a discharge. 
that being said, as the focus of the constitutional question is the validity of
the first test as it relates to a charge of impaired operation, i will set that
requirement to the side and consider only the remaining two at this point.

there
can be little question that a discharge would be in the offender’s best
interest. being spared a criminal conviction would be a significant boon to
the offender going forward. potential employment and his ability to travel
would be largely unhindered. if he was ever asked if he’d been convicted of a
criminal offence, he could truthfully say no. i find a discharge would be in
his best interest.

the
more difficult question is whether a discharge would be contrary to the public
interest.

one
of the main planks supporting the offender’s claim that a discharge would not
be contrary to the public interest is the amount of rehabilitation he’s
undertaken. the public interest, it is argued, is in the offender getting
healthy more than it is in convicting him. conveniently, parliament has
already considered rehabilitation and its potential effect on sentencing in s.
320.23. that section reads as follows:
320.23
(1)
the court may, with the consent of
the prosecutor and the offender, and after considering the interests of
justice, delay sentencing of an offender who has been found guilty of an
offence under subsection 320.14(1) or 320.15(1) to allow the offender to attend
a treatment program approved by the province in which the offender resides. if
the court delays sentencing, it shall make an order prohibiting the offender
from operating, before sentencing, the type of conveyance in question, in which
case subsections 320.24(6) to (9) apply.
(2)
if the offender successfully
completes the treatment program, the court is not required to impose the
minimum punishment under section 320.19 or to make a prohibition order under
section 320.24,
but it shall not direct a discharge under section 730.
(emphasis added)

in
cases where an offender completes a treatment program approved by the province,
courts can grant relief from the minimum punishment and from the mandatory
driving prohibition. even in those cases, however, a discharge is specifically
excluded from consideration.

returning
to the
bruzas
decision,
supra, justice condon considered the
public interest in granting a discharge at paragraph 54:
is it contrary to the public
interest? this court finds that it is contrary to the public interest. courts
at all levels in canada have repeatedly identified the suffering, destruction,
injuries, deaths and trails of psychological harm upon survivors caused by
drinking and driving in canada. the fundamental sentencing principles
applicable to these offences are denunciation and deterrence, both specific and
general. in emphasizing these sentencing principles, this does not ignore the
value of rehabilitation as a preventive strategy in relation to recidivism. in
the case at hand, even when all of the mitigating factors and personal
characteristics of the applicant are considered, the risks caused by the
applicant and her decision to be in care or control of a motor vehicle with a
blood alcohol concentration almost five times the legal limit cannot be ignored.
to grant a discharge in the face of these extreme bac readings would
undermine statements by numerous courts, including the ontario court of appeal
and the supreme court of canada, that extreme behaviours in relation to
drinking and driving must and will result in meaningful consequences. it is
noted that, regardless of the province or territory, no case was presented to
this court in which a discharge was granted for an accused with such
extreme blood alcohol concentration readings. to grant a discharge in
this case would send the wrong message to anyone contemplating, even remotely,
similar behaviour and would be contrary to the public interest.
a discharge in this case would inevitably be cited by the accused
persons with lesser blood alcohol concentration readings as a basis for the
pursuit of a disposition less than the mandatory minimum sentence. that also
would be contrary to the public interest.

this
position is in line with the court of appeal for ontario in the case of
r.
v.
sanchez-pino
(1973),
11 c.c.c. (3d) 53 (ont. c.a.)
at paragraph 17, and the superior
court of justice in
r.
v.
williams
 o.j. no. 4530 (s.c.j.)
at
paragraphs 55 and 56.

by
no means should i be taken as minimizing the offender’s rehabilitative
efforts. at the time of the offence, he was in the grips of a powerful
addiction. the work he has done since has broken that grip. as i said, he
should be proud of how far he’s come. by leaving alcohol behind he has almost
certainly added years to his life and made that life far, far better.

my
task here, however, is to consider not only the offender’s circumstances, but
the facts of the case. i have a person who was operating a motor vehicle with
over five-and-a-half times the legal limit of alcohol in his blood. when
police questioned him, he made it seem he wanted to drive away. he was in a
residential area on a weekday afternoon in the summer. police only became
involved when a citizen saw the offender urinating outside his vehicle. he was
a grave danger to all users of the roads that day. his conduct must be
denounced and deterred clearly and unequivocally.

in
my view, a discharge based on these facts would be contrary to the public
interest. it would not hold the offender sufficiently accountable and would
not deter like-minded persons from drinking and driving. as justice condon
said, it would likely inspire those with lower readings to pursue less than the
minimum punishment. if a discharge were to be granted on these facts, the
minimum punishment would be stripped of any real impact. this would contradict
the clear will of parliament and be inconsistent with the fundamental purpose
and principles of sentencing.
result

i
find that a conditional discharge would not be an appropriate sentence in this
case. as a result, there is no need to move to the second stage of the process
and decide the charter application.

the
offender will be sentenced to a $2,000 fine. i will hear from counsel as to
how much time he would need to pay that amount, and i will also hear from both
counsel on the issue of the victim surcharge.

in
addition, the offender will be prohibited from operating a motor vehicle on any
road, street, highway, or other public place for a period of one year.

he
will also be placed on probation for 12 months. in addition to the statutory
conditions, the terms will be:
(1)
report
in person to a probation officer within two working days of today’s date and after
that, at all times and places as directed by the probation officer or anyone
authorized to assist the probation officer in your supervision.
(2)
you
are to cooperate with your probation officer. you must sign any releases
necessary to permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance, and you
must provide proof of compliance with any condition of this order to your
probation officer on request.
(3)
attend
and actively participate in all assessment, counselling, or rehabilitative
programs as directed by the probation officer and complete them to the
satisfaction of the probation officer, for, including but not limited to,
alcohol abuse and psychological or psychiatric issues.
(4)
you
are not to operate or have the care or control of any motor vehicle.

i
recognize that a conviction will be more difficult for the offender to bear
going forward. it is required in these circumstances. i wish the offender and
his family all the best in the future.
released: 
12 may 2025
signed: justice s.
g. pratt