source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj470/2025oncj470.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. rush, 2025 oncj 470
date: 
september 12, 2025
court
file: toronto #23 48126847-00; 24 48106285-00; 24 48114343-00
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
philip rush
ruling
on
charter
application
sections
8, 10(b) and 24(2)
before
justice brock jones
heard
on may 12 and september 5, 2025
written
reasons released on september 12, 2025
s. arnold............................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
c. bottomley and s. becker….…………………..………………….counsel
for mr. rush
jones j.:
introduction and background facts

philip rush served as the property manager at 39
haynes avenue, toronto, in 2023. this building is a rooming house located in
the york village neighbourhood near york university. it primarily serves to provide
housing for university students. mr. rush occupied a small apartment on the
third floor of the building.

on november 24, 2023, two tenants reported concerns
about mr. rush’s conduct to the police. the officer who interviewed the
complainants found no grounds for criminal charges. a few weeks later, on
december 17, 2023, a second officer, dc graham, contacted one of the complainants
to request additional information. based on details obtained from this second
interview, including the identity of a third complainant, the police initiated
an investigation to determine whether mr. rush had committed the offence of
criminal harassment.

the complaints against him included allegations
of crude behaviour, unwanted remarks, sexualized conduct, unlawful entry into
tenants’ apartment units, and theft of some of their clothing. they did not
allege that he threatened them with violence or assaulted them.

by december 21, 2023, the police sought a search
warrant for mr. rush’s residence to seize evidence related to the offences of
criminal harassment, unlawful entry into a dwelling, and committing an indecent
act. the warrant was initially issued for 27 aldwinckle heights, an address
with which mr. rush had no connection. up to eight toronto police service
(“tps”) officers attended this residence for a nighttime warrant execution.
only after entering did they realize, too late, that they had the wrong
address.

the investigating officers sought a new warrant
for the correct address of 39 haynes avenue instead. on december 23, 2023, tps
officers executed the search warrant in the afternoon. they entered the
residence through the front door using a code provided for the keypad. as they
ascended to the third floor, they encountered a hallway with a locked door that
required another code. lacking the code, they breached the door with a
battering ram.

they located mr. rush inside his apartment, half-dressed,
and ordered him to the ground. he was arrested for criminal harassment, but
they did not initially inform him of his right to counsel.

one of mr. rush’s cell phones was found in his
bedroom. an officer searched the phone without a warrant, believing it to be
stolen. the officer stopped inspecting it after realizing it belonged to mr.
rush and contained potentially incriminating video evidence. a search warrant
was eventually obtained for the phone, but the issuing justice of the peace
imposed a date and time limit on it. the officer assigned to examine the phone
did not do so until a full day after the warrant had expired. images and videos
of several complainants were found on the phone.

inside mr. rush’s apartment, officers discovered
a non-restricted rifle with a loose trigger lock inside a gun case. no
ammunition was present.

mr. rush was ultimately charged with various
criminal offences related to the seizure of these items from his bedroom and
the image and video files found on his cell phone. he submitted an application
to the court claiming that his sections 8 and 10(b)
charter
rights had
been breached. as a remedy, he requested an order declaring that the admission
of the evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute
pursuant to section 24(2). the crown opposes the application.

after hearing from the parties, i reserved my
decision. these are my reasons.
overview of the evidence

five police officers testified regarding the
charter
application. the parties also agreed to certain facts and submitted documents
from the investigating officers on the search team.

39 haynes avenue is a large home that
accommodates multiple tenants. each tenant had a separate room with
keypad-entry doors that opened only with a unique code. mr. rush lived in an
apartment on the third floor, where he served as the property manager for the
building. residents needed a passcode for the front door to enter the building.
to access the third floor, an additional passcode was required. this floor was
not very large and contained only a few apartments.
dc christopher frazer

dc frazer was involved in executing the search
warrants at both residential addresses. when mr. bottomley asked him if he had
made any notes of actions at 27 aldwinckle heights, he confirmed that he had.
he was then asked whether he had disclosed those notes to the crown, and he was
“not sure” if he had sent them, as those notes were “irrelevant” to how the
search warrant was executed at 39 haynes avenue.

before attending either address, he and the rest
of the search team had a briefing about the target of their investigation, mr.
rush. dc frazer acknowledged that he was aware mr. rush faced two charges:
criminal harassment and unlawful entry into a dwelling. he did not receive any
information indicating that mr. rush had a criminal record, was violent, or was
known to possess or use weapons.

dc frazer agreed he could easily enter the front
of 39 haynes avenue and make his way to the third floor. he knew it was a
residence designed for student housing. a door blocked access to the upper
level, where mr. rush’s apartment was located. he used a battering ram to break
down the door. he did not testify that he or anyone on his team knocked and
announced their presence before taking this step.

once they got through the door, they found mr.
rush, half-naked and wearing only pyjama pants, in his bedroom. he was ordered
to the ground. he had nothing in his hands. dc frazer testified that a police
officer “order[ed] everyone to the ground” for “officer safety.” he then
handcuffed mr. rush, who was arrested at approximately 3:08 p.m.


while in mr. rush’s presence, he heard another
officer demand the codes for the other doors in the building, threatening to “kick
them in" if mr. rush did not comply. mr. rush provided the codes but was
not informed of his right to counsel or cautioned about speaking to the police
beforehand.

mr. rush was not allowed to wear a shirt because
he was handcuffed. instead, an officer placed a zip-up hoodie over his upper
body, which the officer managed to zip partially closed. officers took mr. rush
outside, and dc frazer agreed that it was a “chilly” december afternoon. they
waited for a police car to transport mr. rush to the police division.
dc andrew haworth

dc haworth was part of the search team at both
addresses. he made notes of his involvement at 27 aldwinckle heights, but he
“[didn’t] know what [he] did with them.” before providing his notes to the
crown’s office, he removed those pages.

he attended the briefing about mr. rush before
they planned to enter 27 aldwinckle heights. he understood that the charges
against mr. rush included criminal harassment, unlawfully entering a dwelling,
and committing an indecent act. he accepted that none of these constituted
violent crimes.

when asked how officers should execute a search
warrant, he responded that because “any search warrant has the potential for
danger," he treats them “all the same.”

when he found mr. rush in his bedroom at 39
haynes avenue, he informed him of the reason for his arrest. however, he did
not advise him of his right to counsel.

mr. bottomley asked him why neither he nor any
other officer allowed mr. rush to put on a shirt before taking him outside in
the cold of winter. dc haworth responded that because “he’d been cuffed,” that
was not possible. they did not consider uncuffing him to allow this and then
reapplying the handcuffs.

dc haworth agreed it was cold enough outside
that he was wearing a jacket and toque, however.
sgt. darryl bartholomew

sgt. bartholomew was part of the search team at
both addresses. he acknowledged that his notes of what transpired at 27
aldwinckle heights were relevant, but since it had “been so long,” he could not
recall if he had sent his notes to the crown’s office.

he attended the briefing regarding mr. rush
before preparing to execute the first search warrant. he agreed that nothing he
learned in that briefing indicated mr. rush was violent.

when he attended 39 haynes avenue, he went to
the basement of the residence. he initially denied drawing and pointing his
firearm at individuals in the basement. mr. bottomley played the officer’s
body-worn camera footage for him, which shows him pointing his firearm at a
young woman in one of the basement apartment units. he then confirmed his
actions. he did not recall whether he had completed a “use of force report” for
this action, despite being aware that it was mandatory to do so. nor could he
remember if he had disclosed that use of force report, if it existed, to the
crown’s office.

in re-examination, he explained that while he
knew mr. rush lived on the top floor of the residence, he did not know what he
might encounter in the basement. it was “standard” to clear rooms in a house in
the manner he did that day – with his firearm drawn, going room to room. there could
have been weapons present. he “would not change anything in hindsight.”

when he arrived at mr. rush’s apartment on the
third floor, he found mr. rush half-naked. he was not wearing a shirt. he
explained that to put a shirt on mr. rush before taking him outside, they would
have needed to uncuff him for “about a minute.” they decided against doing so.
pc michael garel

officer garel was present to execute both search
warrants. he, too, did “not recall” if he sent his notes regarding his involvement
in the search at 27 aldwinckle heights to the crown’s office.

he agreed that before they executed the search
warrants, they had “no reason to think mr. rush was dangerous.”

he acknowledged that it was his responsibility
to ensure mr. rush was provided with his right to counsel. he did not provide
that right at the earliest opportunity. he further agreed that the officers
should not have questioned mr. rush until he was permitted to speak with
counsel.
dc mandeep randhawa

dc randhawa arrived at 39 haynes avenue well
after mr. rush had been taken into custody. he searched mr. rush’s room and
found a cell phone on a metal shelf near the bed, which was powered off.

he turned on the phone and began to inspect its
contents. he explained that the phone was not one of the items authorized for
seizure by the search warrant, nor was it seized in connection with mr. rush’s
arrest. instead, having received information that mr. rush had stolen clothing
from some of the other tenants at this address, he wondered whether the phone
could also be stolen. he merely wanted to determine if the phone's rightful
owner could be identified by reviewing its contents.

in cross-examination, he agreed that no one had alleged
that mr. rush had stolen their phone. nevertheless, he testified that he was
looking for ownership or registration information on the phone. however, he conceded
that he did not make an entry to that effect in his notes.

the phone was not password-protected. he
discovered three video files on the phone and opened two of them. he did not
clarify how opening these video files would help him obtain “ownership or
registration information.” he was “not sure” where he began his search on the
phone, but he “ended up” looking at these videos. he did not document his
search technique, leaving him with nothing to rely on other than his (limited)
independent recollection to explain his actions.

he never received any special training regarding
his obligations concerning the search of a cell phone. he admitted during his
testimony that perhaps he should have written “more detailed notes.”

in re-examination, at the suggestion of mr.
arnold, he stated that the search warrant authorized him to seize “recording
devices,” which may have justified him in taking the phone. however, he later
backtracked from that answer and equivocated as to whether he subjectively
believed anything in the warrant’s terms justified the search of the phone as
the crown’s re-examination continued. i note that his testimony was
inconsistent on this point, and his initial response in re-examination to this
leading question directly contradicted his testimony in chief, where he stated
that the warrant did not authorize him to seize the phone.

after viewing the two videos, he turned off the
phone and placed it with the other property obtained during the execution of
the search warrant.
detective candy graham

det. candy graham was the officer in charge
(“oic”) of the case. she led the search team at 27 aldwinckle heights. she
could not explain how they obtained a search warrant for this address, which
had no association with mr. rush.

following the location of mr. rush’s cellphone
at 39 haynes avenue, she instructed another officer, pc sidhu, to prepare a
warrant application to search the phone. a justice of the peace approved the
warrant, which authorized the officers to search the phone. it was valid from
december 23, 2023, at 7:59 pm, to december 26, 2023, at 8:59 pm.

the cellphone was placed in an evidence locker
after being seized on december 23. on december 26, det. graham attended the
evidence locker, opened the door, and did nothing more. she did not touch the
phone or otherwise inspect it. she testified that this is how she “executed the
warrant” – by looking at the phone and then closing the locker door. in her mind,
that would permit the tps to examine the phone in detail at a later date. she
explained that the particularized date range on the warrant does not “end and
conclude” as long as an officer takes this preliminary step.

det. graham testified that the actual search of
the phone’s contents occurred on december 27, leading to the discovery of some
video evidence that now forms part of the case against mr. rush.
agreed facts

mr. rush was provided with his rights to counsel
at 3:14 p.m. after he was secured in the rear of pc garel’s squad car.

none of the officers made notes of their
involvement in the search that was conducted at 27 aldwinckle heights.

dc bartholomew did not complete a use of force
report regarding his participation in the search warrant executed at 39 haynes
avenue.
position of the parties

mr. bottomley submits that his client’s section
8 and 10(b)
charter
rights were violated repeatedly. the police officers’
conduct could be characterized as negligent – or worse. he described some of
the violations as “flagrant.”

while mr. rush does not have standing
per se
with respect to the search that occurred at 27 aldwinckle heights, mr. bottomley
submits that the failure of the officers to make notes of this search is
relevant to his client’s
charter
application. it is no coincidence that
the officers each testified they thought they made notes of how they searched
this address, but then somehow could not produce those notes when testifying.
they never did create any notes. their testimony was not only troubling, but
their lack of professionalism has frustrated the truth-seeking function of the
trial process. contrary to the position of the crown, he insists that what
happened at that first address is relevant to how i resolve this application.
the officers attended there to locate incriminating evidence against mr. rush.
why they mistakenly arrived at the address was never explained. i should draw
an adverse inference against the officers as it speaks to their carelessness
and negligence, and their credibility and reliability as witnesses.

mr. bottomley submits that the manner of the
search that was conducted at 39 haynes avenue was excessive and unreasonable.
the officers knew they were entering student housing to locate mr. rush, who
had no history of violence or possessing weapons. there was no evidence that the
officers knocked and announced before entering the home. at least one officer
drew his firearm and pointed it in the direction of innocent students. they
used a battering ram to knock down a door. they refused to allow mr. rush to appropriately
dress himself before parading him outside in the middle of winter. all of this
was justified, in the officers’ minds, as it was standard practice for them to
employ when executing any search warrant. that calls out for condemnation from
the court. they did not consider the individualized circumstances of this
particular search.

regarding section 10(b), mr. bottomley argues
that the officers did not provide mr. rush with his right to counsel properly
until after they had questioned him. it is yet another example of their
disregard for mr. rush’s
charter
rights.

that was followed by a warrantless search of mr.
rush’s cell phone, which was unjustified. cell phones contain treasure troves
of personal information about their owners. there was no evidence before the
officers that the phone had been stolen, and their stated justification for
searching the phone was without merit. and while they did later obtain a
warrant, they did not follow the stipulated timeframe on the warrant. they
commenced their forensic examination of its contents (and the associated sd
card) unlawfully as a result.

mr. bottomley submits i should rule the evidence
inadmissible pursuant to section 24(2). the severity of the state misconduct in
this case falls at the higher end of the spectrum. there were multiple
breaches, and no good faith on the part of the police. there is a strong
societal interest in ensuring that police officers respect the
charter,
and their failure to do so in this case cries out for an order excluding the
evidence that was seized.

according to mr. arnold, i should dismiss the application.
there were no violations of mr. rush’s
charter
rights. even if there
were “teachable moments” for the police in this case, and they did in fact make
mistakes, most of mr. bottomley’s arguments were focused on errors of the
police that had no tangible effect on mr. rush’s rights. as a result, they are
largely irrelevant. for example, the search of the wrong address, while
undesirable, did not directly impact mr. rush’s rights.

the crown does not dispute that mr. rush had a
privacy interest in the contents of his apartment. nor does mr. arnold dispute
that mr. rush has a recognized privacy interest in the contents of his cell phone.
however, he submits that the circumstances under which that phone was searched
in this case lead to the conclusion that there was no violation of mr. rush’s
rights. mr. arnold submits that dc randhawa’s decision to search mr. rush’s
phone was made incident to arrest.

as this initial search was only “cursory”, it was lawfully authorized accordingly:
see
r. v. fearon,
2014 scc 77. alternatively, the officer was at least
entitled to conduct such a search to determine the ownership of the phone.

regarding the alleged violation of mr. rush’s
section 10(b) rights, mr. arnold does not dispute the general proposition that the
police have a duty to hold off questioning after a suspect is arrested and
advised of their right to counsel. however, he submits that this duty does not
prevent questioning that is not intended to elicit incriminatory evidence. the
officers’ questions in this case, before mr. rush was able to exercise his
right to counsel, fall into this category. compelling public safety concerns
permitted them to ask him the questions they did.

if i were to find any breaches of the
charter,
mr. arnold submits they would be minor and committed by the officers while
they were acting in good faith. the evidence should not be excluded pursuant to
section 24(2). while he does not excuse any errors the officers made, he cautions
me against stretching the
charter
too far, and excluding otherwise
reliable evidence.
charter
section
8 – search of mr. rush’s residence

section 8 of the
charter
guarantees
every canadian the right against unreasonable search and seizure by the state.
it functions as “a shield against unjustified state intrusions on personal
privacy”: see
r. v. kang-brown,
2008 scc 18,
at para.
8.

searches of private residences have long been
recognized as engaging particularly compelling privacy interests. in
r. v.
silveira,
1995 canlii 89, the supreme court of canada wrote at para. 148:
the home is
the one place where persons can expect to talk freely, to dress as they wish
and, within the bounds of the law, to live as they wish. the unauthorized
presence of agents of the state in a home is the ultimate invasion of privacy. 
it is the denial of one of the fundamental rights of individuals living in a
free and democratic society. to condone it without reservation would be to
conjure up visions of the midnight entry into homes by agents of the state to
arrest the occupants on nothing but the vaguest suspicion that they may be
enemies of the state. this is why for centuries it has been recognized that a
man's home is his castle.

when the police have obtained a warrant to
search a residence, they may do so within the bounds of the law. however, they
are not granted unlimited authority to utilize whatever techniques they wish. for
a search to be reasonable under section 8 of the
charter,
a search
must
be conducted in a reasonable manner:
r. v. collins,
1987 canlii 84
(scc), 1 s.c.r. 265, at p. 278.


in
r. v. cornell,
2010 scc 31, the
supreme court of canada held that, except in exigent circumstances, police
officers must make an announcement before forcing entry into a dwelling house. this
means that officers must give: “(i) notice of presence by knocking or ringing
the door bell, (ii) notice of authority, by identifying themselves as law
enforcement officers and (iii) notice of purpose, by stating a lawful reason
for entry”:
eccles v. bourque,
1974 canlii 191 (scc), 2 s.c.r.
739, at p. 747.

when the police depart from the “knock and
announce” principle, there is an onus on the crown to explain what would
justify that departure: see
cornell
at para.
20. where the crown can
point to evidence that the police had reasonable grounds to be concerned about
the possibility of harm to themselves or occupants, or there were reasonable
grounds to fear the destruction of evidence, the police may dispense with this
requirement. however, the police must have relied upon information that was or
should have been reasonably known to them then; the crown cannot rely on
ex post
facto
justifications: see
r. v. genest,
1989 canlii 109 (scc);
cornell
at para.
23;
r. v. rutledge,
2017 onca 635, at para.
25.

the “knock and announce” rule exists not only
because it “protects the dignity and privacy interests of the occupants of dwellings,”
but also because it serves to “enhance the safety of the police and public”:
see
cornell
at para.
19. at the same time, the police “cannot be
expected to measure in advance with nuanced precision the amount of force”
executing every search warrant will require:
cornell
at para.
24;
r.
v. asante-mensah,
2003 scc 38, at para.
73. they are entitled to a considerable
degree of latitude as their safety may be in jeopardy. therefore, i approach my
review of the officers’ conduct in this case with caution and note that my role
is to determine whether the search was conducted in a manner that appropriately
balanced the rights of mr. rush as a suspect with the “requirements of safe and
effective law enforcement”:
cornell
at para.
24;
rutledge
at
para.
26.

the reasonableness of a search will be judged
based on whether “the search, overall, in light of the facts reasonably known
to the police, was reasonable”: see
r. v mcmanus,
2021 abca 177, at
para.
31.

each case must be assessed carefully based on the
facts known to the officers at the time. the police cannot adopt a “one size
fits all” approach to executing search warrants. for example, in
r. v ruiz,
2018
onsc 5452, justice diamond found that a dynamic entry was unreasonable in
circumstances where the police had failed to make inquiries into the occupants
of the residence or meaningfully consider the manner of how they would execute the
search warrant before they did so: see paras. 51-52. the officers could not
simply point to the hypothetical possibility of encountering weapons or that
evidence “could” be destroyed. the manner of the search was also found to be
“excessive and unnecessary”, as the officer ransacked the home looking for
drugs: see para. 62.

in this case, i find that the officers applied
an alarming lack of care and attention in executing the search warrants.

the unexplained failure of the officers that
resulted in them searching a completely unrelated residence to mr. rush
initially cries out for condemnation. had due care and attention been exercised
in both obtaining and executing this first search warrant, with the degree of
attention to detail one would expect from police officers, this appalling
mistake would not have occurred. instead, the officers seem to have forged
ahead from 27 aldwinckle heights to 39 haynes avenue and hoped to simply forget
and disregard their previous error. indeed, the officers collectively did not
even seem to believe that their duty to create accurate notes of the entirety
of their investigation was engaged by this earlier search, as they had attended
the incorrect address.

they were wrong. the officers had a duty to
record notes of what occurred at this first address, including why they
attended, on what basis they believed it was associated with mr. rush, and when
they realized they had made a mistake: see
wood. v schaeffer,
2013 scc
71, at para.
67. that material is unquestionably
stinchcombe
first-party
disclosure, and, astonishingly, not just one, but multiple officers involved in
this case appear to have taken the same view that they need not have disclosed
this material to the crown’s office as it prepared the prosecution against mr.
rush. as mr. bottomley correctly argued during closing submissions, this was at
minimum, unacceptably negligent.

i would go one step further. the officers, when
testifying, each claimed they did or “would have” created notes of their
involvement at 27 aldwinckle heights. yet somehow the notes never appeared,
despite mr. bottomley pressing them in cross-examination on this point. mr.
arnold later conceded they did not make any such notes. i do not accept this
was a case of collective amnesia. rather, the officers were attempting to
deceive me about their failure to create accurate notes of their search at this
address, rather than simply acknowledging this shortcoming.

the execution of the search warrant at 39 haynes
avenue was also problematic. what emerged from this hearing overall left me
with the impression of police carelessness, negligence, and indifference to the
officers’ obligations in general and mr. rush’s
charter
rights in
particular.

the officers recognized that the crimes mr. rush
was to be charged with were not violent, that he had no prior criminal record,
and that there was no indication that weapons were likely to be present. this
was not a situation where the destruction of evidence was a pressing concern,
either. notably, 39 haynes avenue was recognized by each of the officers as being
designated for student housing. they were not entering a drug den to apprehend
a known gang member.

yet none of these facts were meaningfully
considered by the search team. they treated their execution of this warrant
just like any other. they entered the residence using a
code to bypass the front door lock. they then proceeded to the third floor,
where they encountered another locked door barring them from accessing mr. rush’s
apartment. they did not properly knock and announce their presence or state
that they had a search warrant.

they resorted to using a battering ram to force the door open. the officers had
no information that would even approximate exigent circumstances justifying
this approach.

officer bartholomew explained he employed
“standard” procedure. officer haworth testified that because “any search
warrant has the potential for danger,” he “treats them all the same.” this was
the antithesis of an individualized approach to assessing risk and determining
an appropriate course of action when executing a search warrant. not a single
officer testified that they tailored their approach based on what they knew,
including that they had no reason to believe mr. rush was violent or had access
to weapons. none of them even considered an alternative, less aggressive
approach.

in addition, some officers’ treatment of mr.
rush was callous. the officers wore warm clothing, including jackets, and some
donned winter hats. when they found mr. rush half-naked, they refused to put a
shirt on him before parading him outside in the cold of winter, because “he’d
been cuffed.” there were multiple officers in his bedroom, yet not one even
considered temporarily removing the handcuffs to allow him to dress himself
appropriately before escorting him outside. placing handcuffs on a person does
not diminish their humanity. mr. rush was always cooperative and submissive to
the officers’ instructions. a minor display of compassion is all it would have
taken, with no risk to officer safety – something, i note, that officer
bartholomew agreed would have taken less than a minute to accomplish.

i am also not convinced that officer bartholomew
drawing his firearm and pointing it directly at the student tenants in the
basement as he “cleared” each room was necessary. while ostensibly for officer
safety purposes, he had no reason to believe anyone present was known to be
violent or possess weapons. he could have checked on these tenants in their
rooms without resorting to such a tactic. this would have been a terrifying
ordeal for these entirely innocent residents. during cross-examination, he
admitted he did not remember completing a “use of force report,” a mandatory
obligation placed on any officer who draws his firearm in these circumstances. additionally,
officer bartholomew at first did not recall when testifying that he pointed his
firearm directly at a student tenant. then, mr. bottomley easily demonstrated
this happened by presenting the officer with his own body-worn camera footage, which
recorded that this was exactly what he did. his reluctance to acknowledge this
glaring fact and his failure to complete this report demonstrate that, in
retrospect, he too realized the error of his way and was hoping to avoid
answering questions about his conduct with his evasive answers.

mr. arnold emphasized during arguments that even
if i found fault with some of the officers’ conduct, i should not allow
anything that occurred regarding the rights of persons other than mr. rush to
affect my decision. for example, i should not concern myself with the search of
27 aldwinckle heights as mr. rush did not reside there. nor should i concern
myself with whether officer bartholomew drew his firearm at students at 39
haynes avenue.

i disagree. courts have recognized that when
assessing whether a search warrant was executed reasonably, the impact of the
police actions on the rights of other persons present at the time may be
considered. in
r. v. charles,
2023 skpc 6, justice daunt held that
“[a]pparent breaches of the rights of others” may exacerbate a finding that a
search warrant was executed unreasonably at a private residence: see para. 55. in
r. v. ly,
2012 bcsc 504, justice barrow held “that the breach of someone
else’s
charter
rights may show a pattern of disregard for
the
charter
by the police”: see para. 73. in
r. v. lambert
and bailey,
2023 nsca 8, the nova scotia court of appeal upheld a trial
judge’s decision that “the cumulative impact of all
charter
breaches
can be considered, including breaches of rights of other [persons] and
breaches that did not directly result in the discovery of evidence” under any
section 24(2) analysis required if violations of an accused person’s rights under
the
charter
are also found: see paras. 96-100.

notably, in
r. v. le,
2019 scc 34, the supreme court of
canada considered the rights of other persons who were present when determining
whether the police violated the
charter
rights of the accused at the
time he was investigated. mr. le and four other young men were gathered in the
private backyard of a townhouse at a toronto housing co
‑
operative when three police officers
arrived. two officers entered the backyard without a warrant or consent and
began questioning the men. as matters escalated, mr. le fled and was then
pursued and arrested. he was found to be in possession of a firearm.

the majority of the supreme court held that the officers lacked a
lawful basis for their investigation and that mr. le’s rights under section 9
of the
charter
were violated. the police conduct towards not only him,
but also the other persons located in the backyard at the time, was relevant to
determining whether he was psychologically detained: see para. 62-64. the
majority also considered the officers’ mistreatment of the other young men who
were in the backyard in its section 24(2) analysis. the majority wrote that
“weighed against the absence of justification to investigate the young men at all,
the impact of this police misconduct is heightened considerably”: see para.
155.

a very analogous case to the facts before me is
r.
v. naess,
2022 onsc 6490. police officers executed a search warrant that
granted entry through a specific door to the accused’s residence. there were
other tenants located there as well. the officers conducted a “safety search”
of the entire home, violating the privacy rights of the four or five other
tenants who were uninvolved in the investigation. the accused brought a challenge
to the search under section 8 of the
charter.

justice stribopoulos found a violation of
section 8 of the
charter.
when deciding on the appropriate remedy under
section 24(2), he held that the “potential impact of a
charter
breach on
the rights of entirely innocent persons” who were present at the time was a
relevant consideration. the conduct of the police when executing the warrant
“occasioned a serious violation of the privacy rights of the upstairs tenants
who shared mr. naess’s home – people who the evidence suggests had nothing at
all to do with the criminal wrongdoing police were investigating”: see para.
146. it was lawful for the court to consider the breach of the privacy rights
of the other tenants when determining whether the evidence obtained during the
search should be excluded: see para. 148.

thus, what happened at 27 aldwinckle heights and
the treatment of the student in the basement at mr. rush’s residence thus very
much matter to this application. every example of state misconduct assists me
with arriving at a full and detailed understanding of how the officers’
approached their duties and whether they were tailoring their approach
appropriately: see
ruiz, supra. i will expand upon the cumulative impact
of the search team’s errors in my section 24(2) analysis accordingly.

furthermore, as i will explain, the officers
disregarded mr. rush’s right to counsel after his arrest without any
justification. considering all of the evidence, i find that the search of 39
haynes avenue was not conducted in a reasonable manner. mr. rush has met his
onus. there was a breach of section 8 of the
charter.
charter
section
8 – search of mr. rush’s cellular phone (and sd card)

in
r. v. vu,
2013 scc 60,
the
supreme court of canada stressed the importance of specific, prior
authorization for searches of computers and digital devices: see paras. 46-49.
the court held that “only a specific authorization to search a computer found
in the place of search ensures that the authorizing justice has considered the
full range of the distinctive privacy concerns raised by computer searches”:
see para. 47. the term “computer”, as used in these decisions, should be
defined expansively to include all modern digital devices. it would be
artificial to apply the law of search and seizure differently to “different
digital devices based on slight technological differences”: see n. hassan et
al,
search and seizure,
emond publishing (toronto: 2021), at p. 352;
vu,
supra,
where the supreme court held, in 2013, that “present day phones have
capacities that are… equivalent to those of computers”: see para. 38.

officer randhawa’s decision to search the phone
in mr. rush’s room was unreasonable. he had no grounds to believe it was a
stolen phone. every piece of evidence available to him should have indicated
that it was likely mr. rush’s phone. it was located on a shelf beside his bed.
there was no information suggesting that anyone’s phone had been stolen. notably,
the warrant authorizing the search of 39 haynes avenue did not include
cellphones as items to be seized. during his testimony, officer randhawa did
not attempt to use the warrant to justify his seizure and subsequent search of
the phone.

a warrantless search of a phone can be justified
in some circumstances, such as when it is seized incident to arrest, and the
requirements established by the supreme court of canada in
r. v. fearon,
supra,
are followed. however, the officer was clear that this, too, was not
the basis upon which he acted. the crown’s argument in this regard thus has no
merit. as explained by tholl j.a. in his dissent in
r. v. sabiston,
2023
skca 105, “[i]t is the actual police power exercised that matters when
examining whether there was a
charter
breach, not some other
power that could have potentially been used but was not”: see para. 93; reasons
adopted by the majority of the supreme court of canada in
r. v. sabiston,
2024
scc 33, at para.
1.

i conclude that officer randhawa’s decision to
search the phone’s video files was entirely unjustified. even if he were
genuinely searching the phone to determine if it belonged to a victim,

he never articulated why
searching the
video files
was relevant to identifying the phone’s owner.
a search of a cellular phone must be tailored to its intended purpose: see
fearon
at para.
76. i find that the search in this case went too far, even if i had
accepted his stated purpose for doing so. moreover, where there is any hint of
criminal activity on a phone, a search of that phone for proof of ownership
generally requires judicial authorization: see
r. v. soop,
2025 abkb
119, at para.
28. once he located the concerning video files, officer randhawa
was taking liberties with how deeply he could probe into the phone’s video
contents to find evidence without a warrant. the officer’s failure to produce
detailed notes of his phone search and to document why he felt it necessary to
inspect the video files for his stated purpose reinforces this conclusion.

a search warrant was ultimately obtained for mr.
rush’s phone. the warrant authorized the police to search the phone from
december 23, 2023, at 7:59 p.m. until december 26, 2023, at 8:59 p.m. however,
det. graham explained that the phone's contents were not searched until
december 27. in her mind, she had “executed” the warrant on december 26 by
merely opening the locker where it was stored and peering at it before closing
the locker door again. this, in turn, meant that the police could search the
phone’s contents later, outside the time frame established by the warrant.

this was incorrect, and it is hard to believe
the officer genuinely thought that “executing” a warrant involved nothing more
than opening a locker door to gaze upon it briefly.

when courts in ontario have rejected a rigid
approach to interpreting time limitations on search warrants concerning the
forensic analysis of cell phones and computers, they have done so only after certain
preconditions were met. for example, in
r. v.
nurse,
2019 onca
260, the appellants’ blackberry devices were seized upon their arrest. the
police obtained a search warrant that allowed them to create an “image” of the
data on the devices. about a year later, officers utilized updated forensic
software to analyze that data again, this time acquiring chat messages that
revealed a plot to murder the victim.

the police initially had a 15-hour window to
execute the warrant. the appellants argued that the data analysis on the
devices needed to be completed within this timeframe, and that failing to do so
by re-examining the devices a year later with new software constituted a breach
of their
charter
section 8 rights. the ontario court of appeal
determined that the search was lawful. the warrant authorized the police to search
the evidence locker at the opp, re-seize the devices, and create “images” of
the data on them for analysis. if that was done within the appropriate period, and
“there was no restriction,
on the face of the warrant
or at law, as to
when or how often the police were permitted to examine or inspect this lawfully
seized and copied data”, there was no breach of the
charter: see para.
137 (my emphasis added); and the trial decision,
r. v. nurse
and plummer,
2014 onsc 1779, at para.
26.

det. graham did not adhere to that established
procedure in this case. the search warrant did not permit her to create an
“image” of the phone’s data for later analysis, and she did not do so. by
merely observing the phone in the evidence locker, she did not “execute” the
warrant. the warrant was time-sensitive, and it was only when she analyzed the
data on the phone on december 27 that it was executed, beyond the authorized
window of opportunity. this rendered the phone search warrantless.

the warrant specifically stated that the phone
itself was the “place” to be searched, within a temporal constraint.
nurse
does not assist the crown. unlike in
nurse,
there was a restriction on
the face of the warrant. therefore, the parameters outlined in the warrant
strictly applied to any data examinations. the investigating officer chose how
to frame the requested terms for the warrant, and the crown must contend with
the analytical consequences of that framing.

mr. arnold argued that this constituted a
“technical violation.” he cited
r. v.
pammett,
2014 onsc 1242.
the police executed a search warrant at a residential address on february 10,
2011. the warrant did not specify a date for its execution. the defendant
contended that this invalidated the warrant. alternatively, the defendant
claimed that the warrant had to be executed on the date it was issued: february
9, 2011.

justice mccarthy disagreed. he found that the
warrant was issued the evening before february 10, with a window for execution
between 6 am and 1 pm. by implication, the only logical conclusion was that the
warrant was to be executed the next day: see para. 10.

this case does not assist the crown. there was
not simply a “technical irregularity” when mr. rush’s phone was searched. the time
limitations on the warrant were clear, and det. graham overlooked an essential
aspect of it due to her flawed understanding of what it meant to execute a
warrant. her search effectively became warrantless.

i find that both searches of his cell phone
violated mr. rush’s section 8 rights. the first search was conducted without a
warrant, and the crown has failed to demonstrate it was conducted lawfully. the
subsequent searches of the phone, while authorized by a warrant, when done
outside the time frame of the warrant. finally, for the sake of clarity, i find
that the search of any associated sd card of the phone that was seized was also
done outside the scope of the warrant, and this constitutes another violation
of section 8 of the
charter.
charter
section
10(b)

after mr. rush was arrested
by the officers and handcuffed, he was not provided with his right to counsel. section
10(b) of the
charter
must be complied with “immediately”, to ensure that
a detained person who is “vulnerable to the exercise of state power and in a
position of legal jeopardy” has access to legal advice:
see
r. v. suberu,
2009 scc 33, at paras.
38
and
40. police officers
must “refrain from taking further investigative steps to elicit evidence,” such
as asking a detainee questions, until they have had the opportunity to speak to
counsel:
see
r. v. taylor,
2014 scc 50,
at para.
26.

when the officers demanded that mr. rush reveal
who else resided at the residence and provide the codes to the basement
apartment units, they violated this well-recognized duty to “hold off.” i do
not accept the crown’s argument that public safety concerns justified these
questions or that they were not designed to elicit admissions. there was no
evidence that anyone else in the residence was in jeopardy or that there was
any urgency that justified asking mr. rush these questions before he could
exercise his right to counsel. i find as a fact that one of the officers
threatened to “kick them in” (meaning the doors to the other residential units)
if mr. rush did not immediately comply and provide them with the entry codes.
this was anything but neutral questioning done for a benign purpose: see
r.
v. dupe,
2010 onsc 6594, at para.
24. this was an intimidation tactic
employed to help the officers garner information quickly that would allow them
to conduct their search of the residence more efficiently. all of this was
being done with the intention of obtaining incriminating evidence against mr.
rush.

even the slightest of admissions to an
investigating police officer could be potentially highly damaging to the accused.
any violation of the right to counsel and the associated right against self-incrimination
must be taken very seriously and should not be easily dismissed. the duty to
hold off has long been recognized as an essential feature of the right to
counsel for good reason. courts should exercise extreme caution before
permitting responses to questions by police officers obtained in this manner to
be admitted into evidence, lest this central feature of one of our most
sacrosanct constitutional rights be rendered hollow.

the officers were required to hold off on
questioning mr. rush until he was provided with a meaningful opportunity to
exercise his right to counsel. i find two violations of mr. rush’s section
10(b) rights accordingly.
charter
section
24(2)

section 24(2) of the
charter
stipulates
that, where evidence was obtained in a manner that infringed a
charter
right
or freedom, that evidence shall be excluded if it is established that, having
regard to all the circumstances, its admission would bring the administration
of justice into disrepute. the court must seek to maintain the “integrity
of, and public confidence in, the justice system”:
see
r. v.
grant,
2009 scc 32, at
paras.
68-70. the focus should be on
vindicating the long-term repute of the criminal justice system:
see
r.
v. pileggi,
2021 onca 4,
at
para.
90.
seriousness of the charter-infringing conduct

the focus of the first branch is on the actions of the police:
see
r. v. orlandis-habsburgo,
2017 onca 649, at para.
130. the court
must “situate that conduct on a scale of culpability”:
see
r. v. paterson,
2017 scc 15,
at para.
43.
the
ontario court of appeal in
r. v. gonzales,
2017 onca 543,
cautioned that “care must be taken to ensure that ignorance of
charter
standards
is neither rewarded nor encouraged and that negligence or willful blindness
does not become a proxy for good faith”: see para. 158.

the police misconduct in this case was, at a minimum, negligent. while
i do not find that the officers were acting in bad faith when they failed to
knock and announce their entry, or when they employed “standard” search warrant
techniques while clearing 39 haynes avenue, they demonstrated a lack of
understanding of their requirements under section 8 of the
charter
and
indifference to the rights of every civilian present at this address. the
officers’ failure to properly create and provide comprehensive notes of their
search of 27 aldwinckle heights was done in violation of the professional
obligations:
wood, supra;
o. reg. 407/23:
code of conduct for police
officers, enacted pursuant to the
community safety and police act,
2019.
i do not accept their testimony regarding why they did not prepare thorough
notes, and i find their collective memory loss about whether they originally
sent the inadequate notes they did create to the crown’s office to be feigned. i
also find officer bartholomew intentionally failed to create a “use of force
report” despite knowing it was his obligation to do so, and attempted to
mislead the court when he was cross-examined on this point. “police dishonesty
aggravates the seriousness of a
charter
breach”: see
r. v. james,
2025
onca 213, at para.
44.

the warrantless search of mr. rush’s cellphone was conducted without
any consideration for his privacy interests. i find that the search for the
video files was not performed for officer randhawa’s stated purpose of
determining whether the phone was stolen. this search constituted a blatant
violation of mr. rush’s rights. after a search warrant was issued, det.
graham’s decision to examine the contents of the phone beyond the time frame set
by the warrant appears to have resulted from a misunderstanding of the law.
nonetheless, even if her error stemmed from negligence, it was significant.

regarding section 10(b), the court must strongly condemn the failure
to provide him immediately with his right to counsel. this long-standing
requirement is one that every officer should know instinctively. the lack of
regard for mr. rush’s right to counsel is deeply concerning.

this factor heavily favours the exclusion of all of the evidence
located by the police.
the impact of the breach on the charter-protected interests of the accused

i must consider the seriousness of the impact of the
charter
breaches
on the
charter
-protected interests of the accused.
the "more serious the impact on the accused's constitutional rights,
the more the admission of the evidence is likely to bring the administration of
justice into disrepute": see
r. v. côté,
2011 scc 46, at
para.
47.

the right to counsel has been described as a “lifeline” for someone
under arrest. placed at the mercy of the state, a detained person being
informed that they can contact counsel immediately, and that the police
officers will respect that right, holds tremendous psychological importance:
see
r. v. rover,
2018 onca 745, at para.
45. i find
that the impact on mr. rush’s section 10(b) rights was profound, even though he
was provided with his rights approximately eight minutes later. every second in
police custody during which a detainee is denied knowledge of his right to
contact counsel must be justified. furthermore, there was no excuse for the
officers’ refusal to pause questioning during this time. exclusion of evidence
is often warranted for “clear violations of well-established rules governing
state conduct”: see
paterson, supra, at para.
44.

concerning the violations of his privacy rights protected by section
8 of the
charter, in
r. v. adler,
2020 onca 246, the ontario
court of appeal held that “[i]t is well-established that two of the areas where
an individual’s right to privacy is paramount is in their home and in their
electronic devices” see para. 33. the unlawful, warrantless search of mr.
rush’s phone demonstrated a startling lack of respect for mr. rush’s privacy
rights. in
r. v. mitchell,
2019 onsc 5040, justice allen stated, “it is
well recognized that cellphones house the most intimate and personal
revelations about a person’s life”: see para. 156.

the search of mr. rush’s apartment at 39 haynes avenue was conducted
pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant. the errors of the police officers relate
to how they executed it and their failure to properly document their entire
search process, including at 27 aldwinckle heights. i find that the breaches of
mr. rush’s section 8 rights had a significant, but not overwhelming, impact on
his
charter
-protected interests. the officers did not execute the
warrant as they did or treat mr. rush as they did out of animus towards him. rather,
they performed their duties mechanically, demonstrating indifference to the
individual circumstances.

overall, this factor weighs moderately in favour of exclusion concerning
the video files on mr. rush’s phone. i note that mr. rush did not challenge the
existence of reasonable and probable grounds for the warrant subsequently issued
for his cell phone search. as noted by the supreme court in
fearon,
failure
to challenge the grounds to issue a warrant militates against both the
seriousness of the breach and the impact on the applicant’s
charter
-protected
interests: see para. 96.

had det. graham conducted herself properly, the phone would have been lawfully
examined, and the evidence against him inevitably discovered. that being said,
discoverability is a relevant but not determinative factor: see
james,
at
para.
54.

this factor similarly weighs moderately in favour of excluding the
evidence found in his apartment, including the firearm. mr. rush did not
challenge the grounds for the search warrant, only the manner by which it was
executed. in contrast, it heavily favours exclusion concerning mr. rush's
statements made before being informed of his right to counsel.
society’s interest in
adjudication of the case on its merits

in
r. v. le,
2019 scc 34, the supreme court of canada
described what should be considered in the third branch of the
grant
test at para.
158:
while we have observed that the third line of inquiry
under
grant
typically pulls towards inclusion of the evidence
on the basis that its admission would not bring the administration of justice
into disrepute, not all considerations will pull in this direction. while this
inquiry is concerned with the societal interest in “an adjudication on the
merits” (
grant, at para.
85
), the focus, as we have already explained, must be upon
the impact of state misconduct upon the reputation of the administration of
justice. while disrepute may result from the exclusion of relevant and reliable
evidence (
grant, at para.
81
), so
too might it result from admitting evidence that deprives the accused of a fair
hearing or that amounts to “judicial condonation of unacceptable conduct by the
investigatory and prosecutorial agencies” (
collins, at p. 281). an
“adjudication on the merits”, in a rule of law state, presupposes an
adjudication grounded in legality and respect for longstanding constitutional
norms.

mr. rush is charged with criminal harassment and voyeurism for his
conduct toward two female tenants. while the crown may still prosecute the
criminal harassment charge despite the absence of evidence obtained from the
searches, its case on the voyeurism charge will be unsustainable without the
video files found on his phone. the protection of vulnerable female victims is
of great importance. he is also charged with the unlawful possession of a
firearm, which represents highly reliable evidence. i agree that these factors
pull towards the admission of the evidence.

however, the introduction of this evidence could also damage the
long-term reputation of the justice system, given that the officers violated
long-standing constitutional norms and appear to have lacked a basic
understanding of their obligations under the
charter.

this branch of the grant test favours admitting the evidence, but
only moderately.
balancing the factors

condoning the officers’ misconduct in this case
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. they initially
searched the wrong address and failed to comply with their notetaking and
disclosure obligations. their failure to “knock and announce” at the correct
address, along with their resort to the use of a battering ram, violated a
long-cherished norm regarding the execution of search warrants in canada, which
is constitutionally required. their collective failure to provide mr. rush with
his right to counsel immediately after his arrest and to question him before he
had the opportunity to speak to counsel demands strong judicial condemnation.

the officers’ refusal to provide mr. rush an
opportunity to put on a shirt and a properly zipped-up sweater before taking
him outside in winter was a minor failure on their part. still, it was demonstrative
of the larger problem i have identified: their unwillingness to consider mr.
rush’s individualized circumstances when executing the search warrant.

i do not for a moment disregard the very
difficult and dangerous situations our law enforcement officers find themselves
in during their duties. they are entitled to prioritize their well-being and
community safety without undue judicial oversight based on the privilege of
hindsight. they must prepare for volatile situations involving unpredictable
individuals and act swiftly with the limited information available to them.

however, not all search warrants are executed
with the same level of threat. mr. rush was not alleged to have committed any
violent crimes, nor does he have a history of possessing or using weapons. the
search team failed to consider any of these factors in their approach to
executing the warrant.

additionally, without a warrant, there was no
lawful basis for searching the video files on mr. rush’s phone. once one was
obtained, det. graham’s disregard for its time limits revealed a startling lack
of understanding of the law.

there is no escaping a pattern of
charter
-violating
conduct from an overall review of the officers’ actions. balancing the
grant
factors,
i find that any evidence obtained from mr. rush’s phone is
inadmissible. similarly, the statements he made when questioned before being
informed of his right to counsel are also inadmissible.

the rifle located in his room presents a more
complex dilemma. it is highly reliable evidence that would have inevitably been
discovered during the execution of the search warrant. its discovery was not
directly linked to the failure of the officers to provide mr. rush with his
right to counsel, either.

while evidence must be “obtained in a manner” that infringed a
charter
right
to justify exclusion, the applicant doesn't need to establish a strict
causal nexus between the violation of their rights and the obtaining of
evidence. the entire chain of events should be examined: see
r. v. tim,
2022
scc 12, at para.
78. the connection between the
charter
breaches and the
evidence in question can be “temporal, contextual, causal or a combination of
the three”:
r. v. wittwer,
2008 scc 33, at para.
21.

the right to counsel for a detainee facing the execution of a search
warrant at his home is of fundamental importance: see
r. v. noel,
2019
onca 860, at paras.
22-26. a slight delay in providing rights to counsel to an
arrested suspect is generally insufficient to justify excluding a firearm: see,
for example,
r. v. todd,
2019 skca 36. however, an unjustified delay in
providing a detainee with his right to counsel alongside an attempt by the
investigating officers to solicit incriminating evidence from him is far more
serious.

it is particularly troubling that the officers committed multiple
breaches of mr. rush’s rights involving “well-established rules governing state
conduct”: see
paterson,
at para.
44. as stated by the alberta court of
appeal in
r. v. araya,
2025 abca 61, at para.
75:
a
determination of the seriousness of the breach will favour exclusion where
there are several breaches involving different
charter
rights:
badu
2022
at paras 70-74,
r v sabiston,
2023 skca 105. a breach is
also more serious where it is a continuation of police practices which are
not
charter-compliant, part of a pattern of police abuse of
charter
standards
or where the police demonstrate a cavalier attitude and carelessness in
implementing such rights:
rover
at para
40,
r v
noel,
2019 onca 860
at para
32,
hobeika
at
paras 88-90.

the combination of the police's failure to knock and announce while
executing a search warrant and their denial of immediate access to counsel for
an arrested individual was deemed sufficient to exclude a firearm in one
reported decision. in
r. v. robertson,
2019 bcca 116, the police
searched the home of the appellant and his wife, where they discovered
firearms, drugs, and stolen property. the trial judge concluded that the police
violated the knock and announce rule by opting for a dynamic entry without
exigent circumstances, breaching the section 8 rights of both the appellant and
his wife. the trial judge also determined that the officers infringed upon the
appellant’s wife’s
charter
section 10(b) rights by questioning her after
she had asserted her right to counsel, but before she was permitted to exercise
that right. in contrast, there was no finding that the officers violated the
appellant’s right to counsel. the evidence was ruled admissible against the
appellant but inadmissible against his wife, and the british columbia court of
appeal regarded this distinction as rational: see paras. 61-66.

mr. rush also faced similar violations of his rights, including the
fact that he was not provided with the right to counsel prior to being questioned
by the police. i also consider the unnecessary decision of officer bartholomew
to point his firearm at the student tenants as part of the constellation of
factors relating to the degree of police misconduct that occurred when
executing the search warrant. the cumulative effect of multiple
charter
breaches should be considered in the 24(2) analysis: see the reasons of
justices rowe and o’bonsawin in
r. v. zacharias,
2023 scc 30, at para.
49;
and the reasons of justices martin and kasirer at para. 132;
r. v. alder,
2020 onca 246, at para.
39.

add to the considerations above the cavalier attitude of the
officers and general indifference to mr. rush’s well-being after placing him
under arrest, and the combination of these factors favours exclusion. i rule
that the seized rifle is inadmissible.
conclusion

the application is granted, and the evidence is
excluded from mr. rush’s trial.
released: september
12, 2025
signed:
justice brock jones

none of the officers testified to the time of the arrest, but this was an
agreed fact.

see the crown’s written materials filed on september 5, 2025.

my emphasis added.

the parties agreed there was no evidence that the officers announced their
presence and that they were there to execute a search warrant, thereby giving
mr. rush time to respond before resorting to breaking down the door.

the crown relied upon
r. v. dill,
2025 bcsc 1153
at para.
26-48,
r. v
pike,
2022 onsc 2298
at para.
71, and
r. v. adem,
2021 oncj 2010, at
para. 37, in support of this proposition. none of these are applicable to the
facts of this case.

it was never made clear to me if the fruits of dc randhawa's first, warrantless
phone search were part of the information to obtain (“ito”) the search warrant
executed by det. graham.