source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj380/2025oncj380.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. ackers, 2025 oncj 380
date: 
2025 06 05
court
file no.: brockville 24-19101690
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
andrew ackers
before
justice j.r. richardson
heard
on march 24, 2025
reasons
for judgment released on june 5, 2025
amelia wilding................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
stephen bernstein...................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
j.r.
richardson, j.:
introduction

the accused is charged that he did, on or about the 20
th
day
of september, 2024, in the township of rideau lakes, in the county of leeds:
a)
fail or refuse to provide a sample of his breath into an approved
screening device contrary to
section 320.15(1)
of the
criminal code; and
b)
operate a motor vehicle while he was impaired by alcohol or a drug, or
both, contrary to
section 320.14(1)
(a) of the
criminal code.

the crown proceeded summarily.

the issue in this case is whether the police had a reasonable suspicion
to demand mr. ackers to provide a sample of his breath into a roadside
screening device. if they did, it is conceded that he refused to provide a
sample. if they did not, the demand was illegal and he should be found not
guilty of the refusal charge.

prior to final submissions, the crown invited me to dismiss the impaired
driving charge. i agreed that based upon the evidence that i had heard, there
was an insufficient basis for finding that mr. ackers was guilty of this
offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
place where this incident took place

this case involves an incident which took place near the village of
lombardy. lombardy is part of the township of rideau lakes. it is located
near the intersection of king’s highway 15 and leeds and grenville counties
road no. 1 (which is also referred to as rideau ferry road).

having travelled this area many times over the years, i know that this
is a predominantly rural area, just south of the town of smiths falls.
evidence of john ferguson

john ferguson is a 52-year-old man who lives in lombardy, ontario. he
is employed as a repairman for an industrial/commercial services company. he
has a grade 12 education.

on september 20, 2024, at approximately 12:45 am, he was outside his
residence on blacksmith road in lombardy enjoying a campfire with his wife and
his friend.

he heard a car go off the road and enter the ditch near king’s highway 15.

upon
hearing the collision he ran across the yard and through a neighbour’s yard
toward the intersection of rideau ferry road and highway 15. he called 911 as
he was running.

he
estimated that it took him about 30 seconds to get from his yard to the scene
of the collision.

upon
arrival, he saw a man opening the door of the vehicle and getting out of the
area of the driver’s seat.

he
asked the man if he was ok. the man said that he was fine. mr. ferguson then
advised the 911 operator, with whom he was still on the phone, that he did not
need an ambulance to attend.

mr.
ferguson did not see anyone else in the vehicle. he acknowledged, however,
that he did not look in the back seat of the car.

mr.
ferguson indicated that when the man stepped out of the vehicle, he “seemed to
be in alright shape.” in cross-examination, mr. ferguson stated that the man
appeared “unharmed” and he may have been “shaken up”. he added, “that’s all i
could get a sense of”.

mr.
ferguson was making his observations from between ten and 15 feet.

mr.
ferguson could not recall what the man was wearing.

he
took two photos that were introduced into evidence.

exhibit
1 depicts a photo of a tesla car in the ditch at the intersection of king’s
highway 15 and county road 1.

exhibit
2 depicts a close-up photo of the tesla in the ditch.

exhibit
3 depicts a google map of lombardy. the incident took place at the
intersection of county road 1 (rideau ferry road not anglican church road) and king’s
highway 15 which is located in the bottom third of the photograph. mr. ferguson
stated that his residence was on blacksmith lane which runs off the roadway that
leads from county road 1 (in approximate area of (“rideau vapes” to union cemetery
on the map). the land in the triangle between that roadway and the
intersection of county road 1 and highway 15 is the land that he ran through to
get to the scene of the accident.

in
cross-examination, mr. ferguson stated that he took the photos as he was
leaving the scene. the friend that he had been at the campfire with had
arrived by car, and her car was visible in exhibit 1.

mr.
ferguson recalled that as he was speaking with the man, the man was trying to
call a tow truck. he said that there was “not a whole lot of talking” between
him and the man. he added that once he confirmed that the man was alright, he
left the scene. he estimated that he was in the presence of the man “two or
three minutes… tops”.

in
cross-examination with respect to the tow truck, mr. ferguson stated that the
man was not actually on the phone trying to call a tow truck, but he told mr.
ferguson that was what he wanted to do.

with
respect to the location where the collision took place, mr. ferguson stated,
referring to a bend in country road 1 just before highway 15, “i have lived
there all my life. i have seen many cars miss that turn.”
evidence of teresa robinson

teresa
robinson is the friend who was enjoying the campfire with mr. ferguson and his
wife. she is 47 and she also lives in lombardy. she works at a group home
with adults who have intellectual disabilities. she has a college
education.

ms
robinson stated that she lives on anglican church road, which she described as
approximately two minutes away from the ferguson residence on blacksmith lane. 
her home is located on the other side of highway 15.

she
recalled that before the fire, she had got off work at about 9:30 pm.

she
estimated that the incident took place sometime between 11:30 pm and 12:30 am. 
she stated that they were just wrapping up the campfire. she recalled having
her hand on the door of her car to leave when she heard a “terrible crushing
sound.” immediately before the crash, she was talking with the fergusons about
a relative who had just got his driver’s licence and they were also making
arrangements to go for a walk the next day.

ms
robinson recalled that upon hearing the crash, mr. ferguson ran through the
field. she got in her car and called 911. she drove toward the crash.

when
she got to the area of a collision, she recalled that a man came out from the
side of the vehicle. she recalled that he came “from the ditch”. she did not
see him come out of the car involved in the collision. she recalled that he
had his hands on his head. he told her he was calling the tow truck. he was
“on the phone” but she did not hear the conversation.

she
told the man that she was calling 911. the man told her that there was no need
for that. she told the man, “too late bud.”

she
recalled being told by the 911 operator that she was free to leave the scene. 
before leaving, she turned around and observed the man on the side of the
road. he had a backpack that he was doing something with. he had one shoe off
and one shoe on.

ms
robinson had a brief conversation with the man, and he said that he was ok. 
she also recalled that mr. ferguson was there before she arrived, and he was
talking with the man.

when
shown exhibit 1, the photo that mr. ferguson took, she indicated that the car
in the photo could be hers. she recalled that her car was further back from
the stop sign than is depicted in the photo.

she
recalled that the man was dressed in jeans and a t-shirt.

after
the 911 operator told her she could leave, she drove up rideau ferry road
(county road 1) a short distance.

she
then turned around and returned to the ferguson residence. she recalled seeing
the man “on a mission to leave”. she stated, “he was hustling” and he was
“moving very fast”.

ms
robinson stated that when the police car arrived, the man was gone. she
recalled seeing him run up rideau ferry road (county road 1).

she
recalled having an interaction with the police officer while at the ferguson
residence between 15 and 20 minutes after she got back from the crash scene.

as
she was driving to her residence, she saw tow trucks at the scene. she also saw
a taxi at a red church which she identified as being just north of the village
on highway 15. she recalled seeing that the taxi had a light on. she
said that she saw the taxi there “a good hour” after she saw the vehicle in
the ditch.

she
conceded that she did not see anyone getting into the taxi. given the hour of
the day, it was dark outside. she thought it was “very odd” that there would
be a taxi in the area of the church on a friday night. upon seeing the taxi,
she performed a u-turn and went back to the scene. she told the police about
seeing the taxi at the church.
evidence of constable dylan dejong
in-chief

constable
dylan dejong has been a member of the opp since february 2024. he had no prior
experience as a police officer before he joined the opp. he stated that he was
involved in two or three investigations pertaining to impaired driving before
his involvement in this case.

he
was operating a marked ford explorer police car and dressed in his full
uniform. his partner that evening was constable hewlett.

he
recalled that on september 20, 2024 at 12:38 am, he was dispatched to a motor
vehicle collision at highway 15 and rideau ferry road (county road 1). en
route, he was advised by his dispatch that the vehicle was in the ditch and the
driver sounded intoxicated.

en
route, he was later advised by dispatch that an involved individual was dressed
in light blue jeans with a beige shirt. he had short, shaggy blonde hair. he
had a backpack. he was then advised that the individual had left the area of
the collision and was walking towards blacksmith road.

he
arrived on scene at about 1:00 am.

upon
arrival, he observed a tesla with ontario plate gvwm 615 in the ditch at the
intersection of rideau ferry road and highway 15. no one was at the scene when
he arrived.

he
noted the presence of a child seat in the rear of the tesla. the airbags had
been deployed.

on
the night in question, he was wearing a body-worn camera. the footage from the
camera at 1:03 am showing the condition of the vehicle was played in court and
marked as exhibit 4.

he
confirmed through dispatch that the vehicle was registered to mr. ackers. a
copy of the ownership was filed as exhibit 5.

he
decided to patrol the area. he drove down the road and did not see anyone. he
then turned around and returned to his brother officer at the scene. while
there, he was approached by ms robinson. she told him that she observed the
same male entering a taxi down the road.

he
left the scene to drive toward the taxi. he stopped the taxi. he saw an
individual who matched the description of the person he was looking for. he
asked the individual if his name was andrew. the man confirmed that it was. 
he asked the man to step out of the taxi.

footage
from constable dejong’s body worn camera was played in court to depict what
took place at the roadside. it was ultimately marked as exhibit 6. the following
was depicted on the body worn camera:
a)
constable
hewlett asked the man if his vehicle was in the ditch. the man confirmed that
it was.
b)
constable
hewlett then asked the man why he was in the taxi. the man indicated that he
was going back to town. he stated that he had called a tow for the vehicle.
c)
at this point
constable hewlett asked, “are you going to do a demand?” constable dejong
replied, “yep”. the time according to the video was 1:13 am.

the
crown asked constable hewlett what his grounds for making the demand were. he
stated that he did not have “full grounds”. he stated that he had a
reasonable suspicion that the man was impaired due to the totality of what had
occurred. the male was no longer at the scene. he recalled the man’s eyes
were glossy.

constable
dejong stated that constable hewlett also had grounds. constable hewlett did
not immediately advise what his grounds were but constable dejong implied from
constable hewlett asking, “do you want to do a demand?” that constable hewlett
also had grounds.

the
following then took place:
a)
he proceeded to
his cruiser to grab the screening device and fresh mouthpiece.
b)
he read the
approved screening device demand to the man from his duty card. the man
understood. he told the man to keep blowing into the device until he told him
to stop.
c)
the man did not
want to provide a sample. constable hewlett told the man that if he did not comply
with the demand he would be arrested, “so you might as well do this test”.
d)
constable dejong
told the man that he was being asked for the sample because his vehicle was
just found in the ditch and now he is “over here”. he told the man that people
saw him running away from the scene. he told the man that they just wanted to
make sure that there was no alcohol in his system.
e)
constable dejong
then said, “do you want to provide a sample?” the man indicated that he did
not consent. constable dejong told him that he was going to be arrested.
f)
he and
constable hewlett proceeded to arrest and search the man.
g)
constable dejong
found a car key. the man confirmed that was his car key.
h)
constable
hewlett asked the man if he was the only one in the vehicle. the man confirmed
that he was.
i)
the man
was lodged in constable dejong’s cruiser. once lodged into the cruiser,
constable dejong advised the man that he was under arrest for “refusing a
demand on the asd” and proceeded to read him his rights.
j)
the man
said he wanted to speak to a lawyer as soon as possible. constable dejong told
him that he could not let him speak to a lawyer right away because of his
privacy. he then advised him that he would let him speak to a lawyer as soon
as they got back to the detachment.
k)
he then read the
man the caution. the man understood his rights and his caution.

at
this point, the crown paused playing exhibit 6 and came back into the courtroom
and asked constable dejong, “what suspicion or belief did you form at that time?”,
referring to the point at which constable hewlett asked him, “do you want to do
a demand?” constable dejong repeated that:
a)
the witnesses
told dispatch he may be intoxicated.
b)
he left the
scene of the motor vehicle collision.
c)
he had glossy
eyes.

he
stated that he had suspicion that he may be impaired. that’s why he agreed
when constable hewlett asked him about “doing the demand”.

constable
dejong stated that he charged mr ackers with impaired operation, after speaking
with constable hewlett because he did not agree to testing for alcohol. 
constable dejong could not advise when he informed mr. ackers that he was going
to be charged with impaired operation.

he
also charged mr. ackers with fail to remain and fail to report under the
highway
traffic act. he was charged with those offences because he did not advise
police of the collision and he failed to remain at the scene.

constable
dejong indicated that after mr. ackers was given his rights to counsel and
caution, they returned to the scene. he stated that they did not know if they
were going to take mr. ackers to the detachment or release him at the
roadside.

they
decided to take mr. ackers to the detachment because he did want to return to
the area at a later date to provide his fingerprints. they took mr. ackers to
the brockville detachment. they departed the scene at 2:12 am and arrived at
2:36 am. once at the detachment, mr. ackers spoke with duty counsel at 2:55
am. his fingerprints were taken at 3:09 am and he was ultimately released at
4:15. a taxi picked him up. constable dejong did not know where mr. ackers
went from the detachment.

the
crown then played the last three minutes of exhibit 6. the only thing of note
was that mr. ackers indicated that he had cannabis and edibles in his backpack. 
the video ended at 1:21.

the
crown asked constable dejong if he gave mr. ackers another chance to provide a
sample of his breath into the approved screening device. he indicated that he
did.

the
crown then played another video from constable dejong’s body-worn camera (exhibit
7) which revealed the following:
a)
constable dejong
told mr. ackers that “we got you fleeing from the scene” and that “not
accepting the breath demand” was the same charge as driving impaired.
b)
he told mr.
ackers that he thought it was more than likely that if he took the asd, he
would not be impaired but that is “entirely up to you”.
c)
he added, “i
don’t know if you want to do the asd, or if you are still saying “no i don’t
want to”, because it is going to be about the same charge as an impaired charge
by refusing.”
d)
mr. ackers said,
“so, i’m open, as i said”.
e)
constable dejong
said, “so you don’t want to do the asd?”
f)
mr. ackers
said, “no.”
g)
constable dejong
asked mr. ackers if he took any marihuana.
h)
mr. ackers said,
“no.”

constable
dejong said he had paperwork to do and he told mr. ackers that he was going to
be charged with impaired operation, refusal, fail to remain and fail to
report.

after
the video was played, the crown asked constable dejong why he gave him the
choice to give a sample again. he stated that he wanted to make sure that mr.
ackers understood what he was getting into by refusing to provide a breath
sample.

constable
dejong indicated that mr. ackers had not given any indication that he did not
understand. he stated, however, that sometimes people don’t understand but say
they do. for this reason he went over it one more time.

the
crown asked whether the impaired charge was by alcohol or drug. constable
dejong indicated “both”. he stated that he did not give a demand for a drug
recognition expert.
cross-examination

defence
counsel asked constable dejong about a portion of exhibit 7 that was redacted. 
he recalled that the portion that was redacted was a portion that talked about
the charges under the
highway traffic act.

constable
dejong agreed that he was in charge of the roadside demand portion of the
investigation.

with
respect to the observation of glossy eyes, he agreed that people can have
glossy eyes for a number of reasons.

defence
counsel asked whether constable dejong agreed that the best indicator of
consumption of alcohol was the smell of alcohol. the officer replied, “
per
se
yeah”. when asked whether there was any smell of alcohol, constable
dejong stated, “not from where i was standing.” he stated that he was not
standing as close to mr. ackers as constable hewlett. he therefore did not
detect the odour.

defence
counsel asked whether mr. ackers was ever asked if he had been drinking. 
constable dejong replied, “not off the top of my head.”

defence
counsel then directed constable dejong to exhibit 6, where at the time of the
making of the first demand to provide a sample into the screening device, he
told mr. ackers, “we want to make sure that there is no alcohol in your
system”.

constable
dejong agreed that the reason for making the demand was that the vehicle was
found in the ditch and mr. ackers was fleeing the scene. he also agreed that
he wanted to make sure that there was no alcohol in mr. ackers’ system.

constable
dejong agreed that mr. ackers was “totally cooperative” and responsive to all
the requests that the police made. he also agreed that mr. ackers had no
trouble speaking with him.

constable
dejong indicated that mr. ackers told him that he had the key to his car in his
pocket but it turned out to be an air pod. he could not recall whether a car
key was ever found.

he
agreed that a tesla is started with an app or a credit card “key”, as opposed
to a typical car key.

constable
dejong denied speaking with anyone on scene before he spoke with mr. ackers. 
he agreed that the source of his information was his dispatcher and constable
hewlett, who had spoken to witnesses.

he
stated that both officers made the decision to lay the impaired driving charge
as well.

he
stated that he did not know whether mr. ackers was impaired by alcohol or a
drug. he recalled that they found cannabis edibles in mr. ackers’ backpack. 
they believed that if he was not impaired by alcohol he may have been impaired
by a drug. he repeated his evidence in-chief that mr. ackers was asked whether
he had taken any of the edibles and he said, “no”.

defence
counsel asked constable dejong if he would normally just do the roadside
because you really don’t know if somebody is impaired by alcohol or a drug. 
constable dejong indicated that sometimes that was true, but in this case, they
had a suspicion.

defence
counsel asked constable dejong his grounds for the impaired by drug. constable
dejong said that they found edibles in his backpack and that was his grounds. 
defence counsel clarified constable dejong’s previous evidence that mr. ackers
indicated that he had not taken any of the edibles on the day in question.
evidence of constable hewlett
in-chief

constable
hewlett testified that he has been a member of the opp since september 2021.

he
was working a 7 pm to 7 am shift on september 20, 2024. his partner was
constable dejong.

he
was operating a fully marked police car and dressed in full uniform. prior to
this incident, he had experience with between 20 and 30 impaired driving
investigations. this case was the first time he had given evidence in criminal
court.

he
recalled that at 12:40 am, he was dispatched to a motor vehicle collision at
the intersection of highway 15 and rideau ferry road (county road 1). he
stated that once he got to the area, he actually passed the scene because he
did not see the tesla down in the ditch.

he
drove to get more information from the complainant at an address on blacksmith
road.

he
spoke with teresa robinson. she advised that the vehicle was in the ditch. 
when she was at the scene, the driver was out of the vehicle. she was
concerned about whether he was the only one in the vehicle. she also observed
that he may be intoxicated. he had made arrangements for a tow.

ms
robinson gave a description of the man: shaggy, dirty blonde hair, blue jeans,
beige t-shirt and a backpack. she estimated he was five feet, six inches
tall.

after
receiving this information, he and constable dejong patrolled over rideau ferry
road and a nearby park area without success. they then returned to the
intersection and observed the tesla in the ditch. their time of arrival
was 1:15 am.

he
opined that before the crash, the tesla had been travelling on rideau ferry
road. he stated that it was in the west ditch. he observed that the airbags
were deployed. he recalled that there was a baby seat in the rear.

constable
hewlett stated that the tesla was searched by constable dejong who did not
observe any occupants.

they
received some information that a tow company had received a call to attend to
remove the vehicle. the tow company advised that the caller was andrew
ackers. he provided a phone number.

he
recalled that while they were at the intersection, ms robinson came to the
scene and advised that she saw a man getting into a taxi just east of where
they were located. he and constable dejong got in their cruisers and went in
the direction of the taxi. he recalled seeing an orange taxi light on the roof
of the vehicle.

he
and constable dejong stopped the taxi.

the
crown played footage from constable hewlett’s body-worn camera (exhibit 8) the
content of which was largely identical to constable dejong’s body worn camera
footage (which is summarized above at paragraph 54).

constable
hewlett stated that the man’s eyes were red and glossy. his description
matched the description given by ms robinson. his shoes and jeans were wet.

the officer
stated that “given the totality of the situation” he and constable dejong
decided to read the demand for the roadside screening device.

he also detected
an odour of an alcoholic beverage on the breath of mr. ackers. he stated that
he made this observation at 1:14 am.

the crown then
played more footage from constable hewett’s body worn camera, which was largely
identical in content to constable dejong’s body worn camera footage, (which is
summarized above at paragraph 57).

constable hewlett
indicated that he believed mr. ackers understood the demand because he nodded
his head when it was read to him. he allowed, however, that he was focused on
mr. ackers’ hands.

constable
hewlett stated that the accused was charged with “refusal” and “fail to
remain”, the latter presumably under the
highway traffic act
as opposed
to the
criminal code.
constable hewlett denied being part of the
decision to charge mr. ackers with the impaired driving count.

the crown asked
constable hewlett what his rationale was for giving mr. ackers a “second chance”. 
he stated that it was just to reiterate the consequences of the refusal.

after mr. ackers
was arrested, constable hewlett returned to the scene of the collision. at
2:03 am, he requested the attendance of a taxi to take mr. ackers to bon echo
provincial park.

mr. ackers then
decided that he wanted to attend at the police station with the officers to be
fingerprinted, rather than have to return at a later date for that purpose.

constable
hewlett recalled having a conversation with mr. ackers expressing concern about
the presence of the child seat and asking whether there was anyone else in the
vehicle. mr. ackers confirmed that he was the only one.
cross-examination

constable
hewlett agreed that when constable dejong read the demand and arrested mr.
ackers for refusal, he was standing “shoulder to shoulder” with him. he agreed
that constable dejong was in a position to make the same observations he made,
including the smell of alcohol.

constable
hewlett stated that he told the court everything that he was told by ms
robinson and he did not leave anything out.

constable
hewlett stated that the demand for the approved screening device was used
because there was a reasonable suspicion “of impairment”. he stated that mr.
ackers was not charged with impaired operation “from the get-go” because the
police did not have the grounds to lay such a charge.

defence counsel
asked constable hewlett if he asked mr. ackers if he had been drinking. 
constable hewlett stated that he did not recall. he confirmed, after checking
his notes, that he did not note asking mr. ackers that question.

defence
counsel asked constable hewlett if he told constable dejong about the smell
emanating from mr. ackers. constable hewlett stated that constable dejong was
close to him, inferring that he believed that constable dejong would have made
that observation.

constable
hewlett added that he observed the glossy eyes and detected the odour on mr.
ackers’ breath. he stated that the demand was read shortly after that. he
agreed that he and constable dejong did not discuss anything at that point and
constable dejong decided to make the demand.
dismissal of the impaired driving charge

prior to making
submissions, the crown invited me to dismiss the impaired driving charge on the
basis that the evidence that i heard was not sufficient.

i agreed with
this submission and dismissed the charge. it was clear to me that there was no
basis for the police to have reasonable grounds to believe that mr. ackers was
impaired by alcohol or a drug. i therefore could not have any basis for
finding beyond a reasonable doubt that he was guilty of that charge.
crown submissions

crown counsel
argued that the following grounds set out by constable dejong made out a
reasonable suspicion:
a)
there had been
an accident where a vehicle was in the ditch;
b)
mr. ackers was
the owner of the vehicle;
c)
police dispatch
advised that witnesses saw a man getting out the driver’s area of the vehicle;
d)
police dispatch
advised that witnesses thought that the man was intoxicated;
e)
the man
ultimately left the scene;
f)
a short
while later, a witness saw a taxi. the witness advised police that the man was
getting into the taxi;
g)
police stopped
the taxi;
h)
mr. ackers was
in the back of the taxi;
i)
mr. ackers
admitted to driving the vehicle;
j)
constable
dejong observed mr. acker’s eyes to be glossy; and
k)
constable hewlett
detected an odour of alcohol.
defence submissions

defence counsel argued
that constable dejong did not have a reasonable suspicion because the
constellation of facts relied on by the officer did not include any indicia
with respect to the presence of alcohol.

defence counsel
submitted that the fact that mr. ackers had been in the accident, left the
scene and was stopped while taking a taxi away from the scene was insufficient
to make the demand. defence counsel reminded me that when constable dejong
summed up his grounds for making the demand to the accused, he referred to the wanting
“to make sure that mr. ackers did not have alcohol in his system.”
analysis
the statutory framework

section
320.14(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
states:
everyone commits an
offence who
(a)
operates
a conveyance while the person’s ability to operate it is impaired to any degree
by alcohol or a drug or by a combination of alcohol and a drug;

section
320.15(1)
(a) of the
criminal code
states:
everyone commits an offence who, knowing that a
demand has been made, fails or refuses to comply, without reasonable excuse,
with a demand made under section 320.27 or 320.28.

section 320.27
of the
criminal code
states:
(1)
i
f a peace officer has reasonable grounds to
suspect
that a person has alcohol or a drug in
their
body and that the
person has, within the preceding three hours, operated a conveyance, the peace
officer may, by demand, require the person to comply with the requirements of
either or both of paragraphs (a) and (b) in the case of alcohol or with the
requirements of either or both of paragraphs (a) and (c) in the case of a drug:
(a)
to
immediately perform the physical coordination tests prescribed by regulation
and to accompany the peace officer for that purpose;
(b)
to
immediately provide the samples of breath that, in the peace officer’s opinion,
are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be made by means of an approved
screening device and to accompany the peace officer for that purpose;
(c)
to
immediately provide the samples of a bodily substance that, in the peace
officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be made by
means of approved drug screening equipment and to accompany the peace officer
for that purpose.
(2)
if a peace officer has in his or her possession an
approved screening device, the peace officer may, in the course of the lawful
exercise of powers under an act of parliament or an act of a provincial
legislature or arising at common law, by demand, require the person who is
operating a motor vehicle to immediately provide the samples of breath that, in
the peace officer’s opinion, are necessary to enable a proper analysis to be
made by means of that device and to accompany the peace officer for that
purpose.

in this case, it
is common ground that constable dejong was proceeding under section 320.27(1)
when he made the demand at issue in this case.

the first issue
i must decide, therefore, is whether constable dejong had a reasonable
suspicion for making the demand.

it is well
established that if he did not have a reasonable suspicion, mr. ackers had the
right to refuse and he is entitled to an acquittal.
the authorities with respect
to the meaning of reasonable suspicion

what is a
reasonable suspicion? how is it different from reasonable grounds?

two supreme
court of canada cases set out the basic requirements for reasonable suspicion:
r. v. chehil,
2013 scc 49
and
r. v. mackenzie,
2013
scc 50.

in
chehil,
justice
karakatsanis set out the following principles with respect to the reasonable
suspicion:
a)
reasonable
suspicion must be based on objectively discernable facts which are subjected to
exacting judicial scrutiny which must account for the totality of the
circumstances.
b)
reasonable
suspicion is something more than mere suspicion and something less than
reasonable and probable grounds.
c)
reasonable
suspicion engages
reasonable possibility
not reasonable probability.
d)
reasonable
suspicion must be assessed against the totality of circumstances. there must be
a constellation of objectively discernable facts that give the investigating
officer reasonable cause to suspect. this inquiry is fact-based, flexible and
grounded in common sense and practical, everyday experience.
e)
reasonable suspicion
need not be the only inference that can be drawn from a particular
constellation of factors. factors that give rise to a reasonable
suspicion may also support completely innocent explanations. this is
acceptable, as the reasonable suspicion standard addresses the
possibility
of
uncovering criminality, and not a
probability
of doing so.
f)
exculpatory,
neutral, or equivocal information cannot be disregarded when assessing a
constellation of factors. the totality of the circumstances, including favourable
and unfavourable factors, must be weighed in the course of arriving at any
conclusion regarding reasonable suspicion; “[t]he officer must take into
account all information available to him and is entitled to disregard only
information which he has good reason to believe is unreliable”. this is
self-evident.
g)
the obligation
of the police to take all factors into account does not impose a duty to
undertake further investigation to seek out exculpatory factors or rule out
possible innocent explanations. in conducting this inquiry to ascertain
whether reasonable suspicion was present, the court will assess the
circumstances the police were aware of at the time of the execution of the
search. however, it is not permissible for the reasonable suspicion inquiry to
assess circumstances learned
after
the execution of the search.
h)
the objective
facts must be indicative of the possibility of criminal behaviour. police
must point to particularized conduct or particularized evidence of criminal
activity in order to ground reasonable suspicion. however, the evidence need
not in itself consist of unlawful behaviour, nor need it necessarily be
evidence of a specific known criminal act.
i)
a nexus
must exist between the criminal conduct that is suspected and the investigative
technique employed.
j)
the
requirement for objective and ascertainable facts as the basis for reasonable
suspicion permits an independent after-the-fact review by the court and
protects against arbitrary state action.
k)
rigorous
judicial scrutiny is an independent review that ensures that the suspicion
relied on by the police is supported by factors that are objectively
ascertainable. the constellation of facts must be based in the evidence,
tied to the individual, and capable of supporting a logical inference of
criminal behaviour.
l)
an
officer’s training and experience may provide an objective experiential, as
opposed to empirical, basis for grounding reasonable suspicion. however,
this is not to say that hunches or intuition grounded in an officer’s
experience will suffice, or that deference is owed to a police officer’s view
of the circumstances based on her training or experience in the field. a
police officer’s educated guess must not supplant the rigorous and independent
scrutiny demanded by the reasonable suspicion standard.

in the companion
case of
mackenzie,
justice moldaver tackled the difficulty associated
with judging the objective reasonableness of facts which may be equivocal or
have an innocent explanation. he noted at paragraphs 71-73 as follows:
a)
reasonable
suspicion must be assessed against the totality of the circumstances. 
characteristics that apply broadly to innocent people and “no-win” behaviour
cannot on their own, support a finding of reasonable suspicion, although they
may take on some value when they form part of a constellation of factors.
b)
exculpatory,
common, neutral, or equivocal information should not be discarded when
assessing a constellation of factors. however, the test for reasonable
suspicion will not be stymied when the factors which give rise to it are
supportive of an innocent explanation. we are looking here at
possibilities, not probabilities. are the facts objectively indicative of
the
possibility
of criminal behaviour in light of the totality
of the circumstances? if so, the objective component of the test will
have been met. if not, the inquiry is at an end.
c)
assessing
whether a particular constellation of facts gives rise to a reasonable
suspicion should not — indeed must not — devolve into a scientific or
metaphysical exercise. common sense, flexibility, and practical everyday
experience are the bywords, and they are to be applied through the eyes of a
reasonable person armed with the knowledge, training and experience of the
investigating officer.

it is well
established that these principles with respect to what constitutes a
“reasonable suspicion” and how trial judges should apply them, apply to cases
under
section 320.27
of the
criminal code: see
r. v. flight,
2014
abca 185;
r. v. morris-rainford,
2020 oncj 447;
r. v. thibodeau,
2023 oncj 308.
the failure of constable
dejong to avert to the correct statutory requirements for demanding a sample
into the approved screening device

defence counsel
made submissions to the effect that, repeating what constable dejong told the
accused, the words “we want to make sure you are not impaired”, was not
sufficient and that accordingly constable dejong did not have adequate grounds.

i agree that
this was a sloppy error on constable dejong’s part. the language of the
statute authorizes him to demand a sample of the accused’s breath where he has
a reasonable grounds to suspect that the accused “has alcohol in their body”.

i note that the demand
which constable dejong read from the card, which was read into the record, was
the correct demand. constable dejong simply did not paraphrase it properly
when he was trying to explain the basis for making it to mr. ackers.

it is well
established that an officer making a demand is not in error if the officer
fails to resort to the exact wording of the statute:
r. v. grant,
2014
onsc 1479.

in that
situation, it is up to the trial judge to determine whether:
a)
the grounds relied on by the officer were subjectively held; and
b)
those grounds passed muster as being objectively reasonable.

for reasons i
set out below, i find that nothing turns on this argument.
must there be an odour of
alcohol for there to be a reasonable suspicion?

the law is well
settled that an odour of an alcoholic beverage is not necessary to satisfy a
reasonable suspicion that the accused has alcohol in his body.
r. v. singh,
2006 canlii 42607
(scj);
r. v. mclean,
2021 onsc 34.
application of the
principles to the facts of this case

in this
case, although constable hewlett smelled an odour of alcohol emanating from the
accused’s breath, and he was close enough to smell the odour, constable hewlett
did not communicate that information to constable dejong before constable
dejong made the demand.

constable dejong,
therefore, could not rely on constable hewlett’s observation. if the officers
took 15 or 20 seconds to compare notes and inform each other of their grounds
before the demand was made, this error would not have been made.

when constable
hewlett stated, “you are going to do a demand”, he was assuming that constable
dejong had the same grounds as he did, when that was not the case.

while this would
have undoubtedly made constable dejong’s grounds stronger, it does not, in my
view, translate into a finding that without this fact, constable dejong’s grounds
were insufficient to satisfy the reasonable suspicion requirement.

when constable
dejong made the demand, he was possessed of the following subjective grounds
which constituted his subjective belief that there was a reasonable suspicion
that mr. ackers had alcohol in his body:
a)
there had been
an accident involving a tesla going off the road and into a ditch;
b)
a person
matching the description of mr. ackers was seen getting out of the driver’s
area of the vehicle.
c)
his dispatcher
told him that witnesses said that mr. ackers was intoxicated;
d)
when he arrived
on scene there was no one around;
e)
he and his
brother officer searched the area with negative results;
f)
he looked
at the involved vehicle and there were no other persons in it;
g)
he confirmed
that mr. ackers is the registered owner of the vehicle;
h)
once he was back
at the scene, one of the witnesses came and told him that person matching the
description of mr. ackers was up the road at a church parking lot entering a
taxi;
i)
he stopped
the taxi and the person in the back seat matched the description of mr. ackers;
j)
the person
identified himself as andrew;
k)
the person
indicated that it was his car in the ditch;
l)
the person
said he had called a tow and was going to town;
m)
he noticed that the man had
glossy eyes.

in my
view, judicial scrutiny of the constellation of those grounds results in a
conclusion that those grounds are objectively reasonable grounds that form the
basis for a reasonable suspicion.

i accept the
evidence of mr. ferguson that for as long as he has lived at that address,
people travelling on county road 1 have missed the sharp curve just before the
stop sign controlling the intersection of county road 1 and highway 15.

i also accept
the proposition that people who get into accidents and leave the scene may be
dazed or confused and not thinking straight.

another
possibility for leaving the scene of the accident was that mr. ackers did not
own the car, that he had stolen it or that he did not have the owner’s
permission to have it. however, before constable dejong stopped mr. ackers in
the taxi, he received confirmation that mr. ackers was the registered owner of
the involved vehicle.

these are
potential innocent explanations for mr. acker’s accident and the fact that he
left the scene.

as i have set
out above, however, the reasonable suspicion standard focusses on the
reasonable
possibility
that there was alcohol in mr. acker’s body. thus, while there
may be innocent explanations, constable dejong had to consider them, but he did
not have to rule them out before making the demand.
reasonable possibility
is a much lower standard that reasonable probability.

i find that mr.
ackers was not dazed or confused for the following reasons:
a)
mr. ackers knew
that the police had been called. he told ms robinson that they were not
necessary. ms. robinson told him that it was too late.
b)
mr. ackers was
seen by mr. ferguson talking on his cell phone and he told mr. ferguson that he
was calling a tow truck.
c)
mr. ackers had
no difficulty identifying himself. he told constable dejong he had called a
tow and was going to a hotel.
d)
mr. ackers was
clear and articulate on the police body-worn camera evidence. he did not appear
to be dazed and confused.

if he is not
dazed, confused or afraid, and if he owned the vehicle, why did he leave the
vehicle when the police were on the way? why after patrolling the area could
the police not locate him? why was in he in a taxi? these objectively
reasonable facts support the reasonable possibility that mr. ackers might have
been trying to conceal something or distance himself from the accident. why?

constable dejong
was advised by his dispatcher, that witnesses said that mr. ackers was
intoxicated. when constable dejong stopped mr. ackers he noted that mr. ackers
had glossy eyes, which constable dejong said was an indicator of the
consumption of alcohol.

this closes the
loop and cements the presence of a reasonable possibility that mr. ackers had
alcohol in his body.
summary

in summary,
constable dejong was possessed of the following objectively reasonable facts
which together make out a reasonable suspicion that mr. ackers had been
operating the vehicle with alcohol in his body:
a)
an unexplained accident with a single occupant;
b)
a fleeing driver;
c)
a third-hand account from a witness who believed the driver was
intoxicated;
d)
confirmation once the cab was stopped that the passenger in the cab was
the driver and registered owner of the vehicle in the ditch; and
e)
glossy eyes.
that’s sufficient.

i therefore find
that the breath demand is valid.

i further find
that mr. ackers, having refused to provide a sample without a reasonable excuse,
will be found guilty of the offence as charged.
released: june 5, 2025
signed:
justice j.r. richardson