source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj607/2025oncj607.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. hill, 2025 oncj 607
date: november 20, 2025
court file no.
23-23101787
23-7353
b
e t w e e n:
his
majesty the king
—
and —
preston
hill
before
justice orsini
reasons
for sentence released on november 20, 2025
k.
de koning........................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
j.
zegers............................................................................................ counsel
for preston hill
orsini
j.:
introduction

these are my
reasons for judgement on a dangerous offender application brought by the crown
pursuant to
section 753
of the
criminal code.

on september 8,
2022 mr. hill plead guilty to assault causing bodily harm, contrary to
section
267
(b) of the
criminal code, and attempted robbery, contrary to
section
344(1)
of the
criminal code.
a gladue report was ordered at that time.

on march 2, 2023,
he plead guilty to manslaughter, contrary to
section 236
(b) of the
criminal
code.

at that time, i
ordered that an assessment be conducted by dr. alina iosif, a forensic
psychiatrist, pursuant to
section 752.1
of the
criminal code
and that a
report be filed for use as evidence on a potential application to designate mr.
hill a dangerous offender. the crown filed its application following receipt of
the report from dr. iosif, dated june 6, 2023. it included the required consent
of the attorney general of ontario pursuant to
section 754
of the
criminal
code.

the defence
obtained its own psychiatric assessment of mr. hill by dr. john bradford as
well as an assessment by dr. eldon loh, a rehabilitation specialist. these
reports were dated december 17, 2024, and jan 9, 2025, respectively.

in addition to
the above-noted reports, and on consent of the defence, the crown filed a significant
volume of documentary records related to mr. hill, including the following:
(a)
mr. hill’s criminal record;
(b)
adult and youth probation records;
(c)
adult and youth institutional
records;
(d)
hospital records; and
(e)
transcripts, police occurrence
reports and court orders related to mr. hill’s prior convictions.

the hearing
itself took place over 10 days. final submission were made on september 2,
2025. the court heard from the following witnesses:
(i)
shelly griffith (parole officer
supervisor, correctional services canada);
(ii)
karen thomson (regional manager of
conditional release programs, parole board of canada);
(iii)
katherine beddows (indigenous
correctional program officer, correctional services canada);
(iv)
dr. alina iosif (forensic
psychiatrist);
(v)
dr. eldon loh (rehabilitation
specialist;
(vi)
bonnie hill (mother of preston
hill); and
(vii)
dr. john bradford (forensic
psychiatrist)
the issues

does mr. hill
meet the criteria set out in section 753(1)(a)(i) and/or (ii) of the
criminal
code
such that he should be declared a dangerous offender?

if so, is there a reasonable
expectation that a lesser measure falling short of an indeterminate sentence
will adequately protect the public against the commission by mr. hill of murder
or a serious personal injury offence?
position of the parties

the parties agree that the predicate
offences are serious personal injury offences as defined by
section 752
(a) of
the
criminal code.

the crown submits that mr. hill meets
the definition of a dangerous offender and seeks to have him sentenced to an
indeterminate period of incarceration. the crown says that the offences before
me form part of a pattern of repetitive behaviour and persistent aggressive
behaviour under
section 753(1)
(a)(i) and (ii) of the
criminal code. the
crown submits that there is no reasonable expectation that the public can be
adequately protected by anything other than an indeterminate sentence.

in the alternative, crown submits
that mr. hill should be designated a dangerous offender and sentenced to a life
sentence or a lengthy fixed sentence in the penitentiary followed by a 10-year
long-term supervision order. in the further alternative, crown submits that mr.
hill be declared a long-term offender and sentenced to a life sentence or a
lengthy fixed sentence in the penitentiary followed by a 10-year long-term
supervision order.

the defence
submits that mr. hill does not meet the criteria for designation as a dangerous
offender and urges the court to impose a determinate sentence of 12 years less
time served. the defence submits that mr. hill is treatable and that there is a
reasonable expectation that treatment in the penitentiary during the course of
a lengthy determinate sentence will adequately protect the public.
circumstances of the predicate offences
manslaughter

the victim, safurani
bakare, was a minister of the interdenominational church. in addition to
operating the “christ redeemer ministries” he operated a cleaning business.

at the time of
his death, as a result of financial hardship, he did not have a fixed address.
for several months, he had been renting a room at a rooming house located at
1061 patricia street in london. he terminated this tenancy at the end of
february 2021 but had left some of his belongings behind which were to be
picked up at a later date.

he had been residing at the salvation
army centre of hope on friday may 14, 2021, where he met mr. hill. both had
spent the night there on the third floor and were observed by a worker at the
shelter to be acting peaceably with each other that night. this was confirmed
by video surveillance from that evening as well as the following morning when
they left the facility together at approximately 7:15 a.m. mr. bakare had
agreed to help mr. hill find employment and housing.

some time after leaving the salvation
army on the morning of may 15, 2021, mr. bakare drove to a local tim horton’s
before attending at his former residence on patricia street to retrieve his
belongings. his former landlord had received a message from him shortly after 8
a.m. that morning indicating that he was on his way.

mr. hill was
travelling as a passenger in mr. bakare’s van. when they arrived at mr.
bakare’s former residence he notified his former landlord of his arrival but
did not receive a response to his messages. as a result, at 8:41 a.m. he
contacted the police seeking their assistance in retrieving his belongings.

while waiting in the driveway of mr.
bakare’s former residence, mr. hill, without provocation, stabbed mr. bakare
one time in the neck. he then stole mr. bakare’s cell phones and fled the area.

at approximately 9:18 a.m., a city of
london parking enforcement officer saw mr. bakare’s body slumped over and
against the exterior of the garage located at 1061 patricia street. he
contacted police after calling out to mr. bakare and receiving no response.

police and
paramedics attended the scene and administered cpr on mr. bakare who had an
obvious stab wound to his neck. mr. bakare was transported to victoria hospital
where further attempts were made to save his life.

mr. bakare was
pronounced dead at 9:53 a.m. as a result of what was determined to be a stab
wound to his neck. a subsequent autopsy revealed that the stab wound had
“nearly transected” mr. bakare’s “right common carotid artery.” he also
sustained a laceration to his left eyebrow/forehead which was likely due to a
terminal collapse.
assault causing
bodily harm; attempted robbery

at approximately 9:00 a.m. that same
morning, simon dunford and his fiancée, catharina van wijk, were walking their
dog on the east side of richmond street near university drive in the city of
london.

mr. hill was on the opposite side of
richmond street and proceeded to jog across the street toward mr. dunford and
ms. van wijk. he stated “hey man” as he approached and ultimately walked past
them on the sidewalk.

when mr. dunford turned towards mr.
hill, mr. hill grabbed mr. dunford’s shoulder with one hand and stabbed him in
the abdomen once with a knife using his other hand. mr. dunford and ms. van
wijk immediately fled northbound, and the accused ran southbound toward
richmond street and university drive.

at approximately
9:05 a.m., immediately following the above-noted stabbing, mr. hill approached
the partially opened driver’s side window of a white 2011 nissan sentra that
was being operated by german toro. the vehicle was stopped at a traffic light
facing eastbound on university drive at richmond street.

mr. hill was still armed with a knife
which he put through the window while stating, “give me your fucking car.” mr.
toro managed to roll his window up. he then had to roll up the front
passenger’s side window as mr. hill was proceeding around the vehicle to the
passenger’s side. mr. hill then returned to the driver’s side and attempted to
break the driver’s side window of mr. toro’s vehicle by striking it four or
five times with his knife. this caused scratches to the driver's side window,
resulting in approximately $300.00 in damage.

at 9:06 a.m., after being dispatched
to the area following a 9-1-1 call from a passing motorist, sergeant yovicic
and sergeant males observed mr. hill running southwest through the intersection
of richmond street and university drive. he ran through a small green space at
the southwest side of this intersection and then onto the property of the td
bank at 1137 richmond street.

after following
mr. hill into the rear parking lot of the td bank, the officers exited their
vehicle and ordered mr. hill to the ground. mr. hill refused to comply and
began walking toward them. sergeant males pointed her service-issued pistol at
mr. hill who continued to walk toward them repeatedly shouting, “just fucking
shoot me.” sergeant yovicic then deployed his oleoresin capsicum spray (also
known as “pepper spray”) at mr. hill who eventually laid down on the ground.

at 9:07 a.m. mr.
hill was arrested for assault with a weapon and was handcuffed to the rear. he
was advised of his rights to counsel at that time. he had blood on both of his
hands. he was in possession of a folding knife with the blade open as well as
one of mr. bakare’s cell phones. the phone was playing the song “rockstar” by
rap artist “da baby”, which mr. hill continued to ask the officers to play as
it was his favourite song.

mr. dunford was ultimately attended
to by ems and transported to victoria hospital. he did not require surgery, and
his injury was not life-threatening.

mr. hill was
interviewed by detective bourdeau later that same day following his arrest for
murder and robbery. he was advised of his right to counsel again. having
previously spoken with counsel, he elected to do so a second time.

during the course
of the interview, mr. hill admitted to stabbing mr. bakare in the neck and
trying to steal mr. toro’s vehicle. he said he knew that mr. bakare was trying
to help him find housing and employment and that he felt bad. when asked why he
stabbed mr. bakare, the following exchange took place:
det
bourdeau: …you said earlier he was gonna give you a ride? mr. hill: yep.
det.
bourdeau: so he musta’ had a vehicle? mr. hill: yeah, i feel
bad.
det.
bourdeau: you feel bad?
mr.
hill: yeah, i do. yeah i mean. det bourdeau: okay.
mr.
hill: he was tryna’ help people, you know [inaudible]. det. bourdeau: so
why did this happen?
mr.
hill: i dunno. it’s enough, yeah, it’s enough i guess. det. bourdeau: you
said you became impatient.
mr.
hill: yeah, cause i wanted to go, go to war actually, ya know.
det.
bourdeau: go to war?
mr.
hill: yeah.
det.
bourdeau: yeah.
mr.
hill: that kills, or goofs mostly, just goofs. not regular war, but go
to war against goofs.
det.
bourdeau: who’s goofs?
mr.
hill: all goofs like rapehounds all those fuckin people. det. bourdeau: because
of…
mr.
hill: child molesters…
det.
bourdeau: because of what happened to you?
mr.
hill: they can all go, they can all go…

he also told det. bourdeau that he
had gotten “sidetracked by drugs” but had not used recently. this was after he
had indicated during the booking process that he had used crystal meth the
prior evening.
victim impact

a victim impact statement dated
december 22, 2022, was filed by mr. dunford.

as a result of the offence, mr.
dunford’s outlook on life has been significantly altered. he explained how he
went from being a positive, optimistic, and trusting person to one who now
lives with a significant degree of apprehension over thoughts that he could be
harmed for no reason whatsoever.

the stabbing left
him with nerve damage in addition to severe ptsd and a general loss of
enjoyment of life. he suffers from flashbacks and indicates that he and his
wife are now burdened with avoidance and fear and a loss of hope because
“violently attacking an innocent person changes them.”
circumstances of mr. hill

mr. hill is now 27 years of age. he
was 22 years of age at the time of his arrest.

mr. hill is an indigenous person
whose personal circumstances are set out in the gladue report prepared in
connection with this matter. both of his parents are registered members of the
oneida first nation. he has a younger sister.

there is a
residential school history on both sides of his family. his maternal great
grandparents attended the mount elgin residential school approximately 20 miles
southwest of london. his maternal grandfather attended the mohawk institute
residential school located in brantford. a similar history was noted with
respect to his paternal grandparents and great grandparents. grandparents on
both sides of the family also spent some time at the mount elgin day school.

mr. hill’s
parents both disclosed that their parents and grandparents were the subject of
significant abuse during their youth. they both acknowledged being raised in
dysfunctional homes marked by alcoholism, domestic abuse and poverty. despite
this, mr. hill’s mother went on to obtain a diploma and worked as a medical
secretary. she now works as a teacher. his father obtained a college diploma in
social work and became a drug and alcohol counsellor.

according to his
mother, mr. hill started having difficulties at school in grade 4. she said
there were reports of her son being disruptive in class and not doing his work.
she said that his teachers encouraged her to take her son to a doctor to be
assessed for learning disabilities but that she chose not to.

it was at
approximately this time that they register mr. hill in hockey, something which
he excelled at. according to his mother, he struggled academically in grade
school and his high school years were marked by frequent fighting and
ultimately being expelled. he subsequently transferred to an alternative school
on the oneida first nation. she believes he obtained a grade 11 education.

by all accounts mr. hill began
experiencing mental health difficulties and trouble with the law when he was
approximately 17 years old. he said this is when he first disclosed to his
parents that he had been a victim of past sexual abuse. this is confirmed in a
pre-sentence report (psr) filed as an exhibit following his first conviction as
a youth in 2015. according to the author of the report, mr. hill indicated that
the abuse began to “bother him more when he became older” and that as a result,
he started taking his anger out on other people. he said he disclosed the abuse
because he saw the perpetrator spending time with his aunt’s child, and this
angered him. as indicated in the psr, mr. hill admitted that “he can be
verbally aggressive when he is upset and is unable to control his outbursts at
times.” this was confirmed by his mother who reported that “preston can be
controlled by his anger and rage.”

he advised the author of the
gladue
report
that he was sexually abuse by an older female child that his parents
had adopted. the child babysat mr. hill and his younger sister. he also
indicated that he struggled to control his emotions following this initial
disclosure stating, “i started getting mad about it. that’s when i started
getting charged and stuff, around that time. ever since then my life has been a
roller coaster pretty much. it was a lot to handle.”

a subsequent psr filed with the court
in 2016 indicates that mr. hill’s behaviour continued to deteriorate. the
report noted that mr. hill was involved in daily drug use, that he began to act
out in an aggressive and angry manner more frequently and that this behaviour
began to frighten his mother and sister to the point that his sister would lock
herself in her room when mr. hill was home. the report noted that mr. hill
failed to follow through on treatment recommendations and that his father would
not welcome him back into the home until he attended residential treatment.

in a
critical incident report
dated march 2, 2016,
which forms part of the youth records filed in these
proceedings, his father indicated that “preston’s angry and aggressive
outbursts often happen without warning signs.” this was confirmed by mr. hill
who, after being confronted for allegedly threatening a staff member said “i’m
just random like that. i could just snap at any moment”.

later in 2016, a
psr update indicates that mr. hill attended an indigenous-based adolescent
treatment centre but left prematurely. he said, “it was too far from home that
he did not like the program”. the report went on to indicate that mr. hill was
no longer welcome in the family home. his father said he did not feel safe
around his son and was requesting an order that his son have no contact with
the family.

the
gladue report
indicates
that at the age of 17, mr. hill suffered a significant head injury after
instigating a fight and injuring someone at a party. he said he subsequently
passed out as a result of intoxication and that while unconscious he was beaten
in the head with a baseball bat. he spent some time in the intensive care unit
as result of a fractured skull and brain hemorrhaging and was ultimately moved
to the parkwood institute for rehabilitation which lasted several months.

the extent to which this head injury
together with mr. hill’s past sexual abuse has contributed to his offending
behaviour is in dispute. i will have more to say about this later in my
judgement.

it would appear
from the
gladue report
that mr. hill’s addiction to substances and
violent tendencies resulted in him being excluded from the family home. his
mother indicated that, in the months leading up to the predicate offences, the
family was living in fear and that this is what led mr. hill to moving out of
the family home and into the salvation army.

while in custody, mr. hill has accessed
anger management programming and participated in smudging in traditional pipe
ceremonies to support his mental health. he is presently taking vyvanse
medication to treat his attention deficit disorder.

with respect to
the predicate offences, mr. hill stated the following to the author of the
gladue
report, “i don’t really remember what happened, but i don’t feel good about
it. i feel bad for what i’ve done.” as indicated in the report of dr iosif, mr.
hill was able to recall the events in question. after conferring with his
client, council confirmed that mr. hill had a memory of the events and that he
was satisfied the crown could prove them beyond a reasonable doubt.

mr. hill’s adult case probation notes
indicate that this injury was in fact sustained on july 16, 2020, just before
mr. hill’s 22nd birthday. this was consistent with mr. hill’s the medical
records. (see exhibit 17:
integrated discharge summary
)

mr. hill has a significant history of
substance abuse. he told dr. iosif that he was introduced to alcohol and
marijuana at the age of 15 and was using crystal meth and cocaine, including
crack cocaine, by the age of 17. he indicated that he was using crystal meth on
a regular and continuous basis between 2019 and the date of his arrest for the
predicate offences. between 2020 and the date of his arrest he was also abusing
xanax to induce sleep after using crystal meth. he began using fentanyl in 2021
and indicated he had developed a “high tolerance” to it.

he advised dr. iosif that “…all the
charges ‘ve ever had i was intoxicated…crystal meth is the worst”.
mr. hill’s criminal history – registered
convictions

in support of its position, the crown
has filed various records relating to mr. hill’s criminal history. this
included police occurrence reports, transcripts of court proceedings, youth and
adult probation records and records from various custodial facilities to name a
few.

as indicated by
the supreme court of canada in
r. v. jones,
1994 canlii 85 (scc),

2 s.c.r. 229, at
paragraph
123, “in the case of dangerous offender proceedings, it is all the
more important that the court be given access to the widest possible range of
information in order to determine whether there is a serious risk to public
safety.”

nevertheless, much of the documentary
evidence constitutes a form of hearsay evidence. in
r. v. l.t.p.,

b.c.j. no. 1706
(b.c.s.c.),
at paragraph 13, the court discussed the admissibility and weight of
documentary hearsay evidence admitted on consent:
the weight accorded to
individual documents will depend in each instance on the nature of the
document, its content and the purpose for which it is produced.

with respect to
the factual underpinnings of some of the offences on mr. hill’s record, there
is an absence of transcripts. as such, the crown seeks to rely on police
occurrence reports.

in
r. v. p.g.,
2013
onsc 589, the
court reviewed the use of police synopses to support factual findings for an
offender's prior convictions. despite the limitations inherent in the use of
police synopses, the court was willing to accept, as reliable, the dates of the
offences, the ages of the parties, and the general nature of the offences.

in
r. v. williams,
2018
onca 437, the
court concluded that police synopses are generally admissible but must be
treated with caution. some basic facts set out in the synopses can be used for
the purpose of establishing details such as dates and ages. the incidents set
out in the synopses must be considered in light of all of the evidence led at
the hearing. certain parts of a synopsis may find support and confirmation in
other parts of the record. if so, it is open to the sentencing judge to rely on
those incidents as evidence in support of a finding that the statutory elements
of dangerousness, such as the requisite pattern of behaviour, are made out.

i also note that the crown bears the
onus of proving the facts underpinning mr. hill’s prior criminal convictions
beyond a reasonable doubt.

counsel for mr. hill does not dispute
the admissibility of the records in support of the factual underpinnings of the
offences relied upon by the crown. as indicated in the reports of the forensic
psychiatrists who testified in this case, they were reviewed with mr. hill.

in the circumstances and having
reviewed the records in some detail, i am satisfied that where transcripts are
unavailable, the police occurrence reports are reliable with respect to the
general nature of the offences described therein.

the record can be briefly
summarized as follows:
(a)
criminal convictions span approx.
7.5 years (november 2015 to march 3, 2023);
(b)
total convictions: 40;
(c)
convictions for violent offences
or threats of violence: 19; and
(d)
convictions for failing to comply
with court orders: 8

in addition to
his criminal convictions, mr. hill admitted to dr. bradford that he committed
additional assaults as an adult for which he did not get caught.

the following is a table of mr. hill’s criminal
convictions and sentences:
disposition
 date / location of court
offence(s) with
 offence dates
(if known)
sentence
november 23, 2015 (london, youth court)
•
assault causing
 bodily harm – s.267(b) cc (od: march 24, 2015)
•
assault (pled down from robbery)
 –
s.266
 cc (may 4, 2015)
•
assault (pled down from robbery)
 –
s.266
 cc (od: may 4, 2015)
•
assault (od:
 may 27, 2015 – referred to in sentencing decision, custody and supervision
 order, and probation order, but not on record)
•
unauthorized
 possession of a prohibited or restricted weapon – s.92(2) cc
•
possession of
 weapon dangerous to public – s.88(1) cc
•
ftc undertaking – s.145(5.1) cc
•
ftc recog. – s.145(3) cc x 3
6 months deferred custody and
 supervision order (on acbh and assaults), 18 months probation on all charges
•
mischief under
 $5000 – s.430(4) cc
may 18, 2017
(london, youth and adult entries)
•
assault with a
 weapon – s.267(a) cc (youth offence – od: december 2, 2015)
•
assault – s.266
 cc x 2 (ods: september 23, 2016, november 4,
2016)
•
robbery – s.343
 x 3 (od: october 11, 2016)
•
mischief under
 $5000 – s.430(4) cc (od: october 11, 2016)
•
break and enter
 – s.348(1)(b) cc (od: october 11, 2016)
•
assault peace officer
 – s.270(1)(a) cc (od: october 12, 2016)
•
ftc
 recognizance – s.145(3) cc (od: january 20, 2017)
•
possess weapon
 dangerous – s. 88 cc (od: january 29, 2017)
adult sentence: credit for 286 days
 of pre- sentence custody (after enhancement) + 1 day deemed served, probation
 3 years (concurrent on all counts)
may 17, 2018
(london,
 adult)
•
theft motor vehicle – s.333.1 cc
•
flight from police – s.249.1(1)
 cc (od for both – october 22, 2017)
suspended sentence with 12 months
 probation
october 18, 2018 (london, this and
 balance are adult entries)
•
carry concealed
 weapon – s.90(1) cc
•
assault – s.266
 cc (pled down from robbery)
•
theft under
 $5000 – s.334(b) cc (pled down from robbery) x 2
•
uttering
 threats – s.264.1(1)(a) (pled down from robbery)
•
theft under $5000 – s.334(b) cc
•
ftc recognizance – s.145(3) cc
(ods: all between nov. 13-15, 2017,
 as stated by sentencing judge, tab 6 criminal convictions brief)
suspended sentence with 18 months
 probation on standalone theft under $5000 and ftc recognizance, on remaining counts
 – credit for 285 days pre-sentence custody (after enhancement) + 1 day deemed
 served + 18 months’ probation
february 27, 2020 (london)
•
assault – s.266
 cc (od: nov. 16, 2019)
•
mischief under
 $5000 – s.430(4) cc (od: nov. 23, 2019)
credit for 135 days pre-sentence
 custody + 1 day deemed served followed by 12 months’ probation
december 7, 2020 (london)
•
impaired
 operation – s.320.14(1)(a) cc (od: june 26,
2020)
$2000
 fine
march 25, 2021 (chatham)
•
impaired
 operation – s.320.14(1)(a) cc (od: november 25, 2019)
$2500 fine
may 4, 2021
(london)
•
assault causing
 bodily harm – s.267(b) cc (od: dec. 21-28. 2020)
•
assault with a
 weapon – s.267(a) cc (od: november 22, 2020)
credit for 90 days pre- sentence
 custody (after enhancement) on assault bodily harm; 30 days presentence
 custody (after enhancement) on assault with a weapon; 90 days (after
 enhancement) on ftc release order, concurrent
predicate offences: plea entered
 september 8, 2022
•
assault causing
 bodily harm – s.267(b) (od: may 15, 2021)
•
attempted robbery –
s.344(1)
(od: may 15, 2021
pending
predicate offences: plea entered
 march 2, 2023
•
manslaughter –
 s.236(b) cc (od: may 15, 2021)
pending
disposition date: november 23, 2015
(youth record
)
assault
causing bodily harm – s.267(b) cc

in support of the
factual underpinnings for this offence, the crown relies on the police
occurrence report, the transcript of the sentencing proceeding and mr. hills
comments to dr. iosif as indicated in her report. transcript of the plea were
unavailable.

the occurrence report
discloses that on march 24, 2015, at 11:30 p.m., the victim was skateboarding
with friends in london. they approached a group of teenage males who were
smoking cannabis. the victim turned in order to avoid them and skateboarded
away. the victim was slightly behind his friends. the group of teenaged males
began chasing after the victim. one of mr. hill’s friends pushed the victim
down and punched him in the face several times. mr. hill then punched the
victim in the face several times. he then stopped and walked away from the
victim. the victim suffered bruising and a concussion.

regarding these offences, mr. hill
told dr. iosif “i don’t really remember...there was an argument with a guy, and
we started fighting. i punched him and he got a concussion.” he subsequently
told dr. bradford that he could not remember the details of any of his prior
offences as he was either “drunk or high”.

given mr. hill’s comments to dr.
iosif, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. hill committed an
unprovoked and unplanned assault on the victim by punching him, and that this
resulted in the victim suffering a concussion.
assault x 2 (pled down from robbery
charges) – s.266 cc, ftc undertaking – s.
145(5.1)
cc

the police occurrence report in
relation to this matter indicates that on may 4, 2015, the two male victims,
age 15 and 16 respectively, were standing on a street corner in london. mr.
hill crossed the street and approached them. unprovoked, hill punched one
victim in the jaw with a closed fist causing him to fall to the ground. he then
punched the other victim in the face repeatedly until he fell to the ground.
once on the ground, mr. hill continued to punch the second victim in the face
and stated: “empty your pockets” and “give me your stuff”. he did not obtain
any property. a third party intervened and broke up the assault. mr. hill was
later arrested at westmount mall while bound by an undertaking with a condition
not to attend there.

the transcript
noted above highlights the seriousness of the offences. during submissions, the
crown stated the following:
your honour
will recall when i read in the facts, the statement from the one independent
witness who came across one of the assaults who was talking about how the
person who turned out to be preston was essentially just pummeling the tinier
male who wasn't doing anything to provide resistance and it seems to me based
what i've read and seen here, that unless preston gets a hold of his anger and
is able to either curb it completely or channel it in some other pro-social
fashion, it likely will get to the point where preston causes serious harm to
people if not you know potentially killing somebody and i'm not someone who's
inclined to being dramatic and exaggerating, but i really hope that what we
hear in the report that preston's had a lot of time to think about things and
be reflective and think to himself about the choices he's made, the decisions
he's made, that he will go down a different path after this point because if he
doesn't, i can only see him being in custody for longer periods of time…

in that same
transcript, justice george(as he then was) said the following:
the court: … it
is actually quite frightening to read some of the facts and listen to some of
the facts being read in and think about well what if someone did not intervene
there? you know what if the police officers did not ultimately charge you with
this? you know what were you capable of? because of the some of this stuff is
just random violence and i am not going to ask you direct questions here, but
as i sit here, i wondered to myself are you just naturally violent? do you have
that inherent desire to do bad things to other people. i do not believe that.
is it because you were under the influence of a substance and you did things
that are out of character. maybe. is it part of this dynamic with you and the
people you used to hang with where it was to be macho or to show them how cool
and tuff is i am going to do these types of things. maybe it is part of that.
in all likelihood it is a combination of a whole bunch of different things…

based on the transcript, i am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. hill was pummeling one of his
victims who was not providing any resistance and that the assault stopped when
a third party intervened.

i am also
satisfied from the transcript that both of the above-noted assaults, as well as
the assault causing bodily harm, were unprovoked. this was confirmed, in part,
in the youth court records filed with the court, wherein mr. hill admitted that
he had assaulted random people as a means of obtaining their marijuana.
ftc
recognizance – s.145(3) cc x 3 and unauthorized possession of a prohibited or
restricted weapon – s. 92(2) cc

one of the breaches is described in a
transcript dated november 23, 2015. mr. hill was on a recognizance and breached
a condition not to consume or possess unlawful drugs or substances. on october
14, 2015, mr. hill was seen by police on dundas street holding a bong to his
mouth with a lighter at the mouthpiece. he quickly handed the bong to a friend
as the officer approached. the officer could smell freshly burnt marijuana on
him. he was arrested and found in possession of an eight-inch mossy oak folding
hunting knife which easily opened with centrifugal force. the bong had freshly
burnt marijuana in it.
disposition date: may 18, 2017
(youth and adult record)

the facts underlying these
convictions are supported by the police occurrence reports and the sentencing
transcript from may 18, 2017.
assault
with a weapon – s.267(a) cc (youth offence)

the occurrence report indicates that
during a hockey game on december 2, 2015, mr. hill struck another player over
the head with his hockey stick. he swung the stick in a two-handed “lumberjack”
style grip, striking the victim four times in the back of the head. police
corroborated this by watching a video of the incident. the strikes were so hard
they broke the victim’s helmet.

the sentencing transcript satisfies
me beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. hill struck the victim in the head with
his stick causing the victims helmet to break.
robbery
– s.343 x 3, mischief under $5000 – s.430(4) cc, break and enter –
s.348(1)(b)
cc (adult offences)

robbery #1: the occurrence report
indicates that on october 11, 2016, at approximately 6:45 p.m., mr. hill ran up
to a woman who was entering her vehicle in her driveway. he grabbed the
driver’s door while banging a stick against the vehicle and demanded she turn
over the vehicle. the victim refused and began honking her horn, before backing
out and fleeing. she was uninjured and mr. hill did not obtain any property.

robbery #2, break and enter, and
mischief: the occurrence report indicates that on october 11, 2016, at
approximately 6:55 p.m., the victim was inside his home when mr. hill entered
uninvited and unannounced. he began striking the victim with a stick while
demanding keys for the victim’s ford pickup truck in the driveway. the victim
managed to grab a knife and chased mr. hill out of the house. mr. hill then
grabbed a brick and threw it into a window causing it to smash. the incident
was witnessed by the victim’s wife, who was also home.

robbery #3: the occurrence report
indicates that on october 11, 2016, at approximately 6:58 p.m., the victim was
driving his car. he was about to turn into his driveway when something was
thrown at his car. he stopped and saw mr. hill emerge from some bushes. mr.
hill approached and opened the driver’s door and attempted to physically pull
the victim out of his car. the driver’s seatbelt prevented his removal and he
managed to drive away, causing mr. hill to let go and flee the area.

mr. hill told dr.
iosif, in relation to these offences: “… that he was intoxicated with crystal
meth and was not sure as to the circumstances of the charges. he commented, “i
was homeless, and i was trying to steal money.”

during the sentencing, justice
skowronski confirmed with mr. hill that he was “not of [his] right mind because
he was under the influence of drugs during these incidents”.

with respect to the offences
themselves, the court indicated the following:
i will not
chronicle all of them, but the significant ones of the assault with a weapon
being a hockey stick, three robberies in succession in a spree-like event when
he was under the influence of methamphetamine, break and enter, again part of
the same spree and damage to property, part of that as well. you assaulted a
peace officer and on two occasions you committed assault. one was on fellow
person being held in custody. a number of punches administered to him. and there
was a push of a security guard during a basketball game while in custody as
well.…
during the
spree that i have already talked about just a matter of minutes there is
attempts to steal automobiles with the people in them. not planned out, just a
spontaneous matters driven by i believe from all the facts that i heard is his
methamphetamine use on the day in question.

the court also noted that an
assessment completed by the family court clinic disclosed that mr. hill “was
victimized early in his life and the impact of that remains today and could be
one of the causative factors about his behaviour.” this would appear to refer
to the sexual abuse discussed above.

in the
circumstances, the sentencing transcript does not give much detail of the facts
underlying the three robberies and the mischief and break and enter offences.
based on the occurrence reports and the comments of the presiding judge, i am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the three robberies involved mr. hill
using force in an attempt to steal motor vehicles, two of which were being
driven by the victims, as described in the occurrence reports. i am also
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that he entered the one victim’s home
uninvited before using force in order to obtain the keys to the victim’s
vehicle.
assault
peace officer – s.270(1)(a) cc (adult offence)

on october 12, 2016, at approximately
3:22 a.m., mr. hill attended a residence and began aggressively knocking on the
door and ringing the bell. the occupants were afraid to answer the door as
earlier in the night an unknown male had entered the home and assaulted one of
the occupants while demanding they give him their car. the occupants
immediately contacted police to report the situation. while police were on the
way, mr. hill threw a rock through their window causing it to shatter. he fled
prior to police attending but a k9 track was established. at 3:54 a.m. mr. hill
was observed fleeing the area. he was followed into the wooded area by sgt.
corcoran of the lps. sgt. corcoran advised mr. hill he was under arrest and
went to take him into custody. mr. hill then struck sgt. corcoran with a closed
fist.

again, given the comments by the
presiding judge noted above, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr.
hill struck the arresting officer with a closed fist.
possess
weapon dangerous – s.88 cc (adult offence)

the occurrence
report for this matter indicates that on january 29, 2017, at 11:05 p.m.,
police were conducting a curfew check on mr. hill as they believed he was the
driver of a vehicle that had fled. upon attending the residence, police saw the
suspect vehicle and mr. hill fled on foot. his father advised police that his
son had a butcher’s knife and had waved it in a threatening manner at him prior
to police arrival. mr. hill also took the car to london and was breaching his
curfew. police tracked him down using a k9 and arrested him.

given the absence of any reference to
this matter in the transcript, i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
mr. hill had possession of a knife for a purpose dangerous to the public peace.
i am not satisfied that he waived it in a threatening manner at his father.
disposition date: may 17, 2018 (adult record)
theft
motor vehicle – s.333.1 cc, flight from police – s.249.1(1) cc

the facts in relation to these matter
are contained in a transcript dated may 17, 2018. i am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt of the facts underlying these offences as described below.

on october 22,
2017, at approximately 10:15 p.m., mr. hill flagged a taxi. he got into the
front passenger’s seat and asked the driver to take him to harvey’s on
wonderland. he was fidgety and put on a black hoodie and ballcap. when they
arrived, he attempted to run without paying, and the driver chased him on foot.
mr. hill then ran back and jumped into the driver’s seat and stole the taxi.
police located the taxi using its gps tracking. they attempted to stop mr. hill
using a spike belt and pursued him with lights and sirens, but eventually
abandoned their pursuit. the taxi was found in a ditch and mr. hill was located
via k9 tracking.

mr. hill told dr. iosif, in relation
to this incident, “… that he stole a taxi because he was trying to get home to
see his parents. he added that he was “always under the influence.”
disposition date: october 18, 2018 (adult record)

the facts underlying these offences
are contained in the transcript of may 17, 2018. i am therefore satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt of the underlying facts discussed below.
theft
under $5000 – s.334(b) cc

on november 13, 2017, mr. hill
snatched a cell phone from the victim’s hands in the lobby of the salvation
army and exited the front door. mr. hill and the victim knew each other as both
resided at the salvation army at the time of the offence.
carry
concealed weapon – s.90(1) cc

on november 13, 2017, mr. hill
entered a convenience store. the events were captured on video. he approached
the cash register and took a small gold coloured bracelet valued at $30.00. he
then walked around the counter and pulled a small knife out with his left hand.
he approached the victim while brandishing the knife. the victim in turn
grabbed a baseball bat, causing mr. hill to flee.

in relation to this event, mr. hill
told dr. iosif that he recalled “trying to rob a store and being chased away
with a bat.”
assault – s.266 cc, theft under $5000 – s.334(b) cc (pled
down from robbery) and
ftc recognizance – s.145(3) cc

on november 15,
2017, mr. hill snatched a cell phone from the victim’s hand as she stood at a
bus stop. the victim pursued mr. hill and placed him in a bear hug in an
attempt to get her phone back. mr. hill punched the victim in the stomach and
ran. the victim and another person (a good samaritan) pursued mr. hill into a
parking lot where, during a confrontation, mr. hill struck that person in the
head, causing him to start bleeding. mr. hill was arrested in possession of the
stolen phone and 30 grams of marijuana (contrary to his release condition).
uttering
threats – s.264.1(1)(a) (pled down from robbery)

on november 16, 2017, mr. hill
followed a victim who had exited the cibc at citi plaza. the victim crossed the
street and mr. hill continued to follow him. the victim stopped near a bus
shelter and pretended to use his phone, hoping that mr. hill would pass by.

mr. hill approached the victim “in an
aggressive manner” and demanded his phone. he then placed his hands in front of
his body and puffed out his chest, exposing the waistband of his pants. the
victim saw what he believed was a gun in mr. hill’s waistband. it had a handle
and a barrel, and it was all black with orange accents. mr. hill demanded the
victim’s phone “or else.”

the victim was fearful and fled to a
circle k convenience store where he asked the cashier to call 9-1-1. the victim
then went to the rear of the store to call 9-1-1 on his cell phone as mr. hill
followed him inside the store, where both remained for a period of time. no
further direct contact was made, and mr. hill eventually left.
disposition date: february 27, 2020

the facts underlying these offences
are contained in a transcript dated february 27, 2020. i am therefore satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt of the underlying facts indicated below.
assault
– s.266 cc, mischief under $5000 – s.430(4) cc

on november 16,
2019, mr. hill and his then girlfriend, brooke kechego, got into an argument
over mr. hill being unfaithful. mr. hill began punching ms. kechego in the face
with a closed fist. this caused bruising on the left side of her face,
underneath her eye, which was still visible when police attended on november
23rd. ms kechego felt like she had an undiagnosed concussion as she felt sick
in the days following the assault.

on november 23,
2019, police were dispatched to ms. kechego’s home (where she lived with her
grandmother), after mr. hill had kicked in the front door. mr. hill had kicked
in the door because ms. kechego refused to drive him to london. once inside, he
chased ms. kechego into the backyard where she hid from him until she felt it
was safe to come out. eventually mr. hill was found and arrested on a warrant.

in relation to ms. kechego, mr. hill
told dr. bradford “i slapped her a few times because of drugs and her lying.”
disposition date: december 7, 2020
impaired
operation – s.320.14(1)(a) cc

i am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt of the underlying facts for this offence as contained
in a transcript dated december 7, 2020.

on june 26, 2020,
police were dispatched to an address on chippewa road. the police saw mr. hill
back an atv out of a driveway and followed him as he drove down various roads,
during which he failed to stop at multiple stop signs and a police checkpoint.
eventually, he was blocked by police vehicles and came to a stop. he had an
odour of alcohol on his breath and was unsteady on his feet. his breath
readings were 196 and 181 mg/100ml of blood respectively.
disposition date: march 25, 2021
impaired
operation – s.320.14(1)(a) cc

i am satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt of the underlying facts for this offence as contained in a transcript
dated march 25, 2021.

on november 25,
2019, police were dispatched to a collision at an intersection in chatham. mr.
hill had crashed a vehicle into the rear end of a vehicle in front of him,
leaving a 110-metre skid mark prior to the impact. he smelled like alcohol, had
slurred speech, and was unsteady on his feet. his breath readings were 233 and
226mg/100ml of blood respectively.
disposition date: may 4, 2021

the facts underlying these
convictions are contained in a transcript of the plea and sentencing on may 4,
2021 as well as in the probation records. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt of the facts disclosed therein.
assault
with a weapon – s.267(a) cc

on november 22, 2020, mr. hill was at
andrew smith’ s residence. he was “mouthing off” and mr. smith asked him to
leave. a physical altercation occurred, and mr. hill struck mr. smith with a
glass liquor bottle. mr. smith managed to gain control of mr. hill, and he was
held down until he calmed down enough to be let go.

mr. hill
admitted at the guilty plea that he and sarah bressette attended at mr. smith’s
residence in response to a prior incident involving mr. smith. he acknowledged trying
to set fire to mr. smith’s residence. regarding the prior incident, mr. hill
admitted that someone had been “set up” and stabbed following which he (mr.
hill) was severely beaten and suffered a traumatic brain injury.

a probation note dated july 17, 2020
appears to shed some light on this “prior incident.” the note states that
“…preston has been involved in an altercation last evening involving michael
wyatt hill. wyatt was stabbed (3/4-inch wound) while preston was riding in the
back seat and wyatt was the driver. later that evening 0200hrs, preston was
found at the home of andrew smith suffering from significant head injuries. he
was taken to st. thomas hospital where he remains in serious but stable
condition.”

mr. hill told the
gladue report
writer that when he was 17, he instigated a fight and
injured someone at a party. he later passed out due to intoxication and, while
unconscious, was beat in the head with a baseball bat.

in another probation note, also dated
july 17, 2020, stan hill told preston’s probation officer that he and his wife
bonnie were “sleeping with one eye open in fear of retaliatory action by others
against their son. preston has been having “violent outbursts” and his parents
wanted him to get help. he was using substances and associating with the wrong
people.”

in a probation note dated july 20,
2020, stan hill told the probation officer about significant concerns he and
his wife bonnie had “around [preston’s] potential for violence as well as retaliation
against those who had assaulted him.”

as noted in dr.
iosif’s report, a witness told police that mr. hill tried to set mr. smith’s
house on fire. at the time of his arrest, mr. hill’s clothes were soaked and
emitted a strong odour of gasoline.

this incident was referred to by
preston’s father, stan hill, in his interview with dr. iosif:
as to the head injury in 2020, mr. hill indicated that it was
related to preston’s lifestyle “to scare and intimate [sic] people...bully the
others”. he indicated that he was likely set up and could have been killed.
after his prolonged stay in hospital in st. thomas, his memory returned but he
seemed to be in “revenge mode”.
ftc
release order – s.145(5)(a) cc

on january 5, 2021, mr. hill was
released on a release order in relation to two counts of assault. one of the
conditions was not to attend within 200 metres of certain person and locations
including tyrell smith and mr. hill’s then girlfriend, jenesse cornelius.
police were called to tyrell smith’s residence upon a report that mr. hill had
assaulted smith’s sister, jenesse cornelius. ms cornelius provided a statement
that mr. hill had been inside the residence that day.
assault
causing bodily harm – s.267(b) cc, ftc release order – s.145(5)(a) cc

on february 2, 2021,
jayla cornelius contacted police to report that mr. hill was at their residence
again [the same address as the above breach] and he was “trying to assault
jenesse cornelius in the basement.” this attendance was again in violation of h
i s release order. police arrived and ms cornelius was bleeding from her nose
and had swelling to her face. mr. hill had fled on foot.

ms cornelius told
police "[preston] just beat me up. he's a good guy but he just beats me
up. he gets so jealous and beats me up and punches me and punches me” while
pointing towards the couch implying that the event took place there. there were
approximately 15 to 20 droplets of blood on the floor next to the couch that
ms. cornelius pointed at. due to the “original collar marks and comments made
by the victim and visible injuries (blood on the ground)” they formed grounds
that he was responsible for causing bodily harm. the victim’s child confirmed
that mr. hill had been in the residence and “beat up mom.”

in relation to the assault causing
bodily harm, mr. hill told dr. iosif “that he hit his intimate partner at the
time, giving her a black eye. he described that he was “drunk.” he could not
recall other details. he indicated that he generally remembers what he may have
done while intoxicated “but not for a long time”.
mr. hill’s criminal history – institutional
offences (adult)

mr. hill also
admitted to dr. bradford that he committed additional assaults as an adult for
which he did not get caught. i am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the
institutional records filed in these proceedings showed that mr. hill admitted
to committing the following offences as an adult while in custody:
(a)
in-custody
assault on july 12, 2021
mr. hill assaulted an inmate in a “two-on-one assault.” he admitted
to this misconduct and was found guilty.
(b)
in-custody
assault on august 21, 2021
an inmate
called for assistance and was observed to have a visible red handprint mark on
his face and neck. guards reviewed video and observed mr. hill assaulting the inmate
in the day room. mr. hill had no observable injuries. he admitted to this
misconduct and was found guilty.
(c)
in-custody
assault on september 11, 2021
mr. hill was
involved in a “two-on-one assault” on an inmate. mr. hill and another inmate
were observed on camera punching the third inmate who was on the ground. mr.
hill admitted to the assault stating he wants to “move to the left side of unit
2.” he was found guilty.
(d)
in-custody
assault on february 22, 2022
mr. hill
participated in a “two-on-one assault” on an inmate who reported the incident
to guards. it was captured on video. no injuries were reported. mr. hill
admitted to “fighting” due to “street beef.” he was found guilty.
(e)
in-custody
assault on august 27, 2022
mr. hill was involved in an altercation with his cellmate.
the cellmate had dried blood on his forehead and swelling behind his right ear.
mr. hill had no observable injuries and reported none. mr. hill admitted to
assaulting his cell mate because “he was snoring.” he was found guilty.
(f)
in-custody
assault on october 9, 2022
mr. hill admitted to assaulting his cellmate because he
wanted to move units. he was found guilty.
(g)
in-custody
assault at the london courthouse on march 12, 2025
on march 12,
2025, at approximately 1:12 p.m., mr. hill was captured attacking an inmate in
one of the holding cells in the courthouse. this was minutes after these
proceedings broke for lunch and in the midst of evidence from dr. bradford on
behalf of mr. hill. counsel for mr. hill admitted the video clips, typed
statement, and duty book notes of an officer (capturing the victim’s statement)
at this hearing.
the video
shows mr. hill sipping his water before setting his cup down and approaching
the cell door, appearing to say something to someone in the bullpen across from
his cell. he then approached the victim, who was seated, and began punching him
with both hands about the face and head, approximately 10 to 15 times. the
victim did not fight back and called for help. within 15 seconds, officers
swiftly attended, and mr. hill was escorted out of the cell area and was
cooperative.
the
investigating officer’s duty book notes captured the victim’s statement. the
victim, james munroe, told the officer that a male in the other bullpen told
mr. hill to “pretty much… punch me out”, telling him something along the lines
of “bang me out”. preston kept asking the other male “your word?”, before
taking a drink of water and then “smashing” the victim.
the officer
noted the following injuries to the victim: hematoma on forehead, bruising
around eyes, bloody nose, and a swollen lip.
mr. hill’s
criminal history – institutional offences (youth)

in addition to the institutional
offences as an adult, the records related to mr. hill’s behaviour in an
institutional setting as a youth are similarly concerning. they include a
number of occurrence reports which are reviewed in the forensic report of dr
iosif and referenced in the crown’s submissions at paragraphs 82-97.

having reviewed the records, i am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that mr. hill was assaultive towards both
staff and other youth while in detention. this included an unprovoked assault
on another youth by repeatedly striking him with a closed fist and which
continued despite being directed to stop.
statutory
framework

part xxiv of the
criminal
code
establishes a two-step process for dangerous offender proceedings. the
first stage, known as the designation stage, requires the court to determine
whether the criteria set out in section 753(1) have been satisfied. if so, the
offender must be designated as a dangerous offender. once that finding is made,
the court moves to the penalty stage, where it decides whether to impose an
indeterminate sentence, a fixed term of at least two years combined with up to
ten years of long-term supervision, or the original determinate sentence.

section 753(4.1) provides that an
indeterminate sentence may only be imposed if the court concludes that no
lesser sentence would adequately protect the public.

while this provision might appear to
create a presumption in favour of indeterminate detention,
the supreme court in
r. v. boutilier,
2017 scc 64 (canlii),
 s.c.j. no. 64, clarified that it merely guides judicial
discretion in line with sentencing principles, emphasizing public protection.
the court endorsed the following structured approach outlined in r. v. crowe
(ontario court of justice, march 20, 2017);
(a)
if a conventional
sentence, possibly including probation, would sufficiently protect the public
from murder or serious personal injury offences, that sentence must be imposed;
(b)
if not, the court
must consider whether a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment followed
by a long-term supervision order of up to ten years would provide adequate
protection. if so, that sentence is required; and if neither option suffices,
the court must impose an indeterminate sentence.

under section 753(5) of the
code,
if the offender is not found to be dangerous, the court may treat the
application as one for a long-term offender designation under section 753.1.

based on the
circumstances of mr. hill's case, the crown has chosen to proceed under
section
753(1)
(a)(i) and (ii) which requires the court to consider whether the evidence
demonstrates a pattern of repetitive or aggressive behaviour posing a threat to
public safety.

those sections read as follows:
753
(1) on application made under this part
after an assessment report is filed under subsection 752.1(2), the court shall
find the offender to be a dangerous offender if it is satisfied:
(a)
that the offence
for which the offender has been convicted is a serious personal injury offence
described in paragraph (a) of the definition of that expression in section 752
and the offender constitutes a threat to the life, safety or physical or mental
well-being of other persons on the basis of evidence establishing:
(i)
a pattern of
repetitive behaviour by the offender, of which the offence for which he or she
has been convicted forms a part, showing a failure to restrain his or her
behaviour and a likelihood of causing death or injury to other persons, or
inflicting severe psychological damage on other persons, through failure in the
future to restrain his or her behaviour,
(ii)
a pattern of
persistent aggressive behaviour by the offender, of which the offence for which
he or she has been convicted forms a part, showing a substantial degree of
indifference on the part of the offender respecting the reasonably foreseeable
consequences to other persons of his or her behaviour,

the crown bears the burden of proving
dangerousness beyond a reasonable doubt. the overriding purpose of the
dangerous offender regime remains protection of the public.

as indicated
above, there is no issue that the predicate offences are “serious personal
injury” offences.

in order to be
found to be a dangerous offender, the crown must prove that mr. hill
constitutes a threat to the life, safety or physical or mental well-being of
other persons. to meet the second threshold, mr. hill’s history must reveal a
pattern of violent or endangering behaviour, lack of restraint or indifference,
and a high degree of intractability.

as explained
in
r. v. lyons,
1987 canlii 25 (scc),
 2 s.c.r. 309, section 753(1) requires four elements:
(i)
the offender must
be convicted of, and is to be sentenced for, a "serious personal injury
offence". (the objective element of dangerousness);
(ii)
the predicate
offence must be part of a broader pattern of violence;
(iii)
there is a high
likelihood of harmful recidivism; and
(iv)
the violent
conduct is intractable. (
see also
r v. boutilier, supra. at para. 26, 33
and
r v hanson,
2024 onca 369
at para.
84
)

the last three
criteria constitute the subjective part of the assessment of the threat posed
by the offender, and the third and fourth are future-oriented.

in
boutilier
at para.
27,
intractability is defined as “behaviour that the offender is unable to
surmount.” it applies at both the designation and penalty stages. as indicated
at paragraph 31, “
the designation stage is
concerned with assessing the future threat posed by an offender. the penalty
stage is concerned with imposing the appropriate sentence to manage the
established threat. though evidence may establish that an offender is unable to
surmount his or her violent conduct, the sentencing judge must, at the penalty
stage, turn his or her mind to whether the risk arising from the offender's
behaviour can be adequately managed outside of an indeterminate sentence.”

offenders cannot be designated as
dangerous if their treatment prospects "are so compelling that the
sentencing judge cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that they present a
high likelihood of harmful recidivism or that their violent pattern is
intractable" (
see
boutilier, at
para.
45
).this was confirmed more recently by the ontario court of appeal in
r
v j.c.,
 o.j. no. 1879
at paragraphs 14-15. the overall goal at the
designation stage is to assess future risk and protect society from those who
demonstrate a likelihood to recommit offences.

however, even where an assessment of
the future threat posed by an offender justifies a finding of dangerousness, at
the penalty stage the treatment prospects are still “relevant in choosing the
sentence required to adequately protect the public.” (
boutilier
at para.
45
)

as recently indicated by our court of
appeal in
r v. straub, (2022) onca 47 at paragraph 62, “treatability is
a relevant factor at the penalty stage of dangerous offender proceedings. but
evidence of treatability must extend beyond speculative hope about successful
treatment. the evidence must give some indication that the offender can be
treated within an ascertainable time.” (
see also
boutilier
at para
45
)
gladue
factors

the sentencing principles set out in
section 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
apply to all sentencing
proceedings, including dangerous and long-term offender proceedings. this includes
the requirement in
section 718.2
(e) that sentencing judges consider
gladue
factors
when determining a fit and proper sentence for an indigenous offender.

in
r. v.
ipeelee,
2012 scc 13, the supreme court reaffirmed the duty of trial judges
to consider
gladue
factors when sentencing any indigenous offender.
justice lebel, writing for the majority, held that
section 718.2
(e) calls upon
judges to use a different method of analysis in determining a fit sentence for
indigenous offenders. when sentencing an indigenous offender, a judge must
consider:
(a)
the unique
systemic or background factors which may have played a part in bringing the
particular indigenous offender before the courts; and
(b)
the types of
sentencing procedures and sanctions which may be appropriate in the
circumstances for the offender because of his or her particular indigenous
heritage or connection.

given that intractability applies to
both the designation and penalty phases on a dangerous offender application,
gladue
factors are also relevant to both stages (
see
r. v. wesley,
2018
onca 636
at para.
23
).

in
r v. awasis,
2020 bcca 23,
the court stated the following at para. 127:
gladue
factors are clearly important considerations for a sentencing judge
when determining "the least intrusive sentence required" to achieve
the primary purpose of public protection, per
boutilier
at para.
60.
while it may seem counterintuitive to suggest that
gladue
factors
could overcome findings of dangerousness, a high risk of recidivism and
intractability -- they could, for example, provide a basis for assessing the
viability of traditional aboriginal-focused treatment options aimed at
addressing the issues that contribute to or aggravate an offender's risk. if
such resources are available and considered appropriate, they could provide a
basis for finding that a lesser sentence will adequately protect the public. in
this regard, see the comments of caldwell j.a. in
standingwater
at para.
51.

in
r v. gracie,
2019 onca 658
at para.
47, the court stated that the issue is whether “the
indigenous programming or treatment options he might access would have any
prospect of addressing the risk he poses to the community such that a sentence
other than an indeterminate sentence would be appropriate.”
psychiatric evidence
dr.
alina iosif

dr. iosif was
qualified to give expert evidence field of forensic psychiatry, with a
particular emphasis on clinical and actuarial risk assessment in the context of
proceedings under
part xxiv of the criminal code.

she was assisted by dr. mamak who
administered a number of psychological tests which showed the following:
(i)
that his overall
intellectual functioning fell in the borderline range. although mr. hill was
diagnosed with adhd as a teenager, dr. iosif indicated that this is not
necessarily correlated with lower-than- average intellectual functioning. her
report further indicates the test results were lower than expected “for someone
who reports not experiencing any academic difficulties and not being diagnosed
with a learning disorder as a child.”;
(ii)
that on a battery
of tests designed to assess neurocognitive functioning, mr. hill received a
score in the.01 percentile. specifically, his performance on tasks involving
memory, language, and attention fell in the extremely low range;
(iii)
that mr. hill was
not feigning or malingering in relation to the cognitive tests;
(iv)
that on the
paulhus deception scale (pds), mr. hill scored in the 99
th
percentile. according to dr. iosif, the result suggests
that “mr. hill is inclined to minimize or deny personal shortcomings that most
would admit” and that he has “poor insight”;
(v)
that mr. hill
reported a “marked need for stimulation and excitement”, traits associated with
antisocial personality disorder which are likely to result in risk-taking and
reckless behaviour;
(vi)
that on the
personality
assessment inventory (pai),
mr. hill described his temper as “well
controlled and within the normal range”. his answers suggested that he was
“generally satisfied with himself and sees little need to change” but that
there were “a number of strengths that
there are positive indications for a
relatively smooth treatment process, if he were willing to make a commitment to
treatment.” [emphasis added]; and
(vii)
he has moderate
levels of “anger pathology” with elevations in areas indicative of “significant
psychological arousal” when angered.

with respect to
his ability to respond to treatment, dr. iosif made the following comment in
her report:
in addition,
mr. hill’s cognitive profile will certainly impact treatment response. to his
credit, mr. hill does present as someone who is likely amenable to treatment if
recommended, but given his cognitive functioning, he may struggle to comprehend
and integrate what is taught in programs to enhance his learning potential, he
would benefit from being provided with extra support while attending programs.
he would likely benefit from being assigned a tutor who can assist him with
homework. in addition, he would benefit from programs that are geared towards
individuals who demonstrate intellectual impairment.

dr. iosif
diagnosed mr. hill with the following mental illnesses, both of which impact on
his risk and the issue of treatability:
(i)
antisocial
personality traits; and
(ii)
polysubstance use
disorder – in partial remission in a controlled setting.

at page 53 of her report, dr. iosif
described how these diagnoses interact:
these diagnoses
are intertwined, with substance abuse sometimes enabling antisocial behavior.
both diagnoses have been extant for mr. hill since adolescence and are well
entrenched. both diagnoses require intensive, long-term (possibly indefinite)
psychological treatment. there is no medication available to treat such problems.

of the seven possible criteria for
antisocial personality disorder, mr. hill “met” five, and “met somewhat” of a
sixth criteria. only three or more need to be met to make this diagnosis.
although these are the same criteria required to diagnose someone with this
disorder under the dsm-v, one must also have a diagnosis of “conduct disorder”
before the age of 15. in mr. hill’s case, dr. iosif indicated that this
diagnosis could not be made as no records were available relating to mr. hill’s
behaviour prior to attaining the age of 15.

with respect to his use of
substances, dr iosif pointed out that “mr. hill has used a laundry list of
illicit substances to his great detriment since early adolescence.” she noted
that he has continued to use substances despite his involvement with the law,
his parents’ complaints, and ultimately his eviction from the family home.

dr. iosif noted that mr. hill claimed
to be severely intoxicated at the time of the index offences and that he
admitted using substances while in custody. his family members described to dr.
iosif the drastic change in his personality when intoxicated, going from calm
and loving, to belligerent and agitated. mr. hill acknowledged to dr. iosif
that his criminal history is “intimately enmeshed” with his substance use
history; in his own words, “all charges i’ve ever had i was intoxicated”.

dr. iosif
commented that mr. hill’s antisocial conduct is exacerbated, but not entirely
predicated on intoxication. she said that illicit substances likely augment his
impulsivity, disinhibit his behaviour, and impair his judgment. she observed
that intoxication facilitates violence. further, his cognitive difficulties and
personality variables contribute to his criminal history, and these would all
be exacerbated by his use of substances.

with respect to the head injury
sustained by mr. hill in july of 2020, dr. iosif was of the opinion that while
this may have worsened his behaviour, it did not entirely explain it. she noted
that “mr. hill’s antisocial personality traits started well before the advent
of the traumatic brain injury.”

dr iosif was also asked to comment on
the diagnosis of ptsd made by dr. bradford stemming from mr. hill’s prior
sexual abuse. at page 24 of her report, she noted that his sister denied having
witnessed any posttraumatic stress symptoms. in addition, dr. iosif testified
that there was no indication of ptsd in the files she reviewed. she was “very
circumspect with respect to the role or the degree to which mr. hill has
suffered from ptsd.” while she acknowledged that a history of sexual abuse can
contribute to a history of violence, she disagreed it played a significant role
in the escalation of mr. hill’s criminal behaviour stating that “this is not
really in keeping with the history of ptsd and it would be, if anything, an
outlier not, not typical.”

in cross-examination,
dr. iosif reiterated her opinion that from a psychiatric perspective, mr.
hill’s sexual abuse did not significantly contribute to his offending
behaviour. she referred to the fact that mr. hill claimed the abuse occurred
between the ages of 7 and 12 and at another time between the ages of 4 and 15.
she stated the following:
so during the
ages of - between the ages of 7 and 12 or even if we take out the outer bracket
of that timeline, between the ages of, i don’t know, 4 and 15, something like that,
we have absolutely no behaviours that are reported, no issues with anger, no
conflicts, nothing like that. and then we have a period of four years after
which mr. hill either by some accounts remembers, that’s what he told me and
dr. mamack or, you know, he, he said hidden and then disclosed this, and then
suddenly we have this great difficulty with managing anger and i, i don’t
understand that, like it doesn’t make sense from a psychiatric perspective that
we go from nothing while the person is being abused for years, purportedly, to,
you know, 100% difficulties managing anger…
…
again, from my
perspective and in my opinion, the sexual abuse cannot account for this, it
cannot account for somebody going from absolutely fine to years later after the
sexual abuse has ended being - violating the rights of others almost
unremittently, being very aggressive, very impulsive, very reckless, i don’t
know of any other cases where something like this would happen. it doesn’t go
along with the way these issues normally manifest, contribute and develop over
time.

the actuarial risk assessment tools
administered by dr. iosif placed mr. hill in the moderate range for future risk
of violent recidivism.

on the psychopathy checklist-revised
(pcl-r), mr. hill received a moderate score of 17 placing him in the 28
th
percentile. the score, which is predictive of future
violent recidivism, shows that of 100 male offenders, 28 would have received a
lower score.

on the violence risk appraisal guide
(vrag), mr. hill received a moderate score of 6 placing him in the fifth of
nine ascending risk categories on this instrument. among the development
sample, 48% of offenders in the same risk category committed a new violent
offense within 10 years of opportunity. accounting for the estimated measure of
error associated with the vrag, mr. hill’s probable risk would be expected to
fall within one category above or below this result, which would place mr.
hill’s risk of violently re- offending between 31% and 58% within 10 years of
opportunity.

despite these scores showing mr. hill
to be a moderate risk for violently re- offending, dr. iosif assessed mr. hill
to be at a high risk for future violent recidivism and concluded that he
“evidences a substantial likelihood of re-offense.” she testified that while
she believed mr. hill to be a high risk, she used the term “moderate high risk”
in her report to reflect “a combination of my opinion and what the actuarial
test would suggest.”

dr. iosif explained that the
actuarial risk scores were “not in keeping with his presentation and history,
which is marked by severe and frequently repeated violence, culminating with
the index offences.” she indicated that the actuarial tools provide a fixed
estimate of risk at a particular point in time and do not account for dynamic
factors.

she went on to write the following:
the discrepancy
between scores and his criminal record rests with mr. hill’s stable and
pro-social family history but may also suggest a certain bias in the collateral
information gathered from family members; as aforenoted, records regarding mr.
hill’s early history (before the age of 15) were not available. in this
particular case, because of mr. hill’s history and presentation, there is
reason to override the moderate risk suggested by actuarial instruments to
high.
i note that mr. hill has always been assessed as high risk in the correctional
system and identified as needing intensive supervision and resources.

when asked to
explain her decision to override the moderate actuarial risk scores, she gave
the following evidence:
in my opinion,
mr. hill is someone who was at high risk of violent recidivism. he has had a
very frequent record of violent offences, it culminates with the index offence.
i have no reason to believe that mr. hill is at the present time any less prone
to violent recidivism than he was for the last seven, eight years before his
incarceration.

later in her
report she stated the following:
from a
psychiatric perspective, the possibility of “eventual risk control” hinges on
the treatability of the problems and issues which are seen as determinants of
mr. hill’s criminogenic behaviour. factors usually considered in order to
arrive at an opinion regarding treatability, include:
(i)
diagnoses,
(ii)
motivation to
change,
(iii)
previous response
to treatment,
(iv)
previous response
to supervision, and
(v)
future prospects
regarding employment and supports in the community.

despite the positive comment noted
above (that mr. hill’s cognitive profile was reflective of someone amenable to
treatment if recommended), dr. iosif questioned mr. hill’s motivation to
change, indicating that it is “likely not a strong driving factor in his
recovery” and that he is more likely to respond to “legal conditions” than
“internal motivation”. she noted that his previous response to treatment has
been poor, that he has breached numerous conditions while on bail and probation
and that his efforts to comply with recommendations have been minimal.

dr. iosif disagreed with the
additional diagnoses made by dr. bradford and was more guarded in her opinion.
she did not believe that these additional diagnoses were determinants of mr.
hill’s criminogenic behaviour in any event and said there was “very little
support” for dr. bradford’s conclusions. she testified that mr. hill’s cognitive
difficulties have “likely impacted his ability to restrain himself and control
his impulses” and that, in her opinion, a neurocognitive disorder would
increase the risk posed by mr. hill and reduce his amenability to treatment.
with respect to the opinion that treatment for ptsd at this point in time could
reduce mr. hill’s violent behaviour, she said this was “a very unlikely
proposition.”

with respect to
any release back into the community, dr. iosif was of the opinion that this
should take place “only gradually and slowly, with extended periods of time in
a residential correctional facility, and limited privileges earned through
demonstrated compliance and appropriate behaviour.” she indicated that mr.
hill’s movements within the community should be “monitored by unannounced
visits by probation and parole officers” and recommended “rapid intervention”
following any breach of release conditions.
dr.
john bradford

dr. bradford was also qualified to
give expert evidence field of forensic psychiatry, with a particular emphasis
on clinical and actuarial risk assessment in the context of proceedings under
part xxiv of the
criminal code.

he also administered the pcl-r and
the vrag. on the pcl-r, mr. hill received a score of 19 (2 points higher than
reported by dr. iosif). on the vrag, he reported an identical score to that of
dr. iosif.

as with dr. iosif, dr. bradford
diagnosed mr. hill as having substance-related and addictive disorders (in
remission in a controlled environment) and antisocial personality disorder
traits. he also diagnosed mr. hill with
attention deficit and hyperactivity
disorder (adhd)
which dr. iosif accepted in her testimony based on the
records she reviewed.

he also agreed that a diagnosis of
antisocial
personality disorder
requires evidence of a conduct disorder before the age
of 15. his report indicates that, “history supports that mr. hill has not shown
evidence of a conduct disorder before age 15.”

dr. bradford’s opinion differs from
that of dr. iosif in that he diagnosed mr. hill with the following additional
disorders:
(i)
post-traumatic
stress disorder; and
(ii)
neurocognitive
disorder due to traumatic brain injury (with behavioural disturbance).

with respect to his diagnosis of
ptsd, his report indicates that mr. hill “most likely” meets the criteria for
this diagnosis. he indicated that mr. hill received a score of 62 on the ptsd
checklist. he indicated that score of 31 – 33 is indicative of ptsd and that a
score of 62 places mr. hill in the range of “active ptsd”. he attributed this
to mr. hill’s prior reported history of sexual abuse and the fact that he has
never received treatment for ptsd.

with respect to
his diagnosis of a neurocognitive disorder due to a traumatic brain injury, dr.
bradford relies on the tests conducted by dr. iosif discussed above in relation
to cognitive functioning and memory, and the diagnostic criteria from the dsm-5
in relation to
major neurocognitive disorder. his report indicates that
mr. hill has symptoms of neurocognitive disorder that would support a diagnosis
“at a minimum of a mild level but possibly a major level”. he attributed mr.
hill’s low cognitive functioning to the brain injury described above. he based
this on the evidence regarding mr. hill’s educational history which suggested
he had a higher level of functioning prior to the acquired brain injury.

dr. bradford also indicated that mr.
hill’s anti-social personality traits “fits very well with the psychiatric
sequelae of traumatic brain injury.” (p. 30 of dr. bradford’s report)

he went on to indicate that in his
opinion, mr. hill’s ptsd and acquired brain injury “played a significant role
in his escalation of criminal behaviour, which also escalated following the
traumatic brain injury. i believe these are also mitigating factors that need
to be considered.” (see p. 30 of dr. bradford’s report).

dr. bradford’s
opinion with respect to intractability was largely based on having diagnosed
mr. hill with ptsd and a neurocognitive disorder – both of which mr. hill has
yet to receive treatment for. in his opinion, mr. hill has a number of
significant ongoing psychiatric problems in need of treatment but presents a
moderate risk for future violent recidivism and can be re-integrated into the
community with appropriate supervision and treatment. he indicated that this
could be done through a long-term supervision order which “should include
conditions of residence, random drug testing, ongoing methadone maintenance
treatment for methamphetamine addiction if supported medically, and then the
specific psychiatric treatment for ptsd and the long-term sequelae of traumatic
brain injury.” (see p. 30 of dr bradford’s report)
dr. eldon loh

dr. loh, a clinical
neurophysiologist, was the doctor who, as part of a multidisciplinary team,
treated mr. hill upon his admission to the parkwood institute following his
traumatic head injury. he was qualified to give opinion evidence in the
diagnosis and treatment of an acquired brain injury with particular emphasis on
the extent to which a brain injury could impact one’s ability to benefit from
treatment i.e., the extent that they are able to learn and absorb material
presented to them. he was not qualified to give an opinion on risk or mr.
hill’s ability to overcome any psychiatric condition.

according to the
medical records, mr. hill was transferred to the parkwood institute from the
st. thomas elgin general hospital on august 17, 2020. he was discharged on
september 24, 2020.

as indicated in the discharge report,
he was diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury. dr. loh explained that although
the
glasgow coma scale
scored mr. hill’s brain injury as moderate, this
was upgraded based on the fact that he suffered five days of post- traumatic
amnesia.

dr. loh indicated
that although the brain injury left mr. hill with some impairments, upon
discharge his ability to problem solve was assessed to be in an average range.
he said that mr. hill had been engaged and motivated in his therapies while at
the parkwood institute and that upon discharge, he was thought to be capable of
managing independently in the community- that there were no concerns with
regards to his physical or cognitive functioning in terms of managing day to
day. he was of the opinion that mr. hill’s impairments would not be a barrier
to his ability to learn or benefit from any future treatment.

in cross-examination, dr. loh
confirmed that “those who suffer from traumatic brain injuries can be noted by
family members to exhibit difficulties with impulsivity, easy frustration, and
poor judgment compared to baseline.” he agreed that he was not aware of mr.
hill’s baseline with respect to these behaviours.

dr. loh confirmed
that upon discharge, mr. hill received written instructions which included a
recommendation that he abstain from consuming alcohol for two years “due to the
risk of sustaining another brain injury and the increased risk of having a seizure.”
it was also recommended that he access addiction counselling through one of the
various community agencies, including the
southwest ontario aboriginal
health access centre (soahac). contact information was also provided for
the
brain injury association of london
which provides support for those
with a brain injury and their families. (see ex. 17: integrated discharge
summary p. 23)

dr. loh confirmed he had a follow-up
appointment scheduled with mr. hill for december 2, 2020 which mr. hill did not
attend. it would appear from the evidence that dr. loh’s last contact with mr.
hill was at or prior to his discharge date of september 24, 2020.
other
witnesses
bonnie
hill (mother of preston hill)

ms. hill gave
evidence that her son’s behavioural problems started when he was approximately
17 years old. she explained that leading up to this time, he was disappointed
at not being drafted into the ontario hockey league (ohl), that he had
witnessed his grandfather’s death and had only recently disclosed being sexually
abused as a child by a family member. she said this led to fighting, school
suspensions and drug use.

she has maintained regular contact
with her son since his incarceration and believes he has made a significant
turn-around particularly in the last two years. she said he more mature now,
wants to get help with his addictions and is remorseful for his actions. she
indicated that she and her husband were willing to do whatever was required to
assist their son in his recovery.

in cross-examination, she confirmed
that her son did not follow through on the discharge recommendations when he
was released from parkwood hospital,
that he resumed drinking and doing
drugs and that he was removed from the family home as they were afraid of him.
she agreed with the suggestion that whenever they took him back into their
home, he would revert to his former behaviour.

ms. hill
testified before the incident referred to above where her son attacked an
inmate during the course of these proceedings. she was unaware that he had been
involved in any other assaultive behaviour while in custody awaiting this
hearing.
other
witnesses

shelly griffith
is employed with
correctional services of canada
as a supervisor of
parole officers. she gave evidence as to the availability of indigenous
programming within the federal institutions as well as parole eligibility for
dangerous and long-term offender’s and the parole supervision process.

karen thompson is a regional manager
employed by the
parole board of canada. she gave evidence as to the
types of release available to dangerous and long-term offender’s as well as the
parole process generally. she confirmed that although indigenous persons
comprise approximately 5% of the general population in canada, they account for
32% of federal inmates.

catherine beddoes
works for
correctional services of canada
as an indigenous correctional
program officer. she has experience in providing institutional programming to
indigenous offenders. she described the various programs available, including
adapted programming for individuals with mental health difficulties, learning
disabilities, and cognitive impairments. she indicated that the programs are
administered in small group settings or one-on-one.
analysis
designation
stage

as indicated
above, the defence concedes that the predicate offences are serious personal
injury offences. i am also satisfied that this is the case.

the next issue to decide is whether
the predicate offences form part of either of the following patterns of
behaviour:
(a)
a pattern of
repetitive behaviour by mr. hill, showing a failure to restrain his behaviour
and a likelihood of causing death or injury to other persons, or inflicting
severe psychological damage on other persons, through a failure in the future
to restrain his behaviour (section 753(a)(i) of the
code
); or
(b)
a pattern of
persistent aggressive behaviour by mr. hill, showing a substantial degree of
indifference on his part respecting the reasonably foreseeable consequences to
other persons of his behaviour (section 753(a)(ii) of the
code
)

for the reasons that follow, i find
that the crown has proven both patterns of behaviour beyond a reasonable doubt.

i find that the record evidences a
pattern of repetitive behaviour involving unprovoked, impulsive and
unsophisticated acts of violence against others.

i find that the pattern is
established by the following offences:
(i)
the assault on
his first victim on march 24, 2015 which resulted in the victim receiving a
concussion;
(ii)
the assault on
two victims on may 4, 2015;
(iii)
the robbery of
three separate victims on october 11, 2016;
(iv)
the assault and
theft on november 15, 2017, during which mr. hill used force to steal the
victim’s cell phone and assaulted a third party who had intervened to assist
the victim;
(v)
the uttering
threat on november 16, 2017 in which mr. hill attempted to obtain the victim’s
phone by threat of bodily harm; and
(vi)
the numerous
in-custody assaults upon other inmates both as a youth and adult, including the
assault committed by mr. hill in the courthouse cells during the course of this
proceeding.

the behaviour
exhibited by mr. hill throughout these offences shows that he gives little
thought to his actions. this underscores the impulsive nature of his behaviour.

i note that on several of these
matters, mr. hill was initially charged with robbery. although he plead to a
lesser offence, the facts largely speak to a more serious matter than would
otherwise be gleaned from a simple review of the record of convictions.

i find that the predicate offences
form a part of this pattern. the facts admitted in support of the offence of
manslaughter involve an unprovoked, impulsive, and unsophisticated attack on
someone who was trying to assist mr. hill. following the attack, he stole the
victim’s cell phone, as he had done in previous offences. the subsequent
assault causing bodily harm involved an unprovoked stabbing on a total
stranger. it was impulsive and unsophisticated. the subsequent attempt to rob a
victim of his car involved an unprovoked, unplanned and spontaneous attack on
an unsuspecting stranger and is similar to past robberies and thefts.

i also find that the record
establishes a pattern of persistent aggressive behaviour commencing in 2015 and
ending in 2025 with the in-custody assault on another inmate.

in coming to this conclusion, i rely
upon the following:
(i)
with the
exception of the first offence of assault as a youth in 2015, mr. hill was on
probation, and in many cases subject to terms of release, when he committed the
remaining offences of violence on his criminal record. this includes the
predicate offences which occurred only 11 days after being released following a
sentence for assault causing bodily harm and assault with a weapon;
(ii)
his 10-year
history of violence includes no significant gaps;
(iii)
the level of
violence has been significant throughout this history. in some cases, bodily
harm was clearly caused. in others, his level aggression could just as easily
have caused significant bodily injury or death.
his first
offence of assault caused the crown to voice concern that mr. hill could
potentially kill someone if he did not get control of his temper. the court
questioned whether mr. hill was “naturally violent” and expressed concern over
what might have occurred had a third party not intervened.
subsequent
offences of violence involved the use of weapons, including knives. he used
“lumber jack style” swings to strike an opposing player 4 times over the head
causing his helmet to break. he stabbed another person during an altercation
that led to him being struck with a bat and suffering a significant brain
injury. he subsequently admitted to trying to set fire to a person’s home,
following which he attacked the homeowner with a liquor bottle.
(iv)
his aggression
has persisted while in custody, including during the course of these
proceedings; and
(v)
his family and
others have repeatedly voiced concern that mr. hill’s aggression is often
without warning and that he has shown little ability to control it.

from a designation perspective, i
also find beyond a reasonable doubt that these patterns are intractable in that
there is a present likelihood that mr. hill will re-offend in the future, and
that he is likely “to cause death or injury to other persons, or inflict[ing]
severe psychological damage on other persons, through failure in the future to
restrain his or her behaviour” and that this risk will result from “a
substantial degree of indifference on the part of the offender respecting the
reasonably foreseeable consequences to other persons of his or her behaviour.”

in coming to
these conclusions, i have considered the entirety of the evidence, including
that of the experts who testified in this case. in that regard, i note that
while expert opinion evidence can be of assistance to the court, it does not
usurp the court’s responsibility to decide the issue of intractability. it is
for the court to determine the weight to be given to the evidence of any given
witness including expert witnesses.

i accept the opinion of dr. iosif
that mr. hill’s risk for future violent recidivism is high and that the
moderate scores on the actuarial risk assessment tools is not in keeping with
his history of violently re-offending. this was also borne out by the
in-custody assault committed by mr. hill following dr. iosif’s testimony.

numerous attempts have been made at
changing mr. hill’s violent behaviour. mr. hill has been subject to numerous
court orders aimed at his rehabilitation, including indigenous-based treatment
programs. his family has made efforts at getting him appropriate counselling
and treatment. despite these efforts, his criminal record shows that he has
consistently re-offended violently and given little thought to the rights of
others or the consequences of his actions. this has also been demonstrated
through the numerous assaults he has committed on other inmates since his
arrest including an assault committed during the course of these proceedings.
his repeated behaviour shows a substantial indifference to the harm he causes.

at this stage, i
find that mr. hill’s treatment prospects are not so compelling as to reduce the
high likelihood of violent recidivism. i do not believe that a determinate
sentence would adequately protect the public. i have no reasonable doubt this
regard.
penalty stage

the question remains as to whether
anything short of an indeterminate sentence can reduce this risk to the public
to an acceptable level.

dr. bradford was of the view that,
with appropriate treatment and controls imposed through the use of a long-term
supervision order, mr. hill could be re- integrated into the community without
significant risk to the public. his opinion was largely based on having
diagnosed mr. hill with ptsd and a neurocognitive disorder – both of which mr.
hill has yet to receive treatment for.

although less optimistic, dr. iosif
did not specifically say that mr. hill’s behaviour was intractable. instead she
said pointed to the factors the court should consider in arriving at an answer
to this question.

for the reasons outlined in the
crown’s submissions, i give significantly less weight to the opinion of dr.
bradford. in particular, i note the following:
(a)
dr. bradford
indicated that he met with mr. hill for 10 hours and that he asked him
questions other than those related to the pcl-r or other testing procedures. while
he indicated that he would normally make rough notes and then dictate them
separately, he acknowledged that apart from his notetaking in relation to the
pcl-r, his notes in this case were consisted of only 2 lines. he confirmed that
he had made no other notes of what mr. hill had told him;
(b)
dr. bradford’s
report contained several errors. for example, his report indicates that mr.
hill’s score on the ptsd test was 62. in cross- examination, the score sheet
was made an exhibit. after reviewing it, dr. bradford readily acknowledged that
the actual score was 54 and that he had incorrectly tabulated the results. at
another point in his evidence, he acknowledged that his report was inaccurate
with respect to what he had been told by mr. hill’s parents. they told him that
their son had been the victim of physical abuse by a teacher in elementary
school and at a later date, sexual abuse perpetrated by their adopted daughter.
in his report to the court, dr. bradford incorrectly conflated these events and
described the first incident as one involving sexual abuse. although he
testified to discovering this error in advance of this hearing he did not
advise the court or file an addendum prior to giving his evidence. he said he
told defence counsel about the error and thought it would be rectified when he
testified.
i note that the error did not come to the court’s attention until
cross-
examination;
(c)
an electronic
copy of dr. bradford’s report was forwarded to the crown and the court. in
cross-examination, it became apparent that it included a number of “text box”
comments of his assistant, jennifer walker. these comments referred to her
making changes to his draft. although he denied she made any changes without
his permission, he confirmed that most of the errors she pointed out had not
been “fixed”;
(d)
dr. bradford
acknowledged that his diagnosis of “likely ptsd” was made without a history of
knowing when the symptoms started or when precisely mr. hill remembered the
sexual abuse. dr. bradford did not ask these questions of mr. hill. in this
regard, the evidence available to dr. bradford showed that mr. hill said
different things to different people at different times regarding when he
remembered the abuse. this included an occasion where mr. hill said he
remembered the abuse when he was 12 i.e., approximately 5 years before his
offending behaviour. dr. bradford’s report also makes no reference to what mr.
hill’s sister told dr. iosif (that she observed no ptsd symptoms);
(e)
his diagnosis of
“likely ptsd” is based almost exclusively on mr. hill’s test results on the
standard dsm-v ptsd checklist. in cross-examination, dr. bradford agreed that
before administering the test he told mr. hill that he likely had ptsd as a
result of the sexual assault. in these circumstances, mr. hill was clearly
aware of the purpose of the questions. this gives rise to the possibility that
his answers were deliberately self-serving. i note for example that he endorsed
having flashbacks, something which he never mentioned in any of the previous
reports; and
(f)
when questioned
about the most recent in-custody assault perpetrated by mr. hill during the
course of these proceedings, dr bradford agreed that from his review of the
video of the assault, it appeared to be impulsive and unprovoked. in these
circumstances, he opined that the attack may have been the result of
“dyscontrol” or psychosis stemming from mr. hill’s brain injury. in my view,
this was entirely speculative.

i accept the opinion of dr. iosif
that mr. hill’s past sexual abuse and traumatic brain injury do not explain mr.
hill’s offending behaviour or reduce his future risk to the public. i also
accept her opinion that, if anything, the additional diagnoses made by dr.
bradford would make mr. hill’s prospects for treatment less compelling.

i note that mr. hill’s offending
behaviour started well before his traumatic brain injury in july of 2020 and
that his offending behaviour since that time has not changed substantially.

in addition, there are indications
that his memory problems and intellectual functioning were compromised well
before this time. for example, as noted at p. 30 of dr. iosif’s report, in a
probation note from february 2016, mr. hill was described as “child-like”. in a
subsequent note from june of 2016, he was described by a social worker to have
“brain function issues”. as indicated at p. 21 of dr. iosif’s report, according
to mr. hill’s father, mr. hill’s work with his grandfather was problematic in
that he “couldn’t remember anything.” this was confirmed by mr. hill himself
who reported that his grandfather was “annoyed at his performance in the
workshop because he seemed to have problems remembering what he was being
taught and asked to do.” there is also evidence that he struggled in school,
including elementary school, where he was noted to be getting average and below
average grades. his father indicated to dr. iosif that his son’s ability to
learn was evident during his school years when he struggled academically. all
of the above related to times prior to mr. hill’s head injury.

the records before me also include
progress notes from the st. thomas hospital where mr. hill was being treated
prior to his transfer to the parkwood institute. one such note from august 4,
2020 indicates that “his mom is fearful for her safety if he gets released.”
this was consistent with prior records showing that mr. hill’s behaviour caused
his family to be concerned for their safety. another such note from august 6,
2020 indicates that, according to mr. hill’s mother, mr. hill appeared to have
returned to his “baseline cognitive state.”

in summary, i find that this evidence
does not support the view that the head injury suffered by mr. hill in july of
2020 resulted in a significant change in his intellectual functioning or the
threat he posed prior to that time.

i also agree with the opinion of dr.
iosif that the sexual abuse suffered by mr. hill does not adequately account
for his offending behaviour
based on a diagnosis of ptsd. in coming to
this conclusion, i have considered the possibility that mr. hill’s anger and
conflict with the law was precipitated by a recovered memory of the abuse and
the onset of ptsd at that time.

while the records show that he first
disclosed the abuse at the age of 17, the evidence that this the result of a
recovered memory at that time, and hence the sudden onset of ptsd, is
inconsistent. in this regard i note that in a risk/need assessment dated
november 18, 2015, mr. hill’s mother stated that mr. hill began to become angry
a few years ago (i.e. 2013) when mr. hill would have been 14 or 15 years old. i
also note that in a pre-sentence report dated november 13, 2015, mr. hill said
he was 12 years old when he became aware he “was abused” after being taught sex
education at school. there is no indication that mr. hill’s behaviour changed
at that time, or any time between the ages of 12 and 14 or 15, nor is there any
prior indication that he forgot and recovered these memories, apart from what
he told dr. iosif (that he remembered when he was 17).

although i have no doubt that mr.
hill suffered sexual abuse as a child, his account of the extent of the abuse
is also inconsistent. while in youth detention in october of 2015, mr. hill
disclosed to a worker that he had been sexually abused when he was 4 or 5 years
old. in november 2016 he disclosed to another worker that he had been sexually
abused around the age of 5 or 6. in a pre-sentence report dated april 12, 2018,
he said he was sexually abused between the ages of 3 and 7. he told the author
of the
gladue report
that the abuse commenced when he was approximately
6 years old and continued throughout his adolescence. he told dr. iosif that
the abuse occurred when he was between the ages of approximately 7 and 10. he
told dr. bradford that the abuse occurred when he was between 6 and 8 years of
age.

there are additional inconsistencies
that cause me to have considerable doubt about mr. hill’s credibility. this
includes what he told others about his memory of the predicate offences. in the
gladue report, he is recorded as saying that he didn’t really remember what had
happened due to his mental health and level of intoxication. he then gave
different versions of the events to dr. iosif and dr. bradford. he told dr.
bradford that he had been living on the street for two months prior to the
predicate offences when the record clearly shows that he was released from
custody only 11 days earlier. as indicated above, he acknowledged the agreed
statement of facts when this was addressed by the court at the outset of this
hearing.

this of course does not mean that an
indeterminate sentence should automatically follow. the question remains as to
whether mr. hill’s risk of violent recidivism can be reduced to an acceptable
level.

in this regard, i find that mr.
hill’s previous response to treatment and supervision to be extremely poor.
this includes indigenous-based treatment that had been made available to him in
the past. his intellectual functioning and antisocial personality traits also
negatively impact the extent to which the risk he poses to the public can be
reduced to an acceptable level.

he has shown little in the way of
motivation to change. he acknowledges his addiction to substances, and there
are indications that he is willing to accept whatever treatment is recommended.
unfortunately, this has been the case for the better part of his criminal
history.

i find that mr. hill’s moral
blameworthiness for the offences is towards the higher end of the range. in
coming to this conclusion, i have considered his indigenous heritage, and the
extent to which
gladue
factors have played a part in what brings him
before the court. there are indications he suffered racism and i accept that
there is some impact flowing from the intergenerational trauma associated with
residential schooling. as indicated in the
gladue report, he grew up in
a community that struggles with addictions to alcohol and substances.
nevertheless, previous pre-sentence reports indicate that he has had the
benefit of an otherwise stable, secure and loving home in spite of the trauma
and hardship endured by his parents and grandparents.

even if, as
indicated by dr. bradford, available treatment could reduce the risk to an
acceptable level, i find it would be speculative to accept that mr. hill would
respond positively to such treatment in a given time frame. in coming to this
conclusion, i have considered the availability of culturally specific
programming.

as indicated
above, mere hope or speculation that an offender will respond to treatment,
such that his risk to the public can be reduced to an acceptable level, is
insufficient. the records are replete with courts directing treatment. youth
workers, probation officers, and family members have repeatedly encouraged him
to see psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists and elders. indeed, he has been
referred to and seen a psychologist, a social worker, multiple elders, and
multiple therapists.

in these circumstances, i agree with
the opinion of dr iosif that mr. hill’s release into the community needs to be
“earned through demonstrated compliance and appropriate behaviour”. in my view,
given the overriding principle of public protection, this can only be done
through an indeterminate sentence.
conclusion

having considered the evidence in its
totality, i find that it does not support a reasonable expectation or
likelihood or sufficient reason for believing that anything less than an
indeterminate sentence will protect the public against mr. hill’s violent
recidivism.

accordingly, having designated mr.
hill to be a dangerous offender, i sentence him to an indeterminate period of
incarceration.
dated at london ontario this 20
th
day of november 2025.
justice g. l.
orsini