source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj123/2025oncj123.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. kamara, 2025 oncj 123
date: 
2025 02 21
court
file no.: toronto region
23-48105030
between:
his
majesty the king
— and
—
abdul malik kamara
before
justice cidalia faria
heard
on december 20, 2024 and january 10, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on february 21, 2025
scott o’neill......................................................................................... counsel
for the crown
melina macchia................................... 
counsel for the accused abdul malik kamara
faria j.:

after a trial, i found abdul malik kamara guilty
of possessing a loaded glock 27 semi-automatic firearm on may 13, 2023. the serial
number on the gun was defaced and he was on two s. 109 weapons prohibitions at
the time.


this is his third conviction for possessing a
loaded firearm. the parties agree as to what the range of sentence in this case
is. the crown recommends 9 years in the penitentiary, and the defence
recommends 6 years. both parties filed material for my consideration. these are
my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts

on saturday, may 13, 2023, at 5:21 p.m., mr.
kamara was walking out of fairview mall with two juices in one hand and his
cell phone in the other, when dc dasilva, who was walking into the mall to get
a juice himself, walked right by him. dc dasilva, who knows mr. kamara, saw a
bulge in mr. kamara’s right front jeans pocket, and identified the protruding
firearm as a mini-glock.

dc dasilva followed mr. kamara out of the mall.
he contacted his guns and gangs team, and the team proceeded to conduct mobile
surveillance of mr. kamara.

mr. kamara drove his ranger rover to kingston
rd. to pick up some food from the twice as nice restaurant and then left with
an associate to an address on pilot st. he was photographed at that address with
the bulge still in his pocket. from there, mr. kamara drove to 1 vendome where
he was seen riding a bicycle through the pathways and a park, at times in the
company of another man. he then drove to an address on yonge st. where he
picked up a passenger and headed downtown.

mr. kamara, with two associates, a male and
female, entered one hotel on wellington in downtown toronto just after 10 p.m. he
was arrested there after a significant struggle. in his right front jeans
pocket was a loaded glock 27 semi-automatic with a defaced serial number. he had
been prohibited from possessing a firearm on december 5, 2016, and again on
september 16, 2022.
ii.
abdul malik kamara

mr. kamara is about to turn 29 years old. he had
just turned 27 when he committed the offences.

he has a criminal record which starts with 4
infractions before a 2016 conviction for possessing a loaded firearm when he
was 20 years old. he was sentenced to 22 months and 8 days in jail after credit
for 52 days of pre-sentence custody for that first s.95 offence. in 2022, at
the age of 26, he was again convicted of possessing a loaded firearm. he was
sentenced to an 18-month conditional sentence order (cso) after credit of 8
months pre-sentence custody (exhibit #1).

mr. kamara’s 37-page impact of race and culture
assessment (irca) prepared by dr. patrina duhaney, highlights the
socio-cultural factors that influenced mr. kamara’s involvement with the
criminal justice system. it provides me with his detailed historical and
personal social context as a black man in toronto (exhibit 5). though it had
several inconsistencies, nonetheless, it was very helpful.


mr. kamara was born and raised in toronto by his
mother, an educated woman who suffers from a mental illness. both his parents
are muslim, and he had some religious instruction. both his parents are from
sierra leone and came to canada because of that long civil war, though he does
not know when, and is unfamiliar with his history.

his parents separated when he was very young although
he does not know when. he lived with his father for a year as a child, which
was difficult as his father was a stranger to him. he did not see his father
until 2022 when they planned to meet, but his father passed away before that
meeting could happen. he has two biological siblings, an older sister who has
lived in france for over a decade and a younger brother. he is not particularly
close to either of them, or to his numerous half siblings on this father’s
side.

mr. kamara has two daughters, an 8-year-old who
lives with her mother mekeda, and a 7-year-old with tashanna bartley, with whom
he has had a relationship off and on for a decade. he considers tashanna, and
two childhood friends, tefari and anthony to be his family.

ms. bartley describes mr. kamara as
kind-hearted, generous, and hard-working. their relationship has been an
intermittent one, and he has been in custody for much of that time. she says he
pays attention to their daughter. she speaks to mr. kamara regularly on the
phone, visits him in jail, and plans to support him throughout.

venetia giazous is mr. kamara’s godmother. she described
mr. kamara as a happy child who grew up with her own child, anthony, in the
same community. he stayed with her often and for long periods of time while his
mother was away on business trips. he is gentle and has helped her during her
cancer diagnosis.

both women are concerned about mr. kamara’s
mental health. both women share narratives of mr. kamara’s difficult life.
both women confirm his involvement with police has always been negative and has
had a negative impact on him.

mr. kamara is physically healthy, and described
his mental health to be as good as it could be. he first started drinking
alcohol when he was 13 years old and continued to do so to the very day of the
offences. he acknowledges he is dependant on alcohol and his use increases
when difficult things happen.

mr. kamara experienced racism throughout his
life. as a child, he had friends whose parents did not permit their children to
interact with him. in school, he felt he was academically evaluated by a
different standard, and he was punished more harshly than white students. his
mother sent him to schools outside his jurisdiction for a better education and
french immersion, but he felt singled out and was often suspended. he went to 4
different schools from jk to grade 8 and felt the same way at each one. he described
racism at each of the 3 high schools he attended which led to his skipping
school by grade 9 and becoming “more interested in making money”, though he has
only had one period of employment when he was 18. he had a more positive
experience in the 3
rd
high school but indicated that there was a
police officer and a student who harassed him there. he was one credit short
from graduating. he invested a settlement he received from the toronto police
service for being victimized by them.

mr. kamara grew up in flemingdon park, in a
government-housing complex. he described observing drug trafficking and drug
use, late night partying, prostitution, drive by-shootings, and people shot. he
has 5 friends who died due to gun violence. engaging in violence was a
normalized lifestyle and even glorified. as he was not close to his family, his
friends and this community is his family.

he believes he has post-traumatic stress from
the violence he has observed but has not sought counselling as he was taught
not to discuss emotions, and counselling is stigmatized in his culture. he
sustained both physical and sexual abuse growing up. in particular, he was
assaulted by a police officer when he was arrested at 15 years old, and sustained
a broken jaw. six months later, mr. kamara was cut across the face coming out
of a restaurant. he has survived multiple shooting incidents.

these experiences, he states, are the reason
that he lives in fear, is desensitized to violence, and carries a gun.
iii.
positions

the crown submits the appropriate global sentence
is 10 years jail to reflect denunciation and deterrence for a 3
rd
possession of a loaded firearm, reduced to 9 years to account for harsh
in-custody conditions,
morris

factors, and the principle of totality.

counsel for mr. kamara submits a global sentence
of 6 years minus credit for pre-sentence custody is appropriate. she emphasises
mr. kamara’s blameworthiness is attenuated by his experience of anti-black
racism, his negative experiences with police, and the harsh conditions of his
incarceration. she differentiates the cases the crown relies on from the case
at bar by stressing that mr. kamara’s offences are not associated with any
other criminal behaviour.
iv.
legal principles

the
criminal law is a system of values. sentencing is meant to reflect and
reinforce these basic values of our society. therefore, the fundamental purpose
of sentencing is to contribute to respect for the law and the maintenance of a
just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions.
sections 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
guide a sentencing judge in this task.

fundamentally,
every sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the
degree of responsibility of the offender.

sanctions
should have one or more of the following objectives:
•
to denounce unlawful conduct
•
to deter the offender and other persons from committing offences
•
to separate offenders from society, where necessary
•
to assist in rehabilitating offenders
•
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to the
community
•
to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders and
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.
v.
analysis

aggravating,
and mitigating circumstances must be considered, along with pre-sentence
custody, harsh incarceration conditions, social context factors, and caselaw. denunciation
and deterrence are the primary applicable principles. parity and totality
principles also apply, as does the principle of rehabilitation.
aggravating factors

the seven major aggravating factors are:
i.
this is the third time mr. kamara has been
convicted of possessing a loaded firearm.
ii.
mr. kamara was serving a cso for the same
offence which statutorily aggravating when he committed these offences.
iii.
whether the glock was loaded or not, he carried
it around with him in a busy shopping mall, when he went to a restaurant, and
while visiting an associate.
iv.
he was in possession of the loaded firearm in
his car when he drove downtown to the one hotel.
v.
he was out past his 10 p.m. curfew when he
committed these offences.
vi.
he was carrying his loaded glock in his pocket, ready
to be fired, in a hotel bar in downtown toronto, with plenty of people around.
vii.
mr. kamara struggled and resisted his arrest. it
took two officers over 7 minutes to get him under control. this resistance with
a loaded firearm in his pocket increased the danger to himself, the officers,
the patrons and the staff close by.
mitigating
factors

the two central mitigating factors are:
i.
his experience of harsh incarceration conditions
at the toronto south detention centre (tsdc).
ii.
his experience of anti-black racism throughout
his life.

in addition:
i.
he has completed the 16-week black employment
support program with the urban rez solutions social enterprise while in custody
(exhibit 7).
ii.
the reintegration case manager spoke highly of
his participation, his insight, and his rehabilitation potential as he is committed
to work with the program to better re-integrate into society after his release.
iii.
he has a job offer with hutsy financial once he
is released (exhibit 4).
iv.
he is involved with in his daughter’s life and assists
both his mother and his godmother with their health conditions.
v.
he has positive support in his partner, his
godmother, and two of his childhood friends.
pre-sentence
custody – conditional sentence

mr. kamara served the first 6 months of his conditional
sentence on house arrest, from september 16, 2022 to march 15, 2023, and was
serving the 12 month curfew portion of the sentence when he was arrested on may
13, 2023.

both parties agree that once mr. kamara was
arrested, an allegation of breach of sentence should have been made. however, his
conditional sentence supervisor never issued a warrant. the police never laid a
charge. he never went before the judge who sentenced him to the cso to decide
what action to take, if any, on the alleged breach. mr. kamara also never
elected to have a reverse onus bail hearing on these charges before the court.

therefore, there was no triggering event to suspend
the running of his cso pursuant to s.742.6(10).

section 742.6(12) states the running of the cso continues
on the detention of an offender under s. 515(6):
(12) a conditional sentence order referred
to in subsection (1) starts running again on the making of an order to detain the
offender in custody under subsection 515(6) and, unless section 742.7 applies,
continues running while the offender is detained under the order.

as stated in
r. v. menezes,
2023 onca 838
at para
51:
regardless of whether an offender is
detained in custody while the opportunity to show cause remains open, or
whether they are detained in custody after failing to obtain bail, for all
intents and purposes it is on the strength of s. 515(6) that the accused is
detained:
atkinson, at para. 20.

although there was no “order” detaining mr.
kamara in custody, he acquiesced to his detention, and was detained.

section 742.7(1) does not apply to suspend the
running of the cso in this case because mr. kamara was not imprisoned to serve
a sentence imposed for another offence.

both parties agree that the result, pursuant to
menezes,
is that from may 13, 2023, when mr. kamara was arrested, to march 16, 2024, a
period of 10 months and 2 days, mr. kamara was serving the remainder of his cso
in custody. this period is not pre-sentence custody attributable to the
offences he is to be sentenced today.
duncan

credit

both parties agree that the difficult conditions
at the tsdc where mr. kamara has been in custody merit consideration.

the crown submits that he has taken these
conditions into consideration in his position of 9 years, and has done so
pursuant to the preferred method, that of a mitigating factor pursuant to
r.
v. marshall,
2021 onca 344.

the defence submits i may quantify the
mitigation due to its severity, which
marshall
permits, and the superior
court of justice in toronto has done numerous times,

as have i, to address the specific, ongoing,
and unacceptable conditions at the tsdc.

mr. kamara deposed in his affidavit (exhibit 3) that
he has experienced significant lockdowns which restrict his showering, his
exercise time, his contact with his loved ones, and his ability to care for his
mother, all of which have negatively impacted his mental health. he states the
conditions are unsanitary and have caused him rashes. he has required medical
care for these rashes and his eyesight, and in both instances, he had to wait to
be seen by a doctor.

jail is not the place from which mr. kamara can
expect to assist his mother with her mental health needs. however, mr. kamara’s
other complaints are troublesome. he had to wait over 3 months to see an ophthalmologist,
and slightly less to see a doctor. hygienic standards are difficult to
maintain, and more so when lockdowns restrict laundry and showers which deceases
cleanliness standards.

mr. kamara appended a lockdown list provided by
the tsdc from may 13, 2023 to october 29, 2024, to his affidavit. it reports on
a period of 533 days, 10 months while he was serving sentence, and 7 months and
2 weeks while he was in pre-sentence custody.
•
there were lockdowns on 130 days, or 24.3% of
that time.
•
only 2 of the 130 lockdowns were not the result
of “staff shortages”, and 3 provided no reason at all.
•
although the document begins with an explanation
that a “partial” lockdown has a start and end time, only 31 of the noted
partial lockdowns had an end time. the other 99 started at 8 a.m. but have no
end time.

the number of these lockdowns, and particularly,
the reason for these lockdowns, demonstrates a persistent institutional
disregard to the human resource requirements of running this jail. that is a
choice that deprives inmates of liberty within the institution that, even pursuant
to the policies of the institution, they are entitled to. these deprivations,
imposed on a regular basis negatively impacts the mental health of those
awaiting trial, and those serving their sentence, including mr. kamara.

these conditions caused by personnel decisions warrant
a deduction in sentence. i decline to quantify it in this case but do state
that it is significant.
social
context

mr. kamara
has been clearly
negatively impacted by anti-black racism while growing up and living in a
marginalized community in toronto. the racist acts of educators such the
principal and the librarian limited his ability to succeed and best use his
skills to his advantage. this has led to limited opportunities for legitimate
employment. he appears to have received limited parenting. he experienced
physical abuse at the hands of both parents. he is the victim of sexual abuse
that was not recognized as such, and he received no support for this
victimization as a child.

his neighbourhood environment was a dangerous
one. it was and is a community struggling with drug use to numb trauma, drug
trafficking to avoid poverty, few positive male role models, particularly as
fathers, and significant gun violence that causes death. each of these in turn
attract police attention, the type of attention that mr. kamara has been at the
receiving end of. his victimization at a young age at the hands of police,
which was not challenged by the crown, has negatively impacted his negative perceptions
of and his experience with police both in the short and long term. as he
states, his fear of his community and police, his concern for his safety, and his
desensitization to violence are the reasons why he carries a loaded gun.

normally, this social context would
significantly attenuate mr. kamara’s moral blameworthiness. however, in this
case, at this time, its weight is diminished for three reasons.

first, mr. kamara received the benefit of
restraint for his youthfulness and his limited ability to make choices about his
environment when he was convicted at the age of 20 for possessing a loaded
firearm. he was not sentenced to a penitentiary sentence, but rather, sentenced
to reformatory period of 22 months. at that point, that sentence should have
communicated to a young mr. kamara the message that possessing loaded firearm
has severe consequences.

second, mr. kamara received a second chance. he was
sentenced very leniently for possession of a loaded firearm when he was 26
years old with an 18-month cso. it is clear by reading that sentencing
transcript, (exhibit 2), that the jurist was both uncomfortable with the joint
submission, and not aware that it was mr. kamara’s second conviction for a
loaded firearm.

that second sentence permitted mr. kamara an opportunity to seek counselling for
his trauma, to move away from the dangerous environment, the people, and the
police that had so negatively impacted his life and limited his choices. he was
given the chance to start again.

thirdly, mr. kamara at the age of 27, while on this
cso, chose differently. fully aware of the serious consequences of possessing a
loaded firearm, he breached that cso.

mr. kamara repeatedly stated to the author of
the irca that the area he grew up was dangerous, frightened him, and was
heavily patrolled by police. he also told the author and his loved ones that
he is afraid of the police. however, while on his cso with an address in
vaughan ontario, he deliberately drove on may 13, 2022 to that very
neighbourhood. the neigbourhood he says is dangerous. the neigbourhood he says
he is afraid of.

from his vaughan address, he would have to drive
almost an hour to go to the fairview mall to get a juice, to visit an
associate, and go to the twice as nice restaurant for chicken. mr. kamara then drove
to the very toronto housing complex on vendome where he grew up, where again,
he states there is gun violence that has caused him trauma, to ride around in a
bicycle on the paths and parks of the “hood” as he calls it.

while true that mr. kamara has been traumatized
by racism, he also has agency. he was not deterred by either of his previous
sentences. he did not seek safety. instead, he chose to go where he believes
there is danger, with a firearm in his pocket. then he drove to a totally
different neighbourhood in downtown toronto and walked into a hotel bar with a
loaded glock in his pocket ready to fire, bringing the danger with him.

the mitigation of his
morris
factors
although relevant, and applicable, in this case, are of limited weight.
caselaw

both the crown and the defence submitted
numerous cases for my consideration. i have reviewed them all but will not
refer to them all.

courts have plainly, and repeatedly found that the
possession of illegal firearms in the city of toronto warrants serious sanctions:
“there is no question our courts
have to address the principles of denunciation and deterrence for gun related
crimes in the
strongest possible terms
”,
r. v. danvers,
2005 canlii
30044 (on ca)
at para.
77. (
emphasis mine
)
“our jurisdiction of metro east
has its own particular problem with gun violence. in these circumstances it is
crucial that any sentence imposed send a strong message to our community that
possession
of firearms will not be tolerated, and that those who do so can expect real
consequences.”
r. v.
abubeker,
2011 oncj 337 at para. 8. (
emphasis
mine
)
“in the six years since
danvers,
was decided, the concern [over gun violence] is still unfortunately very much alive
and unsatiated.” if anything, an even stronger message needs to be sent that
the possession of illegal firearms will simply not be tolerated.” r. v.
lambert,
2011 onsc 3906 at para. 47.

the crown relied on
r. v. graham,
2018
onsc 6817
to support his position for a 10-year jail sentence reduced to 9 years.

justice code in that case refers to
r. v.
hector,
2014 onsc 1970, where justice macdonnell implicitly held that the caselaw
indicated the appropriate total range of sentence for s. 95 recidivists who
breach s. 109 orders to be 6 to 9 years jail (at para. 39).

in
r. v. slack
(2015),
2015 onca 94 (canlii), 321 c.c.c. (3d)
474 (ont. c.a.), the court upheld a total sentence of 10 years, made up of 8
years for a s. 95 recidivist who also received a 2-year consecutive sentence
for breach of the prohibition orders, (
graham
at para.
39
).

justice code found that
the range of sentence
for s. 95 recidivists who breach s. 109 orders to be at the higher end, that of
8 to 10 years. he distinguished mr. hector from mr. graham by pointing out mr. hector
had the firearm hidden in an air conditioner, rather than carrying it in public
as mr. graham did at a bar and in a car (
graham
at para.
40
)

in justice code’s view, a 6-year sentence is at
the top end of the range for a first s.95 offence and at the bottom end of the
range for a second s. 95 offence. he also adopts the view that the breach of
two s. 109 orders should be consecutive to the sentence for the s. 95 offence (at
para. 41). he sentenced mr. graham to 8 years and a year consecutive for the s.
109 breach.

though justice code clearly separates the
sentence range for possession of the loaded firearm while on two prohibitions,
from possession of cocaine among other offences that mr. graham was facing, the
defence in this case, emphasizes that mr. kamara’s offences are unrelated to
any other criminality, and thus should be considered on the lower end of the
range.

although mr. kamara’s offences are not related
to other criminality, by the same token, they are not mitigated by any of the circumstances
present in the cases the defence relies on to support its 6-year
recommendation.

for instance, the offenders pled guilty in
r.
v. warsame,
2022 onsc 424
and
r. v. virgo, 2019 oncj. mr. jama had
no prior conviction in
r. v. jama,
2021 onsc 4871. it was only the second
s. 95 offence for mr. hamilton in
r. v. hamilton,
2013 onsc 3127.

in fact, in this case, not only is there no
mitigation for a guilty plea, but there is evidence of no insight into his
offending conduct.

mr. kamara insists he is the victim of harassment
in this offence. mr. kamara describes the offence to the irca author as “the
police had been following him throughout the day, although they claimed to have
randomly encountered him at a mall, when they reported seeing a gun sticking
out of his pocket. he stated that after leaving the mall, he returned to his
community, visited a friend’s place, and then went to a restaurant, where was arrested
nearly six hours later.”

dc dasilva testified he did not expect to see
mr. kamara at the mall. the reason is now clear, mr. kamara was to be living in
vaughan while serving a conditional sentence. mr. kamara does give
consideration to the fact he had a gun in his pocket while at the mall, at his
friend’s place, at the restaurant, and it was loaded in his right-hand jeans
pocket when he walked into the one hotel bar past his curfew. he appears to
given no consideration to his offending conduct.

though the principle of deterrence is a guiding
principle, i am uncertain a jail sentence can deter mr. kamara from possessing
a loaded a firearm. deterrence is applicable, but denunciation is the weightier
principle in this case.

the jump principle is applicable but attenuated
by the fact that the cso sentence was the result of a joint submission made under
a misunderstanding of mr. kamara’s criminal history.

in addition, though the crown submitted that
rehabilitation is lost on mr. kamara. i disagree. mr. kamara is still young. he
has two daughters to care for. he has several people in his life who care for
him and support him. he is intelligent. he can be focused as demonstrated by
his completion of programming while in custody. he can stay away from trouble as
submitted by his counsel that he is misconduct free time while in custody. mr.
kamara can decide to turn his rehabilitation potential into reality if he uses
all the resources at his disposal and commits to the task.
sentence

a global sentence of 10 years is appropriate for
all the offences, particularly as the firearm had a defaced serial number and mr.
kamara violated two s. 109 orders. however, it will be reduced to global 8
years in the penitentiary to account for
duncan
credit for lockdowns and
to reflect the principle of totality, and to a limited extent the applicable social
context factors.

the sentence will be apportioned as follows:
count 1: s. 95(1) possession of a loaded firearm, 7 years minus
psc

count 5: s. 108(1)(b) possession a firearm with its serial
number defaced, 2 years concurrent to count 1.
count 8: s. 117.01(1) possession of a firearm while
prohibited by a s. 109 order, 1 year jail consecutive to count 1.
count 9: s. 117.01(1) possession of a firearm while
prohibited by a s. 109 order, 1 year in jail concurrent to count 8.

i will also make a dna order, yet another s. 109
prohibiting the possession of a firearm for life and waive the victim fine
surcharge as he is unable to pay.
released: february 21, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c.g. faria

r. v. kamara,
2024 oncj 406

for instance, on page 3 it states mr. kamara was born in sierra leona, but on
page 10 identifies the hospital he was born in toronto. on page 10 it both
states his 15-year-old brother currently resides with his father, but his
father passed away 3 years ago in 2022. on page 10 it states mr. kamara has no
recollection of his father being around him as a child, but at page 17 it states
mr. kamara said that “prior to his patent’s separation, his father hit him
regularly.

r. v. morris,
2021 onca 680

r. v. duncan,
2016 onca 754

r. v. shaikh,
2024, onsc 774,
r. v. ahmed,
2021, onsc 8157,
r.
v. hassan,
2023 onsc 5040
are three.

r. v. ndayihezagiye,
2024 oncj 457

exhibit 2: page 13, lines 15 -20

march 17, 2024 to february 21, 2025 is 341 days. 341 days x 1.5 = 511.5 days,
or 17 months, 7 years is 84 months, 84 – 17 months = 67 months to serve, or
just under 5.5 years.