source url: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj301/2025oncj301.html

ontario court of justice
citation:
r. v. torres, 2025 oncj 301
date: 
2025 06 02
court
file no.: toronto region
23 40000743
between:
his majesty the king
— and —
kayil torres
before
justice cidalia c.g. faria
heard
on january 10 and march 21, 2025
reasons
for sentence released on june 2, 2025
greg elder............................................................................................ counsel
for the crown
patrick metzler........................................................ counsel
for the accused
kayil torres
faria j.:

on january 10, 2025, kayil torres pled guilty to
possessing and accessing child exploitation material on february 17, 2022, contrary
to
s. 163.1(4)
and
163.1(4.1)
of the
criminal code. submissions were
made march 21, 2025.

these are my reasons for sentence.
i.
facts

although mr. torres pled guilty to only two
counts, the facts agreed to

include the possessing and accessing of child exploitation material on 4
separate dates.

on february 17, march 21, april 26, and june 11,
2022, google discovered that kayil torres had uploaded and stored sexually
explicit files on google photos – a photo sharing and storage service developed
by google. these files met the canadian
criminal code
definition of
child pornography.

the toronto police service internet child
exploitation section investigated the account. they identified kayil torres.

on february 2, 2023, police executed a search
warrant at mr. torres’ apartment in toronto and seized electronic devices.

a forensic analysis of mr. torres’ two devices
revealed:
i.
one smartphone contained approximately 121
unique and 46 duplicate images, and 33 unique and 3 duplicate videos, all
meeting the definition of child pornography.
ii.
a second smartphone contained approximately 131
unique and 1186 duplicate images, as well as 2 unique and 10 duplicate videos,
all of which also met the definition of child pornography.

the material seized show children being sexually
violated. all the images and videos show prepubescent female children. all the
children are either fully or partially nude. all the images and videos focus
mainly on the children’s chest, and/or the vaginal and/or the anal areas of
their bodies.
images
i.
the majority of images are of female children
between 8 and 12 years old, while other images were of children between 4 to 8
years old.
ii.
in some of the images of female children between
4 to 10 years old, the children were engaged in sexual acts with adult men
which include the children performing fellatio on the adult men, and the men vaginally
penetrating these children.
iii.
a few of the images show the children between 6
and 10 years old vaginally penetrating themselves with objects.
videos
i.
the majority of the videos show female children between
8 and 14 years old engaged in sexual acts with adult men, including the children
performing fellatio on the men, and the men vaginally penetrating the children.
some videos are under one minute long, other videos are between 3 to 15
minutes. one video is 45 minutes long.
ii.
a few of the videos show female children between
4 and 8 years old being sexually engaged with adult men, including the children
performing fellatio on the men and the men sexually penetrating the children.
these videos are 1 to 5 minutes long.
iii.
a few of the videos show female children
approximately between 6 and 10 years old vaginally penetrating themselves with
objects, such as a hairbrush, a pencil, and a cucumber. these videos are
between 1 and 15 minutes long.

a usb with a representative sample of the child
sexual exploitation material seized from mr torres cell phones was filed with the
court.


mr. torres turned himself into police when
requested, 8 days later, on february 10, 2023.
ii.
position of the parties

the
crown recommends an exact 2-year penitentiary sentence and a 2-year probation
order. he also seeks a dna order, a
sexual offender information registration
act
order (
soira
), a s. 161 order, and the forfeiture of both the
offending materials and the devices seized.

mr.
elder, on behalf of the crown, submits that denunciation and deterrence are the
primary guiding principles, and his position already accounts for the
principles of rehabilitation and restraint. he submits a conditional sentence
does not reflect the principles of sentencing in this case and is an
inappropriate sanction.

in
addition to
r. v. friesen
(2020)
2020 scc 9 (canlii), 1 scr 424, the crown relies on
r. v.
bertarand marchand,
2023 scc 26,
r. v. pike and scott,
2024 onca
608,
r. v. inksetter,
2018 onca 474,
r. v. snead,
2021 onsc 7017,
and
r. v. m.m.,
2022 onca 441
to support his position. the crown also
referred to
r. v. walker,
2021 onsc 837,
r. v. kaardal,
2022 oncj
441,
r. v. jose,
2023 abcj 186,
r. v. welter,
2024 o.j. no. 197
(prov. ct.), and
r. v. s.a.d.f.
2021 mbca 22, to support his position
that a conditional sentence is not appropriate in the circumstances.

the defence recommends a conditional sentence for a period just
under 2 years, and probation. mr. metzler for mr. torres does not take issue
with the dna order, nor the forfeiture of the material and devices, but
disputes the necessity of issuing either a
soira
order or a s. 161
order. his submission relies on the many positive features of mr. torres’
rehabilitation efforts and his youthfulness.

the defence also relies on
pike, as well
as
r. v. v.(m
),
2023 onca 724,
r. v. elias,
 o.j. no. 704 (scj),
r. v. m.c.,
 o. j. no. 23 (scj),
r. v. jongsma,
 o.j.
no. 808 (scj),
r. v. o’driscoll,
 q.j. no. 15183 (qccq), and
r.
v. dunajski,
 o.j. no. 5340 (ocj), to support his position.
iii.
circumstances of kayil torres

kayil
torres is 23 years old. he has no criminal record.
pre-sentence report


mr.
torres was born in the philippines and came to canada as a child with his
parents and older brother. he continues to live with his family in a rented
two-bedroom apartment. he describes his family as loving, close, supportive,
and very religious. his family in turn describe him positively as well. their
church, and their faith community are the family’s social center. his father
is a pastor, his older brother is a receptionist, and his mother is an
administrative coordinator. they work for a religious mission in toronto and
are of limited financial means.

mr.
torres does not drink and has never used illicit drugs. he obtained a degree in
music performance from a private christian university in toronto and is
currently enrolled in a master’s program. he has worked for many years
including as a camp counsellor, doing summer seasonal jobs, and as a line cook.
he continues to work as a kitchen manager at a japanese restaurant, a job he
has had for 4 years.

mr. torres admitted he first started viewing “erotic material”
online in high school a few times a week. in university, it became a daily activity
and grew to twice a day during the pandemic. he believes the escalation coincided
with the breakup of his relationship with his high school girlfriend in grade
12. he initiated that breakup because of the conflict he felt
between his sexual desire to be with her, and his religious beliefs that these
desires not be acted on.

mr.
torres admitted to the psr author that he has realized via his risk assessment
that he is sexually attracted to images of girls from the ages of 10 to 16 but
said that he “no longer has these pedophilic interests” as he is in counselling
and will follow his relapse prevention plan.
community support

counsel
filed 9 letters of support for mr. torres.
most of the letters, (6 of them) are from references that speak to mr. torres’
musical ability, collegiality, academic diligence, and his involvement in
school, work, and faith community. these supporters do not seem to be aware of
the nature of the charges mr. torres’ has pled to.

his
parents and his brother describe mr. torres to be a hardworking and successful student,
a committed employee, involved in his community, deeply religious, and
remorseful. though they do not seem to understand his diagnosis, they are
supportive and confident that the counselling he has received has been
successful.
forensic evidence

shikha harish, a registered psychotherapist with
experience treating men who have had difficulty with the law because of their
sexual behaviours provided a counselling report for mr. torres whom she has
been treating since february 2024.


she reported mr. torres to be forthcoming, motivated,
and taking full responsibility during his sessions. he progressed well with the
understating of “thinking errors”, which was in essence thinking what he had
done caused no harm. he now has a “good appreciation” of these “cognitive
distortions that clouded his judgment and led to his involvement with the law”. 
he understands “the impact of sexual abuse on children especially victims of
csam.” ms. harish quoted mr. torres in her report to demonstrate the insight he
has gained.

ms. harish concluded mr. torres is “low risk and
easily manageable in the community.”

dr. monik kalia, a clinical and forensic
psychologist conducted a psychosexual risk assessment

of mr. torres and testified at
the sentencing hearing.

dr. kalia administered 11 psychological tests on
mr. torres.

of note to the court and to dr. kalia’s
assessment is the result of the phallometric testing. the results are
“suggestive of pedophilic interests and are consistent with his self-report.”


dr. kalia concluded mr torres “does not
demonstrate other risk factors related to sexual violence” as a result of his risk
for sexual violence protocol-v2 (rsvp-v2) score. he wrote:
“his problems are related to underlying
pedophilic interest, lack of an intimate relationship and interpersonal passivity
in his personality style”….in summary, based on the rsvp-v-2 risk appraisal,
the likelihood that he will commit an act of violence is in the low range.”


dr. kalia’s clinical summary states:
“based on the available clinical
information and the nature of the charges, a diagnosis of pedophilia is
likely. his pedophilic interests are limited to fantasy and imagery through
the internet. on being presented with the diagnosis, he was accepting of the
underlying problem and at no time justified his actions…”


dr. kalia concluded mr. torres is a “low risk to
re-offend with respect to the use of child pornography.”


dr. kalia testified that:
•
pedophilia is a sexual interest in children that
is a life-long condition.
•
there is no cure for the condition, but there is
treatment.
•
treatment involves acknowledgment of the
condition, and ways to manage the condition.
•
treatment involves learning not to act on the sexual
feelings and urges.
•
it is not reasonable to expect that mr. torres
will not have pedophilia.
•
mr. torres’ cport result places him in the
middle of the low risk group of child sexual abuse material offenders.

dr. kalia further testified that:
•
mr. torres’ acknowledged his pedophilia
diagnosis, is open to adapting, and amenable to change as demonstrated by his
counselling record.
•
mr. torres’ equivocal statements about his
condition being dealt with because he is in counselling is not “uncommon” due
to feelings of shame as insight may fluctuate.
iv.
victim impact

there were no victim impact or community impact
statements filed. there need not be, to note the devastating harm these images
and videos have caused these children whose sexual violations were documented
and then obtained and kept by mr. torres.

the supreme court in
r. v. friesen,
2020 scc 9 (canlii), 1 scr 424 (at para.
5
) stated that sexual offences
against children are violent crimes that wrongfully exploit children’s
vulnerability and cause profound harm to children and our communities.

victims of child sexual exploitation and abuse
live, not only with the traumatic experience of having been violated, but with
the reality that their images, and the documentation of their abuse, continues
to exist and circulate. even if these images and videos are not distributed,
the victims live in the realistic fear that they could be. the reality is that
victims are powerless and unable to destroy these images. their psychological victimization
is current, and ongoing. moreover, their victimization is repeated every time
their images are obtained, watched, and kept.

victimization of this nature is also not
isolated to the individual children at the time of violation, but rather permeates
throughout that child’s life, and community.

in addition, even those whose professional duty
is to deal with these images for the purpose of enforcing the law, and those
whose professional obligation is to observe these images in their roles in the
criminal justice system, become part of the community negatively impacted by
the degradation and violation documented and perpetuated in these child sexual
exploitation materials.
v.
sentencing principles

sections 718
to
718.2
of the
criminal code
guide the sentencing task.

every sentence must be a proportionate one which
reflects the gravity of the offence and the blameworthiness of the offender.

the sanction the court imposes should have one
or more of the following objectives:
•
to denounce unlawful conduct.
•
to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences.
•
to separate offenders from society, where
necessary.
•
to assist in rehabilitating offenders.
•
to provide reparations for harm done to victims
or to the community.
•
to promote a sense of responsibility in
offenders and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and the community.

in addition, in this case, the principles of
restraint, parity, and rehabilitation apply.
vi.
analysis
aggravating factors

there
are numerous and serious aggravating factors.
i.
mr. torres had child sexual exploitation material in two devices.
ii.
the nature of the images and the videos were highly intrusive and
abusive of children performing fellatio on adult men and being penetrated by
adult penises.
iii.
some of the images and videos were particularly degrading and
dehumanizing, having the children penetrate themselves with objects.
iv.
he possessed a significant amount of material: 252 unique images and 35
unique videos.
v.
all the children were pre-pubescent, but some were as young as 4 years
old.
vi.
there were 1,186 duplicate images on one phone alone. these images of
individual sexually abused children were saved repeatedly.
vii.
some of the videos of the child sexual abuse were of significant
duration, including one that is 45 minutes.
viii.
google established mr. torres accessed child sexual exploitation
material on 4 occasions over a period of 4 months. by his admission, mr. torres
was committing these crimes for almost 2 years.
ix.
mr. torres demonstrated a consistent and persistent intention to
access and possess child sexual exploitation material by searching for it, finding
it, and saving it in secure folders even after being blocked by google for harmful
content in early 2022. he stopped but then returned to accessing child sexual
abuse material in december 2022.
mitigating factors

there are also numerous mitigating factors to
consider.
i.
mr. torres is a youthful offender at the age of
23 years old.
ii.
he has no criminal record.
iii.
he has a solid employment history and is
currently working.
iv.
he is well-educated and continuing his
post-secondary education.
v.
he has strong family support.
vi.
he has pled guilty which demonstrates
accountability.
vii.
mr. torres has stated he is remorseful to his
family, to his therapist, to the assessing psychiatrist and to the court during
his allocution.
viii.
he sought counselling and has now identified his
sexual attraction to children as harmful and wrong. he continues with the
counselling to manage his attraction.
principles

the
maximum sentence for these offences is 10 years in jail.

offences against children attract emphasis on the principles of
denunciation and deterrence (s. 718.01). it is an aggravating factor
that this offence victimizes persons in vulnerable circumstances by virtue of
age (s. 718.04). child sexual abuse material has a devastating, long-lasting,
traumatic negative impact on its victims (
s. 718.2
(iii.1).

the supreme court in
friesen
stated that a sentence for
offences involving the sexual violation of children, which accessing and
possessing child pornography is (at para. 44) the sentence is to reflect:
•
the inherent wrongfulness of the exploitation of
children and the gravity of the offence (para. 78)
•
that harm will materialize even when there is no
physical interference, as in this case by mr. torres personally, but as in the
fact these children were sexually interfered with in images and their abuse
documented on video (para. 79)
•
the reasonable foreseeability that all the
children in all the images and videos the offender, in this case, mr. torres’
accessed and possessed, have and will experience harm that will manifest (paras.
82- 84).
•
that courts do not discount the degree of the
offender’s responsibility by minimizing the harmfulness of the conduct (para. 87).
•
the victimized children must live with the victimization
that occurs when their abuse is distributed, accessed and possessed (para. 48)

friesen
stated that the likelihood to re-offend (para. 123), the offender’s
rehabilitation prospects (para. 124), and the age of the victims, are
significant factors to consider when determining a fit sentence.

the
ontario court of appeal in
pike, which both parties relied on, articulates
that by possessing images and recordings depicting the sexual abuse and
exploitation of children, the offender sexually abused the children by
“invading their privacy, wounding their dignity, and causing them serious
emotional harm. he shares culpability with those who produced the images
depicting the victimization of children that he possessed on his digital
devices” (147- 149).

the
court specifically stated that:
“a child-centered approach to sentencing requires judges to
consider child victims and the wrongs and harms that people who possess child
pornography inflict on them, to reject myths that minimize the perpetrator’s responsibility
and, finally, to apply a denunciatory sentencing range that reflects the
abhorrent and harmful nature of these offence and their long-term negative
impacts on children” (para. 7)

there
is no dispute that denunciation and deterrence are the primary applicable principles
in this case.
conditional sentence

the
issue is whether a conditional sentence is sufficient in these circumstances and
for this offender to sufficiently reflect the denunciation and deterrence required.

there
are 5 pre-conditions for a conditional sentence to be appropriate:
i.
the offences cannot be excluded in
s. 742.1
of the
criminal code.
ii.
the offences must not attract a minimum sentence.
iii.
the offender must not be a danger to the community.
iv.
neither a suspended sentence nor a penitentiary sentence is appropriate.
v.
a conditional sentence would be consistent
with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in ss. 718 to
718.2.

both
parties agree that the jurisprudence establishes a conditional sentence is
available. statutorily, neither accessing nor possessing child pornography is
an excluded offence in
s. 742.1
and neither offence attracts a minimum sentence
which meets two requirements.

given
dr. kalia’s expert report and testimony, mr. torres is a low risk to re-offend.
a strict conditional sentence with terms to manage his risk would likely address
this concern.

both
parties agree that a suspended sentence is not appropriate. the crown
recommends the minimum 2 year penitentiary sentence, but not strenuously so. the
result is that given the numerous mitigating factors, and the evidence before
me, a penitentiary sentence is not warranted for mr. torres. the fourth
requirement is thus met.

the
heart of the matter is whether a conditional sentence meets the fifth requirement,
that it is
consistent with the fundamental purpose
and principles of sentencing set out in ss. 718 to 718.2.

pike
states
a conditional sentence ought not be perceived as
exceptional and there is no presumption against conditional sentences in
sentencing child pornography offenders, however, “more compelling personal
circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the absence of aggravating factors”
are required to justify a conditional sentence than might have been the case
when
proulx
was decided” (paras. 181 and 182).

in
walker, the offender had fewer images and videos, than mr. torres had,
and the victims were in a similar age range as those in mr. torres material.
that offender was sentenced to 2 years for possessing this material.

in
kaardal, welter
and
jose,
the courts emphasized the gravity of
the offences of a similar nature to that of mr. torres, and imposed carceral
sentences on similar offenders as mr. torres with no criminal records, who pled
guilty, took responsibility, were remorseful, and had some insight.

the
defence submits, however, that the cluster of mr. torres’ mitigating factors,
that he is young, pled guilty, is remorseful, has taken therapy, is low risk,
has a supportive family and strong rehabilitation potential creates an exceptional
circumstance that enables a conditional sentence to be appropriate.

he
relies on several cases in support of his position. no two cases are the same,
but in both
m.c.
and
jongsma,
the
offenders were victims of sexual abuse as children themselves. this historic
victimization in the offender’s history is significantly different from the
positive, supportive, loving, and nurturing background mr. torres experienced.

in
dunajski,
the offender was a 63-year-old in
possession of only 19 images, and no videos, far fewer than those accessed and
possessed by mr. torres.

more relevant is the defence reliance on the recently
decided, and i am informed, currently under appeal, decision of
r. v. elias,
 o.j. no. 704 (scj).

mr.
elias, a 37-year-old, was in possession of 22,746 images of child sexual exploitation
material described as disgusting and depraved. he had no record, pled guilty,
was remorseful, and went to therapy. he had been on bail for 40 months and was
suffering from depression. his family blamed him for his mother’s death. he was
a moderate risk to re-offend. the court found that these personal circumstances
and mitigating factors were sufficiently compelling to make a conditional
sentence a fit one.

in
comparison, mr. torres accessed and possessed a substantially smaller number of
images and videos, he is younger, and is a lower risk to re-offend. however,
mr. torres suffers from no mental health condition, and his family is
supportive.

the
comparison illustrates the supreme court’s recognition in
r v. lacasse,
2015 scc 64
that the determination of an appropriate sentence is a highly
individualized exercise (paras. 57-58).

the
personal and mitigating circumstances of mr. torres do not individually, or
collectively, reach the point where a conditional sentence would reflect the denunciation
and deterrence required to appropriately reflect the gravity of his offences
and his blameworthiness.

mr.
torres is a young, religious, studious, obedient, hard-working, young man.
however, he is also a pedophile who repeatedly searched for, accessed,
possessed, and duplicated images and videos of children being sexually violated
for his sexual pleasure over a significant period of time.

it
was submitted mr. torres’ crime was “viewing the images”. this is a simplistic
characterization that minimizes the effort required, and the actions taken, to
be able to get to the “crime” of “viewing the images” from the dark web.

every
time mr. torres searched for, accessed, possessed, and viewed an image or a
video of a child being sexually violated, it was obvious that the child he was
looking at on his phone was being horrendously violated. it was obvious that
these children were being used in a depraved and degrading way. it was obvious
their sexual humiliation and violation was being documented for his pedophilic
viewing. he knew it was illegal since high school. he knew it was morally
wrong. he was blocked by google.

i
do not accept that mr. torres’ did not understand he was causing any harm. i
find his blameworthiness to be high, the severity of his offences grave.

to
sentence him to a conditional sentence would be to permit the principles of
restraint and rehabilitation to overwhelm the primary principles of deterrence
and denunciation. a conditional sentence would not be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
ss. 718
to
718.2, or
the principles articulated in
friesen
as they apply
in this case.

a
jail sentence is warranted.
soira

accessing
and possessing child pornography are primary designated offences per
s.
490.011(1)
(a) of the
criminal code, and thus subject to a
soira
order.

a
soira
order
in this case is not mandatory given that the sentence imposed is under two
years.

the
crown seeks the order, and the defence disputes its necessity and relied on
r.
v. ndhlovu,
2022 scc 38,
r. v. m.l.,
 o.j. no. 3479
ocj, and
r.
v. wicker,, o.j. no. 548 (scj).

section 490.012(3) requires me to make the order unless i
am satisfied:
(a) there would
be no connection between making the order and the purpose of helping police
services prevent or investigate crimes of a sexual nature by requiring the
registration of information relating to sex offenders under that
act;
or
(b) the impact of
the order on the person, including on their privacy or liberty, would be
grossly disproportionate to the public interest in protecting society through
the effective prevention or investigation of crimes of a sexual nature, to be
achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders under
that
act.

i
am to consider the following factors per s. 490.01(4):
a.
the nature and
seriousness of the designated offence;
b.
the victim’s
ages and other personal characteristics;
c.
the nature and circumstances
of the relationship between the person and the victim;
d.
the personal
characteristics and circumstances of the person;
e.
the person’s
criminal history, including the age at which they previously committed any
offence and the length of time for which they have been at liberty without
committing an offence;
f.
the
opinions of experts who have examined the person; and
g.
any other
factors the court considers relevant.

the
offences here are serious and the children depicted in the exploitation
material are young, some very young. though mr. torres is young, with no
criminal record, and positive rehabilitative potential, his diagnosis of
pedophilia, is a lifelong condition and concerning. his condition, desires, fantasies,
and preferences will require management all his life. this places him at risk
to re-offend, though i appreciate it is on the low end compared to those with
similar child sexual misconduct.

the
impact of the order on mr. torres would not be grossly disproportionate to the
public interest in protecting society through the effective prevention or
investigation of crimes of a sexual nature.

there
are safety concerns that justify such an order and that do not allow me to find
that the limited exceptions set out in s. 490.012(3) have been met.
section 161 order

accessing
and possessing child pornography are also designated offences per s. 161(1.1)
(a). the court may consider making the order subject to conditions or
exemptions that the court directs per s. 161(1). the prohibited conduct relates
to the presence of the offender in areas with children, working with children,
having contact with children and accessing the internet.

the
crown seeks the order but made no submissions on the appropriate duration.

the
defence opposed the order but made little reference to the issue in
submissions.

dr.
kalia opined that although he found mr. torres to be a low risk to re-offend, he
stated:
“notwithstanding this statement, out of an abundance of
caution, i would not support him being in the presence of a child
unsupervised…”


as a result, i find that a s.161 order prohibiting and/or
limiting mr. torres’ presence in areas with children, or accessing and working
with children is warranted.

given mr. torres’ age, the concern with contact
with children, and his sexual preference for children, i find that a s. 161
order of equal duration to the
soira
order is warranted.
vii.
sentence

given
mr. torres’ diagnosis of pedophilia and dr. kalia’s evidence that in his
experience, programming at the provincial ontario correctional institute (oci),
would be beneficial to mr. torres, i recommend that mr. torres serve his
sentence in that institution.

mr.
torres will serve an 18-month jail sentence for accessing child pornography and
an 18-month jail sentence concurrent, for possession of child pornography.

there
will be a 2-year probation order with terms subject to submissions.

i
will also make the following ancillary orders:
i.
a
soira
order for 20 years pursuant to s. 490.013(2)(b) on both
counts.
ii.
a s. 161 order for 20 years with the terms subject to submissions.
iii.
a forfeiture order for the child sexual abuse material pursuant and
items seized pursuant to s. 164 (4).
iv.
a mandatory dna order pursuant to s. 487.04(a) on both
counts.
released: june 2, 2025
signed:
justice cidalia c. g. faria

exhibit 1: agreed statement of facts, kayil torres, january 10, 2025.

exhibit 2: sealed usb with sample material seized from mr. torres’ device.

exhibit 6: pre-sentence report, kayil torres, march 19, 2025.

exhibits 5a to 5i.

exhibit 4, kayil torres, counselling report, august 9, 2024, update march 17,
2025, author shikha harish, registered psychotherapist.

exhibit 3: kayil torres, psychosexual report, clinical & forensic
psychological services, july 21, 2024, author dr. monik kalia, c. psych.

exhibit 3 at pg. 13.

exhibit 3 at pg. 14.

exhibit 3 at pg. 15.

exhibit 3 at pg. 15.

exhibit 3, pg. 16.