WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that
the following notice be attached to the file:
A non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding
has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This
subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4  Order restricting publication
—
sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2),
the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)  any of
the following offences:
(i)     an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)    any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)  two or
more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is
an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in
respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
),
the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
)  at the
first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)  on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who
fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or
subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary
conviction.
CITATION:
R. v. Esliger
, 2025 ONCJ 229
DATE: February 6, 2025
Information No. 0411-998-22-11400960
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
v.
ALEX
ESLIGER
R E A S O N S   F O R   S E N T E N C E
DELIVERED BY THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE R.
WADDEN
on February 6, 2025, at
OTTAWA,
Ontario
APPEARANCES
:
L. Welch                  Counsel
for the Crown
C. Dostaler               Counsel
for Alex Esliger
Victim impact
4
Background of Alex
Esliger
5
Principles of
sentencing
8
Mitigating and
aggravating factors
14
WADDEN J.
(Orally):
[
1
]
On December 10, 2021, Sgt. Alex Esliger of the
Canadian Armed Forces committed a sexual assault on E.L., while they were both
deployed on an overseas mission in Erbil, Iraq.  This is a case of sexual
assault in the Canadian Armed Forces that was tried in civilian court. After
trial before me, Sgt. Esliger was convicted and is now before me for sentence.
[
2
]
Alex Esliger was a sergeant in the Canadian Armed
Forces in December 2021 and was on deployment in Erbil, Iraq.  He had served a
long career in the military and had been on previous overseas deployments.  The
victim, E.L., was a younger member of the Forces, of a lower rank of corporal,
and was on her first deployment.
[
3
]
On December 10, 2021, Sgt. Esliger invited E.L. to
his quarters for a night of drinking with a small group of other military members
who were his good friends.  After many hours, E.L. was drunk and Sgt. Esliger
persuaded her to go to his bedroom to sleep before she had to report for duty. 
There were two bunks in the room and E.L. lay on one, wanting to rest before
her duty shift.  She did not want to be seen on the base before she sobered up,
as drinking was not permitted on this deployment in Iraq.
[
4
]            Sgt. Esliger
also went into the room.  While E.L. was on the bunk, he disrobed and he got
into the bunk on which she was laying.  Without her consent, he touched her leg
and her inner thigh, and removed her pants.   He began to digitally penetrate
her.  He then touched her anus to the point of making it hurt.   He tried to
perform oral sex on her but she dissuaded him by saying that she was not
showered, so he stopped, at which point the digital penetration started again.  He
took hold of her hand and put it on his penis.  He tried to have intercourse
with her but was not successful because he was not erect.  He kissed her and
licked one of her nipples.  After the unsuccessful attempt at intercourse, he
digitally penetrated her again.  The assault ended when E.L. finally told him
he had to stop because people were nearby and could hear.
[
5
]            After
trial, Mr. Esliger was convicted of one count of sexual assault and he is
before me for sentencing.
[
6
]            The
parties are far apart in their sentence positions.  Counsel for Mr. Esliger
seeks a conditional sentence of 18 to 24 months, plus three years of
probation.  The Crown seeks a penitentiary sentence of three years.
Victim impact
[
7
]
E.L. filed a detailed and moving Victim Impact
Statement.  She spoke of the feelings she suffered because of the sexual
assault, how she felt lost, dirty, stupid, taken advantage of and helpless. 
She spoke of the difficulty of being in an intimate relationship after this. 
She said she even felt revulsion at seeing any man who looked like Mr. Esliger
in public.
[
8
]
Significantly, she also spoke about the impact
on her career.  E.L. was a successful member of the military, who put a lot of
energy into her career and was recognized for it through promotions.  Her deployment
to Iraq was part of her rapid advancement.  She spoke of the making of this
accusation and disclosure of the sexual assault, and how it isolated her.  The
cascade of consequences from the sexual assault, including the emotional impact
it had on her, led her to withdraw her application to special forces and a loss
of career opportunities.  It impacted her ability to advance as a member of the
Armed Forces, a career she loves and for which she seems well-suited.
[
9
]
E.L. concluded by questioning whether she “would
do it again, the denunciation and the testifying in court”, recognizing “it was
a hell of a journey”.  This is a question that many witnesses no doubt ask, and
E.L. stated that yes, she would come forward again, recognizing the importance
of accountability and the stopping of such behaviours.
Background of Alex Esliger
[
10
]
Turning to the background of Mr. Esliger, I have
before me a Presentence Report and letters from family, friends, and
professionals who are dealing with Mr. Esliger’s physical and mental health
issues.  The Presentence Report was prepared by authorities in Alberta, where
Mr. Esliger currently lives.
[
11
]
Mr. Esliger is a 40‑year-old married man
with two children.  He grew up in New Brunswick and joined the Armed Forces as
a reservist in 2001 and regular forces in 2006.  He started in infantry and
climbed the ranks quickly.  As a reservist, he was a Master Corporal by 2003. 
In 2015, he received a Canadian Forces Decoration medal for 12 years of good
conduct.  In 2022, he was posted to Cold Lake, Alberta as a Warrant Officer. 
His superiors describe him as being professional and accomplishing all tasks
assigned to him.  Recently his ability to work full-time has been impaired,
reduced to three hours per week due to back pain, mental health and effects of
prescription medications.
[
12
]
Mr. Esliger has a stable family life and his
wife continues to support him, both in an interview with the probation officer
and in a letter filed with the court.  Mr. Esliger has a limited social network
in his community, although he maintains regular contact with friends across the
country by telephone.  Numerous letters of support were submitted by his
parents and other family members, and by friends who have known him for many
years.
[
13
]
Mr. Esliger has some mental health issues,
having been diagnosed with Anxiety in 2022, Depression in 2023 and PTSD in
2023, and he has experienced suicidal thoughts.  He attends regular counselling
with mental health professionals.  Although he and collateral sources deny
substance abuse issues, he reports that he was placed on counselling and
probation by the military for drinking overseas, in 2021.  His psychiatrist,
Dr. James Hanley, alludes to Mr. Esliger acknowledging that the incident before
me resulted from “disinhibition associated with alcohol.”  The author of the Presentence
Report identified substance abuse, limited peer associations in his current
community and mental health as areas of concern.
[
14
]
Mr. Esliger has a significant issue with his
physical health, having undergone emergency back surgery shortly before the
scheduled sentencing in this matter last year.  He was physically immobilized
and the imposition of sentence has been adjourned to allow for physiotherapy
and recovery.
[
15
]
There will be significant impacts on Mr. Esliger
as a result of this sentence.  There is a risk he will be discharged from the
military and lose his livelihood, which may result in the family having to sell
their home and relocate.  His wife expressed concern that a period of
incarceration will impact Mr. Esliger’s mental health due to separation from
his children, and would be detrimental to the stability and structure of their
children’s lives.
[
16
]
Mr. Esliger was convicted of sexual assault
under s. 271 of the
Criminal Coce
.  The maximum penalty is 10 years
jail.  There is no minimum sentence.
Principles of sentencing
[
17
]
The procedures and principles of sentencing are
set out in
s. 718
to
718.3
of the
Criminal Code
and include denunciation
of unlawful conduct and the harm done to victims, deterrence of the offender
and others from committing offences, rehabilitation and promotion of a sense of
responsibility and acknowledgement of the harm done.  Similarly situated
offenders who have committed the same offence should be treated in a similar
fashion.  This includes consideration of the fact that this is a first
conviction and sentence for Mr. Esliger, and principles of restraint apply.  The
Court must consider the least restrictive sanctions that may be appropriate.
[
18
]
Sentencing is a very specific process, and the
sentence must be tailored to each case.  As stated in s. 718.2, “a sentence
should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or
mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender”, including
the impact on the victim.
[
19
]
As the Supreme Court stated in
R. v. Parranto
,
2021 SCC 46
, there are no binding starting points for sentence, and ranges
suggested by higher courts are “guidelines, not hard and fast rules.”  Judges
must individualize their approach to sentence for the particular offence
committed by the offender, taking into account the harm to the victim and the
effect on the community.
[
20
]
The facts of the case before me must be
carefully considered.  Much has been made in defence submissions that this
sexual assault did not involve forced intercourse or penetration with the
penis.  E.L. testified that Mr. Esliger attempted to penetrate her with his
penis but was unsuccessful.  Evidence filed on sentencing indicates he suffers
from erectile dysfunction.  Mr. Esliger did attempt intercourse with E.L. and
did repeatedly digitally penetrate her.  He tried to perform oral sex on her,
and he made digital contact with her anus.
[
21
]
As the Crown noted in submissions, the Supreme
Court spoke emphatically on the principles of sentencing for sexual offences in
the 2020 decision of
R. v.
Friesen
,
2020 SCC 9
, in which the
Court cautioned sentencing judges to not simply draw distinctions in sentence
based on whether penetration by the penis took place.  The Court said, at para.
142, that “courts should not assume that there is any clear correlation between
the type of physical act and the harm to the victim.”  Sentencing judges must
consider the “emotional and psychological harm to the victim that all forms of
sexual violence can cause.”  To again quote the Court at para. 142,
“Sexual violence that does not involve penetration is still ‘extremely serious’
and can have a devasting effect on the victim.”
[
22
]
In the case before me, E.L. was subjected to forced
digital penetration and attempts by Mr. Esliger to force intercourse on
her.
[
23
]
In
R. v A.J.K.
,
2022 ONCA 487
, the Court
of Appeal stated, at paras. 73 to 74, that:
“A
sexual assault involving forced penetration is a sexual assault involving
forced penetration. […]
All
sexual assaults are serious acts of violence.  They reflect the wrongful
exploitation of the victim whose personal autonomy, sexual integrity, and dignity
is harmfully impacted while being treated as nothing more than an object.  Whether
intimate partners or strangers, victims of sexual violence suffer profound
emotional and physical harm and their lives can be forever altered.”
[
24
]
The Court further stated, at para. 68, that:
“Numerous
decisions from this court and others have reinforced a range of three to five
years, and in some cases even higher, in the context of sexual assaults of
non-intimate partners involving forced oral, vaginal, or anal penetration …”
[
25
]
Citing the Supreme Court in
Parranto
, the
Court of Appeal noted that a range is not fixed but provides a guidance to
sentencing judges.  The Court noted, however, at para. 77, that:
“Absent
some highly mitigating factor, the forced penetration of another person will
typically attract a sentence of at least three years in the penitentiary.”
[
26
]
In the case before me, the impact of the sexual
assault on E.L. was severe.  There is little difference that the penetration
was penile or digital, or that the attempts at penile penetration were
unsuccessful.  The violation was the same.  It is worth noting as well that the
circumstances of the assault were in a closed, dark room, with E.L. boxed in in
a military bunk bed, having been lured there after a night of drinking.
[
27
]
As mentioned, the defence seeks a conditional
sentence.  Defence has cited a number of cases in which a conditional sentence
was imposed for sexual assault.  In
R. v. Morgan
,
2021 ONCJ 100
, a
conditional sentence of 18 months was imposed; in
R. v. Browne
,
2021
ONSC 6097
, a conditional sentence of two years less a day was imposed; in
R.
v. Simkins
,
2023 ABPC 30
, a conditional sentence of two years less a day
was imposed; in
R. v. G.T.
,
2022 ONSC 2619
, a conditional sentence of 12
months was imposed; in
R. v. Holland
,
2022 ONSC 1540
, a conditional
sentence of eight months was imposed; and in
R. v. Cacdac
,
2022 ONCJ 492
,
a conditional sentence was imposed.
[
28
]
The defence also relied on the more recent decision
of
R. v. L.H.
,
2024 ONCJ 103
, in which a conditional sentence was sought
but the Court imposed an 18-month jail sentence for a sexual assault with
intercourse.  In that case, it is noteworthy that the 18 months was the maximum
sentence available since the Crown had, perhaps erroneously, proceeded
summarily.  The sentencing judge rejected a conditional sentence, finding, at
para. 32, that:
“…
a conditional sentence of imprisonment must also be consistent with the
fundamental principles of sentencing set out in the
Criminal Code
.  I
find that, in this case, a conditional sentence of imprisonment would not be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence nor adequately fulfill the
principles of denunciation and deterrence.  The seriousness of the offence, the
significant violation of the victim’s sexual and physical integrity and the
impact on the victim requires a custodial sentence.”
[
29
]
In
R. v. S.W.
,
2024 ONCA 173
, the Court of Appeal also considered a case of sexual assault
by intercourse, and reversed the conditional sentence imposed by the trial
judge in that case.  The Court held, at para. 46:
“It
appears that the trial judge may have been influenced by the fact that the
respondent was a first-time offender, had a strong relationship with his
parents and children, and had good and stable employment.   However, these
considerations do not justify the imposition of a sentence below two years,
which is required before a conditional sentence can be imposed.  Given the
seriousness of the offence, and in the absence of any factors that would
justify departing from the three to five years sentencing range, the
conditional sentence of two years less a day does not sufficiently meet the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence which, as held in
A.J.K.
, at
para
83
, are an ‘overarching sentencing principle’ in cases of this nature.”
[
30
]
That Court held that a three-year sentence was
fit in that case, holding that such a sentence at the lower end of the range
was appropriate for a first-time offender with close family ties and support.
[
31
]
Without parsing the details of each of the
conditional sentence cases cited by the defence, it is clear that there
are circumstances in which conditional sentences have been imposed for sexual
assault offences even since the Supreme Court
decision in
Friesen
, and some
may have been imposed since the Court of Appeal
decision in
R. v. A.J.K
.
However, on my reading of the law, the Court of Appeal
in the
R. v. S.W.
decision has continued to develop the law to make it clear that principles of
denunciation and deterrence require the imposition of a penitentiary sentence
in cases of a penetrative sexual assault, absent highly exceptional
circumstances.  The Court made it clear that the circumstances of the offender
in that case, which are similar to those of Mr. Esliger, did not justify
departing from the range of three to five years and the imposition of a
conditional sentence.
Mitigating and aggravating factors
[
32
]
In considering the mitigating and aggravating
factors in this case, I will begin with the mitigating factors, which are the
personal circumstances of Mr. Esliger.  He is before the court as a first
offender, with no criminal record.  He has strong support from his family, including
his wife, and friends in the community.  Aside from this offence, he appears to
be of good character.  He has had long and steady employment in the Canadian Armed
Forces, having advanced well in his career and having served his country on
numerous overseas deployments.  He has mental health issues and will require
ongoing psychological and psychiatric treatment.  He has physical issues,
notably his recovery from back surgery for which he has spent most of the last
year.
[
33
]
The aggravating factors include the
victimization of E.L., a fellow member of the Armed Forces, on a military base
where she was a relative newcomer and outsider to the group stationed there. 
Mr. Esliger took advantage of her state after a night of drinking and the
military context made this worse for her, since she knew that none of the
deployed members were permitted to be drinking.  Mr. Esliger assaulted her as
she was pinned between his heavy body and a wall, in a bunk bed, in a pitch-dark
room.  He violated her physical integrity by penetrating her with his fingers,
licking her nipples and attempting oral sex and intercourse.
[
34
]
The impact on E.L. was severe.  Her reporting of
this crime resulted in further loss to her.  She felt ostracized and her
military career suffered.  She suffered significant psychological harm.  Her
detailed statement describing the hardship subsequent to the assault, including
the court process, is poignant and illustrates what was described by Associate
Chief Justice Fairburn in
A.J.K.
, “victims of sexual violence suffer
profound emotional and physical harm and their lives can be forever altered”.
[
35
]
It is aggravating that this assault took place
in a military context.  As E.L. was on deployment overseas, her movements
and interactions were limited to those with whom she was serving.  Members
serving on these deployments are isolated from family and friends and the
familiarity and safety of home.  At the very least, serving members would
expect a supportive and safe environment with their fellow members, on base. 
To sexually violate E.L. in that situation is aggravating.
[
36
]
In
R. v. Royes
,
2013 CM 4034
, a Court Martial
case, a military judge imposed a sentence of three years on a Master Corporal
for a sexual assault on a fellow member whom he took advantage of while she was
drunk.  The military judge, Lieutenant-Colonel Perron, said, at para. 33, that
a sexual assault:
“… is
a most heinous crime in the military context and it is far from being a simple
breach of discipline.  It is both a crime against the physical, psychological
and emotional integrity of the victim and against the dignity of the victim as
well as a significant attack on our values of respect and trust between fellow
service members.”
[
37
]
He went on to describe, at para. 34:
“… the
impact this sexual assault has on the fundamental principles of cohesion, trust
and respect that are needed to ensure a strong and disciplined military force. 
[…] this type of conduct hurts the victim and degrades our operational
capacity.”
[
38
]
In this case, principles of denunciation and
deterrence are paramount.  Society must denounce all forms of sexual violence. 
Other men in similar situations to Mr. Esliger, whether in a military or
civilian context, must be deterred from committing acts that violate the sexual
integrity of a victim.
[
39
]
Mr. Esliger is to be given credit for his lack
of a criminal record, for the fact that this is a first conviction and jail
sentence for him, and for the other positive factors of his personal
circumstances that have been presented before me.  I find that the appropriate
range of sentence for the sexual assault he committed on E.L. is three to five
years; Mr. Esliger will be given a sentence at the bottom end of that range.
[
40
]
The sentence to be imposed on Mr. Esliger is three
years jail, to be served in a federal penitentiary.  Recommendations are to go
for the treatment of Mr. Esliger’s physical ailments and his psychiatric,
psychological and alcohol issues.
[
41
]
There will be a SOIRA order for the sexual
assault registry, for 20 years.
[
42
]
There will be a prohibition on the ownership of
any firearms, ammunition or explosive substances, except for possible
possession in the military context, for 10 years.
[
43
]
The statutory time can apply for the Victim
Surcharge.
[
44
]
Stand up, Mr. Esliger.
[
45
]
Mr. Esliger, my sentence is that you be imprisoned
for three years, and subject to a SOIRA order, and a sample is to be taken, and
you are prohibited from firearms for 10 years.  You can have a seat, sir.
C. DOSTALER
:  Your
Honour, I apologize.
THE COURT:  Yes
.
C. DOSTALER:  I didn’t hear about the victim fine surcharge
.
THE COURT:  The statutory time, unless you’re seeking an extension
.
C. DOSTALER:  I would ask, Your Honour, if we could waive it even
.  At this point, Mr. Esliger will not be working for that
period of time.  His family won’t have much income.
THE COURT:  It’s a $200 charge
.  The
Criminal
Code
is clear that it can be waived if a person is impecunious.  I see many
impecunious people come before me, but Mr. Esliger is employed and he can pay a
$200 surcharge.
C. DOSTALER:  Okay
.
THE COURT:  Does he need more than 30 days or can it be paid within that
time
?
C. DOSTALER:  He’ll be in custody, so I would ask for longer than that,
Your Honour
.  If we can have at least the three years
that he is in custody.
THE COURT:  Arrangements can be made.  I will allow three months so that
he can figure out the exact arrangements, but it is simply a matter of making
that payment to the Ministry.
C. DOSTALER:  Okay.
CLERK REGISTRAR
:  The
weapons prohibition, is it 109?
THE COURT:  109.
C. DOSTALER
:  Now, the other thing, Your Honour,
is just – I’m sure you’re aware, Mr. Esliger has many medications.  He’s
brought his medications with him.  He also has his prescriptions.  I have them
digital as well, I’ve been able to digitize them as well.  He will bring them
with him, but I wonder if we can attach it to the Information just so that it
doesn’t get lost with all the help he needs to have.
...DISCUSSING DOCUMENTS TO BE ATTACHED TO INFORMATION AND SENT TO
CORRECTIONAL SERVICE OF CANADA
THE COURT:  Mr. Esliger, make sure you make clear to the intake both at
the detention centre where you will be held until you are sent to the federal
system, make sure you make it clear to them what you need, sir, and then when
you are processed for intake in the federal system, make sure you go through
that again with them.  Don’t assume anything follows along.
ALEX ESLIGER:  Certainly.
THE COURT:  You may have to keep on them in the provincial while you are
waiting, you may have to keep on them a bit more.  I expect you will be well
taken care of, free medical needs in the federal system.
ALEX ESLIGER:  Yes, Your Honour.
*******
FORM
3
CERTIFICATE
OF TRANSCRIPT
EVIDENCE
ACT
, subsection 5(2)
I, Lynn Carrière, Authorized Court
Transcriptionist, ACT ID 2366775200, certify that this document is a true and
accurate transcript, produced to the best of my skills and ability, of the
recording of R. v. Alex Esliger in the Ontario Court of Justice held at 161
Elgin Street, Ottawa, Ontario, taken from Recording No. 0411_CR10_20250206_092932__6_WADDENR,
which has been certified in Form 1 by Emma Baker.
February 10, 2025
Date                    Electronic signature of
Lynn Carrière, ACT ID 2366775200
Ontario,
Canada
A certificate
in Form 3 is admissible in evidence and is proof, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, that the transcript is a transcript of the certified recording of
evidence and proceedings in the proceeding that is identified in the
certificate.