The court hearing
this matter directs that the following notice should be attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4   Order restricting publication —
sexual offences.
—(1)   Subject
to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing
that any information that could identify the complainant or a witness shall not
be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in
proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any of the following offences:
(i)    an offence under section 151,
152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 172, 172.1, 173,
210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.02, 279.03, 346 or 347,
(ii)    an offence under section 144
(rape), 145 (attempt to commit rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156
(indecent assault on male) or 245 (common assault) or subsection 246(1)
(assault with intent) of the
Criminal Code
,
chapter C-34
of the Revised
Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983, or
(iii)    an offence under subsection
146(1) (sexual intercourse with a female under 14) or (2) (sexual intercourse
with a female between 14 and 16) or section 151 (seduction of a female between
16 and 18), 153 (sexual intercourse with step-daughter), 155 (buggery or
bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166 (parent or guardian procuring defilement)
or 167 (householder permitting defilement) of the
Criminal Code
,
chapter
C-34
of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before
January 1, 1988; or
(
b
)    two or more offences being dealt
with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in
any of subparagraphs (
a
)(i) to (iii).
(2)
Mandatory order on
application.
—   In proceedings in respect of the offences
referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or
justice shall
(
a
)    at the first reasonable opportunity,
inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the complainant of the
right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on application made by the
complainant, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order.
.   .   .
486.6   Offence.
—(1)   Every person who
fails to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, (2) or (3) or
486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v. Cousineau
, 2025 ONCJ 425
DATE:  2025-08-14
ONTARIO  COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS
   MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
   AND  —
ROBERT
  COUSINEAU
Before
Justice Mara Greene
Reasons for Judgment released August 14, 2025
S. Rothman
……………………………………….……………………..….… for the Crown
J. Berkes……………………………………………….....................
for Robert Cousineau
Greene, J:
[
1
] Mr. Cousineau is charged with ten offences all related
to items found on a cellular telephone seized from an apartment on Dufferin
Street on February 8, 2024.   The charges are: accessing, possessing and making
available child pornography, making child pornography x2, sexual assault,
sexual interference and three counts of breaching court orders.
[
2
] The essence of the Crown’s case is that a cellular telephone
was found in the living room of unit […] Dufferin Street on February 8, 2024. 
At the time the phone was located, Mr. Cousineau and a woman the police claim
is Melisa Llamzon were in the unit.
[
3
] The cell phone had a host of photos and videos on it.
It is conceded that some the photos and videos meet the test for child
pornography.  The phone also had a number of photographs of Mr. Cousineau, some
of which are clearly “selfies”.   The police also found a series of documents on
the phone with the name Robert Cousineau on them.  These included a lease for
the unit with Mr. Cousineau and Ms. Llamzon listed as tenants, transportation
ticket receipts in the name of Robert Cousineau, a CV in the name of Robert
Cousineau, what appears to be a work time sheet for a Robert Cousineau and a
job letter to a Robert Cousineau.
[
4
] The telephone had an application on it called “Teleguard’. 
 D.C. Tamas testified that she personally opened this application.  Upon
opening “Teleguard”, D.C. Tamas found a contact list.  She “clicked” on each
name which then opened a screen with lengthy chats between the person listed in
the contact list and the user of the phone.   Many of the communications
included child pornography and descriptive comments by both the user of the
phone and the people writing in about their sexual desires towards young
persons.   D.C. Tamas testified that she was able to easily access the contents
of “Teleguard”, but conceded that she had no knowledge of how the program
worked.  D.C. Tamas took screen shots of all the chats within the Teleguard application
and they were made exhibits at trial.
[
5
] According to D.C. Tamas, a program called Celebrite was
used to extract contents of the phone and categorize the contents.    The
report generated by the Celebrite program was filed as an exhibit at trial
along with the documents identified by the program.
[
6
] A LACE report was also prepared and made an exhibit at
trial.  D.C. Tamas testified that LACE is a tool the police use to categorize
images  into three categories, those that are identified as being child
pornography, those that need to be investigated further and those that are not child
pornography.  The report includes the images and videos so that anyone looking
at it can confirm for themselves that the image is child pornography.
[
7
] Many of the documents, photographs and videos
identified in the LACE and Celebrite reports were also viewed by Det. Rahaman.  According
to an agreed statement of fact, these items were found in the phone’s photo
gallery and download folder.  Det. Rahaman took photographs of the images and
documents he found in the photo gallery and download folder.  These photographs
were also made exhibits at trial.
[
8
] According to the LACE report, 101 images and 45 videos
identified as child pornography were located on the phone.
[
9
] Prior to trial, counsel for Mr. Cousineau filed an
application alleging a violation of his rights as guaranteed by sections 10(a)
and 10(b) of the
Charter
.  Mr. Cousineau sought to exclude a statement
he made to police after his arrest.   After all the evidence was presented
counsel for Mr. Cousineau asked to adjourn the remainder of the trial as he
wanted to prepare fulsome submissions on the
Charter
issue and the trial
proper.  He further advised that he wanted a ruling on the
Charter
issue
before making submissions on the trial proper.    After a short recess, Crown
counsel advised that he was no longer going to rely on the statement made by
Mr. Cousineau to police.  This obviated the need for me to address the
Charter
issue.  The matter was adjourned to June 24, 2025 for submissions on the
trial proper.
[
10
] On May 22, 2025, some three weeks after the evidence
had concluded, counsel for Mr. Cousineau filed a new
Charter
application
repeating the allegation of breaches of  sections 10(a) and 10(b) of the
Charter
and adding in a section 7 breach.  Pursuant to the new application, Mr.
Cousineau was now seeking to either exclude the cellular telephoned seized by
police as a remedy under section 24(2) of the
Charter,
or a stay of
proceedings as a remedy pursuant to section 24(1) of the
Charter.
[
11
] Crown counsel filed a detailed notice of response
arguing that given the late filing of the application, it should be summarily dismissed. 
In the alternative, Crown counsel argued that while there was a section 10(b)
breach, there was no section 7 breach. He further argued that the remedy sought
was not appropriate.
[
12
] In addition to the
Charter
issues raised, counsel
for Mr. Cousineau  further argued that there was no admissible evidence that
the cell phone belonged to Mr. Cousineau and as such the offences have not been
made out.  He further argued that the charges of sexual assault and sexual
interference were not proven beyond a reasonable doubt because the Crown failed
to prove that E.M. was the victim of the offence.
Issues and the Law
Charter issue
(a)
Summary of the evidence
[
13
] On February 8, 2024, D.C. Kama and D.C. Tamas attended
at
unit […] Dufferin Street to execute a search warrant in relation to
offences of possessing, accessing and making available child pornography.  The
warrant was provided to Mr. Cousineau, who was in the unit at the time along with
a person the police said was Melissa Llamzon.    Upon receipt of the warrant,
Mr. Cousineau sought clarification.  D.C. Tamas responded that they had a
warrant to search for electronic evidence in relation to two IP addresses.  Despite
the request for clarification, D.C. Tamas  did not verbally list the charges
under investigation.
[
14
] The police arrived at approximately 6:00 a.m.  Shortly
thereafter a phone was found in the living room.  The police found child
pornography on the phone and immediately arrested Mr. Cousineau for possession
of child pornography.  The arrest took place at 6:20a.m.
[
15
] Mr. Cousineau was advised of his right to counsel and
indicated that he wanted to speak to duty counsel.
[
16
] At 7:00 am, D.C. Tamas was shown a video on the seized
cellular telephone of Mr. Cousineau kissing a young girl.  She was also shown chats
on an application called “Teleguard” that included a picture of Mr. Cousineau
touching the same young girl’s buttocks.   As a  result of viewing these videos
D.C. Tamas had evidence that Mr. Cousineau committed the additional offences of
accessing child pornography, making child pornography, making child pornography
available, sexual assault and sexual interference.   Despite having both the
information from the search warrant about other offences, and the evidence from
the cellular telephone, D.C. Tamas did not arrest Mr. Cousineau for these
offences nor was he even alerted to the fact that the police were investigating
him for these additional offences.
[
17
] At 7:15 am, D.C. Tamas and D.C. Kama returned to the
police station with Mr. Cousineau.  D.C. Kama contacted duty counsel and
advised counsel that Mr. Cousineau was arrested for possession of child pornography. 
Mr. Cousineau spoke to counsel and then was interviewed by D.C. Kama.  The interview
started at 8:45 am, long after the police had evidence of the additional
offences.
[
18
] During the course of the interview, D.C. Kama advised
Mr. Cousineau that he was not attempting to collect evidence and investigate
offences.  D.C. Kama conceded that this was a lie.
[
19
] At trial, D.C. Kama testified that it is the practice
of his unit to arrest a person for possession of child pornography as soon as
child pornography is located.   While he had suspicion of other offences, he
did not advise duty counsel or Mr. Cousineau that he was investigating other
offences.  D.C. Kama testified that it was not his decision about what charges
should be laid and it was his practice to only notify duty counsel or Mr.
Cousineau about the charges laid as opposed to all the charges being
investigated.  D.C. Kama further testified that he thought Mr. Cousineau was
aware of the charges of making child pornography available and of accessing
child pornography because they were listed on the warrant.
[
20
] D.C. Tamas testified that it is also her practice and
the policy of her unit to arrest for possession of child pornography as soon as
it is found.  She further testified that after seeing the videos and chats on
the phone, which occurred prior to the interview, she had grounds to arrest Mr.
Cousineau for  additional offences.  D.C. Tamas testified that she made a
conscious decision not to arrest Mr. Cousineau or advise him of these offenses
before the interview.  D.C. Tamas testified that there was a victim in the
videos, and she wanted to identify this girl.
Analysis
[
21
] I appreciate that Crown’s concern about the late
notice of the
Charter
application.  In my view the remedy was to provide
the Crown an opportunity to re-open his case as opposed to summarily dismiss an
application that was not frivolous.    Crown counsel advised that he did not
wish to call further evidence.  As such, the application was heard on the
evidence already before the court.
(a)
The Charter Breaches
[
22
] There is no dispute that Mr. Cousineau’s rights as
guaranteed by sections 10(a) and 10(b) of the
Charter
were violated.  At
the time of the interview, Mr. Cousineau was detained, and the police had
grounds to arrest him for  a series of serious offences.  The police
intentionally failed to advise Mr. Cousineau of this and as such, he was unable
to obtain meaningful advice from counsel prior  to being interviewed by D.C.
Kama.
[
23
] Mr. Cousineau also alleged a breach of his section 7
rights. It is alleged that the D.C. Kama’s intentional failure to advise Mr.
Cousineau that he was being investigated for additional offences amounted to a
dirty trick and undermined Mr. Cousineau’s right to remain silent.  Crown
counsel argued that given Mr. Cousineau’s admission that the statement made was
voluntary, there is no  s.7 breach.
In
R. v. Singh,
2007 SCC 48
, the Supreme
court of Canada held that in all cases where “an obvious person in authority is
interrogating a person who is in detention”  proof beyond a reasonable doubt of
voluntariness will be determinative of the s.7 issue (
R. v. Singh
, supra,
at
paras
37 and 40
).  This is because they are “functionally equivalent”.  I agree
with Crown counsel.  In the case at bar, Mr. Cousineau has conceded that even
with D.C. Kama’s trickery and his failure to notify Mr. Cousineau of all the
charges he was facing, Mr Cousineau exercised his own free will when he spoke
to D.C. Kama.  If D.C. Kama’s failure to alert Mr. Cousineau of the extent of
his jeopardy and his lie about the nature of the investigation affected Mr.
Cousineau’s will to make a statement, then the statement would have been made
involuntarily.    In light of this concession, I find no section  7 breach.
[
24
] Even if I am mistaken about the absence of a section 7
breach, the facts supporting the breach mirror the facts supporting the section
10(a) and (b) breach and as such, it would not meaningfully alter the section
24(1) and 24(2) analysis.
(b)
Remedy
(i)
Section 24(2) of the Charter
[
25
] The first issue to consider under section 24(2) of the
Charter
is whether the evidence that counsel seeks to exclude was
“obtained in a manner that violated the
Charter
“.   In assessing
whether the evidence was “obtained in manner”, I must be mindful that this is
just a gateway issue and as such, I must be generous in the application of this
requirement (
R. v. Pino
,
2016 ONCA 389
at para
54
).  In determining if
the evidence was “obtained in a manner”, I must consider whether the breach was
temporally, causally or contextually linked to the
Charter
offending
conduct.
[
26
] In the case at bar, the cellular telephone was located
well before the
Charter
breach.  There is clearly no causal connection
between the seizure of the cellular phone and the failure to advise Mr.
Cousineau of all the charges he was potentially facing.  There was, in my view,
however, a temporal connection in that the breaches occurred within a short
time of the seizure of the phone.  I therefore find that the evidence was
obtained in a manner that violated the
Charter
and as such a section 24(2)
remedy is potentially available.
[
27
]
In
R. v. Grant
,
2009 SCC 32 (CanLII)
,
[2009] 2
S.C.R. 353
the Supreme Court of Canada outlined the test for exclusion of
evidence under section 24(2). The Court stated at paragraph 71:
When faced
with an application for exclusion under s. 24(2), a court must assess and
balance the effect of admitting the evidence on society’s confidence in the
justice system having regard to:
(1)
The
seriousness of the
Charter
-infringing state conduct (admission may send
a message that the justice system condones serious state misconduct)
(2)
The impact
of the breach on the
Charter
-protected interests of the accused
(admission may send the message that individual rights count for little), and
(3)
Society’s
interest in the adjudication of the case on its merits.
[
28
]
My role on a section 24(2) application is to balance the assessment under each
of these lines of inquiry to determine whether, considering all the
circumstances, admission of the evidence would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute.
[
29
]     Under the first prong of the
24(2) analysis, it is incumbent on trial judges to assess the seriousness of
the violation in terms of the “gravity of the offending conduct by state
authorities”.  The seriousness of the state-offending conduct lies along a
continuum where on the one end the evidence is obtained through inadvertence or
minor violations and at the other end evidence is obtained though wilful or
reckless disregard for
Charter
rights.   As was
noted in
R. v. Grant
,
supra,
at paragraphs
73-74
, state conduct falling on this latter side of
the spectrum will “inevitably have a negative effect on the public confidence
in the rule of law and risk bringing the administration of justice into
disrepute”.
[
30
] In the case at bar, it is my view that the offending
conduct was very serious.   In relation to D.C. Kama, it is my view that he was
completely unaware of his obligations.  It is surprising that an officer could
rise to the ranks of detective constable without knowing the basics of his
obligation to alert a detained person of their right to counsel for all offences
under investigation. What is additionally aggravating, is that it is clear from
D.C. Kama’s evidence that he has done this before.     Moreover, D.C. Kama seemed
to think that because Mr. Cousineau had been given a copy of the search
warrant, he knew that he was being detained in relation to these additional
offences.  In my view this is absurd. First of all, the warrant in the case at
bar did not identify a person being investigated.  Secondly, when Mr. Cousineau
asked D.C. Tamas to explain the warrant to him, she only told him what the
police were looking for. She did not advise of him the charges.  Thirdly, assuming
Mr. Cousineau did read the warrant and understood it, a lay person would have
no idea that the other charges were still being investigated if he was only
arrested for one of the offences.
[
31
] D.C. Tamas’ conduct, in my view, is even worse.  In my
view she was well aware of her obligations, had the grounds to make an arrest
and actively chose not to arrest Mr. Cousineau or even notify him that he was
under investigation.  She intentionally deprived him of access to meaningful
advice in relation to the charges for which he was detained. D.C. Tamas’ choice
showed a complete disregard for the
Charter
and the protections
afforded under it.
[
32
] Where the police conduct shows a “systemic disregard”
for the
Charter,
the breach is considered to be even more serious (
R.
v.
Yaghoubi-Araghi,
2025 ONCA 314
at para
27
).  In the case at bar, there
is an element of this being systemic in the sense that D.C. Kama admitted that
it is his usual practice to only notify the accused and counsel about the
charges laid as opposed to those under investigation.   Counsel for Mr.
Cousineau argued, however, that the police misconduct extends beyond D.C.
Kama’s ignorance.  Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that the evidence before
the court is that the entire ICE unit always only charges accused persons with
one count of possession and intentionally delay arresting for additional
offences.   He argued that both D.C Kama and D.C. Tamas admitted that the
decision to undercharge the Applicant and interfere with his ability to receive
meaningful legal advice from counsel was pursuant to and in accordance with ICE
unit policy.  In my view, this is not an accurate summary of the evidence.  D.C.
Kama testified that it is his practice and the practice of those in his unit to
arrest an accused person with possession of child pornography as soon as any
child pornography is found.  He did not testify that the policy was to
undercharge nor did he testify that if other evidence was found they
intentionally avoid charging until after statements were taken.   Similarly,
D.C. Tamas testified that it is the policy of the ICE unit to arrest for
possession of child pornography once child pornography is found.  She was then
asked if it was a policy of the unit to avoid arresting for anything else to
which D.C. Tamas replied “at that point that was the only evidence I had”.    She
at no point agreed with the suggestion that this was the policy of the unit.    In
light of this evidence, I do not find that there is evidence of a systemic
issue within the ICE unit to intentionally undercharge accused persons and deny
them access to counsel.
[
33
] While I am unable to accept counsel’s argument, I want
to be clear that I completely reject D.C. Tamas’ evidence that at the time of
Mr. Cousineau’s interview she only had evidence of possession of child
pornography.  In my view, D.C. Tamas was intentionally dishonest with the court
when she gave this evidence.   Prior to the interview,  D.C. Tamas saw the
video of Mr. Cousineau kissing a young girl and saw messages on the phone where
the user of the phone sent the video to others with sexual comments.  When
pressed, D.C. Tamas reluctantly admitted that she did have evidence that Mr.
Cousineau committed the offences of making  child pornography, making child
pornography available, sexual assault and sexual interference and yet failed to
advise him of this prior to D.C. Kama’s interviewing him.   D.C. Tamas made a
conscious decision to hold back this information.  In  my view, This is
deplorable conduct for a police officer.
[
34
] This prong strongly militates in favour of exclusion of
the cellular telephone.
[
35
] The second prong under section 24(2) of the
Charter
is to consider the impact of the
Charter
breach on the right being
protected.  In the case at bar, the breach went to the heart of what section 10(a)
and 10(b) are meant to protect.   Access to counsel is viewed as the lifeline
for those arrested and held in police custody.  The impact in the case at bar,
however, is reduced by a number of factors.  Firstly, while Mr. Cousineau did
not know the full extent of his jeopardy when he spoke to counsel, he still did
have an opportunity to speak to counsel generally.  While not knowing the
extent of one’s jeopardy can impact a choice to speak to police, Mr. Cousineau would
still have been well positioned to receive general legal advice from duty
counsel.  Secondly, there is no causal connection between the finding of the
cell phone and the
Charter
violation.  As was
noted in
R. v. Miller
2019
ONSC 7417
, the impact of a
Charter
breach is more serious where there
is a causal connection between the 10(b) violation and the discovery of evidence. 
The court stated at para 43 of
R. v. Miller
,
“considering the existence
or strength of any causal connection between the
Charter
breach and the discovery
of evidence at this stage of the s.24(2) analysis is just another way of giving
effect to the concept of discoverability.  The fact that the firearm was
discoverable without the
Charter
breach lessens the impact of the breach
and tends to weigh against the exclusion of evidence”.      Similarly,
in
R.
v. Yaghoubi-Araghi
,
supra,
the court held, “where evidence could
have been obtained in any event without the
Charter
-infringing conduct,
the impact of the breach is lessened and the admission [is] more likely”.  (
R.
v. Yaghoubi-Araghi
,
at para
119
).
[
36
] Moreover, the fact that the Crown is not relying on the
statement made by Mr. Cousineau further lessens the impact of the
Charter
breach. 
As was
stated by the Court of Appeal in
R. v. Yaghoubi-Araghi
, supra,
at
para
29
, “[t]wo matters that the case law has confirmed lessen the negative
impact of a
Charter
breach were present in this case.  The first is that
the Crown would not rely on any statements made by the appellant.  Such
voluntary exclusion lessens the impact of a breach:
Hamouth,
at paras.
42-45, 45-49;
R. v. Trough,
2025 ONCA 69
, at paras.
57-58
”.
[
37
] In my view, when I consider all these factors, this prong
weakly favours exclusion.
[
38
] The final prong is the interest society has on having
a trial on the merits.  The charges in the case at bar are very serious and
relate directly to the safety of children.   There is a strong public interest
in this matter being decided on its merits.   I further find that the fairness
of the trial will not be impacted by the admission of the cellular telephone at
trial.  The  cellular telephone was found prior to the   statement being made
and there is no evidence that the statement obtained as a result of the breach
of Mr. Cousineau’s rights led the police to evidence that they did not already
possess. This prong strongly favours admission of the evidence.
[
39
] The final step of the 24(2) analysis is to balance all
these factors. As was
noted in
R. v. Pino
2016 ONCA 389
, the 24(2)
analysis requires the court to consider the “longer-term repute of the justice
system and society’s confidence in our system”. In my view, when I look at all
the evidence, while the breach was very serious, the absence of a causal
connection, the fact that the Crown voluntarily did not lead the statement made
by Mr. Cousineau, the fact that the cellular telephone was otherwise lawfully
obtained pursuant to a valid search warrant, it is my view that admitting the
evidence would not put the administration of justice into disrepute.  This is not
one of those cases where the court’s need to dissociate itself from the police
conduct is greater than society’s interest in prosecuting Mr. Cousineau for the
very serious offences before the court.
Section
24(1) remedy stay of proceedings
[
40
]
Pursuant to section 24(1) of the
Charter,
a court can impose any remedy
that the court deems appropriate and just in the circumstances.
A
stay of proceeding can be an appropriate and just remedy, but it is the most
drastic remedy.   The Supreme Court of Canada has consistently stated that a stay
of proceedings is a remedy that should only be resorted to in the clearest of
cases given society’s interest in having matters tried on their merits.   In
R.
v. Babos,
[2014] S.C.C. 16, the Supreme Court of Canada summarized the
relevant legal principles as they relate to a stay of proceedings:
(1)
There
must be prejudice to the accused’s right to a fair trial or the integrity of
the justice system that “will be manifested, perpetuated or aggravated through
the conduct of the trial, or by its outcome” (
Regan,
at para 54).
(2)
There
must be no alternative remedy capable of redressing the prejudice; and
(3)
Where
there is still uncertainty over whether a stay is warranted after steps 1 and
2, the court is required to balance the interests in favour of granting a stay,
such as denouncing misconduct and preserving the integrity of the justice
system, against “the interest that society has in having a final decision on
the merits”.
[
41
] Where, there is no issue
about trial fairness, the question is whether the state has engaged in conduct
that is “offensive to societal notions of fair play and decency and whether
proceeding with a trial in the face of that conduct would be harmful to the
integrity of the justice system” (
R. v. Babos, supra
, at para 35,
R.
v. Somerville,
[2017] ONSC 3311 at para 115).
[
42
] As noted in
R. v.
Somerville,
supra, at the second stage the question is whether a remedy
short of a stay of proceedings is capable of redressing the prejudice.  At the
third stage, the court must assess whether “the integrity of the administration
of justice is better protected by a stay or by a trial, despite the impugned
conduct”.  (
R. v. Somerville, supra,
at paragraph 118)
[
43
] In my view, there is no prejudice to Mr. Cousineau’s
right to a fair trial by the conduct of the police since the evidence obtained
as a result of the breach – the statement – was not tendered at trial.   I am
also of the view that the integrity of the justice system will not be impacted
if this proceeding continues. As previously stated, this is not a systemic
issue within the ICE unit, nor does the conduct , while very serious, rise to
the level where the court must disassociate itself form the conduct by stopping
the proceedings.  As a result, Mr. Cousineau’s application for a stay of proceedings
is denied.
Trial Proper
[
44
] Mr. Cousineau faces a number of different charges that
have different essential elements.  While the charges are all different, they
are all dependant on the Crown proving beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau
was in possession of the cellular phone where the child pornography was found. 
In addition to having to prove that Mr. Cousineau had knowledge and control
over the contents of the cellular telephone, for a number of the charges, the
Crown must also prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau was the
person who sent messages on a program on the phone called “Teleguard”.    
Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that the Crown failed to prove these two key
facts and as such, Mr. Cousineau must be found not guilty of all charges.
General legal principles
[
45
] The starting point in understanding any decision in a
criminal court is understanding the burden of proof.  The burden lies on the
Crown to prove each essential element of the offence beyond a reasonable
doubt.  This is a high standard.   Reasonable doubt is based upon reason and
common sense.  It is logically connected to the evidence or the lack of
evidence. It is not enough for me to believe that Mr. Cousineau is possibly or
even probably guilty.  Reasonable doubt requires more.  As a standard,
reasonable doubt lies far closer to absolute certainty than it does to a
balance of probabilities.   In order to convict, a trial judge must be sure
that every essential element of the offence has been made out.
[
46
] In the case at bar there is no direct evidence as to
who owned and used the cellular telephone that was seized from the residence. 
This is a purely circumstantial case.  As such, in order to convict, I must be
satisfied that the only inference available from all the evidence is that Mr.
Cousineau possessed the phone and that Mr. Cousineau sent the messages
identified in the “Teleguard” program.  In assessing the presence or absence of
alternative inferences, I must consider if other plausible theories inconsistent
with guilt exist.   As long as there is an air of reality to an alternative
theory, then the Crown will have failed to prove guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt.
[
47
] Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that the Crown has failed
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau was the sole user of the
cellular telephone and that he was the person using the “Teleguard” program.  Counsel
argued that a person named Mr. Barnes and Ms. Llamzon were both sufficiently
connected to the phone to raise an air of reality to the argument that either
Mr. Barnes, Ms. Llamzon or some other person used this phone.
Preliminary issues:
Hearsay
[
48
] The Crown in the case at bar made a decision to only
call as witnesses the two officers who attended the scene and seized the phone
in question.  The bulk of the evidence linking Mr. Cousineau to the phone,
comes from the phone itself.   Defence counsel argued at trial that I cannot
rely on the contents of the phone as proof of the identity of the owner/user of
the phone  because it is hearsay.  Respectfully, I disagree.
[
49
] In order to be considered hearsay, the evidence in
issue must be used for the truth of its contents.  In the case at bar, the evidence
in question is not being tendered for its truth.  Instead, it is being tendered
for the fact that items bearing Mr. Cousineau’s name and likeness were found on
the phone is circumstantial evidence that Mr. Cousineau was the person that
used the phone and had knowledge and control over the contents of that phone. This
is much like a driver’s license or mail being found in a drawer of a room
alleged to belong to an accused person.  This kind of evidence is frequently
tendered, not for the truth of the contents of the document, but merely for the
fact that the presence of such items in a room is some evidence that the person
named in the document has some meaningful connection to that room.
[
50
] I therefore find that the documents on the phone are admissible
for a non-hearsay purpose – that is as circumstantial evidence that Mr. Cousineau
was the main person that used the phone and had knowledge and control over its
contents.
Dangers of electronic evidence
[
51
] Counsel for Mr. Cousineau further argued that since
the entirety of the Crown’s case is based on the contents of a cellphone
without any expert testimony, I should be left with a doubt about the ownership,
user and content of the phone.  This is because digital evidence, absent some
expert evidence, is inherently suspect.
[
52
]
In
R. v Aslami
,
2021 ONCA 249
, Nordheimer J. held
that there is a real danger in relying on digital information like text
messages or other types of messages in the absence of expert evidence to
explain how the systems work. This is because of the real risk of doctoring or
manipulating data.  Nordheimer J. stated that “it is too easy to use various
pieces of software to create, or manipulate, messages such that they can appear
to be from someone when, in fact, they emanate from an entirely different
person.  Similarly, the timing of the messages can be altered to suit a
particular purpose” (
R. v. Aslami
, supra,
at para
11
).
[
53
] Similarly,
in
R. v. McKinley
,
2022 ONCJ 323
,  Jones
J. commented that courts must be rigorous in their evaluation of digital evidence
in light of how easy it is to manipulate electronic messages.
[
54
] I agree with counsel’s argument that I must be cautious
in using the digital evidence in this case.  I have no expert evidence about
any of the programs used and no witnesses saw Mr. Cousineau use this phone.   This
does not mean that the Crown can never rely on digital evidence alone.  Instead,
it is just one factor to consider when assessing the case as a whole.
Analysis – Count by count
Counts 1 and 2:  Possession and Accessing Child
Pornography.
[
55
] In order to make out both the offences of possession
and accessing child pornography, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Cousineau was the person who had knowledge and control over the phone
and its contents.  It is conceded by Mr. Cousineau that child pornography  was
in fact found on the phone that was seized by police.  As such, the only issue
at trial was whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Cousineau had knowledge and control over the phone on the dates identified in
the information.  Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that the Crown has failed to
prove this beyond a reasonable doubt.
Summary
of the evidence
[
56
] On February 8, 2024 D.C. Kama, D.C. Tamas and others executed
a  search warrant at unit […] Dufferin Street in Toronto.   Upon arrival,  Mr.
Cousineau and Ms. Llamzon were present.  They were both detained while the
search warrant was executed.
[
57
] At 6:10 am, D.C. Robbins found a Huawei smartphone in
the living room of the unit.   Officers took a quick look at the phone and
found one photo that was clearly child pornography.  The phone was not password
protected.
[
58
] The phone was subsequently viewed by D.C. Rahaman and
D.C. Tamas.  Two programs were also employed to help categorize the contents of
the phone: Celebrite and Lace.  The following items were located on the phone:
i)
A facebook account with the account name of
Robert Cou
ii)
Transaction /bill documents from Ontario
Northland Transportation in the name of Robert Cousineau as customer from June
10, 24, 30,July 15, and September 26, 2022.
iii)
An amendment to a lease document for Melissa
Llamzon for unit […] Dufferin Street.  Robert Cousineau and Melissa Llamzon are
listed as the tenants.
iv)
A private and confidential letter dated May 10,
2022 to Robert Cousineau offering temporary employment at Pride Marine.  On
page 6 of the document is a place for “crew member signature” and Robert
Cousineau is written beside this. On the next page titled DigiSigner, the email
address of
Robertcou715@gmail.com
is listed and the name Robert Cousineau written beside the email address and
under the heading “signature”.
v)
A document that appears to be a CV with the
name Robert Cousineau at the top and Orillia as the address.
vi)
A payworks time sheet with the name Robert
Cousineau at the top from November.
vii)
A series of photographs including: an Image of
Robert Cousineau naked; an image of Robert Cousineau in a bed; and, images of
Robert Cousineau outside.  Some of these images appear to be “selfies” – for
example DSC06094.JPG, DSC06127.JPG is a screen shot of number of photos some of
which appear to be selfies).
viii)
A photo of Mr. Cousineau on a chair on a deck.
ix)
Images of Robert Cousineau masturbating.
x)
A Photo of Robert Cousineau with a young girl.
xi)
Instant messages received on the phone  from
February 7, 2024 indicating sending zoom link to
robertcou715@gmail.com
.
xii)
Two instant messages on August 13, 2023 wishing
Robbie happy birthday.
xiii)
An outgoing message from the owner of the phone
which states “off to final farewell to melissa’s family as they leave for the
Philippines tomorrow”.
xiv)
Outgoing message on September 17, 2023 stating
“hi Aurora its Robert” and another message sent on September 28, 2023 stating, “Aurora,
this is Rob”.
xv)
An incoming message on September  22, 2023
stating ,“hi Robert, this is Rihanna from LV”.
xvi)
The home page on the phone has a photo of Mr.
Cousineau with a woman.
xvii)
Some
of the photos on the phone are of a penis in front of a television screen with
a young girl on it.  The penis is placed near the young girl’s mouth.    The
table that the TV screen is on and the TV screen itself appear to be the same TV
screen and table located in the unit where Mr. Cousineau was arrested (see SOCCO
photo number 22 and photograph from phone DSC06023.JPG.
xviii)
Under
the “personal info” area of the phone, a photograph of Mr. Cousineau is listed
as the “profile picture”, the phone’s nickname is listed as “Robert Cou”, the
gender is listed as male, the birthday is listed as August 13, 1981 (which
according to the information is Mr. Cousineau’s birthday), and the email
address is listed as
robertcou715@gmail.com
.
Analysis
[
59
] In assessing whether the cumulative, non hearsay
effect of all these items prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau
was the user of the cell phone seized and that he had knowledge and control
over its contents, I am mindful of the dangers of mis-using electronic evidence
or relying on facts not otherwise proven.  For example, I place no weight on
the instant messages wishing Robbie a happy birthday.   I have no evidence that
Mr. Cousineau goes by the nickname Robbie.  In my view, this is not
circumstantial evidence that Mr. Cousineau possessed the phone.    The series
of photographs of Mr. Cousineau that are not obviously selfies are also of
little value, since it is plausible that someone who is not Mr. Cousineau would
have photos of him on his or her phone.  People frequently have photographs of
friends and family on their phone.
[
60
] Mindful of these dangers, I am nonetheless satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau was the person that used  this
phone and had knowledge and control over its contents.   I reach this conclusion
for a number of reasons.
[
61
] Firstly, many documents  found on the phone can be
linked to Mr. Cousineau. For example, the lease, the train tickets, the CV and
pay stub are all in Mr. Cousineau’s name.  In my view, the volume of documents
found on the phone in Mr. Cousineau’s name provides strong support  for the inference
that Mr. Cousineau used that phone.
[
62
] Secondly, there were a number of photographs that on
their face look like selfies (for example: DSC06094.JPG, DSC06127.JPG). In
these images, Mr. Cousineau is looking at the camera with one arm held out in
front of him as though he is holding the phone and taking a picture of himself.
  This further supports the inference that the Mr. Cousineau is the owner and
user of the phone.  While it is possible that one might take a selfie on someone
else’s phone, this is something more often done on one’s own phone. Thirdly,
the home page is a photograph of Mr. Cousineau with a woman.  This provides an
additional link between Mr. Cousineau and contents of the phone.   Fourthly,
there are photographs on the phone that were taken in the living room of the
unit where Mr. Cousineau was arrested.  The TV and table in photographs on the
phone are the same as the TV and table found in the living room of the unit
where Mr. Cousineau was arrested.   Fifthly, there are text messages to a “Robert”
on the phone and text messages sent from a “Robert” on the phone.  Fifthly,  Mr.
Cousineau was in the residence with only one other person at 6:00 am when the
phone was located.
[
63
] Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that I should be left
in a doubt about whether Mr. Cousineau was the user and possessor of the phone because:
-
D.C. Tamas testified about a third party who
advised that he originally owned the phone but had never used it;
-
The phone was not password protected so anyone
could have used the phone;
-
There were two people in the apartment where
the phone was found either one of them could have used the phone.
[
64
] In my view, the above evidence does not leave me with
a reasonable doubt about whether Mr. Cousineau was the main person that used
this phone and had knowledge and control over its contents. Firstly, nothing on
the phone suggests it belongs to a woman or to a Ms. Llamzon in particular.  In
fact, the images and the contents of the phone are all linked to Mr. Cousineau. 
In light of this, it is my view there is no air of reality to the suggestion
that Ms. Llamzon (or the unidentified woman found in the unit with Mr. Cousineau
since there is no direct evidence that the woman was Ms. Llamzon) used this
phone. Secondly, the absence of a password on a phone by itself means very
little.   All this means is that someone else can access it.  It is not
evidence that someone else did in fact access it or that even if someone else
used the phone occasionally, that they stored any meaningful items on it.   The
absence of a password by itself does not provide an air of reality to the
suggestion that someone other than Mr. Cousineau was in possession of the phone
and its contents or that someone else put the significant amount of child
pornography on the phone without Mr. Cousineau’s knowledge.
[
65
] In relation to the suggestion that the Crown has
failed to prove possession because some person spoke to D.C. Tamas about owning
this phone, in my view, this is not evidence that someone else did in fact own
this phone.  Any conversation D.C. Tamas had with potential witnesses  outside
of court are not admissible for the truth of their contents.   This is not
evidence that Mr. Barnes did in fact own or possess this phone.
[
66
] In my view, the documents on the phone bearing Mr.
Cousineau’s name, the selfies of Mr. Cousineau on the phone, the profile
picture being of Mr. Cousineau and the ingoing and outgoing messages
referencing Robert all support the inference that Mr. Cousineau used this phone
and had knowledge and control over its contents.  It is my view, when all the
items found on the phone are considered along with the fact that Mr. Cousineau
was found in the same unit where the phone was located,  the only inference is
that Mr. Cousineau was the main user of this phone and that he had knowledge
and control over its contents.
[
67
] In relation to the charge of possessing child
pornography, having found that Mr. Cousineau was the main user of the cellular
phone and that he had knowledge and control over the contents of the phone, the
only inference is that he had knowledge and control over the child pornography
on the phone.  Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that since the phone was not
password protected, someone else could have put the child pornography on the
phone without Mr. Cousineau’s knowledge.  In my view, that is not a reasonable
inference in this case.  There were over 100 images of child pornography on the
phone.   In my view, the volume of child pornography on the phone makes it unreasonable
to conclude that  the main user of the phone, Mr. Cousineau, did not know about
the presence of child pornography on that phone.
[
68
] In relation to the offence of accessing child
pornography, the Crown must prove that Mr. Cousineau “knowingly caused child
pornography to be viewed by, or transmitted to, himself or herself”.   I have
no direct evidence that Mr. Cousineau ever viewed the child pornography found
on his phone.  Having said that, I am still satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that this offence is made out.  The only inference available given the evidence
in the case at bar is that the images were put on the phone by Mr. Cousineau
for the purpose of him looking at them.  Firstly, many images were located in
the photo gallery.  This is tangibly different from downloading a host of
documents onto a memory stick without looking at the documents.  Secondly, some
of the photos in the photo gallery are of a male watching child pornography in
the living room where Mr. Cousineau was arrested.  This is further evidence
that Mr. Cousineau was engaging with the child pornography.   Finally, the
video of Mr. Cousineau kissing the young girl was taken by Mr. Cousineau the
only reason to take this video was to view it at a later date.
[
69
] I therefore find Mr. Cousineau guilty of both possessing
and accessing child pornography.
[
70
] In relation to the time frame identified in the
information, Mr. Cousineau was in possession of the phone at the time of his
arrest.  I am therefore satisfied that the offence of possession occurred in
the time frame identified in the information.  In relation to the charge of
accessing child pornography,  the photographs in the photo album all have a
date stamp attached to them as do the messages in Teleguard.  In the absence of
evidence to the contrary, I am satisfied that the dates are accurate.  It is
common knowledge that cellular phones record dates on which photos are taken or
items are downloaded.  There is no basis to find that the dates are not
accurate.
Count 3:  Make Child Pornography Available
(November 8, 2023 to February 7, 2024)
[
71
] Mr. Cousineau is
charged with making child pornography available to others between November  8
2023 and Feb 7, 2024.  This charge relates to messages sent using the application
“Teleguard” on the cellular telephone seized by the police in the unit where
Mr. Cousineau was found.    The messages are all dated.  The dates fall within
the time frame particularized in the information.
[
72
] All the evidence about Teleguard came from D.C.
Tamas.  She had no knowledge about how Teleguard works.  D.C. Tamas was only
able to testify about what she found when she opened the application.  D.C.
Tamas testified that when viewing the phone, she clicked on an icon identified
as “Teleguard”.  When this application opened, a contact list was exposed. 
When D.C. Tamas “clicked” on the individual names in the contact list, lengthy
chats came up with dates and times attached to the messages.    The messages sent
on Teleguard were photographed by D.C. Tamas and filed as evidence at trial for
my review.  The messages included comments sexualizing young girls and often
included discussions of sexually abusing young girls.   Many of the messages
sent and received make reference to sending images that would meet the test for
child pornography.  These images, however, are not visible in the material
filed at trial. There were, however, a few occasions where the images were
displayed.  It is conceded that some of these images meet the test for child
pornography.
[
73
] Counsel for Mr. Cousineau
argued that I should be left in a reasonable doubt about whether Mr. Cousineau
was the person who sent the messages found on “teleguard”.  This is because no
expert evidence was  called about how the program worked.  As such I cannot
exclude a third party as being the person that  used “Teleguard” and wrote the
messages.  Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that someone else could have sent these
chats remotely or, because the phone was not password protected, anyone near
the phone could have used the phone to send the messages.
[
74
] Before engaging in
my analysis, I will first address the evidentiary value of the content of the
messages on “Teleguard”.  In the ordinary course, a statement cannot be used
against an accused for the truth of its contents unless it has been proven that
the accused did in fact make the statement.  With this is mind, if one of the
messages states “I am going to the park”, the message is not proof that Mr.
Cousineau went to the park unless it is first proven that Mr. Cousineau made
this statement.   I can, however, use comments in the “Teleguard” chat for the
fact that it was said.   Used in this manner, if Mr. Cousineau was seen in the
park shortly after sending  a message “I am going to the park”, the fact that
it was said, coupled with Mr. Cousineau’s location shortly thereafter is
circumstantial evidence that the person making the utterance is in fact Mr.
Cousineau (
see
R. v. Evans
,
1993 CanLII 102 (SCC)
,
[1993] 2 S.C.R. 629
).
[
75
] With this in mind,
the following evidence satisfies me beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Cousineau is the person who sent the messages on Teleguard”.
(a)
It
is Mr. Cousineau’s phone.
[
76
] I have already found beyond  a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Cousineau was the main person using this phone.  I have further found that
as the main user of the phone, he had knowledge and control of the child
pornography downloaded on the phone and in the photo albums of the phone.  This
is one piece of circumstantial evidence linking Mr. Cousineau to the messages
sent on “Teleguard”.
(b)
The
content of some of the messages support a finding that it is Mr. Cousineau
sending the messages.
[
77
] The content of some of the outgoing messages point
either directly to Mr. Cousineau or provide evidence that the messages are
being sent directly from the phone.  For example, image 389 of the “Teleguard”
messages is a chat with a person named Jess.  The outgoing message provides a
phone number where the person sending the outgoing message can be reached. 
This phone number is 705-500-3828.  This is the phone number of the phone
seized by police.  Evidence was presented at trial that an officer called the
above phone number, at which point the seized phone rang.   The fact that the
outgoing message references the number linked to the phone is some evidence
that the user of the phone is the person sending the outgoing messages on
“Teleguard”.
[
78
] Additionally, image 812 depicts a chat message with
the outgoing message stating, “I’m about to shower also” and then a photo is
attached.  The photo is of the accused.  This is further evidence that the user
of the phone, Mr. Cousineau, sent the messages in “Teleguard”.  There is a
similar message sent to Achilesisback.  The outgoing message states, “shower
with phone time” and a photo of the accused, naked in the shower was sent along
with the text.   I find as a fact that this particular photograph was taken by
Mr. Cousineau.   In the photograph, Mr.  Cousineau’s arm is held out in front
of him and Mr. Cousineau is looking in the direction of where the hand is  in
the way one would if taking  a selfie.  This is further evidence that Mr. Cousineau
is the person sending the messages on Teleguard.   It is not admissible for the
truth that Mr. Cousineau is about to take as shower, but instead the fact that
it was sent along with a self taken photograph of Mr. Cousineau naked in the
shower is some evidence that Mr. Cousineau sent that message.
[
79
] Image 186 from the “Teleguard” images, is another example
of content from the phone that points to Mr. Cousineau as the sender.  This
image is a screen capture of a photograph sent to the person listed as John in
the “Teleguard” program.  The photograph is of a person, with his penis in his
hand, watching a screen of a young girl engaging in a sexual act.  The face of
the person holding his penis is not visible.    This same photo was found in
the photos located by D.C. Rahaman in the camera/photo gallery of the phone. 
This supports the inference that the image was sent directly from the phone as
opposed to an outside source.    Moreover, the TV screen and table from this
image are identical to the TV and table found in the unit where Mr. Cousineau
was arrested.  In other words, the photo in image 186 was taken in the living
room where Mr. Cousineau was arrested.  This is strong support for the
inference that Mr. Cousineau was involved in creating this photo, stored it on the
phone in the photo gallery and then sent that message to John through “Teleguard”. 
 Similarly, photos sent to the person listed as “silent ninja” were also found by
D.C. Rahaman in the camera roll/photo gallery of the phone. In my view this is
strong evidence that the user of the phone sent the messages from that phone.
[
80
] When I consider all this evidence combined,  it is my
view that  the only reasonable inference is that the person who was the main
user of the phone was the person who sent the messages on “Teleguard” and that
this person is Mr. Cousineau.  Since the messages sent include images that meet
the test for child pornography, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Cousineau committed the offence of making child pornography available.   In
my view, there is no air of reality to the assertion that someone else other
than Mr. Cousineau sent these messages.  I am mindful that in the frequently
asked questions portions of the “Teleguard” program, it states that messages
can be sent remotely, but given my findings above, I am satisfied that even
though messages can be sent remotely, they were not done so in this case.
[
81
] I further find the messages were sent in the time
identified in the information.  Each message is dated, and these dates fall
within the time frame identified in the information.  In my view, I can rely on
the date stamp of the messages.  Date stamps are commonplace on messaging
systems.  Absent some evidence that the date system on the phone is inaccurate,
these dates can be relied upon.
[
82
] I therefore find the Crown has proven this count beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Count 4 and Count 10 – make child
pornography
[
83
]  Count 4 was withdrawn as it is subsumed in count 10.
[
84
]  Count 10 relates to  a charge of making child pornography.  
In his submissions, Crown counsel identified the video of Mr. Cousineau kissing
a young girl as an image created by Mr. Cousineau which makes out this
offence.   Counsel for Mr. Cousineau argued that this video does not meet the
test for child pornography and that there is insufficient evidence to find that
Mr. Cousineau even made this video.
[
85
] Child pornography is defined under
section 163.1(1)
of
the
Criminal Code
,
as a representation:
(i)
That shows a person who is or is depicted as
being under the age of eighteen years and is engaged in or is depicted as
engaged in explicit sexual activity, or
(ii)
The dominant characteristic of which is the
depiction, for a sexual purpose, of a sexual organ or the anal region of a
person under the age of eighteen years.
[
86
]
In
R. v. Sharpe,
2001 SCC 2
at para
49
, the
Supreme Court of Canada defined “explicit sexual activity” as,
….acts
involving nudity or intimate sexual activity, represented in a graphic and
unambiguous fashion, with persons under or depicted as under 18 years of age. 
The law does not catch possession of visual material depicting only casual
sexual contact, like touching, kissing, or hugging, since these are not
depictions of nudity or intimate sexual activity. Certainly, a photo of
teenagers kissing at summer camp will not be caught.  At its furthest reach,
the section might catch a video of a caress of an adolescent girl’s naked
breast, but only if the activity is graphically depicted and unmistakenly sexual”.
[
87
] The video of Mr. Cousineau kissing a young girl, in my
view, was made by Mr. Cousineau.   He is looking directly at the camera as he
kisses the young girl on the lips.  The way he is positioned, and the movement
made by Mr. Cousineau at the end of the video establishes that Mr. Cousineau
was the person filming the kiss and then at the end, he turned off the video.  
Crown counsel alleges that the video shows Mr. Cousineau’s tongue in the young
girl’s mouth.  I cannot see this when I watch the video.  I am nonetheless
still satisfied that this video meets the test for child pornography in that it
shows a person under the age of 10 engaged in explicit sexual activity.  The
kiss, while not long, does not look like a quick family “peck”. The length of
time of the kiss coupled with the look on Mr. Cousineau’s face during the kiss,
makes the kiss, in my view, sexual as opposed to a platonic sign of affection
or the type of kissing identified
in
Sharpe
as escaping criminal
sanction.   As Crown counsel pointed out, this is not a video of teenagers
kissing at summer camp.  No reasonable observer would characterize the kiss
captured on the video as not being explicit sexual activity.
[
88
] Crown counsel argued that I should also find that the
photographs of the person masturbating to child pornography on the television
in Mr. Cousineau’s living room are also evidence that he made child
pornography.   I agree.  The photographs were clearly taken in Mr. Cousineau’s
living room and were found on his phone.  The only reasonable inference is that
Mr. Cousineau participated in some way in the making of these photographs.  I
make a similar finding about the photographs on the phone that capture a young
girl on the TV screen in Mr. Cousineau’s living room and a penis in front of
the TV screen where the girl’s mouth is.  This image in my view, meets the test
for child pornography.  It is a person under the age of 18 where the dominant
characteristic is for a sexual purpose. In my view it is explicitly sexual.  
Since it was filmed in Mr. Cousineau’s living room and found on his phone, the
only inference is that he either took this photograph himself or was otherwise
involved in the making of this photograph.
[
89
] I therefore find Mr. Cousineau guilty of making child
pornography.
Counts 5 and 6 – Sexual assault and sexual
interference.
[
90
] These two counts
relate  to the video Mr. Cousineau made of himself kissing a young girl.   I am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau is the person in the
video kissing the young girl and that he is the person who recorded this
video.  Mr. Cousineau’s face is clearly visible in the video.  Moreover,  watching
the video you can see his hand out and he is looking in the direction of the
phone camera as he kisses this young girl.   I am mindful that not all kisses
would meet test for “sexual in nature” nor are all kisses engaged in for “a
sexual purpose”, but for the reasons already noted above, it is my view Mr.
Cousineau engaged in this kiss for the purpose of sexual gratification.   As
such I have no doubt that this act is sexual in nature and was done for a
sexual purpose.
[
91
] The only real
issue raised at trial by counsel for Mr. Cousineau was that the Crown failed to
prove that the person in the video is E.M., as particularized in the
information.   Crown counsel argued that he was not required to prove that the
victim was E.M. as it was not an essential element of the offence.   In the
alternative, Crown counsel seeks to amend the information to substitute the phrase
“female unknown” for the name “E.M.”.
[
92
] This issue of
whether the name of the victim as particularized in the information is an
essential element of the offence was addressed by the Ontario Court of Appeal
in
R. v.
R. v. Sadeghi-Jebelli
,
2013
ONCA 747
. In that case the court held that unless the particularization relates
to something that is not essential to the offence, the Crown must prove the
fact particularized in the indictment.  The court stated  at paragraphs 23-24,
[23]      When the Crown charges an
accused with an offence, and particularizes the way the offence was committed,
it must prove the offence as particularized in the charge.  The Supreme
Court of Canada affirmed this
principle in
R. v. Saunders
,
1990
CanLII 1131 (SCC)
,
[1990] 1 SCR 1020
at 1023
.  McLachlin J. said: 
“It is a fundamental principle of criminal law, that the offence, as
particularized in the charge, must be proved”.  So, for example, if the
Crown charges an accused with trafficking in heroin, it cannot, without an
amendment to the charge, obtain a conviction for trafficking in cocaine.
[24]   This principle is grounded in fairness. 
Particulars permit “the accused to be reasonably informed of the transaction
alleged against him, thus giving him the possibility of a full defence and fair
trial”.  See
R. v. Côté,
1977 CanLII 1 (SCC)
,
[1978] 1 SCR 8
at 13
.  This principle is subject to an exception for “mere surplusage”,
or information in the indictment that is not essential to the offence, but that
exception does not apply here.  See
R. v. Vézina,
1986 CanLII
93 (SCC)
,
[1986] 1 SCR 2
at para.
49
.
[
93
] It follows that if the name of the victim is not essential to
the offence, the Crown need not prove it.   In
R. v. Ferguson-Cadore,
2020
ONSC 7094
, the court held that when the Crown particularizes the name of the
victim, then the Crown must prove the victim’s identity (at paragraph 9). A
similar conclusion was reached by the court of appeal
in
R. v. Melo,
1986
Canlii 4706
(C.A.)
.
In
Melo
,
the Court of Appeal held t
hat the “naming of Vincent Pilleci was an essential averment only
in the sense that the victim having been named in the charge perhaps his
identity had  to be proved”.   Citing from
R. v. Austin
(1955),
1955 CanLII 470 (ON CA)
,
113
C.C.C. 95 (C.A)
, the court stated that “the name was to ‘be regarded as a particular
furnished  by the Crown, and it was made by the Crown a material part of the
charge against the accused”.   The Court
Melo
further citing from
R.
v. Austin,
held “… the Court, upon the trial of the indictment, could
properly have permitted an amendment to be made to the indictment so as to make
it conform to the evidence…and in the absence of power in this Court to make
it, the case for the prosecution failed for want of proof of the charge as made
against the accused”.
[
94
] Following these cases, it is my view that having particularized
the name of the victim, the Crown, absent an amendment, was required to prove
the identity of the victim.    Having failed to call any evidence about the
identity of the victim, absent an amendment, Mr. Cousineau must be found not
guilty of these two offences.
[
95
] This leads me to the Crown’s request to amend the information
from E.M. to “female unknown”.  Crown counsel provided numerous cases where
courts allowed the Crown to amend the information to change the name of a
victim to conform to the evidence at trial.  In all those cases, the
application to amend was made at the close of the Crown’s case.  In the case at
bar, Crown counsel only applied to amend the information during his reply
submissions.  Given the late timing of the application, counsel for Mr.
Cousineau argued that his client has suffered real prejudice and as such the application
should be denied.
[
96
] Pursuant to
section 601(4)
of the
Criminal Code
,
in deciding whether to grant an application
to amend an information, the court shall consider:
-
The evidence taken at trial,
-
The circumstances of the case,
-
The presence or absence of prejudice to the
accused in making a defence,
-
Whether the amendment can be made without an
injustice being done.
[
97
] In the ordinary course, where the Crown, at the close
of their case, seeks to amend the information in relation to the name of the
victim to conform to the evidence, the application is granted because there is
no reasonable prospect of prejudice to the accused.   These types of amendments
rarely impact any substantive defence being put forward.   The prejudice, in my
view, looks very different when the application is only brought after the
defendant has elected to not call any evidence and has made fulsome submission
on the trial proper.   When such applications are raised only after final
submissions are in, the accused is not afforded a real opportunity to address
it.  In some cases, allowing the defendant to re-open may be a reasonable way
to address any potential prejudice, but it is not a fair result in this case
where Mr. Cousineau is in custody.
[
98
] Given the very late timing of the application, it is
my view that the potential for actual prejudice to a fair trial exists and I
will not allow the application.
[
99
] Mr. Cousineau is therefore found not guilty of sexual
assault and sexual interference.
Count 7 – Breach of s.161 order – use of internet
[
100
] At the time of his arrest, Mr. Cousineau was bound by
a s.161 order that included the term that he not use the internet unless he is
the presence of Sara and Richard Cousineau.  Crown counsel argued that the use
of the Teleguard application is using the internet.  I disagree.  I am not
confident that the Teleguard app is any different then sending text messages.  
As such I am left in  a reasonable doubt about this offence.
Counts 8 and 9 – Breaching 161 orders – contact and
attending playground/pool
[
101
] At the time of the offences, Mr. Cousineau was bound
by a section 161 order that included the terms a) no contact with persons under
16 unless supervised by Sara or Richard Cousineau and b) not to attend any
public park or public swimming area unless in the presence of Richard or Sara
Cousineau.
[
102
] I am satisfied that the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau was alone with a person under the age of 16
and that Sara and Richard Cousineau were not present.   The video of Mr.
Cousineau kissing a young girl in my view is sufficient to prove this breach.  He
is clearly with someone under the age of 16.  Moreover, in my view, it is
inconceivable that a responsible adult was with him when this video was filmed. 
Secondly, in his chats with Achilesisback, Mr. Cousineau wrote that he had been
alone with “E.[…]”, someone who he has identified as a young person.  Having
found beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Cousineau was the author of these
texts, the content of the communications are admissible for their truth.  I therefore
find that Mr. Cousineau was alone with E.[…], a person under the age of 16 and
as such violated this term of his section 161 order.
[
103
] In relation to the term that he not attend at a
public park or pool, the Crown argued that there are two avenues to
conviction.  In the messages sent on Teleguard, Mr. Cousineau wrote that he
went to the pool in his condo.  He also wrote that he went to a playground. There
is nothing in these  communications to suggest whether or not Sara or Richard
Cousineau were present.   The burden is on the Crown to prove that they were
not present.  Having elected to call no additional evidence on this point, the Crown
has not proven this breach beyond  a reasonable doubt.  I appreciate that there
must be some air of reality to the suggestion that Sara or Richard Cousineau
were present, but in the case at bar where there is no evidence one way or
another, in my view, this standard is met.   I am therefore left in a
reasonable doubt about this breach.  I therefore find Mr. Cousineau guilty of
count 8 but not guilty of count 9.
Conclusion
[
104
]  In light of all my findings, Mr. Cousineau is found
guilty of counts 1,2,3,8 and 10. Count 4 was withdrawn at the request of the
Crown.  Mr. Cousineau is found not guilty of counts 5,6,7 and 9.
Released August 14, 2025                                                             _____________________
Justice
Mara Greene