CITATION:
R. v. McDonald,
2025 ONCJ 506
DATE:
September 15, 2025
Information
No. 25 50016256
Ontario
Court of Justice
His Majesty
the King
and
TREVOR
McDONALD
Reasons for
Judgment
Proceedings
BEFORE
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE A.
LAVICTOIRE
ON
SEPTEMBER 15, 2025, AT TORONTO, ONTARIO
Appearances
T. Cassidy                   Counsel for the Crown
N. Chaabane                   Duty Counsel
Reasons for
Judgment:
THE COURT:  Mr. McDonald is before
the Court charged with four counts of theft under $5,000, 31 counts of fail to
comply with his probation order, one count of possession of property obtained
by crime. The allegations were filed as Exhibit 1 on consent.
In summary, between August 19 and
September 5, 2025, Mr. McDonald is alleged to have committed multiple thefts
under $5,000, one count of possession of property obtained by crime, and he is
alleged to have breached his probation conditions requiring him not to attend
at 190 Queens Plate Drive and 340 Queens Plate Drive in the City of Toronto. 
It is alleged that he has breached his conditions 31 times, including failure
to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
At the time of the current
offences, he was subject to four probation orders with nearly identical terms
prohibiting him from attending locations where he had previously offended,
specifically the shopping plaza at 190 Queens Plate Drive and the LCBO at 340
Queens Plate Drive. Despite these prohibitions, Mr. McDonald is alleged to have
returned to those same locations and re-offended.  When arrested on September
5th, 2025, two pairs of shoes from Winners were found in his bag as well.
This is a Crown onus matter.  The
Crown must establish, on a balance of probabilities, that Mr. McDonald's
continued detention is necessary under one or more of the grounds set out in
the
Criminal Code
.
The Crown's position is to seek Mr.
McDonald's detention on the secondary ground only, arguing that Mr. McDonald
poses a substantial risk to public safety. The Crown submits that he is not a
suitable candidate for release without strict supervision, which has not been
proposed here.  The Crown emphasizes on Mr. McDonald's lengthy and continuous
record, including recent theft-related convictions in 2024.  The Crown submits
that Mr. McDonald, at 39 years old, has demonstrated an entrenched pattern of
theft and chronic non-compliance. Despite repeated probation orders and
community interventions, the Crown submits that his behaviour has not changed.
The Crown submits that the proposed
plan of release which requires Mr. McDonald to reside at his girlfriend's house
to be released on his recognizance with Sound Times' support, GPS monitoring
which includes exclusion zones, does not adequately mitigate risk.  The Crown
submits that Sound Times is a valuable program but participation is voluntary,
and there is no indication that Mr. McDonald would engage.  Further, the Crown
submits that GPS monitoring may deter a rational offender, but Mr. McDonald's
history of ignoring non-attendance conditions show that such safeguards cannot
be relied upon.
The Crown acknowledges that Section
493.2(b) requires considerations of Mr. McDonald's vulnerabilities but submits
that they do not outweigh the risk he poses to the public.
Duty counsel proposes on behalf of
Mr. McDonald a release plan which involves being released on his own
recognizance with the support of Sound Times, to live with his girlfriend, and
to be subject to GPS monitoring with exclusion zones. Duty counsel highlights
Mr. McDonald's diagnosis of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and P.T.S.D., along
with addiction to alcohol, cocaine and crack. Duty counsel submits that in the
weeks before Mr. McDonald's return to custody, he resumed taking medication for
schizophrenia, sought support from Sound Times for housing and mental health
needs, and began attending A.A. meetings, including while in custody.
While acknowledging his past
difficulties in following through, duty counsel emphasizes that the current
charges and his record are non-violent, that Mr. McDonald understands that this
may be his last chance and is willing to comply with any conditions imposed by
the Court. Duty counsel also urges the Court to consider Mr. McDonald's
vulnerabilities arising from his mental health challenges, addictions and
identity as a black man, pursuant to 493.2(b) of the
Criminal Code
.
In reaching my decision today, I
have considered the presumption of innocence and the right not to be denied
reasonable bail without just cause under the
Charter
.  I have also
applied
the principles set out in
R. v. Antic
2017 SCC 27 (CanLII)
,
[2017] 1 SCR 509
, R. v.
Zora
2020 SCC 14 (CanLII)
,
[2020] 2 SCR 3
and finally, I have been guided by the principle of
restraint, as noted in
s. 493.1
of the
Criminal Code
, and I have been
guided by
s. 493.2
(b) which requires me to pay particular attention to the
circumstances of vulnerable populations.
The issue is whether Mr. McDonald's
detention is necessary to protect public safety.  The test has two steps. 
First, the question is whether Mr. McDonald's detention is necessary for the
safety of the public and the community or whether there is a substantial
likelihood that Mr. McDonald will endanger the safety of the public if
released, or interfere with the administration of justice and, if so, the test
requires me to determine whether the proposed release plan sufficiently
mitigates that risk.
On the secondary ground, I take
into consideration, among other factors, the nature and circumstances of the
alleged offences, the strength of the Crown's case, Mr. McDonald's
circumstances and his criminal record.  Mr. McDonald has a lengthy criminal
record dating back to 2010 and continuing, without meaningful interruption, up
to August 2024.  His record includes more than ten convictions for failing to
comply with court orders, multiple convictions for failing to attend court,
approximately 27 convictions for theft under, as well as convictions for break
and enter and even armed robbery.  He is presently on probation and now faces
31 additional counts of breaching probation orders. This history demonstrates a
consistent and an ongoing disregard for court imposed conditions and for the
authority of the Court.
Probation is intended to support
rehabilitation in the community while ensuring accountability.  When an accused
repeatedly violates those terms, it fundamentally undermines any confidence
that future release conditions will be respected.  Mr. McDonald's conduct shows
a persistent disregard for court orders and confirms that conditions designed
to keeping him away from the locations where he offends have not deterred him. 
The repeated breaches and re-offending at the same businesses heighten the risk
to property, to store owners and employees and the broader sense of security of
community members who should be able to shop without fear.
Moving on to the nature of the
charges, duty counsel emphasized that the charges before the Court, as well as
those in Mr. McDonald's record, are non-violent in nature.  All the charges
before the Court relate to theft under, traditionally categorized as a property
offence.  The secondary ground risks are not confined to property alone.
Repeated acts of theft undermine the community's sense of security,
particularly for store employees, business owners and ordinary shoppers.
Citizens must be able to go about daily activities, such as shopping, without
fear or insecurity.  The risk here is, therefore, both to property and to the
broader sense of safety and security in the community.
On the surface, it may seem that
Mr. McDonald does not pose a direct risk to public safety given that the
offences are not violent.  However, the repeated nature of his offending
demonstrates an ongoing risk to public safety that cannot be ignored.  Public
safety, in my view, includes more than protection from physical harm.  It
includes protection from fraud and theft, extending the concept of safety to
the security of property.
This principle was recognized by
the Ontario Court of Appeal in
R. v. Ameyaw
,
2024 ONCA 364
, at paragraph
28
, and
in
R. v. Omitiran
,
2020 ONCA 261 (CanLII)
, a decision of the
Court of Appeal, 2020.  Stealing from businesses not only endangers their
financial viability, especially in difficult economic times, but also creates
substantial safety concerns for employees.  Individuals such as students,
cashiers and other staff members are entitled to work in an environment free
from intimidation or insecurity.  The unpredictable nature of theft incidents contributes
to a constant sense of fear amongst staff, and the potential for harm to
workers must be considered when assessing risk.
In taking into consideration the
above-noted factors, I conclude that secondary ground concerns exist and that
the risk is substantial.  As such, I must now examine whether Mr. McDonald's
proposed plan of release is sufficient to mitigate the substantial risk to
below the threshold required for detention.  As noted earlier, Mr. McDonald is
proposing his release on his own recognizance with the assistance of Sound
Times, GPS monitoring and exclusion zones per the locations that he is
prohibited from attending.  In my opinion, the proposed plan does not
sufficiently mitigate risk.
With respect to Sound Times, while
it is a respected community program offering counselling, housing and mental
health support, its services are voluntary.
Duty counsel submits that in the
week before his return to custody, Mr. McDonald resumed taking his prescribed
medications, sought assistance from Sound Times for mental health and housing
and attended A.A. meetings, including while in custody.  There is, however,
little concrete evidence before the Court to substantiate these claims. 
However, I am prepared to accept that Mr. McDonald may have taken some initial
steps, but they are, in my opinion, limited and fall well short of
demonstrating a reliable or sustained change in behaviour.  They do not
meaningfully reduce the significant risks identified in this case.
The letter from Sound Times, also
before the Court, fails to confirm any meaningful engagement from Mr. McDonald
with their organization.
Turning to GPS and exclusion zones,
while GPS can alert authorities if Mr. McDonald attends prohibited locations,
it cannot physically prevent offending.  Moreover, exclusion zones tied to
specific addresses do not address the broader risk.  Even if prevented from
entering the two locations, nothing stops Mr. McDonald from targeting other
retail locations.  His history of repeated breaches of nearly identical
probation terms shows that he's not governable. These measures, in my view, are
incapable of addressing the substantial risk he poses to property, businesses,
employees and the public.
In light of his struggle with
mental health and addiction, a solution oriented approach involving treatment,
supervision and a concrete plan to address his addiction with the supervision
of a surety could potentially mitigate risk. However, no such plan has been
presented. While it was noted that Mr. McDonald resides with his girlfriend, no
one has come forward to court to support his release, and there is no evidence
of a reliable supervision of a surety that can assist him in addressing his
challenges.
In reaching the decision today, I
have considered
s. 493.2
(b) of the
Criminal Code
which directs courts to
pay particular attention to the circumstances of vulnerable accused, including
those with mental health challenges, addictions or who are part of groups
over-represented in the justice system.  Black men are disproportionately
represented in custody and face systematic barriers in the criminal justice
system, circumstances that engage this provision. This section is meant to
ensure systematic and background factors are not ignored and that racialized
individuals are not unfairly disadvantaged in obtaining releases.
However, s. 493.2(b) does not
create a presumption of release or immunity from detention.  Vulnerabilities
must be balanced against the risks posed to the public.  In this case, I am not
convinced that Mr. McDonald is being unfairly treated if a detention order is
made. His criminal history shows a persistent pattern of failing to comply with
probation terms and re-offending at the very locations he was ordered not to
attend.  Despite opportunities with probation orders, he has not engaged in a
meaningful way with the supports he's been provided and continues to re-offend.
As noted in
R. v. E.B.,
2020
ONSC 4383
, a decision of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice, if there is a
substantial likelihood that the accused will commit further offences and
compromise public safety, the fact that vulnerabilities under s. 493.2(b)
contribute to the likelihood does not change the outcome where the release plan
does not address the underlying issues. This principle was also echoed
in
R.
v. Nanibush,
2024 ONSC 737 (CanLII)
.
I acknowledge that in our criminal
justice system detention is the exception and release is the norm.  However,
that presumption rests on the expectation that an accused will abide by the
conditions of court orders imposed upon them.  Mr. McDonald has been subject to
multiple probation orders, yet he has consistently disregarded those terms and,
in doing so, placed members of the public at risk.  In the circumstances, he
falls outside the presumption of release.  The exception, therefore, applies,
and detention is required.
I hereby order Mr. McDonald's
detention under the secondary ground.
--- Matter adjourned to September
18, 2025, at 11:00 a.m. in 201 Court.