ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Beites
, 2025 ONCJ 582
DATE: 
2025 11 06
COURT
FILE No.:  Sudbury 4011-998-23-40102993-00
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
KIMBERLY-ANN BEITES
Before
Justice G. Jenner
Heard
on September 20, 2024; April 23, 2025; September 8, 2025; October 23, 2025; and
November 6, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on November 6, 2025
M. Wlodarczyk..................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
S. von Achten and D. Rosso............................ legal
representatives for the defendant
JENNER J.:
I.
Introduction
[
1
]
Ms. Kimberly-Ann Beites is charged with
threatening to cause bodily harm to her son, Darcy, and threatening to burn the
business property of her daughter-in-law, Andrea. Both alleged threats arise
from the same voicemail message left by the accused for Darcy at his place of
work, ‘Douro’, on August 25, 2023. The voicemail was left following the
accused’s exclusion from the funeral of her other son, Miguel, who is survived
by his spouse, Marie-Soleil.
[
2
]
That the accused left the voicemail was admitted
at trial. The recording was entered as an exhibit on consent. In the recording,
the accused says the following:
Listen you sick demented son of a bitch. You
know what? You guys have gone too far with me. Too far. Not letting me see my
grandkids, to hug them. (Inaudible) be there for my son’s funeral. Well, you’ve
gone too far buddy. You know what? You guys wanna be famous? I’ll make you
fucking famous. Mark my words. I’m gonna burn you, Douro, your wife’s business.
Marie’s going down. Everybody’s going down. Go fuck yourself. All go to hell.
[
3
]
Was this admitted utterance a threat to a person
or property within the meaning of
s. 264.1
of the
Criminal Code
? For the
reasons that follow, I find it was both.
II.
Issues and Positions of the Parties
[
4
]
Section 264.1(1)
of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:
264.1(1) Every one
commits an offence, who, in any manner, knowingly utters, conveys, or causes
any person to receive a threat
(a)
to cause death or bodily harm to any person;
(b)
to burn, destroy or damage real or personal
property; or
(c)
to kill, poison or injure an animal or bird that
is the property of any person.
[
5
]
The
actus reus
or prohibited act of a
threat is made out where a reasonable person aware of the circumstances in
which the words were uttered would have perceived them to be a threat of death
or bodily harm to a person or damage to property. The reasonable person is
informed, practical, realistic, and fully apprised of the circumstances of the
case:
R. v. Batista
,
2008 ONCA 804
, at paras.
23-24
.
[
6
]
The Crown need not prove the intended recipient
was aware of the threat, or that they subjectively received it as a serious
threat. The
mens rea
or requisite intent is made out if the accused subjectively
intended the words to be conveyed to intimidate or be taken seriously. The
accused’s intention that the words reach the threatened party or their
intention to carry out the threat is immaterial. While the requisite intent is
subjective, the circumstances in which the purported threat is made can matter.
A court’s determination of what an accused actually intended may depend on
inferences drawn from the circumstances:
R. v. McRae
,
2013 SCC 68
, at
paras.
10-23
;
[
7
]
Because the accused admits the voicemail she
left, my role in this trial is to examine the circumstances surrounding the
utterance and determine whether the Crown has proven the following, beyond a
reasonable doubt:
(i)
That a reasonable person would perceive, in
those circumstances, a threat to harm Darcy;
(ii)
That a reasonable person would perceive, in
those circumstances, a threat to burn Andrea’s business—I indicate burn, rather
than destroy or damage generally, as the count is particularized to burn; and
(iii)
That, examining the circumstances, the accused
subjectively intended her words to either intimidate or be taken seriously.
[
8
]
The Crown called as witnesses Darcy, Andrea, and
Marie-Soleil. The defence called Officer Caverson, the lead investigator in
this matter.
[
9
]
The defence theory is not that the threats made
were not serious or threats of physical harm or damage. They were, the defence
suggests, promises to follow through and prosecute existing civil litigation
between the family members. The argument is that “burn” was not intended as a
literal threat to set any person or business aflame, but rather to cut the
various family members and their businesses down to size, in the figurative
sense; to vindicate the accused within the ongoing family business and legal
disputes; to triumph over them.
[
10
]
The Crown urges me to reject that theory and
conclude that the language used in the voicemail, considered in context, would
cause a reasonable person to fear for their person and property, and that the
language was intended to intimidate and be taken seriously.
III.
Analysis
[
11
]
My task is not to choose which of the parties’
theories I prefer. The Crown always bears the burden to prove the essential
elements beyond a reasonable doubt. If I reject the defence’s theory on the
evidence, I must still ask myself whether it nonetheless raises a reasonable
doubt. I must further ask myself whether, based on the evidence I do accept,
the essential elements of the offences are proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
12
]
I conclude the Crown has met its high onus in
respect of the act and intent on both uttering threat counts. I reject the
alternate theory advanced by the accused, and find the evidence leaves no doubt
as to guilt. I will briefly touch on the extensive evidence tendered with
respect to the accused’s conflicts with her family, before focusing on the most
important piece of evidence, the voicemail itself.
The family
conflicts
[
13
]
Managing the scope of the circumstances to be
examined in this trial was a challenge. The utterances were made in the context
of a complex and tragic family dynamic. Mindful of the accused’s right to make
full answer and defence, I was reluctant to erect firm barriers. Mindful of the
need to control the trial process and ensure that the probative value of the
evidence is not substantially outweighed by prejudice, including to the trial
process, I was required to focus the parties at various junctures.
[
14
]
Each witness testified to a constellation of
conflicts between the accused and other members of her family. These included
efforts to ‘form’ the accused or have her committed for mental health reasons,
disputes relating to dogs, a dispute related to a trespass notice, efforts to
subject the accused to a peace bond, civil litigation relating to the family
and the family business, and of course, the decision to exclude the accused
from Miguel’s funeral ceremony. The parties agree that these conflicts existed
between the family members.
[
15
]
My task in this trial is not to undertake a
series of sub-trials to determine who was right or who was wrong in respect of
these conflicts; who was justified, and who was being unreasonable. My task is
to examine the circumstances in which the voicemail was left to determine
whether a threat was intended and would have reasonably been perceived. The
tenor of the relationship between the various family members when the voicemail
was left matters. The nature of the issues between the parties matters. But the
minutiae do not.
[
16
]
While it is clear the defence takes issue with
the reasonableness of the accused’s family members and their actions over time,
the evidence consistently demonstrated that Kimberly-Ann’s relationships with
Darcy, Miguel, Andrea, and Marie-Soleil were fractured and conflict-ridden. I
find the accused knew her family distanced themselves from her and wished to
maintain that distance, rightly or wrongly.
The
voicemail recording
[
17
]
The most important evidence is the voicemail
itself. The recording was played in court and made an exhibit. I entirely
reject the defence claim that the there is no evidence the voicemail was left
in anger. The message was left in an aggressive, hostile tone of voice. It does
not mention a legal dispute between the parties. It does not mention money at
all. It mention’s Miguel’s funeral. It mentions grandchildren. It is rooted in
anger and hurt over the accused’s estrangement from her family. The multiple references
to Darcy and his family having gone “too far” suggest the dispute between the
parties had reached an extreme level and would signal to a reasonable observer
that the threatened response might be similarly extreme. The reference to
making Darcy and others “famous” is chilling. I disagree with the defence
submission that a business-related lawsuit would tend to make someone famous.
Being victimized in a violent crime—arson, for example—is a better fit.
[
18
]
This is not to say that there is no ambiguity
present in the utterance. I grant that colloquially “burn” can have meanings
other than ‘set fire to.’ It can suggest other forms of retribution, physical
and otherwise. It can also be used in other contexts with different meanings,
like feeling “burnt out”. Likewise, the remark that family members are “going
down” is not necessarily a reference to a physical threat.
[
19
]
Ambiguity of language can be a source of
reasonable doubt. It does not follow that ambiguity is always a basis for
reasonable doubt. It must be evaluated in context. Ambiguity can be intended. It
can be used to intimidate. Indeed, ambiguous threats, sometimes called veiled
threats, or subtle threats, can be a tool to achieve the threat-maker’s goal of
intimidation while attempting to insulate them from accountability. ‘Nice
business you have there—would be a shame if anything happened to it’, for
example. The receiver of ambiguous aggressive language may be left guessing
about the threat-maker’s true intentions and may still, in having to account
for all possibilities, experience fear or intimidation.
[
20
]
That is what happened here. Kimberly-Ann was
angry. She was upset about her ostracization. She wanted Darcy to know there
would be consequences; that she would get her retribution. She invoked the violent
language of fire. She was vulgar. She wanted to intimidate Darcy, Andrea, and
Marie-Soleil. She absolutely intended to be taken seriously. I reject the
inference that the defence asks me draw, that the accused was only stating her
intentions with respect to her unmentioned civil suit. I harbour no reasonable
doubt based on that theory. I am persuaded beyond a reasonable doubt that a
reasonable person, informed of the circumstances, including the family
conflicts and civil suit, would become fearful of physical harm to Darcy and
property damage to Andrea’s business.
IV.
Conclusion
[
21
]
Ms. Kimberly-Ann Beites will be found guilty on
both counts.
Released:  November 6, 2025
Signed:
Justice G. Jenner