ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Lich,
2025 ONCJ 304
DATE: 
2025 04 03
COURT
FILE No.:  22-15545, 23-11401103 Ottawa
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
Tamara Lich
Christopher Barber
Before
Justice H.E. Perkins-McVey
Heard
on from September 5, 2023, with interruptions until September 2024.
Reasons
for Judgment released on April 3, 2025
S. Wetscher, T. Radcliffe.................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
L. Greenspon, E. Granger, Hannah Drennnan……...counsel
for the accused T. Lich
D. Magus, M. Younes ……………………………counsel
for the accused Chris Barber
J.: H.E.
Perkins-McVey
General Overview
[
1
]
The accused Tamara Lich and Christopher Barber
are charged on a 7-count information arising out of their involvement in the
city of Ottawa over approximately 3 weeks in January /February 2022, in what
has been called the “Freedom Convoy 2022”. That Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber were organizers
and leaders of the Freedom Convoy was admitted in the list of Admissions
Exhibit 1, paragraph 4(c). Together, along with others, they led a convoy of
semi-trucks and other vehicles and demonstrators from Western Canada arriving
in Ottawa on January 28th, 2022.
[
2
]
Although the term Freedom Convoy has become a term
synonymous with all protests of Government COVID restrictions and mandates in
2022. It was, a series of different protests across various parts of the
Country organized initially to oppose COVID-19 vaccine mandates for cross
border truck drivers. The movement seemingly quickly expanded to include all
COVID-19 restrictions and mandates.
[
3
]
It was in fact Tamara Lich, Chris Barber along
with others who came to Ottawa that formed the Freedom Convoy 2022 Corporation.
Tamara Lich was the President of that Corporation and Chris Barber one of the
directors.
[
4
]
The Crown commenced the trial by saying that
this trial was not about the political views or perspectives of Ms. Lich or Mr.
Barber and that they certainly were entitled to engage in peaceful protest. The
Crown also conceded that the mere presence of the Accused in Ottawa was not unlawful.
The Crown conceded in its final submissions that Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber came
to Ottawa with the best of intentions to peacefully protest seeking the end to
COVID restrictions. The Crown says they crossed the line, however, with the
means used to try to achieve those ends.
[
5
]
The Crown acknowledged in its final submissions
the right of citizens to demonstrate, citing
R. v McCann
2014 ONSC 2987
at para
16
“in a free and democratic society such as Canada, we welcome and
encourage people to hold demonstrations if such is necessary to exercise their
right of freedom of conscience, freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful
assembly and their right to freedom of association as guaranteed by section two
of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. However. Society also expects
demonstrators to exercise these rights to do so without violating the rights of
others to move about freely or to engage in activities which they have a
perfect legal right to do so”. In submissions, the Crown said that at the
earliest stage of the planning to come to demonstrate in Ottawa did not
constitute as an unlawful act. They argue that upon arrival in Ottawa, the
nature of the agreement quickly changed and turned into an agreement to commit
an unlawful act.
[
6
]
The Crown argues that the Accused before the
Court by the means they used to express their wish for COVID mandates to end, violated
the rights of others to move about freely or engage in activities they had
every right to engage in. Defence argues to the contrary that their clients engaged
in a peaceful lawful demonstration and always encouraged that anyone associated
with them do so.
[
7
]
There is no doubt about the effect of the
Freedom Convoy on downtown Ottawa. Several thousand individuals came to Ottawa
from all parts of Canada, some arriving in private vehicles, many drove large
commercial tractor-trailers and other types of trucks too. This was a
grassroots movement which galvanized persons wanting to protest COVID-19 health
mandates and other perceived government overreach. Some people and their
vehicles were part of the Freedom Convoy, some were curious onlookers, and some
were in Ottawa to protest but were unaffiliated with the Freedom Convoy
[
8
]
With the arrival of trucks from western Canada,
eastern Canada, Quebec, etc. the Ottawa Police assisted or directed trucks
where to park on Wellington and the downtown area and gave them additional
parking on Coventry Road. It became quickly apparent that police intelligence
vastly underestimated the number of vehicles and persons who joined this
protest. The downtown core areas were jammed with trucks and vehicles blocking
many downtown streets. Trucks lined the streets, their engines running and
their horns honking.
[
9
]
The Court heard from witnesses that this protest
disrupted public transportation routes and that public streets were occupied by
vehicles, food stations, structures, speaking platforms, and people. Persons
testified that the noise from the truck horns made it difficult for downtown
residents to sleep and focus on work. Others testified that the egress from
their buildings was blocked or that because of the streets being blocked that it
was difficult or impossible to get to work and appointments. Generally, the
central core of the city came to a standstill. The downtown residents who
testified including persons and their families who lived in the downtown core,
owners and employees of small businesses and other institutions such as
churches suffered significant interferences in the use and enjoyment of their
property and in their daily activities because of the protest. In addition to witnesses
being called the Crown also tendered a compilation of photos and videos to
portray the state of things in Ottawa. There is no question that this was the
state of things in Ottawa during the period of January 28 to February 21, 2022.
[
10
]
As Freedom Convoy participants continued to
occupy Ottawa’s downtown area over the three-week period, they and their
spokespersons told both police and the public that they would not leave until
the government agreed to terminate COVID-19 mandates. Police sought to manage
the situation and ensure public safety by controlling the movement of traffic
and public transportation and by attempting to keep one traffic lane open on
most streets to permit emergency vehicle access. Police were overwhelmed as the
situation escalated and grew out of control. The City of Ottawa declared a
municipal state of emergency on February 6, 2022. Downtown residents, through
private legal counsel, sought and obtained injunctive relief against honking of
air horns and train horns (order of the Superior Court of Justice, per McLean
J., dated February 7, 2022, and Feb 16, 2022). The City of Ottawa on February
9, 2022, declared an Emergency. The Government of Ontario declared a provincial
state of emergency on February 11, 2022. The situation contributed to the
federal government’s invocation of the Emergencies Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. 22
, and
the ensuing declaration of a national state of emergency.
[
11
]
On February 18, 2022, a three-day
multi-jurisdictional police enforcement operation began to clear Freedom Convoy
participants still within the downtown core of Ottawa. The accused Chris Barber
and Tamara Lich were arrested on February 17, 2022, and thus had no further
involvement in convoy activity from that point forward.
[
12
]
The question to be determined is whether the
Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that it was the actions of the
Accused before this court who caused or counselled this interference with the
lawful use or operation of property, intimidation by the blocking or
obstruction of roads, obstruction of justice or disobeying a court order in the
case of Mr. Barber.
Charges
and Summary of Evidence
[
13
]
Tamara Lich and Chris Barber are charged that
between Dec 1, 2021 and February 19, 2022 they did counsel to commit mischief which
was not committed by one or more persons contrary to Section 464(a) (count 1),
count 2  that between December 1, 2021 and February 19, 2022 that they did counsel
to commit the indictable offence of intimidation which was not committed,
contrary to
section 464
(a) of the
Criminal Code of Canada
, Count 3 that between
January 26, 2022 and February 19, 2022 that they did counsel to commit the indictable
offence of obstruct police which was not committed, Count 4 that between
January 26 2022 and the 19th day of February 2022, they did resist or willfully
obstruct a peace officer in the execution of his duty contrary to
section
129
(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada, Count 5 that they did between January
26, 2022 and the 19th day of February 2022 did wrongfully and without lawful
authority, for the purpose of compelling one or more persons to abstain from
doing anything that the person had the lawful right to do, or do anything that
the person had a lawful right to abstain from doing, block or obstruct one or
more highways contrary to
s. 423(1)
(g) of the Criminal Code of Canada, Count 6
that between January 26 2022 and the 19th of February 2022 did commit Mischief
contrary to
Section 430(3)
of the Criminal Code of Canada.
[
14
]
Christopher Barber is charged alone on count 7
that he did counsel commit the indictable offence of disobeying court order,
which was not committed contrary to
s. 464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
of Canda.
[
15
]
The Crown alleges that both accused committed
the offences outlined above either as a principal or as a party under
s.
21(1)
(b) and (c) of the
Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46
, or by way of
counselling pursuant to
ss. 22
and
464
of the Criminal Code.
[
16
]
The Crown called numerous witnesses including Members
of the Ottawa Police including PLT officers who liaised between police and persons
involved in the protest.  Also, Senior managers with the City of Ottawa as well
as residents residing or carrying on business in the downtown core.
[
17
]
Specifically, the following Crown witnesses were
called:
Cst. Craig Barlow who put together a
compilation
video, Inspector Lucas, Surete du Quebec Captain Martel whose
team was involved in the take down and arrests. City of Ottawa officials Kim
Ayotte and Serge Arpin were called to testify. Also, Sgt Pillotte who reviewed Facebook
materials from the Freedom Convoy Facebook site, PLT officer Isabelle
Cyr-Piddcock, PLT officers Bach and Blonde and who dealt with and exchanged
texts with Chris Barber. Nathalie Huneault who described the effects of the
protest on OC Transpo, and four citizens living in the downtown core who
described what they observed living or working in downtown Ottawa late Jan into
Feb 2022.
Cst.
Craig Barlow
[
18
]
Cst. Craig Barlow put together a compilation
video of 38 clips. The Crown then sought to add 7 more clips taken on February 19,
2022, that had not been included by Cst. Barlow. The clips showed each week of
the protest as well as the last few days of the takedown February 18,19, 20 and
some coverage from Coventry. In putting together the video he used open-source material,
police sources and some body cam footage. He testified that the compilation
video represented what was going on in Ottawa at the time. The video
compilation was filed as Exhibit 3.
[
19
]
In cross examination, he agreed that he had been
directed by the Crown’s office to include five specific things. He submitted a
first draft and was told they wanted more footage from the downtown core to
show congested streets. He agreed that the compilation was put together based
on that Crown directive.
[
20
]
The compilation video filed on consent as Exhibit
3, showed loud and disorderly conduct, streets blocked with people and all
types of trucks and other vehicles.
Inspector
Lucas
[
21
]
Inspector Russell Lucas became the OPS Incident
Commander on January 21, 2022, when they were planning to deal with a response
to the Freedom Convoy protest. He did not have any contact with either Tamara
Lich or Mr. Barber.  The PLT officers who worked under him were to work as liaison
to enable dialogue between the parties. He said our general practice is to facilitate
between lawful protests and the persons affected. He said we tried to find a
balance between the two. He said this includes public safety for everyone and
mitigate any impacts that arise.   He stated that Freedom Convoy organizers
were for the most part able to keep an emergency lane open on Wellington during
the first weekend (January 28-30, 2022), but that “we lost it by the Monday or
Tuesday completely”. Lucas believed that the emergency lanes “were gone more
than we had them”. He said their resources were stretched thin and after the
first weekend they were not as focused on traffic and that they just wanted to
keep everyone safe.
[
22
]
Inspector Lucas in his testimony
(pg. 10) said he thought initially by January 21st, 2022, there were five
different convoys but that by the time they are starting arriving January 28,
there were up to 13 identified groups, in addition to many loners or private
individuals. He recalled it was challenging to get a handle on the numbers.  Inspector
Lucas said “So, that changes the dynamics because the initial posting of the
event that was taking place from the western convoy and the original group that
left, they were a core group to the best of my knowledge of about 50 people in
that, but there were people coming and going from that group. And then there
were more groups that were growing every day, which was changing our plans daily,
on how we were going to respond and manage their imminent arrival.”
[
23
]
Inspector Lucas said there were also local groups,
and that part of the challenge is that there were a lot of private vehicles
joining especially from Ontario and Quebec and the immediate area. The original
estimate was that there would be 10,000 people in the downtown core. He
admitted that when on Friday January 28, 2022, they all started coming in, we
didn’t know the size and scope of the convoys, especially from the Ontario/ Quebec
areas, until they left that day.  (pg. 22). Inspector Lucas said they had been
told there would be up to 100 vehicles per province but that the size exceeded
that with over 5000 vehicles. He said their planning was based on the original
2000 vehicle estimate of numbers but that the event far exceeded our
expectations.
[
24
]
Inspector Lucas said when they were planning, protestors
were co-operative with police and that there were no red flags with them
enroute. They looked to where they could divert these vehicles to mitigate the
impact on the city. He said “it’s a balance, regardless of the message. We
wanted to balance the right of free speech but mitigate the impact.
[
25
]
Inspector Lucas was aware of the routes
provided to the protestors and where they were directed to go to the staging
areas.  He said the traffic plan came for the Ottawa Police. Inspector Lucas said
it was his decision to allow trucks on Wellington, that he approved it and
endorsed it. He said Wellington was where they wanted to be, and it was an easy
place to manage. He said in cross that he would still allow the Convoy to park
on Wellington to prevent it spilling out onto other areas. He was asked Is that
still your view today. Answer: It is. In re-examination, Inspector Lucas said
his rationale is that Wellington Street is primarily government offices and
that they would have moved away from residential areas and decreased the impact
on residents and decreased stress on resources.
[
26
]
Inspector Lucas said the exit strategy was that
they would leave after the first weekend. He said many did leave, but the
challenge was that the footprint remained the same. He said the footprint of
the Convoy exceeded their plan.
[
27
]
Inspector Lucas said he was aware of efforts to
negotiate the movement of trucks to shrink the footprint and move vehicles
further west onto Wellington Street. He was also aware that at one point, there
was an agreement to reduce the footprint. He said his preference was to shrink
the protest, but his directive from the Chief of police was not to give them
one inch. In cross-examination, he said he thought that directive came Jan
31st.  Inspector Lucas said that it took power away from the PLT officers as
they had no negotiating power.
[
28
]
The Inspector said that enforcement was
difficult as officers were sometimes swarmed while trying to do enforcement but
that there were no physical violent exchanges.
Sgt. Cyr
[
29
]
Sgt. Cyr was part of the police liaison team or
PLT whose job was to lease with the protestors. She described that they reached
out to organizers to get and convey information for the safety of the
organizers and the public. She had some contact with Chris Barber early on but
had no contact with Tamara Lich.
[
30
]
She understood that there was to be no violence
and that the truckers were to register and there was a code of conduct, but she
never saw a copy and nor was it made an exhibit at the trial. Sgt. Cyr
understood the protestors wanted a peaceful, lawful protest.
[
31
]
Sgt. Cyr recalled that there was the drawing of
a map of where the key staging was to occur. Identified Exhibit 125 as the maps
and routes that were communicated to the truckers. She agreed that it was spelt
out that there was to be an emergency access lane.
[
32
]
Sgt. Cyr was aware that there were efforts to
shrink the footprint. She said some truckers were more open to discussion than
others. She agreed that the purpose was to get the trucks out of the residential
areas into the staging areas. She said a couple of times “I asked Inspector
Lucas if I could move trucks onto a different street and I was denied that.
[
33
]
The signal chat was the means the PLT officers
communicated with each other about what was going on. Feb 2 there was a signal
chat which she agreed conveyed that the trucks at Rideau and Sussex were not
part of the Freedom Convoy but were part of the “French connection”.
Sgt.
Pillotte
[
34
]
Sgt. Pilotte was tasked with a review of the Facebook
accounts of Chris Barber and the Freedom Convoy. The review included screen shots,
posts, and videos on the Facebook accounts of the Freedom Convoy 2022 and Chris
Barber. Several admissions were made regarding whose account it was, dates
shown are accurate, that they are publicly accessible and that the numbers
beside following and followers is accurate etc. The admissions are set out in
Exhibit 1 particularly pages 4 and 5. It was further agreed that the 11 posts
on the Freedom Convoy face book signed by Tamara were attributable to Tamra
Lich and on Exhibit 39 pg. 10/212 that post is signed by Tamara Lich. In
addition, that any video clips featuring the accused and words spoken by them
are attributable to them. Similarly, that posts signed Chris Baber and word
spoken by him were Mr. Barber as well as those authored on his own account. Screenshots,
videos, and transcripts of those videos were filed as exhibits by the Crown.
The Crown stated that they were aware that much of the content on these sites
is hearsay, and stated they were not relying on any replies or comments from
third parties on the Freedom Convoy or Chris Barber’s Face Book account. They
were not relying on that either for circumstantial evidence, the Carter Application
or to prove the case on the merits.  The Crown said they may however rely on
the number of computer-generated likes or followers. There was an extensive
review of the materials viewed and put together by Sgt. Pilotte, those will be
referred to as need be in the analysis of the evidence and the application of
the law.
Captain Etienne
Martel-Surety du Quebec
[
35
]
Captain Martel was in command of a team of police
officers who aided the Ottawa Police. They were deployed to assist with the “removals”,
February 18, 2022. The team included officers for crowd control, the first line
had shields, there was also a team for arrest and flight, 2022. He was
responsible for the Green Squad which was composed of 45 to 50 people. Their
role was to assist in crowd control.
[
36
]
They had an early morning briefing on February
18, 2022, and then received an order to form a front line on Wellington Street.
He was in the Mackenzie and Wellington Street area. He himself was 15 ft behind
the front line. They were equipped with crowd control equipment. First, they
established a presence line and eventually asked to move forward to clear space.
He said there was a heavy presence of demonstrators that prevented them from
moving forward. He said the crowd was resisting. They were not clearing but
there were no projectiles that were thrown. He said they could hear yelling,
but they just stayed in place. He said the line of demonstrators pushed back.
[
37
]
On February 19, 2022, he and his quad were asked
to go back to Wellington Street past Parliament. Again, they formed a line and
moved slowly. The order was to turn the demonstrators so they would go down Bank
Street and make sure there were no further demonstrators on Wellington Street.
[
38
]
Cpt. Martel was shown the compilation video
clips of Wellington Street (Ex. 3) from February 19, put together by Cst. Barlow.
He identified members of his green squad from that compilation. He described
that at certain points, as they tried to move forward, there was pushback by
the demonstrators. He agreed in cross that there were demonstrators singing and
chanting the word “Freedom”.
[
39
]
In cross, he was shown other videos taken from
the same time (Exhibit 6 and 7) He agreed there were police officers saying
Hold the Line on the police radio. He said when he relayed that to his officers,
it to mean don’t move forward. Not to move. We keep the line where we were up to.”
Kim
Ayotte
[
40
]
Mr. Ayotte was called by the Crown. In
January/February 2022, he was General Manager of Emergency and Protective
Services, in charge of the fire department, paramedic services, by-law
officers, and corporate security. He explained that the Chiefs of Fire and
Paramedic Services reported to him and that his group of 2500 people who report
to him work alongside OPS, RCMP and OPP etc. Mr. Ayotte reported to the City
Manager.
[
41
]
During the protest, he said the police took the
lead and that his group were there for consequence management. He said By-Law
gave support by issuing tickets when escorted by police in certain areas. He
did not give any direction to By-Law. He explained on January 29, 2022, his
by-law officers were directed not to give out tickets or tow vehicles in the
Red Zone as police controlled all enforcement activity.
[
42
]
He explained it was the Ottawa Police Service
who were responsible for keeping the peace, maintaining public order, and
dealing with the Freedom Convoy, with Emergency and Protective Services
providing a backup role. In cross-examination, he agreed that handling the
protest came entirely under Ottawa Police management, as a well as all
operational decisions, closing the street, as well as crowd control, ticketing,
and fire safety. From the outset, the Ottawa Police had complete responsibility
for handling the protest. (pg. 27 Transcript Sept 20/2023.) It was put to Mr.
Ayotte in cross, “All open-source information and our interaction with organizers
indicate that this will be a significant and extremely fluid event that could go
on for a prolonged period. He was asked if he disagreed with that information.
He did not (pg. 53)
[
43
]
He testified in cross-examination that he was
not aware of the Ottawa Police Operational Traffic Plan. In cross, however (pg.
53 Transcript Sept 20/2023) he agreed that prior to the arrival of the Convoy,
some streets were closed at the direction of OPS and that the street closures
were meant to coincide with the areas to be occupied by trucks. That they (OPS)
were trying to funnel trucks into certain areas.
[
44
]
Mr. Ayotte outlined that his objective was to
help the police manage a peaceful protest with minimal damage and injury and
the least intrusion to businesses and citizens of Ottawa.
[
45
]
Mr. Ayotte was also able to provide some first-hand
observations about the protest. Mr. Ayotte was able to make observations from
his office on the fifth floor of City Hall, which is close to the Red Zone
where convoy vehicles were concentrated. He also had access to CCTV cameras and
drone footage which he could access from his home and from his office. CCTV
footage was filed as Exhibit 98. He also took several walks around the Red Zone.
He recalled going for a walk on February 11/2022, looking at things from an
injunction perspective. So, I went looking for issues that were a concern. He said
(Sept 20/2 pg 17) “I made observations with regards to, you know, honking horns
and, you know, diesel fumes, illegal parking, illegal use of roads.”  He could
not recall if he made specific observations regarding burning fires but had
made observations of those in the previous week and a half, at different times.
[
46
]
Generally, he observed that the honking of
horns for the first week and a half was constant. He could hear them not only
on his walks from the office but at his condo in Westboro., they were nonstop…
so my observations are on the 11th that they continue to honk their horns.”  He
said “they” were the people participating in the Convoy, large trucks, small
trucks, people who felt like honking their horns.  He noticed there was an odor
of diesel fuel in the air, which they had received complaints about. He said
trucks were idling contrary to the Idling By-Law.
[
47
]
When asked about his observations regarding congestion
(Transcript Sept 20/2023 pg. 18), “There was a lot of congestion on the roads.
There were trucks parked everywhere. There was an attempt to keep the emergency
lanes open, and that effort was visual. By-Law was out there assisting with the
effort as well, but all lanes were blocked. All of Wellington Street was
blocked. There was no emergency lane on Wellington.  And there was illegal use
of roads setting up – speakers, people playing music in the middle of the road
and dancing. Exhibit 98 pg. 21 photo stamped Feb 5 at 2:00 pm Mr. Ayotte said
shows the emergency lane taken over and that there was no Emergency Lane.
[
48
]
Regarding Wellington Street, Mr. Ayotte said,
“We lost the emergency lane the very first night. There was one planned, but
the trucks parked in it, and they chained each other together” (September 20, pg.
19). Later in his testimony, he said for the most part several of the emergency
lanes were maintained. In re-examination, he explained what he meant, saying (September
21, pg. 51) Well, as the protestors came in larger numbers, especially on
Wellington Street, some of them would expand the overall footprint and would
block some of the emergency lanes. He said this was during the first couple of days
and the second weekend.
[
49
]
As for the honking, he observed, “the honking
while I was in my office in the early days of the convoy was constant. They
continued to honk their horns, large trucks, small trucks anyone who felt like
honking their horns. It was non-stop, constant. Following, I believe, the citizens’
injunction…I found it more sporadic…it was a lot less”.
[
50
]
Mr. Ayotte testified about his direct dealings
with Mr. Barber. He attended a meeting with Mr. Barber on February 13, 2022.
The meeting was with a convoy group, including Chris Barber which was to
discuss how Mr. Ayotte could help them facilitate the moving of vehicles from
the residential portion of the downtown area onto Wellington and out of the city.
(Transcript Sept 20 pg. 4) His understanding was that the Convoy group was
going to remove or move the vehicles, and if they had any pushback or concerns,
Mr. Ayotte would be the Senior person within the city they could deal with to
assist in moving barricades or police vehicles, etc.
[
51
]
At that meeting, they had a map and identified
which part of Wellington all the way to the parkway that they could put
vehicles on. He said the organizers understood that it was not physically
possible to move all the vehicles onto Wellington, that they would convince
people to leave the city and go outside the city to a farm that they had
identified where they could continue their protest. The goal was to remove vehicles
from the residential areas. (Transcript Sept 20/24 pg 5). Mr. Ayotte explained
that most of the east end of Wellington was blocked with Trucks, so they were
talking west of Bank St all the way as far as they could get it to the SJAM
without blocking any bridges.
[
52
]
It was for that purpose that he and Mr. Barber exchanged
text messages on Feb 14 and 15, filed as Exhibit 99. Mr. Ayotte said his group
were to facilitate with the removal of barriers etc. He recalled that they did
assist with moving barricades and that some of the roadblocks were also with
police officers not wanting to move vehicles because they had not been given
the direction to move vehicles (pg. 8). Mr. Ayotte contacted Staff Inspector
Drummond, who provided information with regards to their position.
[
53
]
Mr. Ayotte was asked, “And what was the value of
moving those trucks? A: We were trying to look after the citizens of Ottawa,
the residential properties who lived in the downtown Ottawa, who had been
suffering for three weeks with regard to everything they were dealing with. And
what we saw by moving them out of the residential property would give some
people relief with regards to the stress they had been under and, you know, the
challenges they had been under. Also, it would offer them opportunities to
leave their buildings in a comfortable way without feeling unsafe, which is
what we were hearing from them.” (pg 11)
[
54
]
Mr. Ayotte observed on the CCTV the moving of
trucks, and he physically observed that some trucks had moved onto Wellington.
He said Pg 11 Transcript Sept 20/2022 “My observations were that some trucks
had been moved but, in their place, either smaller vehicle had moved in their
place and the jockeying seemed to be that everyone was still trying to get
closer to Wellington but there wasn’t a lot of movement out of town.”
[
55
]
He said the movement of trucks that first day
was seen as a success and from his perspective, the truckers were living up to
their end of the bargain.
[
56
]
Mr. Ayotte did not have any interactions with
Tamara Lich.
[
57
]
Inspector Lucas also spoke of this plan to
reduce the footprint and impact on residential areas, which he endorsed but
ultimately direction came from OPS chief, not to continue this plan and not to
allow Trucks to move onto Wellington.
[
58
]
Mr. Ayotte also discussed the circumstances
surrounding the declaration of an Emergency declared by the Mayor on February 6.
He said the purpose was to flag to the Senior levels of Government that we
needed assistance. He also testified about the fact that the city sought
injunctive relief on February 14. In re-examination, He said they did this as
it was seen as another tool to use that could possibly enforce the laws to a
greater degree (pg. 54 Sept 21/2022 to provide greater enforcement. He
explained that the agreement to reduce the footprint was to help the residents
and alleviate the pressure and anxiety they were facing and still allow the
protestors to protest. The injunction was a tool to enforce, at a greater
level, from a court perspective, the violations that we observed on the streets
from a by-law perspective.
[
59
]
In re-examination, Mr. Ayotte was asked about an
inconsistency in his evidence, on the one hand indicating that he thought it
was going to be a two-day event, but also not disagreeing with the suggestion
that it was going to be a potential prolonged event. He explained that there
was a lot of information coming in from all kinds of sources. He said as of Jan
26, 2022, his concerns were the lack of intelligence about who was coming to
Ottawa and from what other places in the country? Are they coming for the
weekend? Are they going to last longer? Is this going to be a long-duration
event? And no one could really answer that question. It was an operating
assumption in creating our plans that we were hopeful that it would be a
two-day event, that they would come in and police would escort them out as
quickly as possible, in two-days (Transcript pg. 50, Sept 21/2022)
Serge
Arpin
[
60
]
Serge Arpin was the Chief of Staff to the former
City of Ottawa mayor Jim Watson. Arpin testified that he could see trucks lined
up to Parliament Hill and that the entire width of the thoroughfare he walked
on Metcalfe Street was taken up by parked trucks. He said he personally walked Lisgar,
Metcalfe and Wellington Street. While walking on Metcalfe Street during the
second week of the demonstration, Arpin indicated that every city block from
Lisgar to Wellington Streets had vehicles parked tightly side-by-side, three to
four wide. He said some trucks were idling, some running and some honking. He said
there was a strong smell of gas and diesel and loud noises from the trucks idling.
He said it was a loud noise like a lawnmower, which prevented conversation next
to that vehicle. Arpin believed that the vehicles on Metcalfe Street “were
parked in a coordinated fashion all the way down the avenue”. Arpin also stated
that some of these vehicles were vacant, while others were occupied.
[
61
]
Mr. Arpin said he sent a letter to Ms. Lich on
February 12, 2022, Exhibit 100, the fundamental purpose was to send a letter
from the mayor asking the Convoy leaders to consider removing the trucks from
the residential districts of Ottawa, where we felt they were causing issues. We
asked them if they would consider removing their trucks from the residential
areas, those that were south of Wellington, near Coventry ballpark stadium and
other vehicles at the intersection of Rideau and Sussex and in the market.
[
62
]
Mr. Arpin testified that shortly after he sent
the letter, he received a reply that laid out their broad consent to the mayor's
proposal. In cross, he said, he sent the letter to Ms. Lich as it was suggested
she represented the broad moderate group of the demonstrators. He said he
understood that it would be very difficult to move the trucks as they’d have to
go to every truck and explain the plan, and that some might not want to leave. He
said the Ottawa Police and City had to collaborate on this plan to assist
moving concrete barriers. There also had to be movement on Wellington itself so
they could all be parked there.
[
63
]
Mr. Arpin agreed that he testified at POEC that
102 vehicles, including 40 heavy trucks, moved, which he viewed as a commitment
to honouring the agreement. He understood it was the Ottawa Police that stopped
the movement of the trucks. He agreed he apologized to counsel for the Freedom
Convoy because he saw it as a failure on our side to implement the agreement.
[
64
]
Mr. Arpin agreed that on February 9, the city changed
the idling by-law so that you could only idle if it was -15 or colder and that
it was done to assist with enforcement and targeted the demonstration zone.
Sarah Gawman
[
65
]
Sarah Gawman, a downtown resident, lived near
Laurier and Lyon in a condo above the 10th floor. She also worked in the area at
Albert and Lyon streets. During the period of Jan 28 to Feb 19th, she worked
from home. She described that once the trucks moved in, there was incessant
honking, making it difficult to concentrate and she felt anxious trying to do work.
It was put to her in cross that after February 7, the honking was not
continuous. She said, “it was a mixture of what I was feeling and what I heard.
But agreed after Feb 7, it was more sporadic.
[
66
]
Ms. Gawman said that she could see from her
window Slater up to Lyon Street and that there were vehicles as far as the eye
could see.  She said there were a variety of vehicles and a lot of trucks. She
said during Feb 4 to 11, 2022, she observed what seemed that there was
increased traffic, drums, fireworks, etc. at Laurier and Kent.  She described
trucks honking all day, drumming from 8 pm to 2:00 am and Fireworks after 8 pm.
She testified that due to streets being blocked or obstructed, she was not able
to get a taxi to pick her up for a medical appointment or see her friends.
[
67
]
Ms. Gawman indicated she tried to do grocery shopping
near Somerset and Bank street, but there were people shouting, raising their fists,
there were vehicles blocking and she did not feel comfortable. She described
that Banks at Laurier and Lyon closed, and the pharmacy closed the first
weekend. Only the Tim Horton’s was open. She said the second week, as things
went on, she felt scared and that she left Feb 3 to 6 that week to go to her
nieces. She could not identify any truck or people in them, and she never had
any contact with either of the accused.
Vivian
Leir
[
68
]
Vivian Leir testified that she was the Church
Administrator at St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church located on Kent Street at
Wellington Street. She described that when the Convoy came, they surrounded the
church and indicated that she was unable to take her vehicle to work as she
normally did. She said she was overwhelmed by the number of Trucks, the noise
and the diesel smell. She said the noise and fumes infiltrated the Church. She
testified that people were urinating and defecating on Church property and that
when she told them not to, she was sworn at. She said people put items of
clothing on Church statues, and there was also garbage and signage. She said
the church is a sanctuary and they fouled it.
[
69
]
Ms. Leir had no direct dealings with either Mr.
Barber or Ms. Lich. Ms. Leir generally testified as to the impact of the convoy
on the Church. Ms. Leir testified that several regularly scheduled activities,
such as choir practice, committee meetings, could not take place or had to be
moved online. She said rental groups cancelled their bookings, and The Church
lost considerable rental revenue during the Freedom Convoy, and Ms. Leir also
indicated a decline in Church service attendance during the Freedom Convoy.
[
70
]
Ms. Leir said she had to contact the police to
escort their Minister, so that she could go in and out to conduct services. She
testified that noise during the Freedom Convoy was very significant, with the
sounds of rumbling of trucks, honking, and loud music, which could be heard in
the Church sanctuary.
[
71
]
In cross-examination, Ms. Leir, in response to
the Question, you referred to the protest as an occupation? She replied that they
were limiting our space; it was our space taken over, and we were limited in
our activities. I felt it was an occupation. She agreed that the loud music
playing wasn’t constant and nor were the horns after the injunction of Feb 7.
Stephan
Bellfoy
[
72
]
Mr. Bellfoy is another downtown resident who
testified. He lived around Laurier and Lyon. Stephane Bellfoy said that during
the period from January 28 to February 19 his commute changed a lot. He said
his commute prior to that date usually took 20 minutes, but that during the protest,
he had to find alternate routes and that it took 1.5 hours He described a lot
of traffic and lots of obstacles getting around. He said it was difficult to
engage in his usual activities, such as taking his son to hockey and visiting
his parents in Quebec.  He described that one day, coming back from hockey
practice, he could not get into his building and that his son, in full hockey gear
including his skates, had to walk 1.5 km. While they were walking back, several
people were laughing and making fun of his son. He said they had to walk Bronson
down Laurier, because the traffic was not moving and was full of mostly trucks.
Though Mr. Bellfoy’s vehicle was not blocked into his residence in the same way
Jorgenson’s was, he testified about standstill traffic, closed roads, and the
requirement to take alternative routes, as routinely making him late for his
commitments.
[
73
]
Mr. Bellfoy, like other downtown residents,
heard noises at all hours of the day. He described that he heard things such as
fireworks over 7- or 8-days times, car and truck horns, noisy people in the
street and the revving of engines. He also smelled gas or diesel fumes. In cross,
he agreed that after the injunction, the honking was sporadic.
Chantal
Biro
[
74
]
The Court also heard from Ms. Biro, who owns a
women’s clothing boutique in the ByWard Market. Ms. Biro has been a small
business owner for 27 years. She also has an online business through which she
sells clothes all over the world. She had no direct dealings with either Tamara
Lich or Chris Barber.
[
75
]
At the time the Freedom Convoy arrived in
Ottawa, Ms. Biro had recently reopened her store following the lifting of
COVID-19 restrictions. She maintained regular hours and had to lay off one of
her employees during the Freedom Convoy protest.
[
76
]
Ms. Biro indicated that trucks were parked on
Sussex Drive, Rideau Street and Wellington near her shop. She heard constant
blaring of horns, people speaking through a Megaphone in front of her business,
she heard the word Freedom a lot, swearing, especially directed at the then
Prime Minister. She smelled gasoline fumes and exhaust as well as weed and
cigarettes. She said that she saw lots of people, flags, megaphones, and some
days Sussex was completely blocked by rigs, pick-up trucks and upside-down or
F—Trudeau flags.
[
77
]
While Ms. Biro did not report difficulties
accessing her parking spot in the ByWard Market, she testified that the
disruptions associated with the Freedom Convoy resulted in delayed deliveries,
which had a direct impact on her online business. Ms. Biro also testified that,
on the short walk from her parking spot to her boutique (for which she wore a
mask), she had “uncomfortable” interactions with Freedom Convoy participants
who greeted her with “foul language.” And laughed at her for wearing a mask.
She said her business was affected adversely by the loud honking of horns and
noise associated with the convoy and that few customers could make it downtown.
She said her in store sales dropped dramatically. She was subjected to a
variety of loud sounds, audible from inside her boutique, including horns,
megaphones, people shouting “freedom”, and loud music.
Natalie Huneault
[
78
]
Natalie Huneault is the Business Projects and
Events Coordinator for OC Transpo, she usually handles events such as Blues
Fest, Canada Day festivities, Race Weekend and any demonstrations that affect
transportation. She testified that the Freedom Convoy caused a widespread
disruption to public transportation. Specifically, that bus and other OC
Transpo services were impacted specifically in the area between Bronson Street
and the Canal, Wellington Street to Gladstone Street, Albert Street to
Terrasses de la Chaudière, and finally from Sussex Street to King Edward Avenue
to Rideau Street. In response to road closures because of the Freedom Convoy
and vehicles obstructing roadways, there was a complete removal of service on a
number of streets and run time issues due to supplementary traffic.  She said
that 5 major routes were affected, and approximately 150 stops were not in use,
depending on what was open. She agreed that decisions regarding road closures
were made by the Ottawa Police and that buses were rerouted due to road
closures. OC Transpo was not able to serve the roads that those stops were on.
There were no specific examples of changes to Para Transpo. Ms Huneault said
the public’s ridership was significantly affected.
[
79
]
As with other Crown witnesses, Ms. Huneault had
no personal dealings with either Tamara Lich or Chris Barber
Paul Jorgensen
[
80
]
Paul Jorgensen lived at the corner of Kent
Street and Laurier Avenue.  He also worked from home. He said his work was
severely disrupted when the protestors came and that it was hard to convey how
impossible it was to conduct life and meetings, etc. He said the noise was incessant
and very loud. He said the smell from vehicles running stank and that it burned
his throat. He observed plumes of black smoke from a vehicle he thought was
burning coal.
[
81
]
Mr. Jorgensen testified that the exit and
entrance to the building where he resided were completely blocked by vehicles. He
said the first weekend it was chockablock, you would not have even been able to
maneuver a motorcycle. According to Jorgenson, trucks that were part of the
demonstration were parked immediately in front of the exit of his parking
garage, which prevented him from leaving in his vehicle. He said he did not ask
them to move cause even if they wanted to move, they couldn’t have.  When he
and his partner did leave, it was on foot.  He recalled once when he and his
partner did leave on foot, approximately 15 metres up Kent towards Gloucester,
they felt threatened, as they were surrounded by protestors who said, “Oh you’re
wearing masks” and felt that they had to flee. They were not pursued. He said
this occurred during the first weekend. He said when they went out on foot,
most places were closed, so they went to the Glebe which was refreshing and
silent.
[
82
]
Mr. Jorgensen said they left their home from
January 31 to February 9, 2022, as they had trouble sleeping and their pet was also
struggling. When they returned, the noise level had significantly improved and
there was no longer incessant noise.  He said, “It was intermittent, it was liveable”.
He also said the fireworks had stopped, and they did not experience any further
harassing behaviour. He said after their return, he was able to work from home
and would mute himself if there was a noise flare-up up which might last from
seconds to minutes, but not hours.
[
83
]
After Feb 9 when they returned, he also
recalled, there was some possible circulation going east and west – Gloucester
Street and Laurier Avenue; however, circulation north and south on Kent Street
was “impossible”. Even with this circulation, Jorgenson explained that he was
still broadly unable to come and go from his residence by vehicle throughout
the demonstration period.
Zexi Li
[
84
]
Zexi Li, was living in the Bank and Laurier area
in January/Feb 2022.  Ms. Li is also one of the named plaintiffs in the
injunctions before Justice McLean and part of the civil class action lawsuit
against Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber, among others. She testified about her
observations of traffic, honking and diesel fumes during the protest. At the
time, she was working from home. She said she found it difficult to work from
home due to the noise going on outside. She testified she found it difficult to
concentrate not only on work but that it was difficult to focus due to lack of
sleep. Li said that she was hearing a variety of honking horns, blaring of air
horns, some standard car horns also. She said from January 28 to February 4, 2022,
the horns were relentless and constant. After the injunction there were efforts
to honk at more organized periods. Ms. Li said that the morning prior to the
injunction the honking increased and after the injunction there was minimal
honking with the occasional horns.
[
85
]
Ms. Li said that she heard other noises also
such as fireworks, an air raid siren, megaphones, music blasting and roaming
truck with a very loud horn. She said when she heard these sounds, she was in
the parliamentary precinct area, Centertown and near her home.
[
86
]
She said that when she would leave her home, she
observed feces, urine, and garbage everywhere. She observed there were trucks,
cars, and transport trucks parked in intersections and in the middle of the
road and some vehicles with their wheels removed. It was at Kent and Laurier
where she observed the vehicles with their wheels removed. Li made observations
of intersections that were at times fully blocked off. She also said that
occasionally, certain vehicles would be moved, which in turn removed the
blockage.
[
87
]
She said the engine fumes and gasoline, and
diesel smells from the vehicles idling were significant and inescapable.
[
88
]
Using Bank Street as an example, Li further
observed that over time, there would be openings for emergency lanes on certain
roads that were previously completely blocked off by cars and trucks. Li stated
that based on her observations, the areas most affected were Bank Street
between Laurier and Gloucester Streets, Kent, Wellington, and Metcalfe Streets.
Li observed that certain roads were blocked for the entirety or majority of the
demonstration. She said there were also lots of people milling around in the streets.
She recalled at least in the third week, there was a smaller presence on weekdays
than the weekends, that’s when fireworks most occurred.
[
89
]
On either Feb 17 or 18, she was taking pictures
and recording video as she admitted collecting evidence. She said the demonstrators
honked and shouted at her. She agreed she confronted the truckers once, saying,
“Go the F…k back to where you came from.”
Ms. Li also
testified that there was a structure at Bank and Laurier, like a makeshift soup
kitchen. She could recall exactly where it was, but it was partially on the
road.
[
90
]
In cross, she said that February 7, 2022 was a day when she heard
collective honking but could not name other specific dates. Nor could she be
certain of the specific dates when she heard the air raid siren or fireworks,
or which intersections were blocked at any specific time or date.   She also
agreed that it is possible the streets weren’t blocked entirely, as she wasn’t
there the entire time.
[
91
]
She further acknowledged that the injunction before
Justice McLean was focused on stopping the honking.
[
92
]
She agreed that she had given evidence at POEC
that there was a certain chaos on the streets. She also said that after the
injunction, there was only intermittent honking.
[
93
]
It was Ms. Li’s view that By-laws were being
broken with trucks parking on the road, idling etc. She said she reported it to
the police, but that they did not do much.
[
94
]
The observations made by downtown residents and
employees of the road blockages and obstructions were generally consistent with
one another. Their evidence was confirmed by other photographic and video
evidence as well as the observations of police officers working within the
Police Liaison Team (“PLT”). For example, Constable Nicole Bach (“Bach”)
described the Lyon Street and Queen Street area on January 30, 2022, as “a
little gridlock and a section totally blocked by vehicles” Bach also indicated
that as of January 31, she noticed that there were in fact some open lanes
southbound on Wellington Street, except for the area between Metcalfe Street
and Elgin Street.
Acting
Sgt Jordan Blonde
[
95
]
The Crown also called acting Sergeant Blonde as
a witness, a member of the PLT during the Freedom Convoy.  His PLT partner was Cst.
Nicole Bach. He was the secondary PLT contact with Chris Barber. He would often
attend meetings with Cst. Bach and Chris Barber, and input the information. He
referred to Chris Barber as one of the road captains for the Freedom Convoy. 
He had no dealings whatsoever with Tamara Lich. Officer Blonde testified that
the Freedom Convoy was by far the largest demonstration he had ever been
involved with in terms of its scope and duration.
[
96
]
Officer Blonde viewed his role as a PLT officer
as that of a conduit of information between his chain of command and
stakeholders, including persons who were demonstrating. He sought to obtain
information from these stakeholders and determine their intentions. He
explained that the
[
97
]
PLT unit’s objectives were to do everything they
could to ensure things remained peaceful, lawful, and safe. He further
explained that PLT officers assume a role of neutrality and functioned in a
nonenforcement capacity.
[
98
]
Officer Blonde said that every day he would be out
and about in the downtown core making observations. He observed heavy
concentrations of trucks and other vehicles in the downtown core. He saw
multiple campers or trailers many with generators.  He saw tents serving hot
food and drinks to anybody on Lyon Street south of Queen Street. He observed on
January 31, 2022, there were trucks, approx. 10 on the west side of the NB
lanes of Nicholas, Metcalfe Street, some trailers, some passenger cars, approx.
50 from Lisgar to Albert streets, Kent Street was backed up from 417 to
Wellington with all lanes blocked. Slater Street from Lyon to Kent was also
blocked.
[
99
]
On February 3, he was at Confederation Park as
people were erecting a permanent structure larger than an ice shack. In cross,
he agreed that the group in Confederation Park purported to be indigenous, and
he met with the Clan mother who had the most influence over that group.
[
100
]
Feb 8, 2022, he was at Metcalfe and Slater
streets, where there were several vehicles associated with the demonstrators parked
there, and he saw an open fire burning.  At the baseball stadium, he observed there
were trucks, camper vans and personal vehicles as well as propane tanks, saunas,
wood piled up and tents erected.
[
101
]
Generally, his testimony painted a picture of a
downtown area gridlocked by trucks and other vehicles.
[
102
]
Acting Sgt Blonde recalled meeting Chris Barber
on a few occasions, he recalled meeting him Feb 2, 2022, on Kent Street. There
were a number of vehicles on Kent St and there was a request to see if they
could work with the demonstrators to create an emergency lane. They worked with
Barber and another person and were able to open one lane Slater to Gloucester.
[
103
]
Also, on February 4, 2022. Mr. Barber said he
wanted to move trucks out of residential areas and have them fill up Wellington
Street. Barber wanted visibility of trucks on Wellington. He also recalled
communicating with Chris Barber on Feb 14, or what was known as “moving day”,
as there had been an agreement with the city to move trucks out of the
residential areas closer to parliament on Wellington.  Mr. Barber texted that
he had vehicles ready to move, but there was a police cruiser blocking them.
[
104
]
Officer Blonde explained that the PLT’s actions
in the latter days of the Freedom Convoy was to disseminate information,
including the use of what he described as a “measured approach” which commenced
on February 16.  As early as February 9, 2022, police were telling persons at
the Coventry Road staging area to leave. He explained that from February 15,
2022, the PLT began disseminating more formal messaging to encourage
demonstrators to leave of their own accord. A notice was distributed downtown,
which advised demonstrators of the potential consequences of their remaining in
Ottawa, namely the possibility of arrest. The notice was outlined in blue. The
next day, the PLT distributed another notice, with firmer language, indicating
that those who do not leave the area will be arrested, which was outlined in a
bold blue. A further notice was distributed on February 17, 2022, outlined in
red. The border colour reflected the change in the urgency of the
circumstances. For each notice, the paper got bigger, and the language
changed.
[
105
]
Feb 16, he distributed the second message in the
Rideau and Sussex area. He said that area had always been contentious, that the
crowd were yelling and screaming about the notices. He also distributed them up
and down Wellington Street where he watched people put the notices in the
toilets, which were in the middle of the street.
[
106
]
A/Sgt. Blonde said he delivered the red-bordered
notices Feb 17, 2022. He said the mood was not as contentious at Rideau and
Sussex, but the further west they got, the more hostile the demonstrators were,
there were people yelling, screaming and swearing. He said it seemed that when he
attempted to speak to someone, they would blow their horns.
[
107
]
Officer Blonde indicated that no protester
expressed to him any willingness to leave, even after the distribution of these
notices. Prior to the enforcement action beginning on February 18, 2022, PLT
officers delivered final warnings to persons remaining at the scene of their
potential arrest.
[
108
]
In cross examination, he agreed that in one
entry on the Signal chat he said, “I would agree with there were so many different
groups and factions throughout the entire demonstrations (pg. 10). Also, a text
exchange on the signal chat with Miranda was put to him where he texted “We
have so many different convoys here in the city. It is difficult to know who is
where and who is aligned with whom. I am just trying to figure out which convoys
are in which areas of downtown. He agreed he was being truthful when he texted
that. He also testified that there were some people there who were not aligned
with any convoy organizers and had no plans to leave. (pg. 13)
[
109
]
In re-examination, he was asked about his
evidence regarding “different convoys.” He was asked why he believed that. He
replied that a number of people that I spoke to, as well as contacts that I had
a number of dealing with, had indicated that they didn’t know some of the people
that were playing out either on social media or in the news. Some people were
there as singular demonstrators. Then said, “I see it as one demonstration.
There were multiple convoys coming in because they came from multiple areas of
the country. So that is why I would refer to them as multiple convoys. There
was some that came from the east. There were multiple ones that came from the
west. Now I refer to it, the totality of everything including this trial as
part of the convoy (pg. 39)   He said they had a similar general reasoning  for
being in the capital city at that point in time.
[
110
]
He agreed he had contact with different groups
of demonstrators and that none said they were there because of Tamara Lich or
Chris Barber.
Cst.
Nicole Bach
[
111
]
Cst. Bach was the primary PLT contact with Chris
Barber. Notes from her police notebook and the PLT Signal chat acted as her
notes throughout the protest. The text messages between the accused Chris Barber,
and Cst. Bach, January 29th to February 15, 2022, were filed as Exhibit 127.
[
112
]
Cst. Bach gave evidence that she attended the
Antrim Gas Station and the Arnprior Airport and noted 248 vehicles total; of
those 103 were passenger vehicles 35 were passenger vehicles with trailers, 66
tractors or bobtails with the truck portion no trailer and 44 tractors with
trailers was the total she believed were part of the Western Convoy
(pg.
14). She understood those were members of the convoy travelling from Western Canada.
[
113
]
Like her partner, A/Sgt. Blonde. Cst. Bach was
out and about in the downtown core and testified about her observations during
the protest.
[
114
]
Cst Bach made the following observations: January
28, 2022, On Wellington Street, there were multiple camping trailers with
generators capable of creating electricity.
[
115
]
January 30, 2022- Wellington and Lyon, Cst. Bach
observed that there were opening on Wellington that had been fully packed on
January 29. ( pg. 18  Oct 19) She advised various convoy members that no trucks
were to move in to fill the vacant spots. People were encouraged to walk to
Parliament. People were upset with this messaging. On Lyon Street at Queen
Street, Cst. Bach observed “a little gridlock and a section totally blocked by
vehicles. The people she described were very agitated and verbally aggressive
towards the police. ( pg. 19) . She also conveyed that emergency access lanes
must always be kept open and clear for emergency vehicles.
[
116
]
January 31, 2022- Cst Bach spoke to Mr. Barber
about repositioning vehicles to keep emergency lanes open. He indicated they
were interested in doing “rolling Convoys” in and around the city. And he was
waiting for OPS to provide further direction to relocate the vehicles.
[
117
]
January 31, the same day on Wellington, Cst. Bach
noted open lanes southbound on Wellington except for the area from Metcalfe to
Elgin, where there was no open lane.
[
118
]
On February 1st, Cst. Bach also did a vehicle count.
On the Queen Elizabeth Driveway, she noted 4 tractor trailers and 5 campers.
Emergency lanes were open. The SJAM from Booth to Bay Streets, 14 tractor
trailers and 2 campers, westbound lane 28 tractor trailers and 5 campers and 5
to 10 personal vehicles. Queen St. from Bay to Bronson, emergency lane open, 10
tractor trailers and from Bay to Elgin was completely open.
[
119
]
On Bank Street from Albert to Nepean Streets,
the emergency lane was open, there were 18 tractor-trailers and 12 personal
vehicles. On Kent Street, from Somerset to Wellington Streets, all lanes were
completely full with no emergency lanes open and there were about 200
tractor-trailers; On Albert Street from Bank to O’Connor Streets, there were
eight tractor-trailers (pg. 26)
[
120
]
On Metcalfe Street from Lisgar to Albert
Streets, there were 33 tractor-trailers and 19 passenger vehicles; On
Wellington Street from Mackenzie King to Sussex Street, there were 10
tractor-trailers and 15 passenger vehicles; On Wellington Street from Sussex to
George Streets there were eight tractor-trailers; and On Wellington Street from
the Portage Bridge to Sussex Street there were approximately 400
tractor-trailers. She calculated there to be approximately 633 tractor trailers
and 73 passenger vehicles when she made these observations mid-morning.
[
121
]
Cst. Bach spoke to Mr. Barber that day.  He was
on SJAM parkway, there were two problem vehicles that were causing issue for
police. Mr. Barber was there and did his best to have a conversation with them and
identified that they wanted to be “closer to the action,” closer to downtown
and parliament Hill. Cst. Bach advised Barber; the downtown was totally inaccessible
pg. 28. He said the biggest issue collectively was fuel. And lack thereof. He
explained there were cabs with babies, and they were running out of fuel. They discussed
using Slip tanks to avoid spillage. Barber said, “Word is getting out we’re
being starved for fuel and food”. He mentioned more convoys were being
organized and that we need to streamline these issues because this is not going
away.
[
122
]
Cst. Bach made observations of SJAM while she
was there, SJAM was completely packed with tractor trailers and there had been
issues with those tractor trailers and the people inside.  She said there were
a lot of agitated people not co-operating with police. Barber said there was to
be a meeting at the Arc hotel with the PLT Team. The lanes were blocked, and
they were to get vehicles to move to open a lane for emergency vehicles.
[
123
]
February 2, 2022, Cst. Bach recalled a
conversation with Mr. Barber, that he was trying to work with Police to open
areas for it to become safer. Pg 31. She provided suggestions about how he
could do that. Mr. Barber shared that he felt that the convoy was a bit out of
control and that it was becoming unsafe, and therefore, he was more inclined to
work with us to resolve these issues. He also said that perhaps the convoy had
lost sight of the original intent of what it was meant for. Pg 33
[
124
]
February 4th, 2022, Cst. Bach recalled sending screenshots
to Mr. Barber. The screenshots Ex. 127 pg. 40 - 46 were meant to share what the
Ottawa Police was putting on social media, some messaging for anyone involved
in the Convoy. The 9-page document was made Exhibit 128. These were sent to Mr.
Barber and were tendered not for hearsay purposes but for the fact that this
information was conveyed to Mr. Barber, suggesting that it might be helpful in
talking to the truckers, so they are not surprised when/ if they are doing
something unlawful.
[
125
]
The document speaks of increased enforcement
measures to restore public safety and that Protestor vehicles will be directed
to designated parking zones outside the downtown core. There were also
indications about OPS taking steps to end the protest.  Clearly, Mr. Barber
received the information and understood the message from OPS, given his response.
He responds, saying “We are in the opps centre planning. Can you get us commercial
streets to move to instead” Ex. 127 pg. 50
[
126
]
Cst. Bach recalled a conversation with Mr.
Barber and another organizer later the same day. Mr. Barber was facilitating a
conversation with the other organizer but there was also a conversation with
Mr. Barber. Cst. Bach specifically recalled Mr. Barber saying he would sign the
names of Convoy leaders to the police and have a conversation and be able to
relay what it is they would say they are willing to say in Court. Transcript pg
45.  Bach said, “So we are talking in terms of negotiating like moving vehicles
for what they would get in return.”
[
127
]
February 7, 2022, Cst. Bach made observations
that Kent Street from Wellington Street to the north and Gloucester Street to
the south was fully blocked with vehicles and that there were no lanes open for
any type of movement. Laurier Avenue at Kent Street was the only opening on
Kent Street for the movement of traffic. Cst. Bach said that specifically the
block on Nepean Street and Gloucester on Kent were not willing to move any
vehicles. Kent Street is where Cst. Bach usually worked.
[
128
]
February 8, 2022, Cst. Bach recalled a
conversation about how Mr. Barber wanted the Convoy to progress moving forward.
We spoke about a strategy to move vehicles out to staging areas and conduct
rolling convoys. (Pg 47) He suggested they could try moving so that the trucks
could move out of the downtown core and stay in staging areas, and that the
other trucks could be repositioned onto Wellington for optics, essentially, and
then that would open up some of the downtown core to become much safer.  (Pg 48)
He also said the Convoy wasn’t leaving any time soon and expressed that they
hadn’t been acknowledged or had action from the Government or Prime Minister
that there were more trucks ready to come to Ottawa and participate in the
Convoy.
[
129
]
February 9, 2022, she recalled watching a TikTok video of Mr. Barber
being brought to her attention and watching it. This video was made Exhibit 9
at trial. There was also a text exchange with Barber about this video. In the TikTok
video, Mr. Barber is shown in his truck, Big Red, with another person at an
intersection near the National Gallery. He says, “So we’re out just scoping out
the area here. Hey Mike. What do you think about this intersection? Response by
M: It’s Lonely: It looks a little lonely, doesn’t it? It doesn’t look like
there’s anybody here. Do you think we can fix that? M: Yeah, CB (Laughs) I
don’t know about you but that looks like it is lonely. Oh, Boy. Oh, boy.”
[
130
]
Cst. Bach says, “I thought you had said
yesterday that you were looking to move trucks out of the core (with the
exception of Wellington) Barber responded Ex. 127 pg. 76. “Careful what you see
on my TikTok. I’m the guy that loves to stir the shit pot. Make people think one
thing while doing the opposite. What you and I spoke about is still my plan.” “I
have a few guys ready to pull out today from the downtown core. These rumours
of a full-scale tactical sweep on Thursday better be bullshit. The world is
watching very, very closely, and it will not be received well. Please tell me
it’s not true,” Cst. Bach says OK. Although a lot of people believe you and
take your words seriously on your SM CB Yup, I know. They aren’t just going to
pull the stake without being physically talked to. It’s like a big game of Cat
and Mouse. Cst. Bach also recalled that CB said the only way the Convoy would
depart the city is if Justin Trudeau were to recognize the convoy is here and
lift the mandates.
[
131
]
At the Baseball Stadium, there were
approximately 20 tractor-trailers and 60 personal vehicles. There were also
campers and trailers.
[
132
]
February 10, 2022, Cst. Bach had another conversation;
it was about a rolling convoy that had occurred at the Airport. He said he had
been planning rolling convoys, but that the airport was not his location.  Barber
said, “He would try to do his best to message anyone in support of the convoy
or participating in the convoy through social media channels to avoid the
airport and focus on rolling in and out as opposed to like congesting traffic
and stopping, impeding traffic.”    He also alluded to rolling convoys and
different events popping up as a Cat and mouse game and said, “Well, if you
want us to leave the downtown core, what would you expect? Where would the
trucks go? because they haven’t accomplished what it is they want yet?
[
133
]
February 11, 2022 - Cst. Bach observed Kent
Street between Cooper and Wellington Streets was still fully congested with all
lanes blocked north and south on Kent from Cooper to Wellington. The east/west roads
were open, just N/B Kent was blocked. The same day she noted SJAM westbound
lanes were open and there were still four bobtails, 10 personal vehicles, and
three campers parked on the shoulder; and the SJAM eastbound lanes were blocked
from Vimy to Booth Streets and there was approximately three times the tractor-
trailers, 10 bobtails, and 20 passenger vehicles (some had trailers) and
several porta-potties onsite.
[
134
]
February 13, Cst. Bach recalled speaking to
Chris Baber at approx. 5:21 pm. He was upset about counter-protesters and that the
protest was out of control and spoke of a meeting with the city. Mr. Ayotte also
spoke about that meeting.
[
135
]
February 15, 2022, Cst. Bach recalled a
conversation with Chris Barber at 9:56, that he was ready to move trucks again.
Cst Bach provided the context, which was that on February 14, trucks had begun
moving around so that we could open laneways, open parts of the city. Cst. Bach
said that she was given the direction that it was a one-day type of agreement,
and that Feb 15, they weren’t looking to have that happen anymore. She
described that he was quite agitated and frustrated by this especially as they
had been delayed moving trucks the day before. He also explained how it was
difficult to move big trucks in and that it was unreasonable to think you could
move all the trucks or a large portion of them in such a short time frame. Pg
74.
[
136
]
It is understandable that he would have been
frustrated by this, given the agreement arranged with the city. Many witnesses
spoke about this plan and how it ended at the direction of the Chief of Police.
 Ayotte testified about how he felt powerless in the situation and how an
apology was made to Mr. Barber, as, from his perspective, they had kept up
their end of the agreement.  Inspector Lucas also indicated that he stood by
his belief that this plan would have alleviated many of the concerns regarding
the downtown core.
[
137
]
On February 15, Cst. Bach observed that on
Laurier Avenue and Nicholas Street, there were 15 personal vehicles (pickup
truck, van, or car) with several pulling trailers. There were also five
tractor-trailers, one bobtail, and one RV. There was only one live lane of
traffic.
[
138
]
Mr. Barber was arrested Feb 17, but on February
18, 2022, Cst Bach observed -Kent Street was backed up all the way to Lisgar
Street, so Wellington Street to Lisgar Street to the south. Pg 78.
[
139
]
Cst. Bach was also involved in distribution of
messaging February 18, asking people to leave otherwise, they would be arrested,
and their vehicles towed.
[
140
]
As previously noted, vehicles were not the only
things blocking or obstructing the roads throughout the demonstration area.
Similarly, Bach observed hockey games.  Further, a review of video and
photographic evidence depicts numerous demonstrators congregating and walking
in the middle of streets and various items throughout the downtown core.
[
141
]
In cross, Cst. Bach confirmed that the Mission objective for the PLT
during the Freedom Convoy included prioritizing public safety and public order,
and respecting
Charter
rights, public expression, and public assembly. She was
specifically told to write the Mission statement into her notebook. The goal
was to ensure a lawful, peaceful safe demonstration with minimal disruption to
citizens.
[
142
]
In the Jan 30 Signal chat, Cst. Bach said there were many people
with signs- very verbal, not aggressive. This is contrary to her evidence in chief,
where she said people were verbally aggressive with police.
[
143
]
Cst. Bach recalled telling Barber exhibit 127, pg.
14 and 15, Trucks must stop horns at 7. His response “Now getting them to
listen is the next thing. Whether he can get them to agree is another story.
She agreed that people came from different places in Canada and that Barber
didn’t control everybody who was in Ottawa.
[
144
]
Cst. Bach agreed in cross that Barber worked
with her once for sure to clear Kent. Exhibit 127 pg. 38 “we cleared 3 blocks,
and they plugged it again. Stupid asses”. She also agreed that he was looking
to her to assist with moving trucks to some commercial streets and away from
the residential ones.  She did say that it was not as clear as that and that
the area was mixed use. In re-examination, she indicated that there were
specific times that Mr. Barber assisted with moving trucks.
Video and Social Media Evidence
[
145
]
The bulk of the evidence regarding Mr. Barber
and Ms. Lich’s specific involvement in the Freedom Convoy arises from Facebook
posts, TikTok authored by them, texts and open-source material. The Freedom
Convoy Facebook group had a lot of participants and likes and shares, but it is
unclear whether those persons were all Freedom Convoy participants or just curious
participants. A series of videos was entered into evidence on consent through a
police intelligence analyst who had downloaded the material from open-source
postings on the internet. Video evidence shows Mr. Barber leaving Saskatchewan
in mid-January 2022 to his arrival in Ottawa on January 29, and then records
his ongoing participation and involvement ending with his arrest on February
18.
Positions of the Crown and Defence
[
146
]
As noted in the Crown’s opening address and
emphasized throughout the trial, Barber and Lich are not on trial for their
politics. Rather, they are on trial for the alleged unlawful means they
employed to pursue their political ends. It is the Crown’s position that the criminal
culpability of Tamara Lich and Chris Barber is established by the overwhelming
body of evidence from citizens, public officials, and police officers who made
observations of what transpired on the ground in downtown Ottawa during the demonstration,
in media and documentary materials, as well as in Barber and Lich’s own words given
the context in which those words are spoken. The Crown says this large body of
evidence, when applied to the jurisprudence, characterizes the nature of Barber
and Lich’s words and actions in the protest context as criminally culpable
(both as individuals and as members of a joint criminal enterprise).
[
147
]
The Crown argues no matter how noble the cause,
or peaceful and respectful the conduct, the law simply does not permit anyone
to appropriate public space for a prolonged period (Governing Council of the
University of Toronto v. John Doe,
2024 ONSC 3755
, at para.
135
(“Governing
Council of U of T”).
[
148
]
The Crown’s position is that the activities or
means used by the Freedom Convoy constituted or rapidly developed into an
ongoing mischief of which Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber were among the leaders or
principal organizers. Their participation and indeed their organizational and
leadership activities are documented on social media in the form of videos and
texts made exhibits in this trial. The Crown relies on those to prove the
charges before the Court.
[
149
]
The position of the Defence is that the accused
engaged in and encouraged a lawful and constitutionally protected peaceful protest.
Defence argues that the Accused were but one group amongst many who came to
Ottawa Jan/February 2022, and they could not control the actions of all the
persons who came to Ottawa during this time. It is further argued that they
only counselled persons to engage in peaceful protest, and to the extent some
residents and businesspersons in downtown Ottawa were inconvenienced, it was
said to be the fault of the police and city officials who mismanaged the
situation. Further, on behalf of the accused, it is argued that the charges
have not been proven on the evidence, to the criminal standard of proof beyond
a reasonable doubt.
Issues
[
150
]
Whether the Crown has proven the charges before
the Court with both reliable and credible evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.
This determination is based on a review of all the evidence, including the witnesses
called, the open-source videos tendered as well as the words and social media
of each of the accused. Specifically, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt:
1. Did Lich
and/or Barber block or obstruct a highway for the purpose of compelling others
to do or not do anything that they have a legal right to do or not do, or aid
or abet others to do so?
2. Did Lich
and/or Barber interfere with the lawful use, operation, or enjoyment of
property, or aid or abet others to do so? Does the defence to mischief under s.
430(7) apply to provide a defence.
3. Did Lich
and/or Barber obstruct the police in the execution of their duties on February
18-20, 2022, or aid or abet others to do so?
4. Did Lich
and/or Barber counsel anyone to commit the offences mischief, intimidation or
Obstruction of Justice; and
5. Did Barber
counsel anyone to honk their horns in contravention of an interlocutory
injunction issued by the Superior Court on February 7, 2022?
[
151
]
Also, the crown has brought an evidentiary application
seeking a determination whether the Co-Conspirators Exception to the Hearsay
rule or the Carter Exception applies in this case so that the words and actions
of Mr. Barber can be used as evidence against Ms. Lich and vice versa. To do so
the court must engage in a three-step process determine whether:
(1) The Crown
has proven beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of a conspiracy or unlawful
common design.
(2) The Crown
has proven on a balance of probabilities Barber and Lich’s membership in the unlawful
common design; and
(3) Are the
statements made, or any act or declaration made in furtherance of that common
unlawful purpose.
Applicable
General Legal Principles
Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
[
152
]
There are several legal principles that must be considered
in determination of the outcome of this case. One of the cornerstone legal
principles is that the Crown bears the onus of proving
the charges before each respective accused beyond a reasonable doubt. The
question here is whether the Crown has met its burden and proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Barber and Lich – as either principals or aiders or
abettors– committed the offences of intimidation, mischief, and obstruct: Also,
whether Barber and Lich also counselled these offences, with Barber
additionally charged with the offence of counselling the offence of disobey of
a court order.
[
153
]
Both Chris Lich and Tamara Lich are presumed to be innocent unless
and until the Crown has proven their guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The
burden of proof as in all cases rests with the Crown. There is no burden of proof
on the Accused. The burden is on the Crown to prove the constituent elements of
the offense with credible and reliable evidence.
[
154
]
The Accused remains innocent until proven
otherwise.
[
155
]
The presumption of innocence is a
cornerstone of our criminal justice system, originally embedded in our common
law tradition and now guaranteed as a fundamental legal right under our
constitution.
[
156
]
The presumption of innocence, and along with it
the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt, are important safeguards to
ensure that no innocent person is convicted of an offence and deprived of his
or her liberty. Without these protections, there would be a serious risk of
wrongful convictions -an outcome that cannot be accepted in a free and
democratic society.
[
157
]
The concept of proof beyond a reasonable doubt
is not an easy one to define.  The standard is clearly more rigorous than the
balance of probabilities standard applied in civil cases.  The balance of
probabilities requires the party bearing the onus to establish that the
proposition they advance is "more likely than not" -i.e., better than
50/50. In its landmark 1997 decision in
R. v. Lifchus
, the Supreme Court
of Canada held that the following definition would be an appropriate
instruction for a criminal jury at para 39:  The same standard applies to
Judges sitting without a jury.
[
158
]
“A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or
frivolous doubt. It must not be based upon sympathy or prejudice. Rather, it is
based on reason and common sense. It is logically derived from the evidence or
absence of evidence. Even if you believe the accused is probably guilty or
likely guilty, that is not sufficient. In those circumstances you must give the
benefit of the doubt to the accused and acquit because the Crown has failed to
satisfy you of the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. “
[
159
]
On the other hand, it is virtually impossible to
prove anything to an absolute certainty and the Crown is not required to do so.
Such a standard of proof is impossibly high. Though the Crown does not have to
prove the guilt of the Accused to an absolute certainty, its onus is much
closer to that than to a balance of probabilities as cited by the Supreme Court
of Canada in
R. v. Starr
2002 S.C.R. at para. 144.
[
160
]
The bottom line is that probable or likely guilt
is insufficient. If all I can say is that the defendants in this case are
likely guilty, I must acquit. It would not be safe to convict someone of a
criminal offence with only that degree of confidence.
[
161
]
Finally, in determining whether a charge has
been proven beyond a reasonable doubt as set out in
R v. R.B.
2017 ONCA 74 (CanLII)
, [2017]
O.J. 377 OCA, generally the court in any case can assess the evidence of any
witness, and accept or reject, some, all, or none of that evidence. The Court
must ultimately look at all the admissible evidence in reaching its
decision.
Modes of
Liability – Section 21 – Principal and Co-Principals
[
162
]
Turning now to party liability,
s. 21 (1)
of the
Code
provides as follows: Everyone is a party to an offence who actually
commits it; does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person
to commit it; or abets any person in committing it.
[
163
]
Under s. 21(2) Where two or more persons form an
intention in common to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other
therein and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, commits an
offence, each of them who knew or ought to have known that the commission of
the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose
is a party to that offence.
[
164
]
The Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused committed the offence either as a principal or alternatively as a
party to the offence along with others.
[
165
]
In
R. v. Spackman
,
2012 ONCA 905
, at
para.
180
, the Court described the various ways in which a person can be made
culpable for an offence. Specifically, they “may be a principal, aid or abet
someone else to commit the offence, or join and pursue a common unlawful
purpose with another or others who commit the offence”. Further, an individual can
be a principal on their own, or along with one or more other persons (Spackman,
at para.
180
).
[
166
]
The decision in
R. v Mammolita
1983 CanLII 3563 (ON CA)
, [1983]
O.J. 151, is an important decision in evaluating party liability in the context
of a protest or labour dispute.
[
167
]
In
Mammolita
1983 CanLII 3563 (ON CA)
, [1983] O.J. 151, the ONCA dealt
with the degree of participation which will result in criminal liability for
the offence of mischief where persons have wilfully obstructed or interfered
with the right of access to a company’s plant in the course of a labour.
[
168
]
In
Mammolita
, there was a legal strike
of the employees of the Company, there was also an injunction restraining the union
from obstructing or interfering with entrance to or exit from the company
plant. One morning, 75 to 100 persons formed a picket line in front of the main
gate. Some picketers stood in front of vehicles. The Court of Appeal at para 12
dealt with the issue of liability as a principal: “A person may be liable as a
principal if he actually does or contributes to the doing of the actus reus
with the requisite
mens rea
(see Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 4th ed.,
1978, at pp. 113- 4). Accordingly, a person may be guilty as a principal of
committing mischief under s. 387(1)(c) (now s. 430(1) (c)) if he forms part of
a group which constitutes a human barricade or other obstruction. The fact that
he stands shoulder to shoulder with other persons, even though he neither says nor
does anything further, may be an act which constitutes an obstruction. The
presence of a person in such circumstances is a very positive act. However, criminal
liability only results if the act is done willfully.  …”
[
169
]
As
Mammolita
explains, at para
13
, both
those standing shoulder-to-shoulder with demonstrators as well as those on the
fringe may be liable as principals of an offence depending on the context: In
Mammolita
,
the Court of Appeal made the following observation respecting liability as a
principal: “It may not be very difficult to infer that a person standing
shoulder to shoulder with other persons in a group so as to block a roadway
knows that his act will probably cause the obstruction and is reckless if he
does not attempt to extricate himself from the group. This is particularly the
case if the person knows of the existence of a strike and is confronting a
large group of police officers who are trying to clear a passage. The same
conclusion could be drawn where a person is part of a group which was walking
around in a circle blocking the roadway. Those who are standing on the fringe
of the group blocking the roadway may similarly be principals if they are
preventing the group blocking the roadway from being bypassed.”
Modes of
Liability – Sections 21(1)(b) and (c) – Aiding and Abetting
[
170
]
As stated in
R. v. Briscoe
,
2010 SCC 13
,
[2010] 1 S.C.R. 411, at paras.
14-18
, and
R. v. Cowan
,
2021 SCC 45
, 409
C.C.C. (3d) 287, at paras.
29
, 31 and 33, pursuant to ss. 21(1)(b) and(c), a
person may be liable as a party to an offence as an aider or an abettor. To aid
is to assist or help the actor. Abetting includes encouraging, instigating,
promoting, procuring or supporting the offence.
[
171
]
In a recent decision of the Court of Appeal for
Ontario in
R. v. I.A
.,
2023 ONCA 589
, at para.
10
, the court reiterated
the principle: “In summary, there must be a factual finding that supports the
conclusion that an accused is a principal, aider, or abettor. Otherwise, a mere
bystander with previous knowledge of a crime could be convicted.”
[
172
]
In
R. v. Mammolita
(1983),
1983 CanLII 3563 (ON CA)
, O.J. no 151
(Ont. C.A.), the Ontario Court of Appeal dealt with liability of aiders or
abettors at para 16. The court stated the following: “Quite apart from
liability as a principal, a person may be guilty of wilful obstruction under s.
387(1) (c)  (now s 430 (1) (c)) if that person has aided or abetted another
person to commit the offence. In order to incur liability as an aider or
abettor: (i) there must be an act or omission of assistance or encouragement; (ii)
the act must be done or the omission take place with the knowledge that the
crime will be or is being committed;(iii) the act must be done or the omission
take place for the purpose (i.e., with the intention) of assisting or
encouraging the perpetrator in the commission of the crime. However, the act of
assistance or encouragement may be the presence of the accused at the scene of
the crime during its commission, if the aider or abettor is there for that
purpose. The strength of numbers may at times be an important source of
encouragement”. [Citations omitted.]
[
173
]
As noted by these appellate decisions, “the
strength of numbers may at times be an important source of encouragement” (
Mammolita
,
at para.
16
; see also Remley, at para. 103;
Romlewski
, at para 164).
When considering the liability of demonstrators as aiders and/or abettors in a
protest setting.
[
174
]
Ultimately, there must be a connection between
the offence and the acts of alleged aiding or abetting, but authorities take a
wide view of this necessary connection (
R. v. Dooley
,
2009 ONCA 910
, at
paras.
123-124
): “The authorities take a wide view of the necessary connection
between the acts of alleged aiding or abetting and the commission of the
offence. Any act or omission that occurs before or during the commission of the
crime, and which somehow and to some extent furthers, facilitates, promotes,
assists, or encourages the perpetrator in the commission of the crime will
suffice, irrespective of any causative role in the commission of the crime. The
necessary connection between the accessory’s conduct and the perpetrator’s
commission of the crime is captured by phrases such as “actual assistance or
encouragement,” or “assistance or encouragement in fact,” or, as the appellants
argue, conduct that “has the effect” of aiding or abetting.”
[
175
]
As noted in the Summary Conviction Appeal
decisions of
R. v Remley
2024 ONSC 543
, at para.
97
; and
R. v Romlewski
2023 ONSC 5571
, leave to appeal dismissed for both cases, January 10, 2025 at
para. 81). Effectively, abetting will include “encouraging, instigating,
promoting, procuring, or supporting the offence.” Put another way, it is “doing
something or omitting to do something that encourages the principal to commit
the offence”.
[
176
]
As noted in
Briscoe
at para
14
, “the
actus
reus
of aiding and abetting is doing something that assists or encourages
the perpetrator to commit the offence. While it is common to speak of aiding
and abetting together, the two concepts are distinct, and liability can flow
from either one.” At para 15, “Of course, doing or omitting to do something
that resulted in assisting another in committing a crime is not sufficient to
attract criminal liability…The aider or abettor must also have the requisite
mental state or
mens rea.
Specifically, in the words of s. 21 (1) (b),
the person must have rendered the assistance
for the purpose
of aiding
the principal to commit the crime.”
[
177
]
In Briscoe at para
16
, the court stated the
mens
rea
requirement is reflected in the word purpose and has two components:
intent and knowledge.
[
178
]
There is no requirement that the abettor
actually desire that the offence be committed. And at para 17 and 25 the court
said “the aider must know that the perpetrator intends to commit the crime, although
he or she need not know precisely how the offence will be committed. That sufficient
knowledge is a prerequisite for intention is simply a matter of common sense,” and
(para 25) willful blindness will suffice in the absence of actual knowledge as
to whether the principal intends to commit the offence.
[
179
]
In
Romlewski
2023 ONSC 5571
, Leave to
Appeal denied 2024 ONCA leave to appeal dismissed Jan 10, 2025, at paras. 102 –
115, Doyle J. provides a useful overview of some jurisprudence where this issue
was considered. Many of these decisions will be considered in an examination in
the analysis of the charges.
[
180
]
In brief summary, mere presence at a protest is
not enough to ground party liability but presence can amount to criminal
conduct in the context of protest where: presence with purpose can be a
positive act, where an individual’s presence offered encouragement or
assistance to other protesters (even where the individual does not “hands-on”
engage in mischief); where the acts lead to the conclusion that an individual
equates with or tends toward showing a sense of unity or “one-ness” with the
acts of the principals so that a contribution to the events complained of is
proven or inferred; Where the success of a demonstration depends on having a
significant number of participants; or Where the purpose of the activity in
question is not simply to communicate a political idea or voice protest.
[
181
]
At paragraph 164, Justice Doyle, having reviewed
the case law dealing with protests provides a summary of the Applicable legal principles:
“A review of the case law dealing with protests provides a fuller picture of
the applicable principles for party liability to mischief. The principles can
be summarized as follows:
(1) Mere
presence alone at a protest is not sufficient to ground party liability.
(2) If the
protest gains strength by numbers and depends on the participation of a large
group, presence may be interpreted as encouragement, and
(3) Showing a
sense of unity or solidarity with the actions of the principals sheds light on
the purpose behind being at the protest.”
Counselling
– Section 22 (1) to (3) of the Criminal Code Counselling – Counts 1, 2, 3, and
7
[
182
]
It is an offence to counsel others to commit a
criminal offence, and this is so even if the counselled offence is not
committed.
Sections 22
and
464
of the
Criminal Code
provide the following: 
Definition of counsel: For the purposes of this Act, counsel includes procure,
solicit or incite.
Section
464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
[
183
]
Counselling offence that is not committed, s.464
Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, the following provisions
apply in respect of persons who counsel other persons to commit offences,
namely, (a) everyone who counsels another person to commit an indictable
offence is, if the offence is not committed, guilty of an indictable offence
and liable to the same punishment to which a person who attempts to commit that
offence is liable
[
184
]
“Counsel” is defined in s. 22(3) of the Code and
includes, but is not limited to, procuring, soliciting, and inciting (
R. v.
Root
,
2008 ONCA 869
). To incite means to urge, stir up, or stimulate (
Mugesera
v. Canada
(Minister of Citizenship and Immigration),
2005 SCC 40
, at para.
63
).
[
185
]
In
Mugesera
, the SCC dealt with an appeal
of a decision by the Immigration and Refugee Board finding the appellant
inadmissible to Canada following allegations that a speech he delivered in
Rwanda constituted an incitement to commit murder. The outcome of the appeal
relied upon the Court’s characterization of the speech. In its analysis, the
Court took a contextual approach that included consideration of the public
location of the speech. At para. 64, the Court set out the following important
principles when considering a speech and the offence of counselling:
[
186
]
The offence of counselling requires that the
statements, viewed objectively, actively promote, advocate, or encourage the
commission of the offence described in them. The criminal act will be made out
where the statements (1) are likely to incite, and (2) are made with a view to
inciting, the commission of an offence. An intention to bring about the
criminal result, that the counsellor intends the commission of the offence
counselled, will obviously satisfy the requisite mental element for the offence
of counselling.
[
187
]
Shortly following
Mugesera
, the SCC once
again addressed the offence of counselling in
R. v. Hamilton
,
2005 SCC
47
, where the Court stated at para. 29:
[
188
]
In short, the
actus reus
for counselling
is the
deliberate encouragement or active inducement of the commission of a
criminal offence
. And the
mens rea
consists of nothing less than an
accompanying
intent
or conscious disregard of the substantial and
unjustified risk inherent in the counselling
: that is, it must be shown
that the accused either intended that the offence counselled be committed, or
knowingly counselled the commission of the offence while aware of the
unjustified risk that the offence counselled was in fact likely to be committed
as a result of the accused’s conduct.”
[
189
]
Further in
Hamilton
at para
74
, “In the
inchoate scenario governed by
s. 464
of the
Code
, proof of the index offence
(e.g., mischief, intimidation, obstruction) is not required. It is not
necessary for the Crown to prove that the person counselled was persuaded: “the
focus on a prosecution for counselling is on the counsellor’s conduct and state
of mind, not that of the person counselled”.
[
190
]
In the recent Freedom Convoy appellate decision
of
R. v. Pawlowski
,
2024 ABCA 342
, the Alberta Court of Appeal observed
at para. 18: “The law requires that the trier of fact assess the substance and
nature of the communication to determine how it would be understood by the
reasonable person:
R v Jeffers
,
2012 ONCA 1
at para
26
;
Hamilton
at paras
72, 74
per Justice Charron (dissenting, but not on this point);
R v
Sharpe
,
2001 SCC 2
at para
56
[Sharpe]. For a political speech or
communication to constitute the actus reus of counselling, the Crown must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that it will be reasonably understood as in substance
deliberately encouraging or actively inducing those with a political cause to
engage in criminal activities in support of that cause, rather than as in
substance expressing support for the political concerns or goals of the
criminal actors.”
[
191
]
In
Pawlowski
, the Alberta Court of Appeal
upheld the trial judge’s finding that a speech inciting protestors to continue
an ongoing blockade of a highway constituted an incitement to commit mischief.
The Accused appealed this finding to the Supreme Court of Canada, leave to appeal
was denied on March 27, 2025, and as such the Appellate decision remains.
The Right
to Protest and Uneasy Balance
[
192
]
I have subtitled this subsection of this
decision: Why this case is challenging and complex. The Crown agrees that the accused
came to Ottawa to advance a noble cause and had the right to protest against
COVID mandates, but argues they crossed the line with the means used to achieve
their ends. On behalf of the Accused, counsel argues that this case is unprecedented
as the Crown has sought to criminalize the behaviour of Tamara Lich and Chris Barber
and the lawful democratic purpose that thousands of Canadians sought to achieve
over a three-week period. Defence counsel argue that this was always a lawful,
peaceful protest and that the repeated and consistent message was one of
peaceful protest and co-operation with police. There are several competing
interests at stake.
[
193
]
At the heart of the competing interests in this
case lies the question to what extent does the exercise of the right to protest
protects those from criminal liability when the rights of other citizens to
enjoy their property have been impacted by their actions. Even Charter-protected
rights are not absolute.
[
194
]
Principles derived from civil law are also
illustrative of the bounds of protest and where the lines between
constitutionally protected expressive freedoms and liability fall. In the Governing
Council of U of T, the court was required to consider an injunction brought by
the University of Toronto to end an encampment on their “Front Campus” that was
erected in protest of events in Israel and Gaza. At the time of the hearing,
the occupation of the Front Campus had continued for 50 days (Governing Council
of U of T, at para. 128). The court found that save for certain evidence of a
physical altercation outside the encampment, it was a peaceful demonstration
(Governing Council of U of T, at para. 7). With that said, “the law is clear that
protesters do not have a right to camp, erect structures, or block entrances to
property” and this is for good reason (Governing Council of U of T, at paras.
12). In short, if demonstrators were permitted to take power of property for
themselves, “there is nothing to stop a stronger group from coming and taking
the space over from the current protesters. That leads to chaos. Society needs
an orderly way of addressing competing demands on space” (Governing Council of
U of T, at para. 15). Indeed, courts have consistently held that there is no
right for demonstrators to appropriate private or public property for their
causes (Governing Council of U of T, at paras. 133, 135-136).
[
195
]
In another civil case often quoted,
Batty v
City of Toronto
2011 ONSC 6862
, the court articulates the competing interests.
In this case, Occupy Toronto protestors had occupied a public park for a number
of weeks, and the city served them with a trespass notice. The Protestors
sought to use
Charter s. 2(b)
to quash a trespass notice.
[
196
]
Justice Brown said that you cannot appropriate
public property to your own use by pretending to call it speech. At para 12,
Justice Brown stated “The Charter offers no justification for the protestors’
act of appropriating for their own use – without asking their fellow citizens –
a large portion of public common space for an indefinite period”, and at par 13
“The Charter does not remove the need to apply common sense and balance to the
way we deal with each other in our civic relationships. The Charter does not
remove common sense from the process of trying to figure out how to balance
competing rights, which now characterize our contemporary Canadian polity. On
the contrary, the
Charter
speaks of ‘reasonable limits’ on guaranteed freedoms,
thereby signaling that common sense must still play a role – indeed, a very
important role – in that balancing exercise.”
[
197
]
There are many cases where courts have forced
parties to leave property and/or forced them to remove structures from property
when protesters were using property belonging to someone else to exercise
freedom of expression. This is the case with both private and public property.
[
198
]
In the context of criminal law, other court
decisions have relied on s 430 (1)(c) and (d) as reasonable limitations on s
2(b) of the charter. The courts emphasize that the limitation is not on freedom
of expression but rather the method and manner with which it is practiced and
the resulting physical consequence.
[
199
]
In
R v Drainville
,
1991 CanLII 13897 (ON CJ)
, 1991 O.J no. 340, the
accused was a priest and a member of the Ontario Provincial Parliament. The
accused was charged with mischief by obstructing a roadway, contrary to
s. 430(1)
(c)
of the
Criminal Code
. He participated in a protest in support of the Anishnabai
Nation, which claimed the Aboriginal right to lands upon which a road was being
built. The accused was one of a group of protesters who sat down on the road
and were removed physically by police officers. He offered no resistance other
than the fact that officers had to move him. The incident caused a delay of
approximately one hour. The Court found at pg. 6, “In this case, it can be said
that even if s. 430 (1) (c) of the code has the incidental effect of limiting the
accused's freedom of expression, in not allowing him to block a roadway, it is
not sufficient to show a prima facie interference with
s. 2 (b)
of the
Charter
.”
 The basis of the decision is that although he was not able to block the road,
he was not prevented from expressing his dissatisfaction by other lawful means.
The Court, in finding the accused guilty of mischief, writes:  “In short, the
purpose of s. 430(1)(c) of the Code aims to control only certain physical
consequences of certain activity; in this case the obstruction of a road, and
this regardless of the meaning purported to be conveyed; it is clearly not a
"control" over the expression of the accused herein.”
[
200
]
The Ontario Superior Court of Justice in 2014 addressed
this issue in the case of
R v McCann
,
2014 ONSC 2987
, an appeal by three
offenders from a conviction for attempt to commit mischief. The impugned
conduct arose during the protest of a decision to cancel a rehabilitative
prison farm program. The appellants were arrested after they blocked cattle
trucks, removing cattle from the institution.
[
201
]
The appellants argued that they were engaged in
a peaceful protest, and their conduct was protected by
section 2(b)
of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. The Trial Judge had found at para 16 “In
a free and democratic society such as Canada, we welcome and encourage people
to hold demonstrations if such is necessary to exercise their right of freedom
of conscience, freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful assembly and their
right of to freedom of association as guaranteed by
s. 2
of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms. However, society also expects demonstrators who
exercise these rights to do so without violating the rights of others to move
about freely or to engage in activities which they have a perfect legal right
to do.”
[
202
]
The Ontario Superior Court of Justice in
McCann
agreed with the trial judge that the rights of the protestors were not
protected under s 2(b) of the
Charter
. The court stresses that s 2(b) of the
Charter protects communicative ideas and political displeasure, but it does not
protect the right to bring about a certain outcome. The court states at para 20
and 21; “In each of the aforesaid cases of mischief, the Judges found the
demonstrators not guilty, based upon findings that the demonstrators were
attempting to communicate an idea. In the case before Justice Fontana, the
demonstrators were attempting to draw public attention to the plight of the
homeless and the lack of government response to the issue. The learned justices
found that the actions of the demonstrators were 'within the limits of
tolerance in a democratic society' and they did not cross into the realm of
criminal wrongdoing.”
[
203
]
The trial judge found that while the
demonstration was peaceful and was clearly political, the objective was not
simply to express displeasure. Specifically, the trial judge found that the demonstrators
wanted to stop the Frontenac Institution from removing their cattle from the
institution. The Trial Judge correctly noted that Frontenac Institute was
legally entitled to remove property from their own premises.” The Court found
the purpose of the act was not simply to communicate a political idea or to
voice a protest; it was to halt the removal of cattle. The Court upheld the
finding of the trial Judge, and the Accused were found guilty of mischief.
[
204
]
R v Breen
2023
BCPC 84 (CanLII)
, Breen was charged with committing criminal offences in
connection with their actions while engaged in protest activities to express
concerns about the logging of old-growth forests. The accused did not challenge
the constitutionality of the offences of Mischief or Intimidation for which he
was charged. On the facts, the accused blocked traffic at a busy time of day, they
made it clear they would continue to do so indefinitely, the conduct was
disruptive and caused other drivers to become upset. The locations were chosen
to maximize the effect on the public.
[
205
]
The issue was the ambit of the protestors' right
of expression – does it protect blocking the public road? The accused said
their only purpose to blocking the roads was to communicate their discontent,
but the method used was to block roads and impede access to public property.  Justice
Lamperson considered several protest cases, including
McCann
referenced above
and the case of
R v Osborne
{2007} N.B.J. No 27, in that case. The
accused was charged with committing mischief by willfully obstructing,
interrupting, or interfering with the lawful use, enjoyment, or operation of
public property. On a federal election day, the accused held a sign and had
attached himself to a chain link cage that covered an overhead pedestrian
crossing. This overpass spanned a busy four-lane arterial highway. Upon
arriving at the scene, police officers noted that traffic approaching the
overpass slowed as drivers looked at the accused. The officers were concerned
about the travelling public's safety and the risk of a major accident caused by
the distraction. As a result, they closed the traffic lanes over which the
accused was standing and redirected traffic. It took a considerable amount of
time before the accused came down. The trial judge in analyzing the conduct of
the accused states at para 36 and 37: “In this case there was endangerment not
only to the public using the highway but also to the accused. Further, his
refusal to leave when requested to do so by the police in the circumstances
cannot be viewed as consistent with public order. In my opinion, the form of
expression, that is the manner and the place chosen by the accused, cannot be
afforded the protection sought. Further, even if the guarantee of freedom of
expression could be extended to the activities of the accused, in my opinion s.
430(1)(c) is a reasonable limit in applying the proportionality test in
R.
v. Oakes
(1986),
1986 CanLII 46 (SCC)
, 24 C.C.C. (3d) 321 (S.C.C.) and
R. v. Big M Drug Mart
Ltd
(1985),
1985 CanLII 69 (SCC)
, 18 D.L.R. (4th) 321(S.C.C.). The accused was not restricted
from expressing himself as to his dissatisfaction with the justice system and
members thereof in other lawful methods.”
[
206
]
The accused's actions in
Osborne
were not
protected only because they led to the highway being closed off but also
because the method employed by the accused was dangerous and contrary to public
order. Ultimately, in
Breen
, the Charter Application was dismissed, and
the accused were found guilty of the offences before the court.
[
207
]
The ongoing tension between these rights is also
discussed in
R. v Puddy,
2011 ONCJ 399 (CanLII)
. The accused was
arrested in the course of the G20 summit in Toronto. At para 43 and 44, the
court writes, “At the time of his arrest, the defendant was attending a
political rally. One need looks no further than the daily headlines respecting
events in the Middle and Near East and North Africa to recognize how vital
political demonstrations are to the celebration of a viable democracy. And how
important it is that short of criminal conduct and true threats to public
order, participants should be afforded broad latitude in expressing their
political beliefs. Indeed, rights of expression, peaceful assembly and
associations are enshrined as fundamental freedoms under
s. 2
of the
Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
.”
[
208
]
At 44, “The zealous exercise of police arrest
powers in the context of political demonstrations risks distorting the necessary
if delicate balance between law enforcement concerns for public safety and
order and individual rights and freedoms on the other. It further risks what
commentators have described as the ‘criminalization of dissent,’ … none of this
is to say that there are not occasions when forceful police action is warranted
to maintain public order.  However, the calculus in each case must the degree
possible respect the rights and liberties of those engaged in political speech
and assembly.”
[
209
]
Inspector Lucas, in his testimony, conveyed that
he was seeking to find that delicate balance with the Freedom Convoy when he
said “General practice is to try to find a balance between facilitating lawful
protests and its impact on the community. (Sept 6 pg. 6-7) Also pg. 15 “regardless
of what people might think about any group's message that they want to get out,
we want to find that right balance of allowing that message to be heard in
accordance with the
Charter
and their rights and balancing that with reasonable
impact on the city.” He also added that on February 15, 2022, enforcement
action was required to restore public order and so that the footprint did not
spread onto other parts of the outlying neighborhoods, and to set parameters.
[
210
]
Cst. Bach similarly said in her testimony that
on February 15 at a PLT briefing they were told “using an integrated response the
Ottawa Police and policing partners will keep the peace, enforce legislation,
and maintain public safety for the duration of the Ottawa Truck demonstration
with the utmost respect to the individuals
Charter of Rights
and Freedoms with priority,
for emergency service, personal safety and well-being.
[
211
]
Counsel for both Lich and Barber repeatedly
claimed that Justice McLean’s orders characterized the Freedom Convoy protest that
was occurring in Ottawa at the time as “peaceful, lawful and safe.” Ms. Lich
went so far in one of her posts as to suggest they had the support of a Superior
Court Judge.
[
212
]
The Crown says the Orders of Justice McLean of
the Superior Court dated Feb 7 and 16 are clear. “This Court orders that,
provided the terms of this order are complied with, the Defendants remain at
liberty to engage in a peaceful, lawful and safe protest” which the Crown
argues is the right everyone in Canada enjoys pursuant to the
Charter
, but that
right is not without limits, including the right to stand up for your beliefs.
[
213
]
I have carefully reviewed the transcripts of
Justice McLean’s proceedings. He was only asked to address the issue of the honking
of horns – and not infringements of the
Charter
or the
Criminal Code
with
respect to the broader protest.  Justice McLean says February 7, pg. 33 “if there
are other issues that the local authorities want to take issue with, that’s
their issue. This injunction is aimed at the horns.” At pg. 39 and 40. “That’s
the only issue. That’s the only issue before me … there’s nothing here in any
of the materials that says the right of movement has been infringed, that’s-
it’s just noise, that’s it. And I’m not going to get into anything else because
I’m not asked to”. At pg. 47, the Affidavit evidence before Justice McLean was
about noise levels, the effect of the noise – nerves frayed, can’t sleep,
anxiety.
[
214
]
In his Reasons for Decision for the February 7 injunction
at pgs. 64-65 Justice McLean states, “Certainly, people have a right to protest
things, particularly governmental things, that they don’t like. However, in
these particular circumstances, we have an issue of the fact of the manner of self-expression,
that is, continual horns of – or using horns on vehicles, trucks in particular,
which is having an effect on the people in the particular area of this protest.
That is clear from the evidence of the plaintiff, it is clear from other
evidence. …Clearly the inference that the court draws from this is, quite
frankly, that the defendants (of which the accused were a part) comprehend the
fact that there is a deleterious nature to the use of these horns. When we
consider this as a whole, we are of the opinion that the balance of convenience
has been made out, in that the rights of the Citizens for quiet, but a right to
quiet has been made out as the overcoming or being the overriding right here.
[
215
]
He also says at pg. 94 “But as I said when I
gave my reasons earlier, the only purpose for this (meaning horns) is to bring
attention to the protest. And as I said in my view from the material that has
been filed, there is no need for that anymore. The public has full
comprehension of what’s going on in downtown Ottawa.
[
216
]
In his decision of February 16,  pg. 26 -27 Justice
McLean clearly articulated that the right of protest is not without limits stating
“I want to make sure but everybody knows from this, that when I said last week
that there is a right to dissent, and there is a right to protest that exists,
but it has to be balanced by the duty to the public. And that duty in this case
is paramount to the duty of dissent. In other words, you can dissent as long as
you don't hurt people.
[
217
]
We have to make sure that these things are done
in an orderly manner and hurting people by keeping them up all night or destroying
or deciding to, or destroying their peace in their own home, is certainly not
something that a peaceable country like Canada is, can put up with. But because
there's a right here to protest but there is an overriding duty here for those
protesters. The duty of those protesters is to protect the public generally,
and they have a duty to be concerned about fellow citizens' needs and feelings.
[
218
]
What we have here to do is to control that kind
of protest. But the protesters must understand is that they can convince people
to do other things however, they cannot use force of the kind of one kind or
another or pain or anything else that's massively disruptive to other people in
other words keeping people from going to work, keeping people from sleeping.
They can't use that to put their beliefs on other members of the public. And in
these circumstances, the public's rights are superior to the protesters rights
in the way this has gone. And so therefore, the order will be given as amended.”
[
219
]
Justice McLean in no way, expressly or implicitly,
endorses or declares that what was going on in the streets of Ottawa was peaceful,
lawful, or safe. Justice McLean in his decisions, is trying to grapple with the
right to protest and dissent balanced against the need to protect the public. In
fact, examining the words of Justice McLean above, he clearly found that the
manner and effects of the Freedom Convoy from the civil standard had crossed
the line saying “But the protestors must understand that they can convince
people to do other things however, they cannot use force of the kind or other
pain or anything massively disruptive to other people in other words keeping
people from going to work, keeping people from sleeping. They can’t use that to
put their beliefs on other members of the public. And in the circumstances, the
public’s rights are superior in the way this has gone.” This is in no way an
endorsement of the Freedom Convoy Protest.
[
220
]
Neither of the Accused testified or called
evidence, which is their right, and there is no adverse inference drawn from
that decision, but it means this court has no evidence from which to consider
how either accused could have thought Justice McLean’s order authorized them to
continue their protest in the manner they had.
[
221
]
The law is clear from both the criminal and
civil standards. While the rights enshrined in the
Charter
are important hallmarks
of a free and democratic society, there are limits on those rights when they
encroach on public order and the rights of other citizens.
Mischief
[
222
]
Both Accused are charged in Count 1 with Counselling the offence of
Mischief contrary to
section 464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
and in Count 6 with Mischief
contrary to
s. 430(1)
(c) of the Criminal Code.
[
223
]
Section 430(1)
of the
Criminal Code
provides:
Everyone commits mischief who willfully … (c) obstructs, interrupts or
interferes with the lawful use, enjoyment or operation of property.
[
224
]
The essence of the offence of mischief is the
deliberate interference with a person’s lawful use, operation, or enjoyment of
property. One can commit this offence by personal conduct, by being part of a
common purpose with others who are engaging in such conduct, or by aiding and
abetting others to do so.
[
225
]
Mischief is a general intent offence committed such
that where the Crown has proven the accused voluntarily committed the actus
reus of mischief, the
mens rea
will be satisfied by proof of an
intentional, deliberate, or reckless obstruction, interruption or interference
with the lawful use, enjoyment, or operation of property.
[
226
]
“Wilful” means knowingly or deliberately;
“Obstruct” means to stand in the way of; “Interrupt” means to break the
continuity of; and “Interfere” is akin to “get[ting] in each other’s way”.
[
227
]
The term “enjoyment” of property has been
interpreted expansively as “an action of obtaining from property the
satisfaction that the property can provide.” Accordingly, enjoyment of property
within the meaning of
ss. 430(1)
(d) is to be read plainly and includes mere
enjoyment – there is no need for interference with property rights. The offence
also captures interference with commercial properties: see
R. v. Maddeaux
(1997),
1997 CanLII 1934 (ON CA)
, 33 O.R. (3d) 378 (C.A.) and
R. v. Tysick
,
2011 ONSC 2192
.
[
228
]
However, one cannot be charged for conduct that
is not illegal, simply because it may upset another individual; the conduct
must be “wrongful” for it to be an offence.
[
229
]
Charges that arise out of picketing further the
analysis of what constitutes the offence of mischief under s 430(1)(c). The
simple presence of the picketers does not make out the offence of mischief.
There must be a physical act greater than the accused's mere presence to
constitute an obstruction, interference or interruption with the said business.
Justice Green from the Newfoundland Supreme Court Trial division elaborates on
the threshold constituting the offence of mischief in
R. v. Dooling
1994
CanLII 10215
at para
24
(NLCA) as follows.
[
230
]
“In order to constitute the external
circumstances of this offence, there must be some physical act on the part of
the accused which operates as, or has the effect of causing, some sort of
obstruction, interruption or interference with the use or enjoyment or
potential use or enjoyment, of the property in question that goes beyond the
mere communication of information through picketing. In
R. v. Mammolita
(1983),
1983 CanLII 3563 (ON CA)
, 9 C.C.C. (3d) 85 (Ont. CA), where a large group of picketers interfered
with police who were attempting to escort personnel into a workplace, the
obstruction or interference was found in the "human barricade" that
was created. It was "more than mere presence and passive
acquiescence" (p. 88). In
R. v. March
(K.J.) et al (1993),
1993 CanLII 8328 (NL SC)
, 111
Nfld. & PEIR 116 (NFSC) where picketers of a struck store in a shopping
mall were milling about in a circular motion "completely blocking off the
front entrance" (p. 120) to the store in an intimidating atmosphere, the
obstruction or interference was found in the creation of difficulty of access
to and egress from the store which went "well beyond an information picket
line".
[
231
]
In ascertaining whether the offence is made out,
the context is critical as noted in the Summary Conviction Appeal decisions of
R.
v Romlewski
2023 ONSC 5571
and
R. v Remley
2024 ONSC, leave to appeal
denied. Both these decisions, being Appellate decisions are binding on this
court.
[
232
]
Context was also seen as critical in ascertaining
whether the offence of counselling to commit mischief was made out in the
Alberta Court of Appeal decision of
R. v Pawlowski,
2024 ABCA 342
. Leave
to Appeal SCC denied. In that case, the context that the speech occurred near
the blockade and the fact that demonstrators were part of the crowd and that it
would have been obvious a demonstration was occurring, was critical in
evaluating whether the offence of inciting others to commit the offence was
made out.
[
233
]
Generally, in the group protest context, the
simple presence of a protestor without more normally does not make out the
offence of mischief (
R. v. Mammolita
, (1983),
1983 CanLII 3563 (ON CA)
, 9 C.C.C. (3d) 85, at para.
9
(Ont. C.A.)). Generally speaking, “more than mere presence and passive
acquiescence” is required (
Mammolita
, at para.
9
). However, when “presence”
is no longer “mere” when relevant context is considered, presence can in fact
become a positive act in the commission of the offence.
[
234
]
In
R. v. Remley
,
2024 ONSC 543
, at
paras.
104-105
, Somji J. set out a useful list of examples where courts have
found liability for mischief in minimal forms of conduct that were held to have
exceeded “mere presence” at a protest:
[
235
]
The
R. v. Pascal
, 2002 Carswell 3838
(P.C.), aff’d
2006 BCSC 1311
, case is instructive. A group of protesters,
dressed in camouflage, were opposed to the development of a ski resort and set
up a makeshift camp along Highway 99. They used rocks and boards to block the
highway, resulting in the blocking of vehicles and logging trucks.
[
236
]
The accused were convicted, and the court
discussed the participation of various individuals on principal and party
liability.
[
237
]
Firstly, the court commented that blocking
logging trucks is not normally the activity of one person. It is usually the concerted
effort of several people.
[
238
]
However, mere presence on the road is not enough
to warrant a conviction. In relation to one accused, she did not operate a
camera or pull spike boards on or off the road or put up stop signs, etc.
However, the court noted that she wore camouflage and her presence there would
“indicate that she shared a common intention with the others and by her
presence offered her encouragement, if not outright assistance, by standing on
the highway. Certainly, she is a party, but one could also accurately call her
a principal”: at para. 49.
[
239
]
The court also noted her presence earlier when
vehicles were being stopped and she was wearing the Mohawk flag. The camouflage
emphasized the aspect that it was a “uniform” meant to show solidarity and
intimidation: at para 54.
[
240
]
R. v. Snarch
the
Quebec Superior Court found that the accused’s participation with a group of 50
students occupying a university computer centre for 13 days and restricting
access by others to the school facilities made her a party to mischief. The
accused’s mere presence aided and assisted the students who erected the actual
barricades because the occupation’s success depended on having a significant
number of participants.
[
241
]
In
R. v. Colford
, protesters erected
roadblocks on highways in what was described as a peaceful protest against
legislative amendments imposing sales taxes on Indigenous persons residing on
reserves. Although the decision is not a binding authority, the New Brunswick
Provincial Court added a “personal addition and caveat” to the three
requirements of mischief set out in
Mammolita
which is that “The acts
constituting the actus reus must be such as to lead one to the conclusion that
they equate with and tend towards showing a sense of unity or “one-ness” with the
acts of the principals so that a definite contribution to the events complained
of is proven or necessarily inferred:”. Applying the
Mammolita
framework
and additional caveat, the trial judge found four of the six accused who were
present and drumming with protestors guilty of mischief.
[
242
]
Courts have also found that the use of vehicles
to form a blockade will result in liability for mischief as principle [sic] or
party. In
R. v. Tysick
the Superior Court of Justice found that the
Accused’s conduct in parking a truck at one entrance and setting up an
encampment with tents, generators, campers, and food at a second entrance as
part of a blockade during a labour protest that prevented access to a
commercial property constituted mischief.
[
243
]
Also, in
R. v. Carr
,
[2024] O.J. No. 1638
(O.C.J.)
, an Ottawa Freedom Convoy case, Crewe J. convicted the accused of
mischief for his involvement in the protest. Evidence adduced at trial included
a number of posts and videos from the accused’s Facebook account over the
course of several dates demonstrating his association with the protest. These
posts include, among other things, photos of trucks, protest-related slogans,
as well as videos depicting the accused in the downtown core on various dates
throughout the offence period, including during the Removal Operation. Justice
Crewe held that the evidence established that the accused “could not have
failed to be aware that the actions of the Freedom Convoy was causing
continuing distress to the residents of the City of Ottawa and interfering with
their right to lawful access to and use of public property. As well, it
contributed to repeated interruption with residents’ sleep from the incessant
noise caused by, among other things, the blaring of truck horns at all hours”
(Carr, at para. 93). Ultimately, Crewe J. found that the accused “clearly took
part in activities designed to assist those contributing directly to the mischief,
as well as to encourage the continuation of those activities” (Carr, at para.
96).
[
244
]
In another Freedom Convoy case,
R. v. David
Gandzalas
(26 June 2023), Ottawa (Ont. C.J.), which is unreported, Justice
Dorval found that the defendant’s actions “amounted to participation in the
offence of mischief.” First, the trial judge determined that the Freedom Convoy
protest itself “clearly amounted to mischief.” Second, she determined that the
accused participated in that mischief. “He chose to drive protestors in and out
of the downtown core, to act as security at their resupply location at
Coventry. He chose to continue to urge others to protest when, on February 18th,
he faced the line of officers tasked with clearing the streets.” The trial
judge found that the accused was yelling to “hold the line”, which “is
manifestly an expression of participation in the overall mischief.” Justice
Dorval proceeded to explain, at pp. 15-16, how the
mens rea
for the
offence of mischief was satisfied:
[
245
]
“The overall scene, which [the defendant]
himself videotaped, showed that the streets of Ottawa could not be used as
streets. This was not momentary but was prolonged. When Mr. Gandzalas chose to
add his voice to the protest, he also added his actions, which supported the
group in its activities of blocking the streets and resupplying. He intended to
assist in that endeavour, and that constitutes the
mens rea
for the
offence.”
[
246
]
The appellate court
in
R. v Tysick
2011
ONSC 2192
in finding the trial judge erred in acquitting the accused found at
para 38 that a finding of mischief does not require direct contact between
protesters and those who experienced the interference, nor is there a
requirement that the Crown lead evidence that a protester was asked to leave
the scene before returning. The Court also found that the use of vehicles to
form a blockade will result in liability for mischief as a principal or as a party.
[
247
]
In
R. v Remley
2024 ONSC 543 (CanLII)
, 2024 ONSC at 543 para
107
found that neither the statutory elements of mischief nor the supporting
jurisprudence requires that obstruction or interference with the enjoyment of
property must occur for a minimum amount of time before liability for mischief
can be found. What is significant is not the duration of the conduct but the
context in which it arose. For example, in
R. v Drainville
(1991)
1991 CanLII 13897 (ON CJ)
, 5 C.R.(4th)38,
the accused argued his participation in a roadblock only accounted for a 3-minute
delay. In analyzing the “de minimis” argument, the court stated at para 13, “that
even where the obstruction is brief, it must be considered in the overall
context of the protest.”
Count 6
– Section 430(3) Interference with the lawful use and enjoyment of Property:
Principal or Aided or Abetted that offence.
[
248
]
The principles of party liability, are referred
to earlier in this decision, are relied on but will not be reproduced.
[
249
]
I also have considered
R. v Blackman
2024
ONSC 3595
, where Justice Phillips indicated the crown cited
R v Mammolita
(1983), 9 C.C.C (3d) 35
and focused its argument on the idea that Mr. Blackman
was liable because he willfully participated in a group activity that displayed
a common intention, or that he aided or abetted others. The trial judge did not
address the Crown’s argument that Mr. Blackman could be convicted of mischief
as a party to the larger protest. The acquittals on mischief were set aside due
to insufficient reasons, and a new trial ordered for all counts. The Accused
appealed this decision, but the Ontario Court of Appeal dismissed the
Application for leave to Appeal on January 10, 2025.
[
250
]
In
R. v Romlewski
at para
164
Justice
Doyle provides a summary at para 164 of the applicable principles for party
liability to mischief based on the case law: The principles can be summarized
as follows: 1. Mere presence alone at a protest is not sufficient to ground
party liability; 2. If the protest gains strength by numbers and depends on the
participation of a large group, presence may be interpreted as encouragement;
and 3. Showing a sense of unity or solidarity with the actions of the
principals sheds light on the purpose behind being at the protest
[
251
]
I also have considered the case of
R. v Drainville
(1991),
1991 CanLII 13897 (ON CJ)
, 5 C.R. (4th) 38 (OCJ). I highlight this case because of the noble cause
the accused sought to protest and the fact that the protestors advocated for no
violence, as they did in the case at bar. On the day before the offence date,
the accused, accompanied by his friend, met with demonstrators near the
blockade site and participated in various ceremonies. All involved were advised
to “govern themselves with honour and dignity,” and it was clear that there was
no advocacy for violence. When arrested, the accused offered no resistance
other than the fact that officers had to move him; it took 25 minutes to remove
protesters, and the incident occasioned a delay of approximately one hour. In
this case, the court at pg. 5 found “the act of obstructing the roadway did not
contribute to public order, and the court found that the expression was not
deserving of protection. The court ultimately found (at pg. 6) that the accused
was not completely restrained from expressing his dissatisfaction with the government
“in other lawful ways”. Instead, the court found the accused’s actions
constituted an “interference with the proprietary rights of lawful occupants on
the said public lands” and an unlawful act. At pg. 7 the court stated “Notwithstanding
argument that the accused’s involvement was minimal, his motives and intentions
were “noble and good”, and the activities were a small contribution to a “just
and honourable political solution”, the court could not find his actions
constituted condonable civil disobedience. In doing so, the court cited Nutting
J. as stating: “The adoption of civil disobedience methods in the promotion of
a just cause does not transform illegal actions into legal ones” (
Drainville
,
at p. 8). Ultimately, the court concluded that overlooking civil disobedience,
while tempting in certain circumstances, would open dangerous floodgates (
Drainville
,
at p. 8):
[
252
]
Both Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber are admitted
leaders of the Freedom Convoy 2022 movement. They were involved in organizing
and leading trucks and other vehicles from western Canada. Both Accused are
shown as being on the initial Board of Directors Freedom Convoy 2022
corporation. In Exhibit 101. Ms. Lich’s response to the Mayor Watson’s letter,
Ms. Lich signs as the President of the Corporation.
[
253
]
In one of the first news conferences, Ms. Lich
is referred to as “the spark that lit the fire” of the Freedom Convoy movement.
There is no evidence that Ms. Lich had a vehicle emitting exhaust fumes or
honked, or blocked egress to a building. Ms. Lich set up the Freedom Convoy
2022 Facebook page, which amassed a significant following during the time the
Convoy was in Ottawa, and she was involved in setting up the Gofundme page and
later the Givesendgo page, which was one of the ways that donations were
accepted. The ability to accept e-transfer was also created, and there was a
cash jug on Parliament Hill. Ms. Lich posted on Facebook and Tik Tok and had
some text exchanges with Mr. Barber. It is admitted that those statements were
authored by her.
[
254
]
Mr. Barber came to Ottawa in his Truck, “Big
Red”. Big Red was parked on Wellington Street for approximately 11 days. I
agree there is no evidence to support that he was blocking any street, nor is
it required. The Crown must prove that he participated in the obstruction.  He
is an admitted organizer and leader. Mr. Barber had a self-admitted sizable following
on TikTok, and he posted regularly throughout the time in Ottawa. Mr. Barber dealt
with the police liaison officers Bach and Blonde, and much of the evidence
considered by this court is those texts and TikTok statements admitted to being
authored by him.
[
255
]
At this trial, there were numerous witnesses,
police officers and city officials who testified about their observations of
what was occurring on the streets of downtown Ottawa from January 28 to
February 20, 2022. Other evidence came in the form of videos or photographs
taken either by these eyewitnesses or compilation posts and videos prepared by
police.
[
256
]
There is no question that the evidence adduced
at this trial establishes that the Trucks and truckers and persons who came to
Ottawa created a mass mischief during the protest period and that what occurred
significantly interfered with the lawful use and enjoyment of property.
[
257
]
There is unchallenged direct evidence from the
civilian witnesses that the blocked streets made it difficult and at times
impossible for people to come and go to and from their residences, while others
could got to work or appointments, as neither public transit nor taxis could
travel into the demonstration area. Other witnesses complained of the noise
from the constant honking of horns that kept them up at night or made it
impossible to concentrate while trying to work during the day. The smell of the
diesel fuel from idling engines was described as sickening.
[
258
]
The administrator from St. Andrew’s Church
described the vandalism that occurred on their property, the difficulty persons
had in accessing the Church which is located facing Wellington. Their Minister
needed a police escort to enter or leave the premises, and they were not able
to rent out rooms in the Church, leading to a loss of revenue.  Other business
owners testified about issues with deliveries due to the streets being blocked
and more than one witness spoke about being or feeling harassed or threatened when
they ventured onto the street. None of these witnesses had any direct contact
with either Ms. Lich or Mr. Barber, nor is such contact required for a finding
of Mischief in this matter, as noted in the decisions of
Tysick
par
38
and
Romlewski
at 99. There is ample evidence to find that a mass
mischief occurred in Ottawa January 28 to February 20.
[
259
]
I accept, and the evidence supports that there
was more than one group involved in this “Convoy” movement. Inspector Lucas
confirmed that in his testimony, as groups came to Ottawa from various parts of
the Country. Some people came to Ottawa on their own, affiliated with no one,
and some people downtown were just curious on lookers.
[
260
]
I also accept and the evidence supports that Mr.
Barber was not able to influence or control all the truckers and perhaps even
some within his own group as shown in some of the text exchanges with Cst.
Bach.
[
261
]
I am not convinced that the multiple convoys,
can’t control everyone argument takes the defence very far, as there is
overwhelming evidence that Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber were leaders of a
significant group of truckers that arrived in Ottawa January 28 and stayed
until they were removed, commencing February 18th.  The Freedom Convoy 2022
group were described by Mr. Arpin as the broad moderate group.
[
262
]
I accept the evidence of Inspector Lucas, that
as part of the Operational plan, Ottawa Police prepared maps directing certain
types of trucks to go to take one route and park on certain streets and
vehicles coming from certain directions, etc., as set out in Exhibit 125. I
accept Inspector Lucas’s evidence that they did this in an effort to balance
the protestors’ right to protest and at the same time, trying to reduce the
impact on the residents of Ottawa. He also authorized certain blockades to be
erected to contain the footprint and funnel trucks into certain areas. I also
accept the Inspector’s evidence that they were completely overwhelmed by the number
of trucks that arrived.
[
263
]
Defence Counsel suggest the fact that Ottawa
police directed them in with maps etc gave them carte balance to fill out the
streets and block roads and intersections as occurred from the observations of
Cst. Bach, A/Sgt Blonde and the observations of Mr. Ayotte and Arpin and the
civilian witnesses.
[
264
]
An examination of Ex. 125 makes it clear “Take
Direction from Police whenever applicable. Leave Open space for Emergency
vehicles AT ALL TIMES, No closed trailers on Wellington near Parliament Hill. All
staging area must keep an adjacent emergency lane clear.  The map provided also
set out max number of vehicle capacity and weight limits for each parking area.
None of that was adhered to by the truckers. Ottawa police did not tell the
trucks arriving to gridlock the city.  The Operational plan with the maps and
directions attempted to do just what Inspector Lucas said to allow trucks and
persons to come and exercise their Freedom of Expression while at the same time
limiting the number and types and trucks to go to certain areas to lessen the
impact on residents of the downtown core. Inspector Lucas agreed that the trucks
were directed into Ottawa, but he also said at some point that welcome expired.
[
265
]
Mr. Barber as early as January 29 the day after
their arrival  (Ex. 135 Vol 1 Tab 29 pg 10) says  “We are completely messing
this city up” Same day, he says (Ex. 132  Vol 1 Tab 30), “We fucked this town
up.”  January 30 while talking with others (Dale)  who are talking about
gridlock. Barber responds, “it’s already locked, we train wrecked it” and on
February 10, 8:31 pm, speaking about a Slow roll, Barber says “Really Good
Train wrecked traffic. By these texts authored by Mr. Barber, he clearly knew what
was going on in the streets of Ottawa. He knew we were completely messing up
this city.  He says, “We train wrecked,” not some other group, but we did.
[
266
]
I accept that both Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber came
here with the noblest of intentions to simply protest their wish for the
government and Prime Minister (at the time) Trudeau to end COVID mandate. I
also accept that a number of factors came together that led to that initial
gridlock, more trucks came than was anticipated and the number restrictions and
directions to truckers in Ex. 125 were not followed. But with that knowledge,
they did not take steps to alleviate that until much later in the demonstration.
[
267
]
The evidence is that Mr. Barber knew by the
Sunday of the first weekend that police wanted the Trucks gone by 8:00 am Monday
morning. His response was they were staying until the mandates came down. I
accept that this was framed as more of a wish that they leave and was somewhat
ambiguous.
[
268
]
However, by February 4, 2022, the Ottawa Police
made their position clear and Mr, Barber clearly understood. Cst. Bach recalled
sending screenshots to Mr. Barber. The screenshots Ex. 127 pg. 40 - 46 were
meant to share what the Ottawa Police was putting on social media, some
messaging for anyone involved in the Convoy. The 9-page document was made
Exhibit 128. These were sent to Mr. Barber and were tendered not for hearsay
purposes but for the fact that this information was conveyed to Mr. Barber,
suggesting that it might be helpful in talking to the truckers, so they are not
surprised when/ if they are doing something unlawful.
[
269
]
Exhibit 127 is titled: The Ottawa Police
Implements Increased Measures to Protect Downtown Neighbourhoods.  It goes on
to say that they are implementing a surge and containment policy to restore
order and prevent unlawful activity. It says in connection with ongoing
demonstrations, Ottawa’s downtown residents and businesses continue to be
severely impacted by unlawful acts, including harassment, mischief, hate crimes
and noise violations. We know that additional demonstrators are coming, and we
are significantly increasing our policing resources to respond to prevent and
reduce the impacts of demonstrators entering the downtown core, and to improve
neighbourhood safety. It also says the surge of police officers will result in
enforcement to restore public safety. This includes increased investigation,
enforcement and charges for all criminal acts related to hate, harassment,
assaults, including spitting, intimidation and mischief. Ottawa Police is
implementing the following measures effective immediately.
[
270
]
From Mr. Barber’s response to that communication,
he clearly got the message. He responds, saying “We are in the opps centre
planning. Can you get us commercial streets to move to instead”  Ex. 127 pg. 50,
Cst. Bach recalled a conversation with Mr. Barber and another organizer later
the same day. Mr. Barber was facilitating a conversation with another organizer,
but there was also a conversation with Mr. Barber. Cst. Bach specifically
recalled Mr. Barber saying he would sign over the names of Convoy leaders to
the police and have a conversation and be able to relay what it is they would
say be willing to say in Court. Transcript pg 45.  Bach said, “So we are
talking in terms of negotiating like moving vehicles for what they would get in
return.”
[
271
]
As of this date, it would have been very clear that
the Freedom Convoy was no longer welcome and that police would be seeking to
restore public order. Mr. Barber clearly understood this from his response. It
is only as of this date that the evidence shows that Mr. Barber was willing to
try to alleviate the impact on the residents. The evidence from Cst. Bach and
others show that the protestors were free to leave at any time and that the Police
would work to assist anyone who wanted to do so.
[
272
]
Counsel for Ms. Lich argues that there was no
enforcement of any by-law. Mr. Ayotte’s evidence from September 19th, 2023,
testimony at page 18 said, “we were fearful for the safety of our officers, not
knowing what the intent was of the protesters. That is the decision that I made
based on what I was seeing, throughout North America regarding protests and
civil unrests and we were reminded by the police chief to not be that single
point of contact that could cause a riot” So the lack of enforcement was not
because there was nothing to enforce but because of the concerns raised by Mr.
Ayotte for the safety of the By-law officers.
[
273
]
Much of the evidence comes from numerous videos
across various dates that depict Barber and Lich circulating on Ottawa streets
that are blocked or obstructed by demonstrators and vehicles during the
demonstration period. One of many such examples includes a video posted to TikTok
by Barber on February 3, 2022, where he gives an enthusiastic thumbs up to a completely
blocked intersection at Kent Street and Slater Street, stating, “we’re here”,
among other things.
[
274
]
In Exhibit 16, there is a video of Mr. Barber walking
on Wellington, pointing out, “We’re going to have some stick hockey down on
Wellington and Lyon. “Got a beautiful spot picked out, the trucks are parked
back here (pointing to blocked street) and that way. Come down here, and we’re
going to make this happen.” In this video, he is counselling people to come
down to the blocked street and continue the blocking.
[
275
]
Ex 17, Mr. Barber on Feb 4, TikTok, he states “there's
a few people in high rises that don't like horns and I apologize for that. I
don't know what else I can do to fix that.” This of course shows his awareness
that residents are disturbed by that date.
[
276
]
February 9. TikTok Ex. 24, (Grab that horn tik
Tok ) Mr. Barber is speaking to his followers are rumours of enforcement and he
says if you see a large, vast majority of police coming towards your truck like
they do, like, the, they’re building up guys, lock that door, crawl into that
bunk. But before you do that, grab that horn switch, and don't let go. Let that
******* horn go no matter what time it is, and let it roll as long as possible
until their busting your ******* windows down. We want everybody to know when
the time comes, and that is the best way to do it when it happens. Do that guys,
please let that horn go. Don't let go. When we see the mass force of police
coming at you. OK guys, be strong, we've got this. This is Mr. Barber’s
rallying cry to sound the alarm if there is enforcement by police.
[
277
]
In Exhibit 25, Mr. Barber says on TikTok, “they're
coming for us. They've been instructed to clear the streets of downtown
Ottawa... We have instructed them that for every trucker who is protesting in
downtown Ottawa, that is arrested and has to sign. For every truck that signs
to get out of custody. We will then replace that driver that truck driver with
three new truckers when the call goes out, guys, everybody and their *******
dog come to Ottawa cause we need all the help we can get. They think they can
control the number of guys right now; you wait to see how many we bring in to
replace us. be strong, hold the line.”
[
278
]
The above statement is a clear encouragement or
counselling for his followers to come and continue the blocking of streets. He
says that for every truck that leaves we will replace it with three more.
[
279
]
Ex. 26, Feb 10. Mr. Barber says on TikTok Tok
“do you think we're leaving? Do you think we're leaving? We might move a few
trucks around just a little bit, so apparently, there are a few issues at the
airport this morning. I don't know. You know, we moved a few trucks out of the
downtown core and then they kind of replaced somewhere else, so that's so
unfortunate, you guys, my goodness.” One has to watch this TikTok video,
because it is clear that Mr. Barber is speaking sarcastically when he says
this.
[
280
]
There are numerous examples of Mr. Barber on
video among the crowds of truckers and demonstrators. In a few of them, persons
are treating him a bit like a celebrity or a rock star. In one of them, the
person says I've been looking for you. I really want to take a picture with
you. Again, on February 12th, Mr. Barber is out and about, and someone else
says Can I get a picture with you. And Barber says even your boy, meaning him,
is kind of a celebrity in Ontario. And he says to the person Keep up the fight,
we're winning. Mr. Barber was not a mere bystander in the protest, his presence
meant something to those who were on the ground and part of the blocking of
streets. His very presence was a positive act as referred to in
Mammolita
.
[
281
]
Both Mr. Baber and Ms. Lich carried out an organizational
and leadership role for the Freedom Convoy until their arrest. Ms. Lich was
primarily a spokesperson, some said the “face” of the Freedom Convoy movement.
She was also primarily involved in raising and distributing funds to keep the
truckers in Ottawa. Mr. Barber dealt with the Truckers on the ground and was
involved in liaising with police, trying to arrange fuel distribution and, at
times, the distribution of money to truckers for fuel and food so that they
could continue to stay in place.
[
282
]
Mr. Barber was also involved in “slow rolls”, which
the defence argues was meant to be a better way of demonstrating. The problem
is in Mr. Barber’s Feb 10 statement regarding a slow roll, he says, “Really
Good Train wrecked traffic”. That shows an intentional act to interfere with the
enjoyment of others driving on the highway.
[
283
]
Defence counsel says there is no evidence that
Mr. Barber ever aided or abetted or counselled any of the drivers to block the
streets.
[
284
]
In her testimony Cst. Bach recalled that on
February 9, 2022, she recalled watching a TikTok video of Mr. Barber being
brought to her attention and watching it. This video was made Exhibit 9 at
trial, it appears to have been posted February 7, 2022. There was also a text
exchange with Barber about this video.
[
285
]
In the TikTok video, Mr. Barber is shown in his
truck, Big Red with another person at an intersection near the National
Gallery, Barber says, “So we’re out just scoping out the area here. Hey Mike, what
do you think about this intersection? Response by Mike: It’s Lonely. Barber responds
(laughing) It looks a little lonely, doesn’t it? It doesn’t look like there’s
anybody here. Do you think we can fix that? M: Yeah, CB (Laughs) I don’t know
about you but that looks like it is lonely. Oh, boy, Oh boy.”
[
286
]
Watching that video, you hear Mr. Barber
laughing at the empty intersection The only available inference is that he is
sending a message to his followers to fix the problem of the lonely
intersection or block the street. That is clearly an encouragement to his
followers to commit mischief and block the road or intersection.
[
287
]
There are a few examples of Ms. Lich out amongst
the crowd and with Mr. Barber. Both he and Lich are filmed by “Papawolf”
interacting with demonstrators among parked vehicles on an obstructed
Wellington Street. Papawolf tells Lich that he’s been following and posting
behind her, and she asks him to “keep getting the word out” and tells him that
it’s “like Canada Day on steroids” in response to Papawolf explaining that it’s
his “fourth time up here”. Lich is similarly captured among demonstrators on a
blocked or obstructed Wellington Street in other videos, smiling in a
photograph with Barber and an unknown individual beside Barber’s truck “Big
Red” (in front of the Department of Justice Building on Wellington Street). As
stated, “Big Red” was one of many trucks that contributed to the blockage and
obstruction of Wellington Street for a period of time. Its presence there is
documented in photographs, text messages and in video. I do note that on
February 8, 2022, when Barber moved it to another location. Barber confirmed
the departure of “Big Red” in a text message to Bach on February 9, 2022, where
he stated, “Yesterday worked perfectly getting my truck off Wellington”.
[
288
]
February 10, Ms. Lich is down amongst the crowd
and says “Check out this street” pointing to a blocked road.
[
289
]
Most of Ms. Lich’s posts for regarding fundraising
and imploring people to donate to the freedom convoy movement. In one Facebook
or tick tock Ms. Lich says quote “so please, if you can donate, and help us
keep these truckers going, you know we plan to be here for the long haul, as
long as it takes to ensure your rights and freedoms are restored”. She makes it
clear that the purpose of the funds is to allow truckers to stay longer in
Ottawa and keep the protest going, to allow the trucks to stay where they are
blocking the roads.
[
290
]
On February 14, on Parliament Hill, on
Wellington Street surrounded by trucks and protestors, and introducing Former
Premier of Nfld, Ms. Lich said, “first of all, we are not afraid. In fact,
every time the government decides to further suspend our civil liberties, our
resolve strengthens, the importance of our mission becomes clearer. We remain
peaceful but planted on Parliament Hill until the mandates are decisively ended….
Listen to your hearts, Canadians. Is the emergency at the right response to our
demonstrations of love and freedom? Now I want to address the Prime Minister.
No matter what you do, we will hold the line. There are no threats that will
frighten us. We will hold the line. Lastly, to our truckers and friends on Parliament
Hill, do not give in to fear and threats your courage has already exceeded all
our expectations and inspired an international movement. Be strong. Show
kindness love will always defeat hate. Hold the line, thank you.”
[
291
]
February 16, Ms. Lich posts on the Freedom
Convoy Facebook page, “you guys. I just want you to stay strong and I want you
to continue to be unified” ... “You have to know that they're trying to provoke
us. I mean, you hear their language. You hear the language and the verbiage
that they're using, and not is not coming from us. And I know you guys all know
that. But we can only win this with love, and we can only win this together. And
it’s time to stand together. If you can come to Ottawa and stand with us, that
would be fantastic and if you can't pray for us. I know you are. I just want
you know you to know that this is my hill. And the hill of so many brave men
and women. I can't tell you how amazing these people are. And they're going to
stay, and they're going to fight for your freedom as long as they possibly can.
I'm just so damn proud of you every single one of you not just in Canada but
all around the world so, please try not to be angry keep loving your heart stay
strong. Stay unified and stay proud I want you to keep fighting the good fight.
And I want you to lookout for each other so tomorrow is a new day and I'm ready
I'm not afraid. And we're going to hold the line thank you.”
[
292
]
In many of Ms. Lich’s posts as well as Mr. Barber’s
they are encouraging people and truckers to come join and participate with
them.
[
293
]
Ms. Lich often interspersed or ended her posts
with the Phrase “Hold the Line”. Yes I agree in different contexts it can mean
different things, but it was, without doubt, a rallying cry for the
demonstration for people to remain where they were on the streets and fight the
good fight. The phrase was also indicative of joint participation in the protest
the manner of which was the blocking of streets and roads and interfering with
the property of others.
[
294
]
As a spokesperson and President of the Freedom
Convoy, Ms. Lich was present and participated in many news conferences. For
example, Feb 6 where what was going on in the streets was discussed, including
the disproportionate harm to the residents complaining of harassment, noise
from horns fumes etc., and given her personal walkabouts, Ms. Lich could not
have failed to be aware of the actions of the Freedom Convoy was causing and
the continuing distress to the residents of the downtown, interfering with
their right of lawful access and use of public property. It is in that context
that you have to look at her words. She was right there at the scene of the
protest when she gave the speech replete with Hold the Line on Feb 14, when she
was asking for donations, she was aware that the streets were blocked and
resident complaining.
[
295
]
Proof of her awareness is also found in the
correspondence between she and the mayor found as Exhibit 100 and Exhibit 101.
In his letter to Tamara Lich as President of the Freedom Convoy 2022, he writes,
“My overarching concern is for the safety and security of our residents,
business owners and workers in the downtown core, who are innocent collateral
damage of this unprecedented national and international demonstration. Our
residents are exhausted and on edge, and our small businesses impacted by your
blockades are teetering on the brink of permanent closure. I am writing to ask
you to remove your convoy and its trucks from all our residential neighborhoods
and that you restrict your presence to a limited perimeter from Wellington,
where it meets Elgin and to the Sir John A McDonald Parkway. I ask that you
immediately seek the support of the truckers to follow this path of de-escalation.”
[
296
]
Ms. Lich responds, “The truckers here in Ottawa
have always been about peaceful protest. Many of the citizens and businesses in
Ottawa have been cheering us on, but we're also disturbing others that was
never our intent with the freedom convoy. We agree with your request to reduce
pressure on the residents and businesses in the city of Ottawa. We have made a
plan to consolidate our protest efforts around Parliament Hill. We will be
working hard over the next 24 hours to get by in from the truckers. We hope to
start repositioning our trucks on Monday.” By her response she is aware that
the protest is causing distress to residents.
[
297
]
Clearly, on the evidence, even if Ms. Lich did
not have a truck on the road, she was standing shoulder to shoulder with the
demonstrators. At times, she was literally shoulder to shoulder when she was in
the streets in the heart of the area where the mischief was occurring. Ms. Lich
was also the voice of the Freedom Convoy, not only as its President, but as a
leader, so when she said “Hold the Line, stay where you are” it meant
something. The context of the words of both accused is important. The evidence
is that they were both organizers, they were leaders of what was happening, and
as a result of fundraising by Ms. Lich, the Truckers could stay in place in
Ottawa.  The connection between the aiding and abetting is that Ms. Lich
provided encouragement and assistance via funds, encouraging persons to stay in
place or hold the line, knowing that the streets were blocked, and residents
were affected by the actions of the blockade.
[
298
]
The presence of both Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber was
a positive act, their presence in and of itself was an encouragement, given the
reaction of the public seeing them among the crowds.
[
299
]
Counsel has raised the fact, that Ms. Lich
entered into a plan with the city to reduce the footprint and that it was the
police that caused that not to happen. There is no suggestion of bad faith on
the part of the Freedom Convoy 2022 group.  Also, there is evidence that Mr.
Barber worked to implement the movement of trucks as per the agreement and on
other occasions. These acts detract from the Mischief that had already occurred,
and they had both played a role in aiding it by fund raising and in Mr.
Barber’s role dealing with the trucks on the ground.  They both encouraged the situation
to continue and in the context of what was going on in the streets. The fact
that they tried to work to reduce the footprint, work with the city and the
fact that they wanted a peaceful protest, to attenuate the severity of their
role and may be a consideration down the line.
[
300
]
Ms. Lich raises the argument that the fact that
the police permitted the demonstrators to park on Wellington Street gave them
what is called a color of right to do so. I disagree for two reasons: one, the
restrictions set out by the police were not followed, and second, there is no
evidence that Ms. Lich was ever told of this or knew of it. There is no
evidence of any conversation with Mr. Barber about this and it was not
mentioned in any of the press conferences. Ms. Lich did not testify as is her
right, and there can be no inference of guilt as a result, but it means there
is an absence of evidence about what information she would have received.
[
301
]
Similarly, Mr. Barber did not testify, and while
not an inference of guilt as a result, there is no evidence from which the
court can assess Ms. Lich’s or Mr. Barber’s honest belief, as there is no
evidence about what those beliefs may be and what evidence supports that honest
belief. I find there is no air of reality of this color of right defence.
[
302
]
I find that the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber personally committed mischief as
the leaders, and organizers and social media influencers and that they also
aided and abetted that mischief and incited followers to continue that activity
until the Government or Prime Minister dropped the COVID Restrictions.  As
noted in
R. v Pascal
at par
109
after reviewing
Mammolita
, the
court added what it called a personal additional caveat to the three
requirements as an aider and abettor “the acts constituting actus reus must be
such as to lead one to the conclusion that they equate with and tend towards
showing a sense of unity or oneness with the acts of the principles, so that a
definite contribution to the events complained of is proven a necessarily
inferred.
[
303
]
The evidence strongly supports that Lich and
Barber are principals and, in the alternative, they were aiders and abettors
showing a sense of unity with the principals and by their acts they aided and
encouraged those blocking the roads, with the backdrop knowledge of what was
happening in the downtown core and that residents lawful use of property was
affected by the actions of the protest.  They are not mere bystanders.
Count 1 –
Counselling the offence of Mischief
[
304
]
In Count 1, both Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber are
charged with counselling the offence of Mischief, which offence was not
committed by one or more persons contrary to
s. 464
of the
Criminal Code
. Under
s. 464 (a) everyone who counsels another commit and indictable offence is. If
the offence is not committed, guilty of an indictable offence and liable to the
same punishment as a person who attempts to commit that offence is liable.
[
305
]
Regarding Count 1, the Crown needs to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt a deliberate encouragement or active inducement of a
criminal offence, the
mens rea
is a conscious disregard of the
substantive and unjustified risk inherent in the counselling. Proof of the
index offence is not required because the focus is on the counsellor’s conduct,
the state of mind and not that of the person counselled.
[
306
]
The law of counselling is set out earlier in
this decision. The actus reus for counselling will be established where the statements
made by the accused actively induce or advocate and do not merely describe the
commission of an offence.  Counselling is defined in s. 22(3) of the Code and
includes, but is not limited to, procuring, soliciting, and inciting (
R. v.
Root
,
2008 ONCA 869
).
[
307
]
To incite means to urge, stir up, or stimulate
(
Mugesera v. Canada
(Minister of Citizenship and Immigration),
2005 SCC
40
, at para.
63
). In Mugesera, in its analysis, the Court took a contextual
approach that included consideration of the public location of the speech. At
para. 64, the Court set out the following important principles when considering
a speech and the offence of counselling: “The offence of counselling requires
that the statements, viewed objectively, actively promote, advocate, or
encourage the commission of the offence described in them. The criminal act
will be made out where the statements (1) are likely to incite, and (2) are
made with a view to inciting, the commission of an offence. An intention to
bring about the criminal result, that the counsellor intends the commission of
the offence counselled, will obviously satisfy the requisite mental element for
the offence of counselling.”
[
308
]
In
R. v. Hamilton
,
2005 SCC 47
, where the
Court stated at para. 29: In short, the actus reus for counselling is the
deliberate encouragement or active inducement of the commission of a criminal
offence. The
mens rea
consists of nothing less than an accompanying
intent or conscious disregard of the substantial and unjustified risk inherent
in the counselling: that is, it must be shown that the accused either intended
that the offence counselled be committed, or knowingly counselled the
commission of the offence while aware of the unjustified risk that the offence
counselled was in fact likely to be committed as a result of the accused’s
conduct.
[
309
]
In the recent Freedom Convoy appellate decision
of
R. v. Pawlowski
,
2024 ABCA 342
, the Alberta Court of Appeal observed
at para. 18: “For a political speech or communication to constitute the actus
reus of counselling, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that it
will be reasonably understood as in substance deliberately encouraging or
actively inducing those with a political cause to engage in criminal activities
in support of that cause, rather than as in substance expressing support for
the political concerns or goals of the criminal actors.”
[
310
]
In
Pawlowski
, the Alberta Court of Appeal
upheld the trial judge’s finding that a speech inciting protestors to continue
an ongoing blockade of a highway constituted an incitement to commit mischief.
The Accused appealed this finding to the Supreme Court of Canada, leave to
appeal was denied on March 27, 2025.
[
311
]
In
Pawlowski
, the accused travelled to
the Smugglers Saloon adjacent to where the Coutts blockade was happening and
gave a speech. The Trial Judge found that some of the protesters involved in
the blockade were present and that the accused knew protestors were blocking
the highway when he told the audience they were, “heroes of the solidarity
movement” and that they should not “dare break the line”… “do not lose your
momentum”, “You can do the right thing, or pack and honk around parliament...but
..they’re not really afraid of our horns” …. “here is your opportunity to hold
the fort. Do not break the line. Don’t do it”. The Accused did not directly
take part in the blockade of the highway.
[
312
]
The Alberta Court at para 55 to 58 addressed the
s. 2
(b) issues with the nature of the speech: The expression undertaken by the
appellant in this case fell within the scope of
section 2
(b). His speech had
significant political content. His apparent motivation was to advance political
causes he deeply believes in, and to express his dissatisfaction with the government’s
approach to matters of public importance. Whatever their objective merits, the
sincerity and depth of the appellant’s commitment to those positions were
clear. To the appellant, the COVID-19 lockdown measures and vaccine
requirements presented a profound threat to individual liberty and bodily
autonomy, and speaking out against them was a matter of utmost urgency and
significance. Political expression is at the very heart of the values sought to
be protected by the freedom of expression:
Libman v Quebec
(Attorney
General), [1997] 3 SCR 569 at para
29
,
1997 CanLII 326
;
Sharpe
at para
23
;
R v Guignard
,
2002 SCC 14
at para
20
;
Harper v Canada
(Attorney General),
2004 SCC 33
at para
84
.
[
313
]
Para 56 “Just because a certain expressive act
may also constitute an offence under the
Criminal Code
does not mean the
expression falls outside the scope of
section 2
(b).” In Reference re ss 193 and
195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code (Man),
1990 CanLII 105 (SCC)
, [1990] 1 SCR 1123 at 1182 [Prostitution
Reference], Justice Lamer explained in his concurring reasons: “the mere fact
that Parliament has decided to criminalize an activity does not render it
beyond the scope of
s. 2(b)
of the
Charter
”. He noted there are many
offences “whose
actus reus
may consist either in whole or in part of
speech or other form of expression”. He provided an “incomplete list” of
offences to illustrate his point, which list included
section 22
counselling: s.
21(1)(b) and (c) (parties to an offence),
s. 22
(counselling a party),”
Pawlowski.
[
314
]
At para 57, “The speech given by the appellant
in this case was protected by
section 2
(b). However, that does not mean the
appellant acted with 'legal justification' in inciting mischief. As illustrated
by Justice Lamer’s list, an act of expression that is protected by
section 2
(b)
may also constitute a criminal offence and, therefore, not be legally
justified.
Section 1
of the
Charter
allows expressive acts that fall within the
protection of
section 2(b)
to nevertheless be criminalized so long as the
subject offence constitutes a “reasonable limit” that “can be demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society”.
[
315
]
Para 58 “As a result, the appellant cannot rely
on
section 2
(b) for “legal justification”. Freedom of expression is subject to
“reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free
and democratic society”. The limit prescribed by law in this case is
section
22
, the counselling provision. As the appellant has not challenged the
constitutionality of that provision, there is no issue as to whether it
constitutes a “reasonable limit” or is “demonstrably justified”. The
section
2
(b) right is subject to an unchallenged limit and therefore is not a basis for
finding legal justification.”
[
316
]
The Court says at para 60-62 “
Section 2(b)
of
the
Charter
allows a person to disagree with government actions regarding
vaccinations or pandemic lockdown measures. The ability to express one’s
feelings, beliefs, ideas and views is fundamental to a democratic society.
However, the rule of law is also fundamental to a democratic society.”
[
317
]
Para 61 “There is no caselaw which finds that
section 2
(b) is unjustifiably infringed by criminal counselling offences under
sections 22
or
464
of the
Criminal Code
. It is difficult to imagine an argument
that it would not be a reasonable limit on freedom of expression when the
counselling is intended to incite a physical act of criminal mischief. It is
worth reiterating in this regard that the actus reus for
section 22
has been
“carefully circumscribed” to account for the constitutional protection of
freedom of speech, as discussed above.”
[
318
]
Para 62 “In this case, the trial judge found the
accused counselled or incited the protesters to continue to commit the criminal
offence of mischief. Where an individual incites or counsels others to commit
criminal acts, the right to freedom of expression is subject to the limit
prescribed by
section 22
of the
Criminal Code
.
Section 2
(b) cannot be used as a
shield to allow the commission of criminal offences including the offence of
counselling others to commit criminal offences. If the appellant wanted to
argue that
section 22
is not a “reasonable limit” that “can be demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society”, he needed to challenge the
constitutionality of that offence. That was not done in this case.” The Alberta
Court of Appeal upheld the trial judge’s decision and the conviction. An appeal
was made to the SCC, but leave was denied March 27, 2025.
[
319
]
When you review the statements of Ms. Lich and
the context with in which they were given they are of a very similar nature, to
that of Mr. Pawlowski.
[
320
]
On February 14, on Parliament Hill, on Wellington
Street surrounded by trucks and protestors, and introducing Former Premier of Nfld,
Ms. Lich said “first of all, we are not afraid. In fact, every time the
government decides to further suspend our civil liberties, our resolve
strengthens the importance of our mission becomes clearer. We remain peaceful
but planted on parliament hill until the mandates are decisively ended…. Listen
to your hearts, Canadians. Is the emergency the right response to our
demonstrations of love and freedom? Now I want to address the Prime Minister.
No matter what you do, we will hold the line. There are no threats that will
righten us. We will hold the line. Lastly to our truckers and friends on
parliament hill do not give in to fear and threats your courage has already
exceeded all of our expectations and inspired an international movement. Be
strong. Show kindness love will always defeat hate. Hold the line thank you.”
[
321
]
February 16, Ms. Lich posts on the Freedom
Convoy Face Book page, “you guys. I just want you to stay strong and I want you
to continue to be unified” ... “You have to know that they're trying to provoke
us. I mean you hear their language. You hear the language and the verbiage that
they're using and not is not coming from us. And I know you guys all know that.
But we can only win this with love, and we can only win this together. and It’s
time to stand together. If you can come to Ottawa and stand with us, that would
be fantastic and if you can't pray for us. I know you are. I just want you know
you to know that this is my hill. And the hill of so many brave men and women.
I can't tell you how amazing these people are. And they're going to stay and
they're going to fight for your freedom as long as they possibly can. I'm just
so damn proud of you every single one of you not just in Canada but all around
the world so, please try not to be angry keep loving your heart stay strong.
Stay unified and stay proud I want you to keep fighting the good fight. And I
want you to lookout for each other so tomorrow is a new day and I'm ready I'm
not afraid. And we're going to hold the line thank you.”
[
322
]
Feb 10, posts a video known as the “Papa Wolf
video” Ms. Lich is out an about on Wellington, a group including Chris Barber
are talking about various convoy activities, slow roll at the airport etc. Papa
Wolf introduces himself says he’s following her on social media . She says keep
getting the word out.  Lich referring to what is going on behind her protest
crowds etc “it’s like Canada Day on steroids”.
[
323
]
In her testimony Cst. Bach
recalled that on February 9, 2022, she recalled watching a Tic Tok video of Mr.
Barber being brought to her attention and watching it. This video was made
Exhibit 9 at trial. There was also a text exchange with Barber about this
video. In the Tic Tok video Mr. Barber is shown in his truck Big Red with
another person at an intersection near the National Gallery, He says “So we’re
out just scoping out the area here. Hey Mike. What do you think about this
intersection? Response by M; It’s Lonely: It looks a little lonely, doesn’t it?
It doesn’t look like there’s anybody here. Do you think we can fix that? M:
Yeah CB (Laughs) I don’t know about you but that looks like it is lonely. Oh,
Boy Oh, boy
.”
[
324
]
Barber posts on TikTok platform for which he
admits he has a large following: Exhibit 25, this was also cross posted on Face
Book. “they've been instructed to clear the streets of downtown Ottawa; they're
going to use whatever force possible. We have instructed them forever every
Canadian truck driver that is protesting in downtown Ottawa that is arrested we
will then replace that truck driver with three new truckers. When the call goes
out, guys, everybody and their ******* dog, get coming to Ottawa cause we need
all the help we can get. They think they could control the numbers of guys
right now. You wanna see how many we bring in to replace us. This ain't no
******* drill either. Be strong, hold the line we have the F liberal government
fractured right now, provinces are falling.
[
325
]
February 10, 2022, Ex. 26, Barber states again
on Tik Tok “Do you think we're leaving? Do you think we're leaving? We might
move a few trucks around just a little bit, so
[
326
]
In another Tik Tok dated February 7,2022 Barber
says “you come here and you **** this city. I don't give a **** if the entire
country of Canada comes to ******* Ottawa. That's what we're living right now.
Government tyranny”
[
327
]
When you take into account that both Lich and
Barber were leaders and organizers, that they were out and about in the
downtown core seeing that streets were blocked. There was an awareness of the affect
their actions were having on the residents of Ottawa. Ms. Lich acknowledged it in
her response to the mayor’s letter. Barber was told by Cst. Bach about the
affect the blocking of streets was having.
[
328
]
When you consider their statements against that backdrop,
there is no doubt that their statements telling people to stay strong. Hold the
line, to stay united, not to give in to fear, to come stand with them in Ottawa,
is meant to incite their followers to continue to do what they were doing which
was the blocking of streets or continue the mischief. They said these types of
things to their followers on a regular basis. Given that, these statements were
not off the cuff statements, they said these things with a conscious disregard
of the substantial or unjustified risk inherent in the counselling which as per
Hamilton at para
29
makes out the actus reus and
mens rea
for the
offence of counselling. These statements were made to incite or rally the
followers of the Freedom Convoy to stay or come to Ottawa to continue the
protest. The Charge of counselling to commit the offence of mischief has been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt for both accused.
[
329
]
The Crown acknowledges, that the evidentiary
foundation for the charge of counselling to commit Mischief and the substantive
offence of mischief is the same. Given that this court has found that the offence
of counselling by both accused has been committed and that the offence has
occurred, they are liable as parties to the offence of counselling under s. 22
and the as a result the Charge on count one will be stayed as requested by the
Crown.
Offence
of Mischief – Statutory Defence in Section 430(7)
[
330
]
Section 430(7)
of the
Code
provides a statutory
defence to mischief. The provision provides that no person commits mischief “by
reason only that he attends at or near or approaches a dwelling-house or place
for the purpose only of obtaining or communicating information.”
[
331
]
Defence counsel argue that the defence to
mischief under s. 430 (7) applies to the accused and the facts of this case, as
the purpose of the “mischief” was communication to end the COVID mandates.
[
332
]
In
Tremblay
, the ONCA overturned a
mischief conviction that flowed from a neighbour dispute between the accused
and complainant. In short, the accused parked a van bearing the message “I AM
NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR YOUR BASEMENT FLOODS” alongside the property line that he
shared with the complainants (Tremblay, at para. 3). As a result of the
accused’s actions, the complainants had to cancel an open house (
Tremblay
,
at para. 4). In defence of his actions, the accused relied upon s. 430(7),
arguing that he acted solely for the purpose of communicating information
(Tremblay, at para. 7). In rendering their decision, the Court needed to
interpret s. 430(7), which it found had a “genuine ambiguity” in the meaning
and scope of the words “communicating information” (
Tremblay
, at para.
26).
[
333
]
The Court found that s. 430(7) “protects acts
done for the purpose of communicating information that would otherwise
constitute mischief regardless of whether the intended results were to
interfere with or interrupt the use or enjoyment of another person’s property”
(
Tremblay
, at para. 21). With that said, the Court made clear that the
applicability of the provision does not come without limitation (
Tremblay
,
at para. 28):
[
334
]
The communication must be peaceful and
non-violent, to be entitled to protection. And it must not simply be a mask or
subterfuge for conduct that is not solely communicative and that has some
entirely different purpose. This line will not always be easily drawn and will
depend upon the circumstances of the case.
[
335
]
The Court then went on to provide a few examples
of communication held “not to be for the purposes only of … communicating
information” which are summarized as follows (
Tremblay
, at paras.
28-30): Anti-nuclear protesters climbed an anchor chain of a United States
aircraft carrier intending to display a radiation symbol flag. Two of them
fastened themselves to the anchor chain. Their acts “went beyond trespass” and
“seriously interfered with a very crucial part of the moorings of a very large
vessel”.
[
336
]
In another case, an individual told a court
official that he had a bomb to blow the courthouse up and showed a device which
caused the courthouse to be evacuated; and in another case, an indigenous
protester blocked a private parcel of land and was convicted of mischief on the
basis that freedom of expression did not include a right to use someone else’s
property without permission and did not justify forms of expression that were
inconsistent with public order. [Citations omitted.]
[
337
]
Ultimately, the Court held at para 31 “that –
the accused’s acts constituted no more than communication of his message: “[the
message] did not constitute trespass or harassment … did not endanger anyone
and posed no potential risk of damage to the [complainant’s] property”. The
Accused’s sign was on his property.
[
338
]
Recently, the parameters of s. 430(7) were
discussed by the Alberta Court of Appeal in
R. v. Pawlowski
2024 ABCA
342
.  This was an appeal from
R. v. Pawlowski
,
2023 ABCJ 131
, the
accused attended at a site close to the Coutts blockade and gave a speech. The
speech was given to a group of people, some of whom were blockading a nearby
highway. The Accused did not participate in the mischief directly, but the
trial judge found his speech incited the protesters to carry on the blockade or
carry on the mischief. The accused was therefore found guilty of inciting
mischief contrary to
sections 22
and
430 (1)
(c) of the
Criminal code
.  The
accused appealed his conviction, arguing the trial judge erred in finding his
speech amounted to inciting mischief and in not finding s 429(2) or s. 430(7)
of the criminal code applicable.
[
339
]
The Alberta Court of Appeal dismissed the
Appeal. A further Appeal was made by the Accused to the Supreme Court of
Canada, leave to appeal was denied March 27, 2025.
[
340
]
In the Appellant decision the Court wrote
commencing at para 35-38 “The trial judge said his conclusion that the
appellant intended to incite the protesters to continue the blockade did not
logically allow him to also conclude that the appellant’s actions were solely
communicative:
Pawlowski
at paras 61–64. On appeal, the appellant argues
that this does not follow. The appellant argued that this reasoning was
contrary to the direction in
R v Tremblay
,
2010 ONCA 469
at para
16
[Tremblay] that section 430(7) “only comes into play – by definition – where it
is applied to communication that would otherwise be culpable as mischief”.
[
341
]
The Court at para 36 stated “The Ontario Court
of Appeal in Tremblay stated that for section 430(7) to apply, “the
communication of information will already carry with it the willful intention
or purpose to interrupt or interfere with the lawful use or enjoyment of
property, or recklessness in that regard”: Tremblay at para
17
. Therefore, it
held, where section 430(7) speaks of a communication being “for the purpose
only of... communicating information”, that should include “communication with
the intention of accomplishing some other purpose as a consequence”, including
a “willful intent to interfere” with property:
Tremblay
at paras
26,
27
”. Essentially, it this reasoning in Tremblay that the accused rely on in the
case at bar.
[
342
]
The Alberta Court of Appeal distinguished
Tremblay
saying at para
37
“
Tremblay
was a case about non-physical mischief
involving two neighbors. One parked a broken-down van near his property line
with the other. The van had written on it, “I am not responsible for your
basement floods”. This resulted in cancelling an open house which affected the
sale of the other neighbour’s home. The neighbour was charged with mischief. He
testified that his use of the van was only to communicate a message to the
complainants. The Ontario Court of Appeal held that section 430(7) applied
because the actions of the accused were solely for the purpose of communicating
information, even though the intended result of that communication may have
been interference with property:
Tremblay
at paras
21, 31
.
[
343
]
At para 38 “Although the court allowed for
intended mischief as a consequence, it emphasized that the communication could
not be for some entirely different purpose (
Tremblay
at para
28
):
[
344
]
“Of course, the communication must be peaceful
and non-violent, to be entitled to protection. And it must not simply be a mask
or subterfuge for conduct that is not solely communicative and that has some
entirely different purpose. This line will not always be easily drawn and will
depend upon the circumstances of the case.”
[
345
]
The court identified a number of cases where
protesters attended at certain places and physically interfered with the use of
property as examples of conduct that went beyond attendance at a site for the
purpose of only communicating information:
Tremblay
at paras
29-31
,
citing
R v Tan
, 15 BCAC 231,
1992 CanLII 312 (BCCA)
,
R v Conforti
,
8 WCB (2d) 106, [1989] OJ No 3151 (QL) (ONPC)
,
R v Drainville
,
1991 CanLII 13897 (ON CJ)
, 5 CR
(4th) 38, [1991] OJ No 340 (ONCJ). As the purpose was not “solely
communicative”, section 430(7) did not apply in those cases.”
[
346
]
In
Pawlowski
, the accused did not
testify and allow himself to be cross-examined on his intent and, therefore,
intent had to be inferred by the trial judge. The trial judge did not find the
appellant attended for a purpose that was “solely communicative”. The Judge
found that the accused “intended to incite the audience to continue the
blockade” and that his “comments were designed to spur on the protesters to
continue the blockade”.  In other words, the appellant’s intention was to
incite others to continue physically interfering with the highway. This was a
fundamentally different intention than the “solely communicative” intention at
issue in
Tremblay
.
[
347
]
At Paragraph 40, the Court writes “The appellant
cites additional cases where individuals picketing or protesting, but only
communicating information, led the courts to conclude that they were not guilty
of mischief:
R v Dooling
, [1994] NJ No 390 (QL),
1994 CanLII 10215 (Nfld
SC)
;
R v Lévesque
,
2022 QCCA 510
,
R v Pearson
,
43 WCB (2d) 205,
[1999] MJ No 311 (QL) (MBPC)
. None of those cases dealt with physical actions
of interference with property or inciting others to commit mischief pursuant to
section 22
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
348
]
The Court of Appeal found there was no error
with the trial judge holding that his conclusion as to intent was inconsistent
with finding that the appellant had attended Coutts “for the purpose only of...
communicating information” within the meaning of section 430(7).The conviction
was upheld.
[
349
]
Mr. Pawlowski, sought leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court of Canada primarily on the basis that the Appellate Court erred
in their interpretation of
Tremblay
, arguing that this was an important
issue of national importance that warranted reviewed by the Supreme Court of
Canada. However, leave to appeal was denied on March 27, 2025.
[
350
]
In
R. v McCann
, Justice Johnson found the
defence did not apply as the purpose of the activity was not simply to
communicate a political idea or to voice a protest, the purpose was to halt the
removal of Cattle from the Frontenac Institution.
[
351
]
Defence in their submissions relies on the
decision of
R. v. Wagner
2010 O.J no. 5018 (OCJ)
. In
Wagner
, the
accused attended an abortion clinic carrying a bouquet of flowers. On leaving
the clinic a nurse encountered the accused and recognized her from the day
before at another clinic where she was employed. The Nurse returned to the
clinic and alerted staff. The accused followed, she was advised she had to
leave, she did not leave but remained outside in an area open to the public and
left pamphlets behind. Her presence led to the clinic closing for a short
period of time. The court concluded that it was a confluence of other activity
that led to the decision to close the clinic. The Court found her conduct
objectively to be passive and could justify the closing of the clinic.  The Court
looked at the context of her encounter with the nurse, there was no aggression,
no threats and no physical contact. The Court found her acts in the context of
what occurred were for the purpose of communication only, even though her
actions constituted mischief as they interfered with the enjoyment of the
property.
[
352
]
Defence in this case argue but if Ms. Lich is in
any way linked to the conduct of the protesters in the downtown core that it
was one of many factors that led to the gridlock that it was not the
contributing factor, and the defence should apply.
[
353
]
In this case, one of ways the mischief was
carried out to which the Accused were either principals or aiders or abettors,
was the use of horns. Clearly the purpose of horns was to bring attention to
the protest, and to aggravate the enjoyment of those around. Honking a horn is
not an expression or communication. A horn is not an expression of any great
thought.
[
354
]
I note at par 40 of
Pawlowski
, the
Appellate Court notes “the appellant cites additional cases where individuals
picketing or protesting, but only communicating information, led the courts to
conclude that they were not guilty of mischief. [Citations omitted] None of
those cases dealt with physical actions of interference with property or
inciting others to commit mischief pursuant to
s. 22
of the
Criminal Code
“
[
355
]
In the case at bar, the words of Ms. Lich, were
markedly similar to that of Mr. Pawlowski. He told his audience they should not
dare break the line, don’t lose your momentum, here is your opportunity to hold
the fort, do not break the line. Don’t do it. Ms. Lich in numerous speeches –
implored persons to come stand with us, repeated phrases like “Hold the line”, “be
strong”, “no matter what hold the line”. She implored people to donate to keep
truckers in Ottawa as we are here for the long haul. February 14, on Parliament
Hill surrounded by thousands of persons and trucks on Wellington St., she said
“Lastly to our truckers and friends on Parliament Hill. Do not give in to fear
and threats. Your courage has already exceeded our expectations and inspired an
international movement. Be strong, show kindness. Love will defeat hate. Hold
the line.”
[
356
]
In the context of where those words were spoken,
on parliament Hill where in the back drop, trucks were blocking roads in the
area, where there were physical actions of interference with property and where
the audience was supporters, truckers and demonstrators those words had the
intended purpose to stir up or incite the audience to continue the mischief, I
cannot find that the purpose was solely communicative . As noted in
Tremblay
,
the word can’t be a mask or subterfuge for conduct that is not solely
communicative and that has some entirely different purpose such as to keep the
streets blocked to keep the pressure on the government to end the COVID
mandates.
[
357
]
As in
R. v Pawlowski
, Ms. Lich and Mr.
Barber were not merely engaging in political speech, rather they were inciting
Freedom Convoy Protestors to continue their ongoing blockade of downtown Ottawa
inciting criminal mischief to put pressure on the government to drop COVID
restrictions. I find the defence under s. 430(7) thus does not apply.
Intimidation
[
358
]
The offence of intimidation is defined in
section 423
of the
Criminal Code
, as follows: 423 (1) Everyone is guilty
of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term of not more than
five years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction who,
wrongfully and without lawful authority, for the purpose of compelling another
person to abstain from doing anything that he or she has a lawful right to do,
or to do anything that he or she has a lawful right to abstain from doing, ….
(g)blocks or obstructs a highway.
[
359
]
Exception (2) A person who attends at or near or
approaches a dwelling-house or place, for the purpose only of obtaining or
communicating information, does not watch or beset within the meaning of this
section.
Offence
of Intimidation –
Section 423(1)
(g) – Counts 2 and 5
[
360
]
Section 423(1)
(g) of the
Criminal Code
,
R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46 (“the Code”) in essence makes it an offence to block or
obstruct a highway with the intent to intimidate or compel someone to act or
abstain from something they have the lawful right to do. The Blocking of a road
or highway will be intimidation if it’s done with the intent to compel someone
into taking or not taking a specific action that they have the lawful right to
do .
[
361
]
In Count 2, the Accused
are charged with counselling the offence of Intimidation by the Blocking or
Obstructing of Roads and Highways contrary to s. 464(a) the Crown to prove that
Chris Barber and Tamara Lich counselled to commit the offence of Intimidation
contrary to
section 464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
. In Count 5, the Crown must the
show the accused wrongfully intimidated persons by engaging in conduct
proscribed in
s. 423(1)
(g) blocking or obstructing a highway.
[
362
]
This offence is often engaged in relation to
protest or strike activity. Many of the reported case deal with blocking roads
to prevent logging or other development often on indigenous lands, where colour
of right or ownership of the land is argued. The Crown must establish beyond a
reasonable doubt that the criminal act of intimidation occurred, and that the
accused was a party to it.
[
363
]
In
R. v. Stockley
(1977),
1977 CanLII 2116 (NL CA)
, 36 C.C.C. (2d)
387 (Nfld. C.A.), two accused appealed their convictions for intimidation by
blocking or obstructing a highway (formerly
s. 381(1)
(g) of the
Code
) after it
was found that they – along with a crowd numbering in approximately 50 to 70
people – prevented a vehicle from proceeding along a road during a labour
strike. The grounds of appeal advanced were that the trial judge erred in
finding the road was a highway within the meaning of the Code as the road was a
company road, but it was one over which the public had a right of access. The
second issue was whether the accused did in fact block or obstruct it
(Stockley, at pp. 1-2). In dismissing the appeal, the Newfoundland Court of
Appeal held that the Crown only needed to prove the accused’s association with
the group who obstructed the roadway in question (
Stockley
, at p. 2):
[
364
]
An important element here is that the mob or
group of people surrounded the vehicle, did damage to it and made threatening
gestures.
[
365
]
In
R. v. Sauls
,
2002 BCPC 638
(affirmed,
2004 BCSC 1476
), four accused were convicted of intimidation by blocking or
obstructing a highway after they, along with others, set-up a roadblock on a
two-lane road that led in and out of a resort. The roadblock was erected in
protest of the development and expansion of the resort. The roadblock
effectively halted traffic in and out of the resort for a period of
approximately three or more hours. During this time, protesters communicated
their reasons for the blockade, negotiated, and sometimes argued with the
individuals affected by it. Notwithstanding the fact that some vehicles were
permitted passage – for example, tour busses or ambulance, a considerable
amount of traffic backed up (
Sauls
, at para. 8). Following some
negotiation with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the protesters eventually
removed the roadblock and proceeded to march onto the site of the development
(Sauls
,
at para. 9). All accused were found to have participated in the roadblock, as
well as prevented a developer from operating machinery at the site of the
development
(Sauls
, at para. 10). Their defence of colour of right was
rejected by the court as having no air of reality in the circumstances (
Sauls
,
at para. 60). In convicting the accused, the court stated that the “police had
reasonable grounds to make arrests and dismantle the roadblock upon their
arrival; instead, they showed restraint and patience with the protesters,
attempting to negotiate an end to the blockade. The conduct of the protesters
was marked by aggression, intimidation and inflammatory language” (
Sauls
,
at para. 62).
[
366
]
The key component here appears to be the
conduct of the protestors was aggression, intimidation and inflammatory
language.
[
367
]
The Ontario Court of Appeal in R. v Boast
2017 ONCA 602 (CanLII)
,
dealt with the offence of Intimidation under
s. 423(1)
(b). In this case the
accused was charged that he did wrongfully and without lawful authority, for
the purpose of compelling the complainant to proceed in public without fear,
intimidate by threats that punishment would be inflicted on the complainant
contrary deception 423(1) (b). The Court agreed that the accused’s purpose in
attempting to intimidate the complainant is one of the essential ingredients of
the offence. And the onus rests upon the Crown to prove the Accused’s purpose
beyond a reasonable doubt. At par 10 the Court said that
s. 423 (1)
(b)
specifically requires, as an essential element, in addition to a finding that
the accused attempted to intimidate a person, that the attempted intimidation
had been for the purpose of compelling another person to abstain from doing
anything that she (or he) has a lawful right to do.
[
368
]
In
R. v Martin
2006 BCSC 1874 (CanLII)
, the
accused was charged with both Mischief and Intimidation under
s. 423(1)
(a).
The Crown directed a stay of the charge of Mischief and the trial proceed on
the charge of Intimidation. The issue on appeal was the
mens rea
of
Intimidation. At para 14 the court says “it will be seen as a specific intent
offence that is; it requires proof, not only of what the accused did, but as
well, the purpose in doing it. … That purpose must be to compel another person
to abstain from doing something she had the right to do or something she had
the right to abstain from.
[
369
]
The Crown argue the Freedom
Convoy attempted to pressure and intimidate the government to withdraw its
COVID-19 mandates. The method of achieving this, it was argued, was to disrupt
and occupy downtown Ottawa, in part by blocking highways and thereby pressuring
residents and businesspeople in that area. They the
protesters were attempting by their presence in Ottawa, as Ms. Lich and Mr.
Barber stated in many online social media statements, news conferences to
pressure, convince the government to end its COVID19 mandates. Of that there is
no issue.
[
370
]
That being said, the Crown relies on the same
evidence with respect to the charge of Intimidation and the offence of
counselling to commit Intimidation as they relied on for the offences of
Mischief see their written submissions para 82 to 101. They ask the court to
consider the context and to accept the evidence of the civilian witnesses, city
officials and the PLT officers and to find the roads were blocked and the
parties knew or had to know that had occurred.
[
371
]
They say the evidence
establishes is beyond a reasonable doubt the Barber and Lich were part of a
group of people who unlawfully and without authority blocked and obstructed
streets throughout the offence period for the purpose of compelling the
government to end COVID-19 mandates. They say that there are multiple routes to
liability as both co-principles, aiders and abettors.
[
372
]
When I reviewed those submissions, I felt I was
having a Deja-Vu moment, because I had read that same evidence and the same
reasoning for the offence of mischief. In fact, I have accepted that evidence
and that reasoning in finding the Accused guilty of Mischief.
[
373
]
So, either the charges of Intimidation should
be stayed because, it the same underlying evidence as the offence of mischief
or we must carefully examine what makes the charge of Intimidation different.
[
374
]
I do note in the decision of
R. v Manuel
2008 BCCA 143
at para
6
The appellants were charged with Mischief, contrary to
s. 430(1)
(c) of the
Code
, as well as Intimidation by blocking roads. The Court
found the evidentiary foundation of the mischief by blocking roads and the
intimidation by blocking roads to have the same factual underpinning and stayed
the charge of Intimidation following the trial, in accordance with
R. v. Kienapple
1974 CanLII 14 (SCC)
, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 729
[
375
]
The word “Intimidation” is by definition is
different from mischief. The Cambridge English Dictionary defines intimidation
as follows “the act of frightening or threatening someone, usually in order to
persuade them to do something that you want them to do. Mischief in law is
wilful destruction of property, rendering it dangerous or useless or
obstructing someone’s lawful use or enjoyment of property.
[
376
]
When you examine the cases of Intimidation
referred to above and relied on by the Crown, they all have elements of
threatening or aggression or violent behaviour.
[
377
]
S. 423 (1) (a) to (f) all
contain that type of menacing of threatening behavior often in the context of
criminal harassment and or, watching besetting type behavior.
[
378
]
Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber
consistently said this was to be a peaceful protest. There are no messages, Tik
TOK or otherwise where they used violence or threats of same. They did not incite
or aid supporters in engaging in intimidating, aggressive or threatening behaviors
by their mischief or blocking roads.  they were not trying to intimidate the
downtown residents.
[
379
]
The conduct of Ms. Lich and
Mr. Barber in my view does not fall within what is intended by the count of
Intimidation s. 423 (1) (g), the conduct which interfered with the use and
enjoyment of property was not intended to intimidate by violence or otherwise
to persuade the Government of Canada or the Prime Minister to drop COVID
restrictions.  There is no evidence the accused or the Freedom Convoy intended
to intimidate. I have found that the tactic of mischief was used to highlight
the issue and pressure the Government.
[
380
]
Similarly, there is no
evidence of counselling same. If I am wrong, then the counts of Intimidation
and Counselling to commit Intimidation same should be stayed as the evidentiary
foundation is the same for both offences.
[
381
]
I find the accused, Tamara
Lich and Chris Barber not guilty of the offences of Intimidation and
Counselling to commit Intimidation.
Obstructing Police Counts 3 and 4
[
382
]
The Accused are charged in count 3 that between
January 26 and February 19, 2022, they did counsel to commit the offence of Obstruct
Police contrary to
s. 464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
and in count 4, that they
did resist or willfully obstruct a peace officer in the execution of his duty or
any person lawfully acting in aid of such an officer, contrary to
s. 129
(a) of
the Criminal Code. The Crown, in their written submissions, says the issue is
can the court find beyond a reasonable that the accused obstructed the police
conducting the removal orders February 18 and onward.
[
383
]
Counsel has conceded that during February 18 to
20 the police were acting in execution of their duty.
[
384
]
In
R. v Tortolano
(1975)
1975 CanLII 1248 (ON CA)
, 28 C.C.C 562 ONCA,
the court set out the elements of the offence of Obstruct: That there was an
obstruction of an officer; that the obstructing affected the officers in the
execution of a duty that they were then executing; and that the person
obstructing did so willfully. Importantly, obstruction can still be made out
even if it does not “wholly prevent” the officer’s execution of their duty
(Tortolano, at para.
12
).
[
385
]
In
R. v Nasser
[2002] O.J. No 6073 at
para 40
, Justice Parfett held that the act or omission constituting the offence
must obstruct the officers in an appreciable way and not in a fleeting
fashion.  It need not amount to a major inconvenience of the officers.
[
386
]
In
R. v. Yussuf
,
2014 ONCJ 143
, at para.
52
, Paciocco J., as he then was, explained the essential elements of the
offence in the following way:
[
387
]
Element 1 – There must be peace officer who is
in the execution of a lawful duty as a peace officer when he or she is obstructed.
[
388
]
Element 2 – The accused person must know or be
willfully blind to the fact that this person is a peace officer and must know
or be willfully blind to the act the officer is executing.
[
389
]
Element 3 – The alleged obstructive conduct must
be an intentional act by the accused person, or an intentional omission by the
accused person, constituting a failure by the accused to comply with a legal duty.
[
390
]
Element 4 – That act or omission must make it
more difficult for a peace officer to carry out their duties; and
[
391
]
Element 5 – The accused person must intend to
make it more difficult for the police to execute their duty.
[
392
]
In
Yusuf
at para 48, Justice Paciocco writes,
“In other words, the accused must intend the act or omission that amounts to the
obstruction. I agree that this is all that is needed.” He later states in the
same paragraph, “In my view, what must be willed is the outcome of making it
more difficult for the police to carry out their duties.”
[
393
]
In
Yusuf
at para 49, Justice
Paciocco further writes, “In other words, the offence is only committed by
those who act intentionally and do so intending to make it more difficult for
the police to execute their duty. With respect, I therefore disagree with the
conclusion expressed in
R. v Bentley 2003
Carswell 1994, where it was
said that “it is sufficient that the offender has the general intent to do an
act which has, in fact, obstructed a peace officer. This aggressive reading of
the section does not, in my view, serve its purpose of preventing offences against
the administration of law and justice. …”
[
394
]
In
R. v. Blackman
,
2024 ONSC 3595
,
Justice Phillips, a summary conviction appeal case relating to a Freedom Convoy
demonstrator, Evan Blackman agreed that the five essential elements noted above
are the elements of the charge of obstructing a peace officer.
[
395
]
Mr. Blackman was acquitted at trial, and the
Crown appealed his acquittals. The trial judge held that there was reasonable
doubt on the question of whether the accused knew he had to leave the
demonstration area and was not satisfied that he had been told to leave or
given sufficient opportunity to do so (Blackman, at para.
6
). Effectively, the
trial judge characterized the offence of obstruct as requiring proof of a
breach of some clearly articulated police order or instruction (Blackman, at
para.
6
). In granting the appeal, Phillips J. held that this characterization
was in error and no such proof was required to make out the obstruct offence.
[
396
]
The Court said in paragraph 10, “That in the
circumstances, the act of kneeling at the front of the protester line could be
construed as a willful act of obstruction. By kneeling, as here, a person takes
his legs out of commission, rendering himself non-ambulatory. Mr. Blackman
arguably wished to convert his body into an obstacle for the police to have to
work around, to perhaps have to move with lifting force rather than be ushered
along with words.”
[
397
]
The police officers involved in the removal of
protestors were clearly acting in the lawful execution of their duties. They
were involved as part of a legitimate police operation and were acting in
execution of their duties at common law to preserve the peace, prevent crime
and protect life and property.
[
398
]
As indicated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R.
v. Mann
,
2004 SCC 52
, a case regarding the scope of police powers and
investigative detention,   the court at para 26 indicated that police powers
are recognized as deriving from the nature and scope of police duties,
including those at common law, “the preservation of the peace, prevention of
crime and the protection of life and property” (Deadman at par 32) Other duties
are set out by federal and provincial statutes including the
Criminal Code
.
[
399
]
Both Mr. Barber and Ms. Lich had been arrested
by the time the police commenced the removal of trucks and demonstrators on
February 18, 2022, so they were not personally involved in the obstruction of police
during the “removal action”.
Count 4 –
Obstruction of Justice as Aiders or Abettors
[
400
]
The Crown argues their guilt in the obstruction
can be grounded both as principals and as parties. As principals, because
metaphorically they stood shoulder to shoulder with those who remained downtown
February 18 onward and as parties because each of their acts of encouragement
for the protestors to “hold the line” or to remain in place, etc.
[
401
]
The Crown argues that, notwithstanding
requests by police for demonstrators to leave and warnings of criminal
liability that could attach to those who remained, many demonstrators remained
in place and instead obstructed police efforts to maintain public order and
prevent the continuation of criminal offences. The Crown says there is direct evidence
that both Lich and Barber circulated publicly throughout the downtown and
influenced the placement of vehicles and encouraged demonstrators to “Hold the
Line and remain in place.  The Crown says the effect, or their influence, continued
even after their arrest.
[
402
]
This court heard evidence about the removal
operation from AC/Sgt Blonde who observed the public order unit move from
Laurier Ave to Nicholas Street towards Rideau to Sussex, continuing west to
Parliament Hill. He was behind the Public Order Units who were pushing the
crowd or demonstrators westward. He described that some people were refusing to
move.
[
403
]
The Court also heard from Captain Etienne Martel,
who described the difficulty his squad had in clearing the street.  He
described the crowd’s resistance to move that when police tried to move forward,
the demonstrators would push back. He said they were not clearing. No
projectiles were thrown or anything. He agreed in cross-examination that there
were demonstrators singing and chanting the word “Freedom”.
[
404
]
In cross, he was shown other videos taken from
the same time (Exhibit 6 and 7) He agreed that during the removal, there were
police officers saying “Hold the Line” on the police radio. He said when he
relayed that phrase to his officers, it meant don’t move forward. Not to move.
We keep the line where we were up to.”
[
405
]
The evidence before this court is that both Ms.
Lich and Mr. Barber were entirely cooperative with police when they were
arrested. The video of Mr. Barber’s arrest shows him already cuffed and being
searched, asking someone to let his wife know. Ex. 135 Tab 62 pg. 12. Someone
says to him Hold the line, my friend. We are proud of you, although this
statement is hearsay, it is an example of what the phrase can mean.  In that context,
I find the phrase clearly meant “Stay strong” or “don’t give up”. It was not an
entreaty to obstruct the police. He went willingly.
[
406
]
On February 17, 2022, Ms. Lich was arrested.
There is a video posted on social media of the arrest. Ms. Lich was with others.
The officer queries: Miss Lich? TL: Yes, PO: How are you? TL I’m good, how are you?
PO: Can I talk to you for a second? Yes of course. PO: So, you’re going to be
placed under arrest. TL: Okay. PO2: (Talking to others in the group) Just ask
you to back up a little bit, just need you guys to back up, please. Just backup.
Thank you.  TL: My coat’s wet. PO Your coats wet? TL Yes. There is some
conversation with the others saying to arrest them too. … TL: See you later
guys. Sean Thiessen says Hold the Line: TL replies: Hold the Line “TL’s last
words are It’s all good, it’s all good. Be respectful. Thank you.”
[
407
]
There is no evidence that either Ms. Barber or
Mr. Barber acted as principals or personally obstructed the police in any way
at the time of their arrest. There is no evidence that Ms. Lich ever interacted
with police other than on the day of her arrest. Both Tamara Lich and Chris
Barber were in custody at the time of the police removal activity which
occurred commenced February 18, 2022
[
408
]
The issue is whether Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber respective
use of the phrases such “Hold the line, “love over Fear” or statements that the
Freedom Convoy was staying until mandates were removed before February 18, 2022,
were made with the intention to make it more difficult for police to execute
their duties. The effect was that they were aiders or abettors by inciting or
encouraging obstruction of police.
[
409
]
As examples of Mr. Barber’s encouragement, the
Crown points to Vol 2 Tab 4 Feb. 16 chat 584 “Police are getting heavy handed.
They’re handing out papers stating people must leave. At pg. 8.9 Mr. Barber says
“Hold the Line …How about we all get arrested. Also, on Feb
16 Ex. 135
Vol 1
Tab 51 at pg. 80. A person,” Mike” asks Chris Barber about getting a notice
from the police. Barber responds, “Hold the line. We are a peaceful protest”.
The fellow explains, he’s in a truck now, by me now with a camper at the
intersection. So, thinking some have tucked tails and left. Barber responds I’m
on my way. I’ll have the radio “Lots of lawyer shit today. Watch my TikTok. The
hearsay words of others are for narrative only.
[
410
]
The Crown also relies on the comments set out
respectively by Lich and Barber, found at paragraph 129 of their written
submissions. A review of these comments confirms they are iterations of hold
the line, for everyone who leaves or is arrested other people and trucks will
replace them, we will continue our protest until we see a clear path to the
elimination of Covid mandates.
[
411
]
In examining the evidence, it is also important to
consider specific statements made by each accused to their followers, asking
them to co-operate with law enforcement.
[
412
]
The evening before Ms. Lich’s arrest on
February 16, 2022, exhibit 59 on a Facebook live, Ms. Lich says, … You guys I
want you to stay strong. And I want you to continue to be unified. Spread the
love. You know? I have to ask you. I’ve seen people right, well maybe not
rightfully so, I, I can’t tell you what to do, but you know when you see
reporters in the streets, be kind and show them love.  … Show respect to our
police officers. A lot of these men and women, although I know it is not an
excuse, are just trying to feed their families. I said it from the start, and
I’ll say it again. Please pray for them and forgive them for they know not what
they do. At least I believe that (crying) “She says she says it is inevitable
that she will be arrested tomorrow. But says just stay peaceful. And the only
way this is going to succeed is from a place of love…. I pray you will make choices
based on love. We can only win this from love. “Keep love in your heart. Stay
strong. Stay unified. Stay proud. …. So, tomorrow is a new day. And I’m ready.
I am not afraid. And we’re going to hold the line. Thank you I love you guys
see you soon. “Time to stand together. If you can come to Ottawa and stand with
us fantastic, if you can’t pray for us” We make choices from Love and Choices
from fear. I choose to make choices form Love”.
[
413
]
The Crown argues that during the removal action seen
in video C0019 05:45 to 07:05 you hear a protestor say “Love over Fear” and you
see a drum and guitar playing in the background. The Crown says this phrase is
taken from Ms. Lich’s February 16 FB live video, suggesting the repeating of
this phrase shows her metaphorical reach to the protestors who did resist
arrest on February 18, 2022. In essence that she is with them in spirit,
standing shoulder to shoulder.
[
414
]
Mr. Barber also told his social media followers
to respect law enforcement. In Appendix A #1,2.9.12-13,15 Mr. Barber says to
his followers, “We do not engage. If they have a gun against your head, you ask
how you can comply. You remember, we are all peaceful. I’ve said it before,
I’ll say it again, they arrest you, put your hands behind your back and comply.
The only thing we need to do, and they are saying something's coming. When it does,
put your hands behind your back, take it like a man.”
[
415
]
In exhibit 104 in a Facebook video, Mr. Barber says:
“trying to open up a lane of traffic, trying to let police know we are acting
in good faith. Please, no matter what, work with law enforcement. This is one
of the world’s greatest rallies… we don’t need violence. We need peace. Keep
your eye on the prize. We need emergency lanes open at all times. Clear access
to ambulances and hospitals”
[
416
]
As noted at para 16 of
Mammolita
“Quite apart
from liability as a principal, a person may be guilty of willful obstruction
under (then) s. 387 (1) (c) if that person has aided or abetted another person
to commit the offence. In order to incur liability as an aider or abettor: (i)
there must be an act or omission of assistance or encouragement;(ii) the act
must be done or the omission take place with the knowledge that the crime will
be or is being committed and (iii) the act must be done or the omission for the
purpose or intention of assisting or encouraging the perpetrator in the
commission of the offence.”
[
417
]
The Crown argues that the act of assistance or
encouragement may be the metaphorical presence of the Accused as leaders of the
Freedom Convoy. The Crown points out that in
R. v. Mammolita
at par
16
, where
the Court writes “However the act of assistance or encouragement may be the
presence of the Accused at the scene of the crime during its commission, if the
aider or abettor is there for that purpose,
Dunlop and Sylvester
(1979)
1979 CanLII 20 (SCC)
, 47
C.C.C. (2d) 93 per Dickson J. pp 106,
R. v Clarkson
and others
(1971) 3
All E.R. 334
.  The strength of numbers may at times be an important source of
encouragement. Re A.C.S. (1969)
1969 CanLII 904 (QC CS)
, 7 C.R.N.S. 42 at pp 59-60.
[
418
]
The statement made in par 16 of
Mammolita
,
is made of course in the context someone can be present physically standing
shoulder to shoulder with others at a barricade and even though they do not say
or do anything, there very being there may be an act that amounts to
obstruction as the very presence of the person is itself an overt act. At par 12,
the court says that criminal liability only results if the act is done willfully.
[
419
]
When considering the liability of demonstrators
as aiders or abettors in a protest setting,
Mammolita
at para
17
, sets
out a. there must be an act or omission of assistance or encouragement; b. the
act must be done, or the omission take place for that purpose (i.e. with
intention) of assisting or c. encouraging the perpetrator in the commission of
the crime.
[
420
]
There must be a connection between the offence
and the acts of alleged aiding or abetting; the non-perpetrator’s conduct must
have the effect of assisting or encouraging the perpetrator in the commission
of the offence. Liability as an aider or abettor has both a conduct component
and a culpable mental state component. Both components tie the accessory’s
liability for the substantive crime to the actual commission of that crime by
another. Accessorial liability is not inchoate as per R. v. Dooley
2009 ONCA
910
para
116-117
.
[
421
]
We know neither Ms. Lich nor Mr. Barber was
physically present, as was the case in
Mammolita
. Ms. Lich never told
her followers to make it more difficult for the police.  Feb 16, she says “I
can’t tell you what to do…Show respect to our police officers”. Feb 17, when
she is being arrested, she responds to someone else saying Hold the Line,
responding with “Hold the Line, It’s all good, It’s all good. Be respectful.”
[
422
]
What the phrase “Hold the line” means is somewhat
contextual; figuratively to maintain your position or state of affairs, in some
cases it can be inferred to mean stay strong in your beliefs, stay and pursue
the purpose of the demonstration or don’t give up; in others remain in place or
at your line. Hold the line has been historically a phrase used by the military
and then adopted by striking miners strikes in the 1970’s.
[
423
]
I agree that this phrase became a rallying cry during
the Freedom Convoy protest. It was a phrase used by both Ms. Lich and Mr.
Barber. It was repeated by those on the street and was used during a speech on
Parliament Hill February 14, 2022, by former Premier of Newfoundland Brian Peckford,
who was a spokesman for the Canadian Convoy Truckers. (Ex 74) I accept it was a
rallying cry both for the purpose of the demonstration to end the COVID
mandates and the means to maintain your stay in Ottawa. Blocking the roadways or
maintaining the mischief is a distinct offence to obstruct justice. Inciting or
encouraging the ongoing state of affairs or mischief, yes, but not obstruction
of justice.
[
424
]
I do not find that the only inference that can
be made by the accused’s use of the terms is to encourage or incite others to commit
the offence   of obstruct the police in the execution of their duty or make it
more difficult for them to do so. The offence of obstruct peace officer has
five very specific elements as set out in
Yussuf
.
[
425
]
The Accused were not present during the removal
and complied in every respect with the police on their arrest, which was prior
to that date. When the words hold the line, etc were spoken, there was no
police action underway. The fact that they used this phrase as a rallying cry prior
to the police execution of the removal order, in the absence of more, cannot be
proven as an intentional act or encouragement to make it more difficult for
police to carry out their duties.
[
426
]
Each of the accused encouraged their followers
to co-operate with police if arrested, to respect police, be peaceful. There
are no words spoken where they suggested to make it difficult for police to do
their lawful duties. The actions of the Accused on their respective arrests
were consistent with what they told their followers; their actions led by
example.
[
427
]
I find the Crown has not met their burden of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the Accused either as principals or aider
or abettors did resist or willfully obstruct a peace officer in the execution
of their duty contrary to
s. 129
(a) of the
Criminal Code of Canada
.
Count 3 –
Counselling to Commit the offence of Obstruct Justice.
[
428
]
Count 3 in the Indictment alleges Mr. Barber and
Ms. Lich “did counsel to commit the indictable offence of Obstruct Police,
which offence was not committed contrary to
s. 464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
by
one or more persons, contrary to section 464, clause (a) of the Criminal Code.
[
429
]
Counselling is defined in
s. 22(3)
of the
Criminal
Code
and includes procuring, soliciting and inciting. In
Mugesera v Canada
2005 SCC 40
at para
63
, to incite means to urge, stir up or stimulate.
[
430
]
In
R. v Root
2008 ONCA 869
at para
83 and
84
, the Court of Appeal adopts the reasoning in
R. v Hamilton
and states,
“Counselling includes but is not limited to procuring, soliciting and inciting.
What is essential is an active inducement or advocacy, not merely the
description of the commission of an offence
.
R. v Hamilton
2005 SCC 47 (CanLII)
, [2005] 2
S.C.R 432 at para
15
,22 and 23:
R. v Sharpe
2001 SCC 2 (CanLII)
, [2001] 1 S.C.R 45 at para
56
.
In other words, the actus reus of counselling requires deliberate encouragement
or active inducement of the commission of a criminal offence.
Hamilton
at
para
29
[
431
]
The mental element or
mens rea
in counselling
is set out in
R. v. Hamilton
2005 SCC 47
, at para.
29
, the Supreme Court
of Canada held “in short, the actus reus for counselling is the deliberate
encouragement or active inducement of the commission of a criminal offence. And
the
mens rea
consists of nothing less than an accompanying intent or
conscious disregard of the substantial and unjustified risk inherent in the
counselling; that is, it must be shown that the accused either intended that
the offence counselled be committed or knowingly counselled the commission of
the offence while aware of the unjustified risk that the offence counselled was
in fact likely to be committed as result of the Accused conduct”
[
432
]
The issue is therefore whether Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber
counselled obstruction of police, as charged in count 3. I consider the
evidence of each of the accused set out above regarding count 4 on the
information as both counts on the information relate to the same time period,
February 18, to February 20, 2022, during the removal hearings.
[
433
]
Similarly, the law regarding the offence of Obstructing
Justice remains the same and is applicable to the offence of counselling to
commit the same offence. Did the statements of counselling create an
unjustified risk that police efforts to encourage protestors to leave the city
would be resisted and was it the accused specific intention to do so.
[
434
]
As noted, the videos or social media postings of
Ms. Lich and Mr. Barber shared with online followers repeatedly stated it was
to be a peaceful protest, that there must be no violence, they were not leaving
until the COVID mandates were lifted to “hold the line”. They also specifically
state that persons should respect and co-operate with police if there is to be
an arrest.
[
435
]
I have found that the phrase holds the line”
means different things depending on the context. I agree that it was a rallying
cry both for the purpose of the demonstration to end the COVID mandates and the
means used to stay in Ottawa. But blocking the roadways or maintaining the
mischief or Intimidation are separate and distinct offences with different
essential elements than the offence to obstruct justice.
[
436
]
I agree there was evidence of the counselling
or inciting or encouraging of the offence of mischief. Admonition to continue
to protest is not the same as admonition to obstruct police in the execution of
their duty. Particularly, given the statements of the respective accused to
ensure no violence, peaceful, lawful protest, to co-operate with police if
arrested and to respect police, they are just doing their job and given their
own actions on arrest etc.
[
437
]
I cannot find that the Crown has proven beyond
a reasonable doubt the
mens rea
of the offence. I cannot find accompanying
intent or conscious disregard of the substantial and unjustified risk is made
out for the offence of counselling the obstruction of justice given those
statements by the Accused. Both Accused will be found not guilty of both Counts
3 and 4 on the information.
Disobey
Court Order s. 127 of the
Criminal Code
[
438
]
Mr. Barber is charged with counselling to commit
the offence of disobey court order contrary to
s.464
(a) of the
Criminal Code
. The
order may be either a civil or criminal court order. Section 127 states “Everyone
who, without lawful excuse, disobeys a lawful order made by a court of justice…
other than an order for the payment of, is, unless a punishment or other mode of
proceeding is expressly provided by law, guilty of an indictable offence or an
offence punishable by summary conviction.
[
439
]
The law of counselling set out above at para 473
to 475 above applies following the dicta of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Hamilton regarding the
actus reas
and
mens rea
of counselling pursuant
to
s. 22 (1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
440
]
In
R. v Gibbons
, Trotter J., as he then
was, considered a conviction appeal related to the enforceability of an
interlocutory injunction regarding protest activities around Toronto abortion
clinics. In dismissing the appeal, Trotter J. addressed the scope of s. 127 (
Gibbons
,
at para. 11):
[
441
]
The provision is broad in its scope, applying to
orders made under provincial and federal legislation by both courts and
tribunals. The availability of the inherent power to punish for contempt is not
a “punishment or other mode of proceedings expressly provided by law”: see
R.
v. Clement
(1981),
1981 CanLII 212 (SCC)
, 61 C.C.C. (2d) 449 (S.C.C.). Accordingly, the ability to
supervise a court order through the contempt power is not a bar to a charge
being laid under s. 127. This was recently confirmed by the Supreme Court
in
R. v. Gibbons
(2012),
2012 SCC 28 (CanLII)
, 283 C.C.C. (3d) 295 (S.C.C.), a case relating to the
identical charge laid against Ms. Gibbons within days of the charge in this
case. [Emphasis added.]
[
442
]
In a subsequent appeal by Mr. Gibbons following
a further conviction under s. 127 for breaching an interlocutory and permanent
injunction related to protest activities, Trotter J. stated that “[i]individuals
cannot be subject to criminal liability for breaching the spirit or intention
of a court order (whether it is a probation order, bail order, prohibition
order or a civil injunction); liability only lies where it has been proved that
a specific term of an order has been infringed (
R. v. Gibbons
,
2014 ONSC
4269
, at para.
14
).
[
443
]
Applying the dicta of
R. v Hamilton
at
para
29
, the
actus reus
being the deliberate encouragement or active
inducement by the accused to commit the offence of disobey court order. The
Crown must prove that Mr. Barber counselled the breach of Justice McLean’s
order of February 7, 2022. It must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Barber’s post deliberately encouraged or actively induced the commission of
breaching the court order.
[
444
]
The
mens rea
consists of “nothing less”
than an accompanying intent or conscious disregard of the substantial and
unjustified risk inherent in the counselling, it must be shown that the accused
either intended that the offence counselled be committed or knowingly counselled
the commission of the offence while aware of the unjustified risk that the
offence counselled was in fact likely to be committed as result of the accused
conduct.
[
445
]
The court order in question is the interlocutory
injunction granted by MacLean J. on February 7, 2022, and subsequently
continued on February 16, 2022. The order was granted in a civil proceeding
commenced by residents of downtown Ottawa. Chris Barber was a defendant named
in the application and was represented by counsel at the hearings. His counsel,
Keith Wilson played a key role in drafting the order and made representations
to the court regarding the injunction.
[
446
]
The order of Justice McLean dated February 7, 2022,
is Ex 122(b). The order prohibits any person having notice of the order “from
using air horns or train horns other than those on a motor vehicle of a
municipal fire department, in the geographic location anywhere in Ottawa, in
the vicinity of downtown Ottawa being any streets north of Highway 417,
otherwise known as the Queensway for 10 days from the date of this order.
[
447
]
The order also requires Mr. Barber and three
other named Freedom Convoy leaders to communicate this order through their
social media channels and other channels to all persons they know are or who
have been participating in the Freedom Convoy Protest in Ottawa, Ontario, from
January 28, 2022, to the present day.
[
448
]
The order further provides that, “provided the
terms of this order are complied with, the defendants and other persons remain
at liberty to engage in a peaceful, lawful, and safe protest.”
[
449
]
Counsel for Mr. Barber argues that the order must
be clear and free from ambiguity and that the defendant must readily be able to
determine their obligations and responsibilities. A review of the Order of
February 7 is clear and not ambiguous.
[
450
]
Counsel also argues that the context and timing
of the video must be examined in light of other social media posts and texts that
Mr. Barber posted leading up to Tik TikTok video.
[
451
]
Further, the Defence counsel argues that we
don’t have the entire statement. There was no cross-examination when this
exhibit was tendered to suggest that we do not have the entire TikTok statement
posted by Mr. Barber. Defence counsel in submissions suggested that there is no
evidence the order was explained to him and that this was a true misunderstanding.
[
452
]
Mr. Barber did not testify at this trial as is
his right, but it means I have no other evidence except the statement and the context
in which it was made to evaluate the statement and its content. In the absence of
testimony from Mr. Barber the inferences suggested by counsel are speculative
and in fact contrary to the evidence.
[
453
]
The video the Crown relies on to support this
count is found at Exhibit 24. This is a TikTok video posted by Mr. Barber, who
had a wide following on TikTok by his own admission. There is no evidence that
this is not the complete posting made by Mr. Barber.
[
454
]
The video states as follows: Chris Barber says, “Hi
kids. Live from Ottawa. So, just want to go over a few things. We’ve got a lot
of rumors, a lot of rumblings about, um, internet blackouts coming, and riot
police are coming, indications are probably saying Thursday at, our our,
earliest blah blah, blah. Maybe we’re just giving everything up for law enforcement
here, but then they’re probably watching and listening to us anyway. Uh,
rumours are, they have the phones tapped, la, la, la. This is our Canadian
Fuckin government. I thought for a minute we were in China there, and then all
of a sudden, it’s “Boom”. So, this word is going out to everybody in trucks
around the city. Right now, there’s an order in place to keep the horns down,
horns have to be quiet, okay? If you see a large, vast majority of police
coming towards your truck like they do, like, the, the .like they are building
up… Guys, lock that door, crawl into that bunk. But before you do that, grab
that horn switch and don’t let go. Let that fuckin’ horn go no matter what time
it is, and let it roll as long as possible until they’re bustin your fuckin
windows down. We want everybody to know when the time comes, and this is the
best way to do it when that happens. Do that guy, please. Let that horn go.
Don’t let it go. When we see that mass force of police coming at you. Okay guys?
Be Strong. We’ve got this. We’ve got more announcements coming up. It’s going
to be pretty cool here. We’ll see if we can fire some shit up”.
[
455
]
On February 9 there is a text exchange with Cst.
Bach. Barber texts “I have a few guys ready to pull out today from the downtown
core. These rumours of a full-scale tactical sweep on Thursday better be
bullshit. The world is watching very, very closely, and it will not be received
well. Bach responds, saying she wasn’t aware of any kind of sweep. She would keep
him informed.
[
456
]
Defence counsel suggest that it can be inferred
from these posts that there was a buildup of fear of being swarmed by a mass of
riot police and that this created a dangerous and hazardous situation. With all
due respect, I must disagree.
[
457
]
Police coming to arrest is not the type of
dangerous or hazardous situation that might authorize the use of the horn and
disobeying the court order. A review of the transcript of the proceedings before
Justice McLean in which the Accused's counsel participated indicates that what
was discussed was if the truck is driving on the road and a child darts across
the road, then using the horn would be warranted. That is the perfect example
of using the horn for its intended purpose, which is to prevent an injury or
harm, not to warn others that police were moving in to enforce.
[
458
]
A review of Mr. Barber's TikTok video shows that
he is aware of both the existence and terms of Justice McLean’s order. He says in
ex 24,” Right now, there’s an order in place to keep the horns down, horns have
to be quiet, okay?”
[
459
]
Barber acknowledged in texts that he had a
sizeable following on Tik Tok, and he says he wants this information conveyed
to everyone in trucks around the city. A review of the post clearly shows
Barber intended the horns to be sounded at the sight of riot police “if you see
a large, vast majority of police coming towards your truck like they do” He
asks everyone to lock the door, crawl into the bunk grab the horn and don’t let
do.
[
460
]
The only purpose is to alert others, as he says,
“We want everybody to know when the time comes, and this is the best way to do
it. Mr. Barber’s statement shows that he has an awareness that there is an
order in place and that the prohibition is on the use of the horns. Barber says,
“horns have to be quiet, okay?” He tells his followers to raise the alarm by
using your horn. He says Do that, please. Let that horn go. He repeats, “do
that, please”.
[
461
]
I find this statement shows a deliberate
encouragement to disobey the order in place, and that there is an accompanying intent
or conscious disregard of the substantial and unjustified risk inherent in the
counselling. I find both the
actus reus
and
mens rea
of the offence
of counselling to disobey a court order are made out. The Accused, Chris Barber,
will be found guilty of count 7 on the information.
Summary
[
462
]
For the reasons set out above, The Accused
Tamara Lich and Chris Barber are each found Guilty of Count 6 Mischief, Count 1
– Counselling to Commit Mischief is therefore stayed as requested by the Crown,
Count 5 – Intimidation Accused are each found Not Guilty and on Count 2 –
Counselling to commit Intimidation – Each of the Accused is found Not Guilty.
Count 7 – Disobey Court Order, Mr. Barber only is charged. He is found
Guilty.
Released:
Signed: Justice Heather Perkins-McVey