WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v. Kim
, 2025 ONCJ 579
DATE:  2025·October·28
COURT
FILE No.:  4810 998 24 48108240-00
BETWEEN:
ONTARIO  COURT  OF
   JUSTICE
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
GEONWHI KIM
Before
  Justice Peter Scrutton
Heard
  on September 25, 26 and 29, 2025
Reasons
  for Judgment released on October 28, 2025
M. Friedman..............................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
W. Jaksa............................................................................................................... 
   for the defendant
Scrutton J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
Geonwhi (Eric) Kim
is charged with one count of sexual assault and one count of forcible
confinement in relation to R.V.  It is accepted by both parties that the defendant
and complainant had their first and only date at his apartment on March 1,
2024; that when he first tried to kiss her, she pushed him away; that she told
him she did not come there for sex; that they subsequently had sex, immediately
after which she angrily left his apartment; and that the following day, she
confronted him over text about forcing himself on her, an allegation that he
did not deny in response and at least appeared to admit.  R.V. testified that
the defendant was sexually aggressive with her that night and forced her to
have intercourse despite her repeatedly telling him that she did not want to.  Mr.
Kim testified that R.V. was an active, willing participant to their sexual
contact.
[
2
]
Both parties
acknowledge that there is no real way to understand the evidence of either
witness as giving rise to an air of reality about mistaken belief in
communicated consent.  The real question at this trial is whether the Crown has
proved beyond a reasonable doubt that R.V. did not consent to the sexual
intercourse that occurred that evening.
THE
EVIDENCE
R.V.’s
Account
[
3
]
R.V. and the
defendant “matched” on the Tinder dating app on February 28, 2024.  The next
day they began to message back and forth and eventually made plans to get
together that afternoon.  R.V. planned to have a short date, potentially for
coffee or a trip to the gym.  She arrived at Mr. Kim’s apartment, which he
shared with a roommate who was absent, around 5 p.m.
[
4
]
R.V. had expected
they would go out but was content to stay at the apartment. They chatted about
all manner of things and the defendant made her dinner.  She was interested in
him and they discussed a second date.  While they were sitting on the couch
after dinner, Mr. Kim leaned in to kiss her.  R.V. pushed him back with two
hands, asked what he was doing, and explained that she did not kiss on the
first date.  He accepted this and backed off.  She told him she was not on the
dating app for hookups (sex) and that was not why she had come to his
apartment.
[
5
]
Mr. Kim initially
appeared to respect these boundaries but soon after began moving closer to her
on the couch; she would move away in response but he would move closer still.  She
told him that she needed to leave to tend to her kitten but ultimately changed
her mind and decided to stay longer.  He kept making advances and eventually
she decided to let him kiss her, a kiss she agreed was consensual.  He asked
her to sit on his lap but she said “no.”  Eventually, he had moved so close to
her side of the couch that she had no more room and sat on his lap.  They
kissed some more while talking intermittently.  He put his hand up the back of
her shirt and undid her bra, at which point she got up and went to the
bathroom.
[
6
]
R.V. decided it was
time to go home.  She mentioned the nice view as she stood beside a window.  Mr.
Kim approached her from behind and hugged her.  When she turned around, he
pushed her against the wall and pinned her arms above her head before he led
her into his bedroom, which was right off where they were standing.  He tried
to get her on the bed but she pushed him away and went to the kitchen.  They
had a brief conversation there but as she was putting on her shoes to leave he
turned her around and bent her toward the island, put his hands down her pants,
and tried to pull them down in an effort to penetrate her. She asked what he
was doing and he carried her into the bedroom.  She said “no” and repeatedly
told him to stop.
[
7
]
Mr. Kim carried her
with her legs dangling from his arms, her face pointed away from his.  He put
her down on the bed and took her pants off, pulled his pants down, and began to
have intercourse with her, eventually ejaculating on her stomach.  After, he
went to the washroom and gave her a towel.  She went to the washroom to clean
up.  As she walked out, he tried to pull her back to the bed and asked why she
was leaving, did she not enjoy the sex.  She said “no” and angrily left the
apartment.  When she got to the underground parking, she saw that she’d gotten
a parking ticket, called him to come down, and angrily handed it to him.  Later
that night, upset about what had happened and unable to sleep, she messaged the
defendant at 2:02 a.m.  He did not respond until the next morning.
The
Text Message Exchange
[
8
]
R.V. began her texts
the next day by asking Mr. Kim to look for an earring she thought she had lost
in his apartment.  They texted back and forth about his efforts to find it
between 12:49 p.m. and 3:38 p.m.  Just before 6:30 p.m., R.V. texted again and
the following exchange occurred:
R.V.
: 
“Also hope yk I wasn’t ok with what happened last night.  I said no multiple
times to kissing and sex but you kept on insisting, disregarded what I said and
forced yourself on me, which I am not cool with.”
Eric Kim
: “I know you left with anger. What can I do with this..?  Do you just
want to blame me?”
R.V.
:
“Why did you even go through with it to begin with I said no multiple times.”
Eric Kim
: “Sorry.”
R.V.
:
“Like I just want an explanation…how, why you thought it was ok to do that.”
Eric Kim
:  No I didn’t think its ok”
R. V.:
“But you did it anyways??”
Eric Kim
: “idk what can I say”
[
9
]
R.V. subsequently
disclosed her allegations to the police.  Mr. Kim was arrested the next day.
Challenges
to R.V.’s Account
[
10
]
R.V. agreed that
she and Mr. Kim had talked generally about sex and its importance in a
relationship.  They had not, though, discussed the topic of them having sex.  She
acknowledged that, by the time they were on the couch together, she liked Mr.
Kim and was interested in him romantically.  She denied that they had “made
out” but agreed that she had sat on his lap a few times and that they had
kissed periodically.
[
11
]
R.V. did not
recount lying in Mr. Kim’s bedroom after the first time she went to the washroom
in her examination-in-chief.  When this was suggested to her, she recalled that
he had briefly lied on top of her there and she had told the police that.  She
agreed that Mr. Kim never stopped her from leaving the apartment and
acknowledged that, rather than telling the police that he had physically pinned
her against the wall, she had said he kissed her up against the wall before
leading her to his bedroom.
[
12
]
R.V. initially
denied ever willingly kissing the defendant after their time on the couch.  She
agreed, though, that she told the police she had given him a kiss goodnight
when she first went to the kitchen to leave, and also that she had kissed him
goodbye there.  She denied any consensual sexual activity after that goodnight
kiss.  She similarly denied that the reason she was upset at the end of the
night was because she had voluntarily broken her own rule about not having sex
on the first date or because she had gotten a parking ticket.
Eric
Kim’s Account
[
13
]
Mr. Kim came to
Canada from Korea in 2019.  He was 31 when he met R.W., eleven years older than
she was.  He had not spoken much English before he lived in Canada.  He was
proud of his command of the language but was more proficient at understanding
spoken English than he was at reading it or speaking it himself.  He testified
in English for the vast majority of the trial but used the assistance of an
interpreter on occasion.
[
14
]
R.V. arrived around
5 p.m.  They engaged in a pleasant conversation that crossed many topics.  He
assumed, based on the fact that she worked as a realtor and also went to
school, that she was older than he came to learn she was, perhaps in her
mid-twenties.
[
15
]
After dinner, while
sitting together on the couch, he leaned in to kiss her and she pushed him away
in response, hard, saying “no, what are you doing?”  He was worried he had made
a mistake and they went back to chatting.  Soon after that they began to kiss
but he could not recall what precipitated this or if they had discussed it.  He
remembered that their eyes locked and the kiss happened naturally. They began
to make out, alternatingly kissing and, talking, with her moving back and forth
between sitting on his lap and sitting on the couch.  This went on for a long
time.
[
16
]
At some point, R.V.
noticed the view and walked to the window.  He followed and hugged her from
behind before they kissed.  She said she wanted to go to the bathroom so he
took her to his ensuite and while she was there he lied down on his bed, as he
was tired from all of their conversation.  When she came out, she lied beside
him, which was a little awkward, as he had planned to be back in the living
room before she returned.  They kissed on the bed briefly before she went back
to the washroom and he went to the living room.
[
17
]
At this point Mr.
Kim was tired and ready to end their date; at the same time, a friend had
started to message him about meeting at a bar.  When R.V. re-entered the living
room, she told him that she needed to go home to feed her cat.  He walked her
to the kitchen, expecting her to leave.  She stopped suddenly, turned around,
and kissed him intensely.  As they were kissing, he lifted her up to sit on the
island.  They kissed passionately and she said “ok, let’s fuck it”.  He picked
her up and they continued to kiss as he carried her to his bedroom.  He put her
on the bed, took her pants off, and she guided his penis inside her.  She never
said no or asked him to stop at any point that night after the first time he
tried to kiss her on the couch.  Had she done so, he would have stopped.
[
18
]
After, Mr. Kim gave
her some tissue from the bathroom so that she could clean up.  He noticed that
her demeanour had changed.  She seemed sulky.  He asked if she was ok and she
said she was fine and left.  She called him a few minutes later to come down to
the parking garage and handed him a parking ticket before she drove away.  She
seemed upset.  He left from the parking garage to meet his friend.
Mr.
Kim’s Account of the Text Messages
[
19
]
Mr. Kim was out
late and slept in.  Eventually, he saw that R.V. had messaged him. He
remembered two conversations, one about her missing earring and one in which
she seemed very angry.  He was hung over and did not want to argue over text.  His
responses to her angry texts were an attempt to deescalate the situation. He
wanted to be nice and was thinking about how, culturally, Canadians frequently
say “sorry” to be polite, even when they have not done anything wrong.  He did
not understand what R.V. was accusing him of at the time and had not been
paying close attention to her messages.
Challenges
to Mr. Kim’s Account
[
20
]
Mr. Kim understood
R.V. to be referring to sex when she told him that she did not do “hookups” on
the first date.  He agreed that they had only engaged in conversation about sex
generally, and not any discussion about
them
having sex.  He took “ok let’s
fuck it” to mean either that she wanted to have sex, or that she wanted to
break her rule against sex on the first date, both of which he took to mean
that she wanted to have sex with him.  He was surprised by this turn of events
and was not thinking rationally about it in the moment.
[
21
]
At the time they
were exchanging text messages the next day, Mr. Kim thought he had understood
them, and only realized what R.V. had really meant sometime after his arrest.  He
agreed that, at the time they were messaging, he had understood the meaning of:
“I hope you know I wasn’t ok with what happened last night”; “I said no
multiple times to kissing and to sex”; and “you disregarded what I said.”  He
had not understood what “forced yourself on me” meant and was surprised to
learn later that it meant forced to have sex.
[
22
]
Mr. Kim explained
that when he had seen the long messages R.V. was sending, he knew she was upset
but had not really read the messages. If he had known how important they would
become he would have been more careful and cautious but, in the moment, he was
simply trying to deescalate.  He could tell R.V. was angry and did not see the
point of engaging in an argument over text.  He did not think that he had
sexually assaulted her and had not meant to admit that.  He was not sure why
she was angry, perhaps because of the parking ticket or lost earring or because
she had broken her own rules.  He had not meant it when he said, “I didn’t
think it was ok”, he had simply given up and wanted the messaging to end.
The
Parties’ Positions
[
23
]
Mr. Jaksa argues
that Mr. Kim’s account of events ought to be accepted or at least raise a
reasonable doubt.  They mutually consented to a progression of intimacy over
the course of the evening.  Mr. Kim gave a reasonable, coherent account of
R.V.’s communication of consent by both words and conduct.  His messages should
not be viewed as an admission to sexual assault but must be understood in the
context of his limited proficiency in English and his explanation for their
content.  With respect to the forcible confinement count, R.V. was in the
apartment for hours of her own free will and admitted that no threats or
violence forced her to remain there.
[
24
]
Mr. Jaksa further
argues that the complainant’s evidence should be rejected, as she took pains to
minimize her involvement with the accused that evening and selectively omitted
discussion of much more consensual kissing and intimacy than she initially
described.  She downplayed sitting on his lap but admitted in cross-examination
that she was on and off his lap for a substantial period.  She did the same
with respect to the frequency of their kissing, which she was reluctant to
describe as “making out.”  She voluntarily stayed in the apartment for
approximately 5 hours despite planning to have only a short date.  Her own
account of being frozen during the sexual activity is inconsistent with her
forceful attempt to establish boundaries the first time he tried to kiss her.
[
25
]
The Crown submits
that this is not a straight-forward credibility case but one where the
complainant’s evidence is materially and cogently confirmed by the defendant’s
admissions in their text message exchange, which provides a basis for rejecting
his testimony.  His explanations about the incriminating texts do not withstand
scrutiny.  The Crown disputes that R.V. attempted to downplay the consensual
conduct that she ultimately acknowledged participating in, arguing that she
fairly admitted the events when she was reminded about them.  There is nothing
concerning about forgetting parts of a lengthy evening.
[
26
]
Both parties at
least tacitly accept that the testimony of the two witnesses does not provide an
air of reality for a potential defence of honest mistake in communicated
consent. If the complainant’s evidence is accepted, it establishes both that
she did not consent and that the defendant knew or was at least reckless to the
fact that she did not consent.  According to the defendant, R.V. communicated
consent to the sexual activity verbally and by conduct.  I agree that this is
not a situation in which it is possible to cobble together some of the
complainant’s evidence and some of the defendant’s to provide an air of reality
to that defence.
[1]
RELEVANT
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
[
27
]
Eric Kim is
presumed innocent of these charges.  The burden of proof is on the Crown, who
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he is guilty of sexual assault and
forcible confinement.  There is no onus on him to prove anything.  The standard
of proof beyond a reasonable doubt is an exacting one.  It is more than
probable or likely guilt and much closer to absolute certainty than proof on a
balance of probabilities.  Ultimately, I may only find Mr. Kim guilty if I am
sure that he committed the offence alleged.
[
28
]
Mr. Kim is entitled
to the full weight of the direction in
R. v. W. (D.)
,
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
,
[1991] 1 S.C.R.
742
.   If I believe his evidence that he did not sexually assault R.V., then I
must find him not guilty.  If I do not believe his testimony but am nonetheless
left in reasonable doubt by it, he must similarly be found not guilty.  Even if
I am not left in doubt by his evidence, I must ask myself whether, based on the
evidence that I do accept, I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt of Mr.
Kim’s guilt.
[
29
]
The purpose of this
framework is to emphasize the burden of proof and the presumption of innocence
by ensuring that criminal cases are not reduced to credibility contests.  The
issue is not whose evidence I prefer but whether the Crown has proven the case
against Mr. Kim beyond a reasonable doubt.  There is no rigid order in which
evidence must be analyzed – reasonable doubt principles are a matter of
substance rather than form.
[
30
]
This case hinges on
the credibility of each witness.  No magic formula applies to assessing
credibility.  A witness’ evidence is to be considered using a common-sense
approach that is not tainted by myth, stereotype or assumption.  Many factors
may be relevant.  Some key ones include whether the witness’ evidence is
internally consistent, whether it coheres with evidence from other witnesses or
exhibits, whether the witness has a motive to fabricate, whether
inconsistencies in the evidence are about important or minor matters, what
explanations are given for any inconsistencies, and whether the inconsistencies
suggest that the witness is lying. I must also be mindful of the distinction
between credibility and reliability.  The former relates to the sincerity of
the testimony; the latter relates to its accuracy.
FACTUAL
FINDINGS
i)
Eric Kim
[
31
]
Mr. Kim testified
in a clear, straight-forward manner.  I accept his testimony that most of their
long interaction that night was pleasant and that they liked talking to each
other.  Notwithstanding the consistency of his demeanour and denials of any
misconduct, however, I do not accept material parts of his evidence.
[
32
]
Mr. Kim said that
he lied down on the bed while R.V. went to his ensuite washroom because he was
tired and planned to return to the living room before she finished in the
washroom.  I do not accept this for two reasons.  First, he had no indication
of how much or little relative time R.V. would be in the washroom, such that
his explanation that he merely got on the bed for a rest and meant to leave
before she came out makes little sense.  Second, his claim that his tiredness
caused him to lie down on the bed, and that he was “exhausted” when he left the
bedroom for the couch, is belied by his testimony that as soon as he returned
to the living room, he began making plans to meet his friend at a bar.  I find
that his purpose in bringing R.V. to his bedroom after her first trip to the
washroom was to try to engage in sexual activity there.
[
33
]
More pivotally, I
reject his account of R.V. kissing him intensely in the kitchen as she was
about to leave and then saying “ok let’s fuck it” before they became more
intimate.  On both of their respective accounts, R.V. told him that she needed
to go home to tend to a kitten and had spent much longer in the apartment than
either had anticipated.  I reject Mr. Kim’s testimony about this interaction
because it is contradicted by his own messages with R.V. the next day, which
can only reasonably be interpreted as an admission that he engaged in sexual
activity with her despite her protests and an adoption of her description of her
having said “no” multiple times.
[
34
]
I do not accept Mr.
Kim’s explanations for why he responded to those texts in the way that he did.  I
do not believe him when he says he was not paying attention to the substance of
what R.V. was communicating because his answers are directly responsive to her
questions.  In cross-examination, Mr. Kim admitted that the only part of the
text exchange that he did not understand at the time was what R.V. meant by
“forced yourself on me.”  Even assuming this is true, he nonetheless
acknowledged that he understood, at the time he was replying to R.V., what “I
hope you know I wasn’t ok with what happened last night” meant; what “I said no
multiple times to kissing and to sex” meant; what “you disregarded what I said”
meant; and what “but you did it anyways” meant.
[
35
]
Mr. Kim’s
explanation that he only understood that R.V. was angry and was not
interpreting “word for word what she said” in these messages is belied by his
own responses. It is also inconsistent with his own testimony that he
understood what these texts meant at the time he responded to them.  I do not
believe him when he says the only thing he understood from the text messages at
the time was that R.V. was upset, not why she was upset.
[
36
]
Further, I do not
believe that Mr. Kim responded in the way that he did because he was trying to
placate R.V. and deescalate the situation.  He conveyed in his testimony that
he was essentially beaten down by this long, angry text exchange that just
would not stop.  But the messaging about what happened that night occurred
three hours after the longer text exchange about R.V.’s missing earring.  He
remembered two distinct text conversations, one of which was angry.  The second
exchange consists of eight back and forth messages totalling just over one
hundred words.  Mr. Kim testified that if he had known why R.V. was upset and
had done something wrong, he would have apologized to her – which is exactly
what he did in those messages.  For these reasons and others that I will expand
on below, I reject Mr. Kim’s version of events that he and R.V. engaged in
consensual sex as failing to raise a reasonable doubt.
ii)   R.V.
[
37
]
In my view, R.V.
answered questions thoughtfully and sincerely in cross-examination.  I agree
with counsel that R.V.’s evidence in-chief minimized some of the consensual
intimacy that she ultimately agreed she had participated in.  I have reviewed
her testimony carefully in this regard.  In-chief, she described how the
defendant kept insisting on kissing her after dinner and that she had willingly
acquiesced to this because she thought things could work out between them.  She
was forthright about the amount of time she spent in the apartment and that she
had stayed voluntarily because she liked Mr. Kim.  But she did not initially
describe sitting on the defendant’s lap, lying on his bed after she first went to
the washroom, or giving him a kiss goodnight when she first went to the kitchen
to leave the apartment.
[
38
]
R.V. did, though,
candidly agree with these suggestions when they were put to her in cross-examination
and adopted the high-level sequence of events put to her without
qualification.  I am satisfied that her initial, unamplified account did not
consciously omit these details in an effort to dissemble.  Her date with the
defendant lasted approximately 5 hours.  I would not expect either witness to remember
every aspect of it.  Mr. Kim could not recall certain things about that evening
and I accept that his lack of memory about those things was also sincere.
[
39
]
I have considered
R.V.’s varying accounts of what happened after she first went to the washroom.  She
testified that the defendant pinned her against the wall by holding her hands
together above her head before aggressively leading her into the bedroom, after
which she pushed her way out.  She told the police that he “kissed her against
the wall” and did not mention anything about him pinning her against it; that
he led her to his bedroom; and also that they had been on the bed together and
he had kissed her there.  When she was asked about this latter part in
cross-examination, she said that he lied on top of her on the bed and she
pushed him off.  In her statement, she said they both lied on the bed and he
kissed her until “I stopped it.”
[
40
]
R.V. explained in
her testimony that she was referring to pushing him off her when she said she
“stopped it”.  I accept that her testimony was simply a more detailed
description and do not find, in any event, that these descriptions are
inconsistent with one another.  I do not take the same view about her in-chief
description of pushing her way out of the bedroom after he led her there and
her elaboration in cross-examination that they had spent some time on the bed
before she pushed him off her.  Because of this inconsistency, and because I do
not accept Mr. Kim’s account of those events, I am unable to make findings
about exactly what happened during that sequence of events.  But, for reasons
that I will expand on below, this inconsistency does not cause me to doubt
R.V.’s credibility generally or her account of what happened after this
interaction in his bedroom.
[2]
[
41
]
I reject the
submission that R.V. had a motive to fabricate these allegations.  Defence
counsel suggested that R.V. was angry with herself for breaking her own rule
against hookups on the first date, which she disputed.  I accept her evidence
on this point and note that it would be irrational to punish Mr. Kim with a
false accusation because she was angry with herself.  I similarly reject the
idea that she was sufficiently upset about the parking ticket to fabricate
these allegations, which would be a sinisterly disproportionate response to
this minor inconvenience.  I appreciate that there is no burden on Mr. Kim to
demonstrate that R.V. had some motive to fabricate and that the absence of one
here is only a neutral factor insofar as it relates to R.V.’s credibility but
in my view, it is not something that negatively impacts it.
[
42
]
R.V.’s post-event emotional
state is more than a neutral factor but one that is potentially confirmatory of
her testimony that she was sexually assaulted.
[3]
Mr. Kim admitted in his texts
and in his testimony that R.V. was angry when she left his building.  The most
obvious and reasonable explanation – perhaps the only plausible explanation for
this sudden change in her emotional state – is that she did not consent to sex
with the defendant.
[
43
]
While R.V.’s
emotional state provides some limited confirmation of her testimony, Mr. Kim’s
texts the next day provide powerful corroboration of it.  The probative value
of these texts does not flow from the fact that they are a prior consistent statement
of R.V. and I am not relying on them in that respect. As discussed above, I
reject the defendant’s explanations for those texts. I find them to be an adoptive
admission assenting to the truth of R.V.’s description that their intercourse took
place despite her having said no “multiple times.”  Mr. Kim both apologized for
this and acknowledged that he “didn’t think its ok.” [sic]
[
44
]
In noting these
pieces of confirmatory evidence, I do not mean to suggest that any aspect of
R.V.’s testimony requires corroboration before it can be relied on.  But it is
important in my assessment of the respective credibility of each witness, in
the context of all the evidence at trial, that the most material parts of her
account – that she did not say “ok let’s fuck it”, did not consent to sex, and
actively communicated her lack of consent – are confirmed by the defendant’s
texts and by her emotional state in the immediate aftermath of their sexual
activity.
[
45
]
I accept R.V.’s
evidence on these points as credible and reliable.  I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the Crown has proved that R.V. did not consent to sex
with the defendant and that he knew she did not consent.  I reject Mr. Kim’s
evidence that R.V. communicated consent to sex as failing to a reasonable
doubt. I find him guilty of sexual assault.
[
46
]
The Crown did not
press its theory that Mr. Kim should be found guilty of forcible confinement, a
count which was premised on R.V.’s description of Mr. Kim pinning her against
the wall outside his bedroom.   I have already explained that I am unable to
rely on R.V.’s description of that sequence of events.  As such, it is not
necessary to determine if the brief restraint that she described is sufficient
to establish the elements of this offence.  I find the defendant not guilty of
that count.
Dated:   October 28, 2025                                       _____________________
Justice
Peter Scrutton
[1]
R. v. Park
,
1995 CanLII 104 (SCC)
,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 836
at paras.
25-26
.
[2]
R. v. Duncan
,
2020 ONSC 7428
at para.
17-18
.
[3]
R. v. A(J.),
2010 ONCA 491
;
R. v. Varcoe
,
2007 ONCA
194
.