CITATION:
R. v. Dumfeh,
2025 ONCJ 128
DATE: February 28, 2025
File
No.
4911-998-24-91101142-00
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
v.
SAMUEL
DUMFEH
EXCERPT OF PROCEEDINGS
BEFORE THE
HONOURABLE JUSTICE E. PRUTSCHI
on February 28, 2025, at NEWMARKET,
ONTARIO
APPEARANCES
:
Z. Sethna              Counsel for the Crown
N. Debellefeuille       Counsel for Samuel Dumfeh
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2025
PRUTSCHI, J.
(Orally):
In the early morning hours of October 31
st
, 2023, Mr. Samuel
Dumfeh was stopped by police for a sobriety check.  An investigation ensued. 
After approximately five minutes of that investigation while talking to the
investigating officer, Mr. Dumfeh suddenly drove off accelerating away from
Constable Yellapah even as the officer was leaning against the driver’s side
roof of the car.  Officer Yellapah returned to his cruiser and aired to
dispatch that Mr. Dumfeh was arrestable for obstruct police.  The officer
inquired about air support but none was available.  He was advised by his
sergeant not to engage in a formal pursuit of Mr. Dumfeh.  The officer
proceeded to drive at a leisurely pace with his emergency lights off towards
the last known direction of Mr. Dumfeh’s vehicle.  He testified that this was
not a pursuit, but, since he had Mr. Dumfeh’s key fob in his police possession,
he thought he would at least drive in that direction and see whether the
vehicle had become involved in an accident or simply become disabled.
Mr. Dumfeh was not located at that time but was later arrested and
charged only with the offence of flight from police, pursuant to
s. 320.17
of
the
Criminal Code
.  This Section is headed “Flight from Police Officer”
within the
Criminal Code
and reads as follows:
Everyone commits an offence who
operates a motor vehicle or vessel while being pursued by a peace officer and
who fails, without reasonable excuse, to stop the motor vehicle or vessel as
soon as is reasonable in the circumstances.
Constable
Yellapah was the sole Crown witness.  At the close of the Crown case Mr. Dumfeh
brought an application for a directed verdict.  He argues that he was not
“being pursued” at the time and, therefore, an essential element of the offence
is missing.
He relies on the Ontario Court of Appeal
decision of
R. v. Quinn
,
2014 ONCA 650
.  At paragraph 10 of that decision the Court of Appeal adopts the
dictionary definition of ‘pursue’, namely, to “follow with intent to overtake
or capture”.  This same definition was cited with approval in the Summary
Conviction Appeal Court
decision of
R. v. Jensen
,
2015 ONSC 1040
.
The defence, therefore, argues that although Mr. Dumfeh might well be
guilty of obstruct police or even dangerous operation he cannot be guilty of
flight from police as Constable Yellapah had no intention to “overtake or
capture” as the definition of ‘pursue’ seems to require.
Neither of these cases address a factual situation where an accused’s
flight from police takes place after the accused first complied with a traffic
stop and where police subsequently made a public safety decision not to engage
in a formal pursuit.
Such a situation was addressed much more recently by Justice Garg of
the
Ontario Court of Justice in
R. v. Parnell
,
2024 ONCJ 310
.  At paragraphs
27 to 29 Justice Garg addresses exactly the factual scenario facing us here
with Mr. Dumfeh.  Like here,
in
R. v. Parnell
there was no dispute that
the officer had pursued the accused and demanded he stop by activating emergency
lights on the cruiser.  Like Mr. Dumfeh, Mr. Parnell did indeed stop, and upon
stopping it was clear that he was not free to leave until the conclusion of the
investigation.  Mr. Parnell “took off for the very purpose of evading police”. 
Justice Garg continues at paragraph 29,
The only question is whether the
offence remains available in circumstances where the accused had initially
stopped as directed.  In a sense there was no active pursuit after Mr. Parnell
had pulled over.  But the case law makes clear that a driver who pulls over in
response to an officer’s direction and then speeds away before the interaction
is complete is rightfully guilty of this offence.  The driver cannot reasonably
think that their conduct would not result in a pursuit”.
At
this point Justice Garg cites the cases of
R. v. Athwal
,
2016 ONCJ 89
as
well as referring to the
R. v. Jensen
case
that I previously referred to
at paragraph 30.  He then continues,
In effect, the passages in
s. 320.17
of ‘while being pursued’ and ‘who fails...to stop the motor vehicle’ are
interpreted broadly to give effect to the legislative purpose while respecting
the statutory text.  In this context, the pursuit remains ongoing until the
driver is free to leave, and the obligation to stop includes the obligation to
stay stopped.
I
find Justice Garg’s reasoning to be very compelling.  It respects the clear
legislative purpose of
s. 320.17
which is designed to criminalize the
extraordinarily dangerous act of fleeing police while in a car.  There is no
doubt that if Constable Yellapah took any steps to further pursue Mr. Dumfeh,
even steps as simple and ineffective as running a few paces after the car as it
peeled away, flight from police would be made out.  I cannot endorse the
absurdity that would short-circuit a charge of flight from police simply
because police made a strategic decision, informed by public safety concerns,
not to engage in a highly dangerous chase.
Counsel for Mr. Dumfeh urges me to be bound by the Ontario Court of
Appeal
decision in
R. v. Quinn
,
but I note that the Court
in
R. v.
Quinn
at paragraph
10
explicitly declined to decide “the outer limits” of
flight from police.
I accept instead the Crown’s argument that pursuit in this case began the
moment Constable Yellapah activated his emergency lights.  The pursuit did not
end when Mr. Dumfeh stopped.  ‘Pursuit’ is a continuous act which, as Justice
Garg put it
in
R. v. Parnell
,
“remains ongoing until the driver is free
to leave, and the obligation to stop includes the obligation to stay stopped”.
Moreover, while Constable Yellapah did not consider himself to be in
formal pursuit of Mr. Dumfeh, it is clear to me that the officer is using that
word in the context of police policy on formal high-risk pursuits.  Despite
saying that he did not pursue Mr. Dumfeh, the officer did in fact engage in a
form of pursuit.  As soon as Mr. Dumfeh sped away Constable Yellapah quickly
got back into his cruiser.  He radioed for assistance and began driving in the
last known direction of Mr. Dumfeh.  His thought was that he might come across
the vehicle in an accident or otherwise disabled by virtue of its distance from
the key fob.  He testified that he lost sight of the vehicle at one point but
at another time he was able to see its taillights well off in the distance.
A pursuit under s. 320.17 need not be a high-speed chase, but simply an
active effort to overtake and capture the accused.  Had Constable Yellapah
managed to find Mr. Dumfeh’s vehicle, the inference is quite clear that he
would have detained Mr. Dumfeh again and continued his investigation.  This
broad interpretation of ‘pursuit’ is most in keeping with the legislative
purpose of s. 320.17 which is to deter and punish the dangerous act of
vehicular flight from lawful police investigations.  The existence of
alternative charges, such as obstruct police or dangerous operation, do not
negate the reality that Mr. Dumfeh’s actions could also meet the definition of
flight from police as articulated in
s. 320.17
.
For these reasons, I find that the Crown has presented at least some
evidence on all the essential elements of the offence.  The motion for directed
verdict is therefore dismissed.
**********
FORM 3
ELECTRONIC CERTIFICATE OF TRANSCRIPT (SUBSECTION 5
  (2))
Evidence Act
I,
Michelle Waters
,
(Name of authorized person)
certify that this document is a true and accurate
  transcript of the recording of
Samuel Dumfeh
in the
Ontario Court of Justice
(Name of case)
(Name of court)
held at
50 Eagle Street West, Newmarket ON
  L3Y 6B1
(Court address)
taken from Recording
4911_303_20250228_084616
, which has been certified in Form 1.
March 7, 2025
(Date)
(Electronic signature of authorized person)
2695391641
(Authorized court transcriptionist’s identification
  number –
if applicable)
Ontario
, Canada.
(Province of signing)
A certificate in Form 3 is admissible
  in evidence and is proof, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that
  the transcript is a transcript of the certified recording of evidence and
  proceedings in the proceeding that is identified in the certificate.