WARNING
The court hearing this matter
directs that the following notice be attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection
486.4(2.1
) of the
Criminal Code
.
These subsections and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which
is concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection
486.4(2.1
)
, read as follows:
486.4 (2.1
) Victim under 18 — Other offences —
Subject to subsection (2.2), in proceedings in respect of an offence other than
an offence referred to in subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18
years, the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any
information that could identify the victim shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way.
(2.2)
Mandatory
order on application —
In proceedings in respect of an offence other than
an offence referred to in subsection (1), if the victim is under the age of 18
years, the presiding judge or justice shall
(a)
as soon as
feasible, inform the victim of their right to make an application for the order;
and
(b)
on application
of the victim or the prosecutor, make the order; and
(c)
if an order is made, as soon as feasible, inform the victim of the
existence of the order and of their right to apply to revoke or vary it.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
—
(1)
Every
person who fails to comply with an order made under any of subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. C.P.
, 2025 ONCJ 576
DATE: 
2025 11 04
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region (Niagara) 24 21103363
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
P.(C.)
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on October 8 & 9, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on November 4, 2025
Ms. Bajwa............................................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
Mr. Buchanan ............................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
De Filippis
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
The defendant was charged with assaulting her
granddaughter and breach of probation for failing to keep the peace and being
of good behaviour. The result in the second charge is driven by that in the
first.  At the time of the events in question the child was four years old. 
She was five years old at the time of trial. I will refer to her as the “child”
or the “child in question”.  At the time of these events the defendant was on
probation.
[
2
]
On July 17, 2024, around lunchtime, the child was seen by a
neighbour. M.P., wandering the streets of a townhouse complex.  M.P. had seen
the child before but had not met her.  M.P. noticed what looked like mud on her
clothes and a terrible smell from her body. She saw a bruise on the child’s eye. 
She also saw a cut on her lip – “going from the outside to inside of lip, it looked
like she had run into something like a coffee table.  The child went into her
house and quickly came outside again with two dogs running free.  After
speaking to another neighour, D.P., M.P. called the police.  M.P. had heard
community gossip about a poor relationship between the defendant and D.P.
[
3
]
PC Fray-Warnica arrived at 2 PM.  She approached M.P. who had the child
with her.  The officer noted that the child had no shoes, dirty hair, and
smelled of dog feces.  She also noticed “small reddish dots all over her body
and a small abrasion on her lip”. When prompted by the Crown, the officer
recalled seeing a bruise over the child’s eye.   The officer went to unit 31
and knocked on the door. The defendant answered and explained she had been
napping and the child had gone out on her own.  The defendant added that alarms
had been put on the door to prevent this as it was a regular occurrence. In
talking to the defendant, the officer saw a younger child in the home.  This
one was also had a rash, with dirty hair and the same foul smell.  The officer
called Family and Children’s Services (FACS).
[
4
]
Nadia Hynes arrived from FACS. She took both children to the FACS
office.  While there, she observed, with respect to the child in question, a prominent
hand mark, “like grab mark”, on her left arm and red spots all over her head.  Her
clothes were dirty.  Both children were apprehended and taken to foster homes.
[
5
]
Amanda Marino is the regular FACS worker who had been previously
assigned to monitor the defendant and the children.  On July 16, 2024, she was
at the defendant’s home.  She saw both children up close and did not see any
marks or injuries on them.   Ms. Marino had spoken privately with the child in
question in the preceding months.  She did not notice injuries. The child
reported being spanked once but did not disclose other physical punishments or
being hurt.  Ms. Marino confirmed that alarms had been placed on the rear door
of the defendant’s home as the child had a history of leaving the home without
permission.
[
6
]
On August 1, 2025, the child was interviewed by police.  This interview
was recorded on video.
EVIDENCE BY THE CHILD
[
7
]
The prior statement given to police by the child was played in Court.
The child testified that what she told the police was true. The interview is 13
minutes in length.
[
8
]
The child reported the following:  The defendant “hurts” her and her
sister and the dogs.  The defendant often says the child is “bad”.  The child explains
she is not bad “on purpose” but “by accident”.  The defendant threw the child
on the floor.  The defendant threw the child against a wall and caused her lip
to bleed. This happened after the child broke something.  The defendant hurt
the child’s lip by pinching it.  The child does not know what happened with
respect to the blood on her lip. The defendant hurt the child on the back of
her head.  This has happened before.  The defendant hurt the child before by
throwing a big toy at her.  It is not clear when the events described
occurred.
[
9
]
Cross-examination, included the following exchange:
Q: is it possible there are
some things you weren’t telling the truth?
A: I was
Q: [repeated]
A: I don’t know
Q: Is it fair to say you don’t
know if you were telling the truth
A: Yes
[
10
]
The
child agreed that on the last day she lived with the defendant, she left the
home without her grandma’s knowledge.   She left because she does not like her
grandma.  She does not like her because her grandma has many rules and punishes
the child when the rules are not followed.  She said she was hit by the
defendant when she returned to the house.  She added that, “I sneak out three
times and police came the last time and after this I was hit, and grandma went
to jail”.  Later, the child said, the cut lip happened on a different day than
when the police came.
[
11
]
The
child agreed that she would be punished by the defendant if rules were broken,
and this included spanking. The child testified that each time she left her
grandma’s house, she went to the home of D.P.  She liked going there because
D.P. let her have things her grandma would not. The child agreed that D.P. told
her to tell the police how her grandma had hurt her and further agreed that
these events did not happen.  In re-examination, the child repeated that what
she told the police in the video recorded statement was true.
EVIDENCE BY THE DEFENDANT
[
12
]
The
Defendant testified that she obtained custody of the child and the younger
sibling in 2022 because their parents could not care for them due to drug
addiction. She is the maternal grandmother of the children. The child was three
years old at the time and the younger sibling was six weeks old.  Both children
were kept in hospital for a time after birth as their mother had abused drugs
during pregnancy.  FACS had been involved with the family before the defendant
obtained custody and this continued afterward.
[
13
]
The
defendant testified that the child had left her parents’ home several times
without their knowledge and this continued when she came to live with her.  The
first time was on February 3, 2024.  It is around this time that the defendant became
involved in a confrontation with D.P.  The defendant believed this woman was
influencing the child and wanted it to stop.  The defendant believed the child
loved D.P. and saw her as her best friend.  Just before the child left the home
without permission on February 4, the defendant had told the child she was not
to see D.P.  The defendant was later found guilty of assaulting D.P.  The
defendant has two convictions for impaired driving.
[
14
]
The
defendant testified that July 16, 2024, was extremely hot and this caused both
children to experience a heat rash that others saw the next day. The defendant
denied there was any physical altercation with the child on July 17 and apart
from spanking her once, has never hit or injured her in any way, including as
described by the child.  The defendant noted that the child did not like her
rules and would leave home.  On one occasion the child tried to climb out of
her second-floor window. The defendant told the child this was dangerous and
spanked her on the bottom three or four times.
[
15
]
On
July 17, 2024, the defendant awoke around 5 AM.  She later made breakfast for
the children.  At 11 AM she went for a nap.  She was awakened by the police
knocking on her door, along with a FACS worker and the child. The defendant did
not see any injuries on the child, nor did anyone point to such injuries. The
children were taken away from her this day and remain in foster care.
[
16
]
The
defendant agreed she was frustrated by the child’s defiant attitude.  She also
agreed she had consumed wine overnight on July 16 – 17.  With the assistance of
a FACS worker, the defendant had placed marble coffee tables to block the front
door so the child could not leave on her own.    These were heavy and she
cannot say how the child managed to get outside while the defendant was
napping.
ANALYSIS
[
17
]
The Crown carries the burden of proving guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.  This fundamental principle of law means that if the
defendant has called evidence, there must be an acquittal where the testimony
is believed or where the testimony is not believed but raises a reasonable
doubt.  An acquittal will follow even if the defence evidence is rejected, but
the remaining evidence fails to convince, beyond reasonable doubt, that the defendant
is guilty (
R. v. W(D),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742).  Probable
guilt is not the criminal law standard of proof – it is closer to certainty.  A
reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense which must be
logically based on the evidence or lack of evidence (
R. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33 (CanLII)
).  In applying the standard, I can accept some, part, or
none of what a witness states.  The testimony of a witness is assessed based on
the person’s sincerity and accuracy.
[
18
]
This prosecution fails without a consideration
of the defendant’s testimony.
[
19
]
The
child told police she had been hurt by the defendant on several occasions
before July 17. I am confident that she did not understand some of the
questions put to her in cross-examination about these incidents and I am not
troubled by her answers to those questions, which would otherwise be fatal to
credibility and reliability. Nevertheless, leaving aside for the moment the cut
lip, the child’s account of when and how she was hurt is not at all clear.   Moreover,
Ms Marino, the FACS worker assigned to this family visited home – often
unannounced – in previous months and spent time alone with the child.  She never
noticed injuries and the child never disclosed any abuse.
[
20
]
The injuries seen by several people on July 17 must have been sustained
that day.   The bruise and cut lip were not present the day before when Ms. Marino
visited.  As a FACS worker she would have noticed such marks. Ms. Hynes noticed
a “grab mark” on the child’s arm on July 17.  This is consistent with the
child’s account of being thrown.  However, the many inconsistencies in the
child’s narrative about
how her lip was cut is a shaky foundation on which
to build a case.  These inconsistencies arise in the statement she gave to
police and in cross-examination.  With respect to the latter, I cannot say that
the child did not understand the questions that prompted these answers.
[
21
]
The
defendant was likely overwhelmed by having to care her young grandchildren at
her stage in life. It may be that she has issues with alcohol use.  On July 17,
the child was outside without supervision, in bare feet, with dirty clothes and
hair, and smelling of dog feces.  The children are now in foster care.  My role
is to determine if the defendant is guilty of the charges.  On the record
before me I cannot come to that conclusion beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
22
]
The
charges are dismissed.
Released:  November
4, 2025
Signed:
Justice J. De Filippis