ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Aguilar
,
2025 ONCJ 474
DATE:  September 17, 2025
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
EDWIN AGUILAR
Before Justice H. Borenstein
Oral Reasons for Judgment released August 20, 2025
Written Reasons for Judgment released September 17,
2025
Varda Anwar ............................................................ counsel
for the Crown
Edwin Aguilar .................................................................. on
his own behalf
BORENSTEIN J.:
[
1
]
Edwin Aguilar is charged with
operating a motor vehicle while his ability to do so was impaired by alcohol
and with an excessive blood alcohol concentration.
[
2
]
There was a collision around
12:40 a.m. on December 24, 2024 at the intersection of Keele and Calvington in
Toronto. Police were called and attended. Shortly thereafter, P.C. Singh
demanded Aguilar provide a sample of his breath into an approved screening
device (ASD).  Aguilar failed and was arrested. He was taken to the police
station where he spoke to duty counsel for under two minutes and then provided
two breath samples into an approved instrument registering truncated breath
readings of 190 and 170 mg of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood.
[
3
]
The Crown, as always, bears
the burden of proof on these charges. Aguilar is self-represented and has
brought
Charter
motions arguing his rights under sections
7, 8, 9 and 10(b)
were violated. It is his onus on the
Charter
motions however, given this was a warrantless seizure of his
breath, the Crown bears the onus of proving the search was authorized by a
reasonable law and the manner in which the search was conducted was reasonable
[
4
]
I heard from Ms. Galvez who
was driving the other car involved in the collision, her husband Mr. Aviso who
was her passenger and the two officers who attended on scene. I heard from a
friend of the accused who came to the scene after the accident.
I Begin with the
Collision
[
5
]
Ms. Galvez was in her Toyota
highlander travelling northbound on Keele with her husband and others. They
were coming from working late at the church setting it up for Christmas.  It
was snowing. As she went through the intersection, the light turned amber.  A
vehicle, coming from another direction, came into her lane and hit her car.  Ms.
Galvez’s air bags deployed causing smoke within the car.  She and her
passengers got out. She did not realize the smoke was likely from the deployed
airbag. She feared her car might explode. The accused approached her. She
believed he was the other driver. He tried to give her a hug and asked her if
she was okay and said accidents happen. He seemed drunk, meaning a little
groggy and sleepy. She did not notice slurred speech and would tell the officer
that when he arrived on scene.  Ms. Galvez was having trouble breathing.  She
broke a rib in the collision. Her car was damaged beyond repair.
[
6
]
Galvez’s husband, Mr. Aviso,
testified. He was in the passenger seat. Around 12:40 - 12:45, as they went
through the intersection, the light turned from amber to red. A car in front of
them turned left and hit them “head on” as it turned. The driver got out, came
and said sorry “accidents happen”.  He identified the accused as the driver.  His
eyes looked sleepy and he smelled of alcohol. The accused’s comment “accidents
happen” upset Mr. Aviso. He had just turned into his lane and caused this crash.
 Aviso did not want to engage with the accused. The Highlander automatically
notified 911 upon detecting the crash. The police arrived and eventually arrested
the accused.
[
7
]
Officer Singh received a call
dispatching him to this collision and was advised the driver was possibly
impaired.  Singh arrived at 12:52 a.m. and saw Fire and EMS dealing with the
occupants of the other car. The accused was outside his car on his cell phone.
Singh’s interaction is captured on his body worn camera (BWC). Singh believed
the accused was on his phone trying to avoid engaging with or making eye
contact with him which made him suspicious.  He began interacting with the
accused at 1:00 a.m.  Singh testified the accused’s eyes were glossy. He asked
the accused for his driver’s license and paperwork and walked with the accused
to his car. Singh testified that, given how significant the accident was, he
wanted to look inside the car to assess the extent of the damage and ensure no
one was hurt inside the car. The back windows of the accused’s car were tinted,
and he could not see through them. The accused opened the front driver’s door
to get his paperwork. The BWC shows Singh outside the driver’s door. Singh
testified he looked in but could not see the back seat due to the deployed
airbag. Singh told the accused to step aside and opened the back door. He did
not enter the car but looked in. There was no one in the car but he saw empty
beer cans in the back seat. Singh closed the car door and directed the accused
to his cruiser where he read him an ASD demand at 1:02 am. The accused said the
other driver ran into him. The Crown seeks to introduce that non-elicited
statement made when the accused was detained arguing it was voluntary.
[
8
]
The accused failed the ASD at
1:04 a.m. after a couple of attempts. At 1:05 a.m., he was arrested for
impaired operation. The arrest should have been for the blood alcohol
concentration (BAC) offence but nothing turns on that in my view in light of
the fact that all the same events followed. Singh searched the accused and read
him his right to counsel and caution at 1:09 a.m.  At 1:10 am, the breath
demand was read. The accused initially equivocated about understanding the
demand and whether he would give a breath sample. Singh explained he would face
a refuse charge if he refused, and the accused agreed. The accused wanted to
speak to duty counsel right then on scene, but P.C. Singh said he could not
afford him privacy on scene and would put him in touch with counsel at the
station. They left the scene at 1:44 a.m. and arrived at traffic services at 2:13
a.m. The accused was paraded and booked at 2:20. The booking ended at 2:33.  The
accused spoke to duty counsel at 2:38 a.m. and was taken to the breath room at
2:40 a.m. He provided his first sample at 2:54 a.m. which resulted in a
truncated breath reading of 190 milligrams of alcohol in 100 milliliters of
blood. He was then lodged in the cells and returned to the breath room where he
provided his second breath sample at 3:23 a.m. resulting in a truncated breath
reading of 170 mg of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood. He was released from
the station at 5:04 a.m.
[
9
]
Singh’s partner, P.C. Minhas
testified. He was the one who called duty counsel. He did not ask the accused
if he received meaningful advice in his call with counsel.
[
10
]
Aguilar’s friend John Ttap
testified. The two had dinner at Ttap’s family’s home the night before. They
did not drink alcohol. Aguilar then dropped Ttap off at home at 10 p.m. and
went to do laundry. Ttap called Aguilar around midnight as Aguilar had not
returned home. Aguilar said the laundry was not yet dry. Aguilar then called
Ttap again and told him he had been in an accident. Ttap went to the scene and
saw Aguilar. His walking speech and eyes all seemed fine, as they were earlier
in the evening.
[
11
]
That was the evidence called
in this case.
The Issues to be
Decided
[
12
]
I am satisfied based on the
evidence of both civilians that the accused was indeed the driver involved in
the accident. I do not rely on the accused’s utterance the Crown seeks to
adduce to establish the accused as the driver. It is based on Aviso in
particular as well as Galvez.  Aguilar was still on scene when the officers
arrived. He was the driver.
[
13
]
As to the cause of the
collision, the only witnesses who testified with direct knowledge of the
collision were Galvez and Aviso. They both had the accused colliding with them
in their lane. The accused’s statement, which the Crown seeks to adduce, is
that the other driver ran into him. There is a discrepancy between Galvez and
Aviso as to whether Aguilar caused the accident by hitting their car head on or
while turning although I think, based on the vagueness of Ms. Galvez’ evidence
on this point, it was likely caused by the accused turning and then hitting
Galvez in her lane.  There is also evidence that Ms. Galvez was going through
the intersection when the light was amber and turning red. In the end, while it
is most likely Aguilar caused the collision by turning right into Galvez, I am
not very confident about the exact circumstances that lead to the collision;
meaning; was Aguilar going straight and veered into Galvez’ lane or did he turn
into the lane and did Galvez go through the intersection as the light turned
amber or was it turning from amber to red.
The Impaired Count
[
14
]
I am not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that Aguilar’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired
by alcohol.  I am unable to use the readings without expert opinion to assess
impairment as opposed to consumption. The accident can be some evidence of
impairment but as I just indicated, I am not confident about the cause. There
is no evidence of slurred speech or imbalance or problems with dexterity. There
is evidence of glossy eyes, apparent fatigue and an odour of alcohol.  I do
accept the opinion evidence of both Galvez and Aviso that they believed Aguilar
was impaired but when I consider the basis for their opinion, it is primarily
his eyes. In the end, I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that his
ability to drive was impaired by alcohol. To be clear, he likely was.
Blood Alcohol Concentration Charge, Formerly, “Over
80”
[
15
]
The accused failed the ASD and
provided two suitable samples of his breath at the police station both showing
a high BAC. That charge been proved beyond a reasonable doubt subject to the
Charter
applications.
Arbitrary Detention
[
16
]
Aguilar submits he was
arbitrarily detained. P.C. Singh attended a significant accident late at night.
EMS and Fire were on scene.  He began investigating the matter.  The accused
was detained only once Singh made the ASD demand. The question is whether the
demand was lawful. If not, it would be arbitrary and would violate Sections 8
and 9 of the
Charter
.
[
17
]
P.C. Singh suspected Aguilar
had been driving with alcohol in his body and issued an ASD demand.   Was his
belief objectively reasonable? Considering the collision, the glossy eyes, the
odour of alcohol, the suspicion was reasonable. Moreover, Singh’s suspicion was
heightened by Aguilar remaining on his cell phone which Singh understandably
took as Aguilar trying to avoid dealing with the officer on scene. All of those
factors in my view render Singh’s suspicion that the accused had consumed
alcohol objectively reasonable. The empty beer cans certainly increase the
suspicion but are not necessary for this finding.
Search by Opening the Back
Door of the Car –
Waterfield
Test
[
18
]
Opening the back door and
looking inside to assess the extent of the damage and look for anyone who may
have been injured, even briefly, is a search.
[
19
]
Aguilar submits it was an
illegal search contrary to s. 8 of the
Charter
and the results of that
search, and ensuing ASD and breath demands, should be excluded. The Crown
submits this conduct was a legitimate exercise of power associated with the
police duty to ensure public safety as per the test first articulated in
Waterfield
.
[
20
]
Before turning to the
Waterfield
test, in my view, Singh’s suspicion Aguilar had consumed alcohol having driven
would be objectively reasonable even without the observations of the empty beer
cans in the back seat of his car. Nonetheless, opening the back door in these
circumstances was lawful under the ancillary police powers doctrine as
described in
Waterfield
.
[
21
]
Under the
Waterfield
test, the Court must determine whether the police conduct in question falls
within the general scope of duties imposed on the officer by statute or common
law.  If so, did that particular conduct involve a justifiable use of powers
associated with the duty.
[
22
]
Here, the conduct in issue was
opening the back door of the car to look inside to assess the extent of the
damage and to ensure no one was injured and needed assistance.
[
23
]
Peace officers have a duty to
respond to calls, ensure public safety, investigate offences and render
assistance if needed. Singh testified he wanted to assess the extent of the
damage given the severity of the accident and the need to report same. More
importantly, there is a duty on officers to ensure public safety and render
assistance where needed. In those circumstances, looking in the back seat to
ensure no one was injured and briefly assessing the extent of the damage fall
within the general scope of police duties.
[
24
]
Turning to whether opening the
back door and briefly looking inside was a justifiable use of the powers. The
2014 SCC decision in
MacDonald
, [2014] SCC 3, (a case involving police
powers to search where they had safety concerns), summarized the
Waterfield
test as follows: (at paras 35-37):
[35]    At
the first stage of the
Waterfield
test, the court must ask whether the
action falls within the general scope of a police duty imposed by statute or
recognized at common law.  For safety searches, the requirement at this first
stage of the analysis is easily satisfied….
[36]    At
the second stage, if the answer at the first is affirmative, as it is in this
case, the court must inquire into whether the action constitutes a justifiable
exercise of powers associated with the duty.  As this Court held in
Dedman
,
[t]he
interference with liberty must be necessary for the carrying out of the
particular police duty and it must be reasonable, having regard to the nature
of the liberty interfered with and the importance of the public purpose served
by the interference. [Emphasis added; p. 35.]
Thus,
for the infringement to be justified, the police action must be reasonably
necessary for the carrying out of the particular duty in light of all the
circumstances (
Mann
, at para. 39;
Clayton
, at paras. 21 and 29).
[37]    To determine whether a safety search is reasonably
necessary, and therefore justifiable, a number of factors must be weighed to
balance the police duty against the liberty interest in question.
These
factors include:
1.  the importance of the performance of the duty to the
public good (
Mann
, at para.
39
);
2.  the necessity of the interference with individual
liberty for the performance of the duty (
Dedman
, at p. 35;
Clayton
,
at paras.
21, 26 and 31
); and
3.  the extent of the interference with individual
liberty (
Dedman
, at p. 35).
If
these three factors, weighed together, lead to the conclusion that the police
action was reasonably necessary, then the action in question will not
constitute an “unjustifiable use” of police powers (
Dedman
, at p. 36). 
If the requirements of both stages of the
Waterfield
test are satisfied,
the court will then be able to conclude that the search in question was
authorized by law.
[
25
]
The Court held that, in
determining if a police action was reasonably necessary to carry out their
particular duty, and therefore not an unjustifiable use of power, the Court
must assess:
1.
The importance of the duty to the
public good;
2.
The necessity of some interference
with a subject’s liberty for the performance of that duty; and
3.
The extent of that interference.
[
26
]
Looking in the car to ensure
no one else was injured was an important duty performed by P.C. Singh upon
coming on an accident like this. One could imagine the circumstances had he not
looked and there was someone injured. This was a significant accident, late at
night. Air bags had been deployed in both cars. There were injuries. The
accused was outside his car acting in a manner P.C. Singh reasonably took as
evasive. I say reasonably because I had a similar impression when watching the
body worn camera. It seemed odd that Aguilar was so focused on his private call
in the circumstance. Ensuring no one was injured is an important duty. Had the
back windows not been heavily tinted, P.C. Singh would have been able to
fulfill this duty by looking through the window without opening the door. He
could not. In those circumstances, opening the door to determine if anyone was injured
in particular was necessary. Finally, opening the back door of a car that had
been in this kind of collision was a minor interference with the accused’s
reasonable expectation of privacy and I note his expectation of privacy in his
vehicle on a public road is a diminished one.  In my view, this act was not an
unjustifiable use of police powers and was therefore authorized by law as an
ancillary power of the police duty. I disagree with Mr. Aguilar’s submission
that this was merely an exploratory search by Singh who was just curious. I
accept he wanted to ensure no one was injured in the car which was lawful. I
note that, had I found that search to not be authorized by law and in violation
of section 8, I would find it to not be a serious infringement at all.
Right to Counsel
[
27
]
Aguilar submits his right to
counsel was violated by the officer not advising him of his right to counsel
prior to making the ASD demand or administering the test. Singh was not
required to advise him of his right to counsel as Aguilar was not detained
until the demand. There was about two minutes between the demand and the test.
The law permits a brief suspension of the right to counsel between the demand
and the test if done quickly.
[
28
]
Aguilar’s argument is premised
on the demand being unlawful and it was not.
Delay in Implementation
of Right to Counsel Until the Station
[
29
]
Aguilar submits the delay in
implementing his consultation with counsel until he arrived at the station
violated his right to counsel. He was arrested, searched, read his right to
counsel and issued a breath demand by 1:10 a.m. Thereafter, there was a conversation
between Aguilar and Singh where Aguilar was uncertain about his obligation or
whether he would comply and the officer explained and cautioned him with
respect to a refuse charge. Aguilar agreed to comply and wanted to speak to
duty counsel on scene but Singh advised he could not afford him privacy and
would do so at the station. They left the scene at 1:44 a.m., roughly 30
minutes after the breath demand and discussion about refusing. They arrived at
the station at 2:20, booking was complete at 2:33 and Aguilar spoke to counsel
at 2:38 a.m.  The delay was at the scene. There was no evidence or suggestion
officers were not being diligent and they were dealing with a serious accident.
Two cars were heavily damaged, the driver was injured, fire and EMS were on
scene.  The police did not question or attempt to elicit evidence from Aguilar.
They were concerned with ensuring he could consult with counsel in private
which is their obligation. There is no evidence that the 30-minute delay in
leaving the scene was avoidable or unreasonable given what was going on.
Officers are not to be expected to drop everything leaving the other driver and
witnesses on their own immediately upon the arrest and right to counsel.
Short Call to Counsel
[
30
]
Aguilar submits the short
phone call he had with counsel ought to have caused the officer to make inquiries
about whether he was satisfied with his call. His call was certainly short but
there is no suggestion the police or anyone else cut the call short. There is
no evidence from Aguilar that he told the officer he was dissatisfied with the
call and no evidence at trial that he was dissatisfied. There is no basis to
find the police breached his right to counsel in this call.
Voluntariness
[
31
]
The Crown seeks to adduce
Aguilar’s statement to the police that the other driver turned into him. The
statement was being adduced to assist in proving Aguilar was the driver. As
already noted, I found he was the driver based on the civilians’ evidence and
Aguilar’s utterance played no part in that finding. I also considered that
utterance in finding that I was not confident as to the cause of the collision
and therefore did not rely on Aguilar causing the collision (which I find to be
likely) as part of my determination whether the Crown proved impairment beyond
a reasonable doubt. Given those two issues, it is my view that the probative
value of Aguilar’s utterance, for the Crown or defence, is spent. Nonetheless,
I do find the statement, which was not elicited in any way, to have been
voluntarily given.
Mouth Alcohol
[
32
]
Aguilar submits there is no
evidence officers watched him between the two breath tests. He submits this
evidence is necessary to ensure there was no mouth alcohol present during the
second test.  This argument also fails. The spectre of mouth alcohol has often
been litigated in Over 80 cases. In this case, that is not a realistic
possibility given the accused was in custody from 1:02 a.m. and the tests were
conducted around 3:00 a.m.  The accused was placed in a cell between the two
tests. There is no realistic possibility he consumed alcohol. As for belching
in between and producing mouth alcohol, that is pure speculation.
S. 7 – Due to “Threatening”
Other Charges
[
33
]
Although Aguilar did not
testify, he continually submitted he suffers from anxiety and argued Singh
exacerbated his anxiety by threatening further charges. Aguilar was referring
to Singh telling him he would face refuse charges if he did not accompany him
to the police station for the breath test and that “threat” violated his right
to security of the person. There was no such violation. Aguilar was less than
clear or responsive to the breath demand. It was reasonable for Singh to advise
him of the consequences of refusal.
[
34
]
In my view, despite Mr.
Aguilar’s impressive skills in Court, his
Charter
and other arguments do
not succeed. The Crown has proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt on one of
the two counts.  He will be found guilty of operating his vehicle with an
illegal amount of alcohol in his blood and not guilty of impaired operation.
Oral
Reasons released:  August 20, 2025
Written Reasons released:  September 17, 2025
Signed: Justice H. Borenstein