CITATION:
R. v. Serraj
, 2025 ONCJ 711
DATE:
November 20, 2025
4810
998 25 50001701/25 48101305
ONTARIO COURT OF
JUSTICE
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
-
v -
KRISTJAN SERRAJ
P R
O C E E D I N G S  O N
G U
I L T Y  P L E A
BEFORE
THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE B. BROWN
On November
20, 2025, at TORONTO, Ontario
APPERANCES
:
I. Sunderland            
               Counsel for Crown
A. Gold                                  Counsel
for Defendant
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2025
R E A S O N S  F O
R  S E N T E N C E
BROWN, J.
(Orally)
The defendant
Kristjan Serraj was charged in an Information with the offence of careless
driving cause death, contrary to the
Highway Traffic Act
.   He has plead
guilty to that charge, and extensive facts have been read in evidence, which
the defence has agreed to.  The court has found him guilty of that offence.
It is to be noted
that Mr. Serraj was previously charged with the offence of dangerous driving
cause death, contrary to the
Criminal Code
.  As a result of that charge,
the Crown and defence counsel attended judicial pre-trial meetings with this
court with a view to scheduling the trial for that charge.  However, as these
meetings went on, and they were quite involved, extensive evidence was reviewed
and later gathered with respect to that charge.
As the Crown stated
earlier the Crown came to the decision, and the Crown acts as a quasi-judicial
officer, that the Crown would not have sufficient evidence, considering the
testimony that would be at trial from all the witnesses and the expert
witnesses, the photographs, and the video.  The police gathered a lot of
evidence for this case.  But even with all of that evidence there wasn’t enough
evidence to show that there would be a reasonable prospect that he would be
convicted of the charge of dangerous driving causing death.
There is no issue
that Mr. Serraj caused the death of the victim.  The issue was whether what he
did in driving amounted to dangerous driving.  As a result, the evidence that
existed would not support him being found guilty of that charge of dangerous
driving because it would not amount to what in law is called a marked departure
from the standard of care of driving for a reasonable person.
In addition to
that, if the Crown had done a trial for that charge, and if the judge on that
case, it would not be me, it would be a different judge, a trial judge, was of
the same view that there was not enough evidence to prove it was dangerous
driving, Mr. Serraj would have been found not guilty.  He would have been acquitted. 
And he would have had no finding of guilt for any offence related to the
driving in this case, and the loss of the victim
A
gnesa
Shukulli.
By operation of law,
there is no included or lower offence for dangerous driving, such as careless
driving, because careless driving is in a different statute called the
Highway
Traffic Act
.  So, he could have only been found guilty of dangerous
driving.  And if not, he would have been found not guilty and acquitted.  If he
were charged with careless driving of course, as he is now today, he could have
had a trial in that matter and he could have been found guilty of that charge. 
We do not have to deal with that because he admitted some time ago that what he
did was careless driving.  It does amount in law to the offence of careless
driving.  And he has now entered the guilty plea, which has saved the need to
go through the trial that probably would have been a week or two long.  So,
he’s admitted all that.
Throughout, the
court has been advised that Mr. Serraj wanted to accept responsibility for this
offence, for the loss of Ms. Agnesa Shukulli, a woman who he loved.  And he has
suffered the pain and guilt everyday for her loss, which was caused by his
driving.  It is guilt he will carry with him for a very long time, if not the
rest of his life.
In the end, both
counsel for the Crown and for the defence agreed that the appropriate offence
for this type of driving is careless driving.  And the Crown has charged him
now with careless driving cause death.  And he has admitted he did that.  So,
we do not need to have a trial.
The matter is now
before the court for the imposition of sentence.
The Facts
A)
Circumstances
of the offence
An agreed statement
of fact has been read and filed in evidence.  The court has considered very
carefully those facts, together with the facts indicated earlier that had been
communicated to this court on earlier dates.  The court will review a portion
of the agreed statement of facts.
Firstly, as it
related to the driving the court would note as follows.  On January 19, 2025,
Mr. Kristjan Serraj was driving his van in the area of Lakeshore Boulevard
East, in Toronto.  He was driving, and his girlfriend
Agnesa
Shukulli
was in the front passenger seat.  It was after 9 p.m. and the sun
had set.  So, it was dark.  It was minus eleven degrees Celsius and there was a
thin covering of snow on the ground.
The two of them went
to the Woodbine Beach parking lot, which is next to Ashbridges Bay, in the City
of Toronto.  This parking lot is a big parking lot that has space for 270
cars.  At the west side of the parking lot there were three separate launches
for boats.  Those launches or ramps provide access for boats to get into the
water of Ashbridges Bay, which is part of Lake Ontario.
At about 9:30 p.m.
after being in the parking lot, Mr. Serraj turned on the engine of his vehicle. 
He turned on his headlights.  He began to drive.  He turned the car around
quickly, performing a U-turn so it was facing west.  He then accelerated
quickly, and at a high rate of speed drove towards one of the boat launch
ramps.  He drove down one of them onto the ice-covered water of Ashbridges
Bay.  The witnesses in the parking lot who saw him drive described the driving
essentially as too fast for the circumstances.
There was a CCTV
camera that captured some of the driving.  It showed the vehicle heading to the
ramp at a high speed.  The brake lights of the vehicle did come on, but only
when the car was at the top of the ramp, so, essentially too late.  The car
travelled onto the ice, and shortly thereafter the ice cracked and broke apart
and the vehicle went into the water beneath the ice.  Both Mr. Serraj and Ms. Shukulli
were both in the vehicle as it began to sink.
After the vehicle
went into the lake there were numerous bystanders, people who were nearby in
the dark, and they realized that this vehicle had gone into the lake with one
or two people inside it.  In what can only be described as a testament to the
bravery and courage of a number of regular people who were nearby, many people
jumped into action.  Into the dark and into the icy waters of Lake Ontario, in
a valiant effort to save the occupants of the vehicle, including Ms. Shukulli.
In that regard the
court would note from the agreed statement of fact the following.  The other
people in the parking lot had seen the car drive down the ramp and onto the
ice.  They saw it beginning to sink after the ice broke apart.  The witnesses
immediately called 9-1-1 and made efforts to help the occupants of the sinking
car.  There was an air pocket in the back of the vehicle and both Mr. Serraj
and Ms. Shukulli moved into the rear of the car in the air pocket.
One of these
bystanders, a witness, grabbed a metal pole and used it to smash the rear window
of the car as it was sinking.  Another witness used a metal propane tank also
to smash the rear side window to allow the occupants to escape.  Unfortunately,
there was a cage inside this vehicle that had been installed for security
reasons to prevent the theft of tools or materials from the van.  As the
vehicle sank and Mr. Serraj and Ms. Shukulli were in the rear of the vehicle, the
cage prevented people from getting the occupants out, and it prevented the people
inside from getting out of the back of the van.  Although the windows had been
broken, the occupants could not escape.  The only way out of the vehicle was
through the front doors, which were at that point flooded and blocked with cold
lake water.
With the passage of
time after the incident it became evident that the courageous efforts of
regular people were not able to succeed in saving Agnesa Shukulli.  She was
trapped inside the vehicle and no one was able to rescue her.  Even the similar
courageous efforts of the Toronto Police officers who attended moments later
were not able to save her and remove her from the vehicle.  Although Mr. Serraj
was able to escape and make his way to shore, as indicated in the facts, he
told the people who were there that he needed to get his girlfriend out, that
she was in there.  He kept repeating “my girlfriend – my girlfriend”.  He urged
other people on scene to get her, as she was still inside the sinking vehicle.
As the Crown
indicated earlier, there was no evidence that Mr. Serraj ever intended to harm
her.  As indicated above, Mr. Serraj thought he was driving to an exit from the
parking lot.  He thought he was driving onto another street.  He did not
realize until it was too late, and he was driving too quickly, that he was
driving to a final exit, an entry to the dark, icy cold waters of Lake Ontario
by way of a boat ramp that descended deeply and quickly into the lake.  By the
time he realized where he was headed, and he applied brakes at the top of the
boat ramp it was too late.  His vehicle went into the lake.
Often in driving
cases that the courts deal with there is a situation where a driver has been
drinking alcohol or taking drugs, and that is what caused a fatal outcome like
this.  That is not the case in this case.  There is no evidence he had been
drinking or taking any drugs.  This was not a case of dangerous driving.  It
was a case of driving without due care and attention, of speeding to the ramp,
not knowing for certain if it was a proper exit from the parking lot to the
street.  He was wrong.  It was an exit to the lake.
The circumstances
of the offender
The court has been
advised of the circumstances of
Mr. Serraj.  Mr.
Serraj was born on Christmas Day, December 25, 2001.  He attended high school
in Albania, where he was a good student, respected by teachers and classmates. 
He volunteered at the Catholic church in Albania.  He was the youngest of five
children.  His siblings remain with his parents in Albania.  He calls them each
day before work.  He has had a very close relationship with his cousin, who
assisted in bringing him here to Canada.  He’s been living with his cousin for
a period of time, starting one and a half years before the incident.  His
cousin speaks very highly of him.  He indicates that his cousin has been a great
houseguest.  Mr. Serraj respects the people he lives with and follows the rules
of the house.  He has worked in residential construction for his cousin’s
company, where he has worked long hours, and sometimes six or seven days a
week.  He is a very responsible and good worker.  His cousin has been impressed
by his work ethic.  His cousin is here today to show his support for Mr.
Serraj.
Mr. Serraj has
attended St. Mother Teresa Church in Etobicoke.  His church and his work have
been important constants in his life.  Although he has been getting therapy
from his church, and attending there to try to deal with his guilt for this
terrible tragedy, and the church has been somewhat successful, it may be that
counselling ordered by the court would be of greater assistance to deal with
the guilt in this matter, to deal with his driving conduct that caused the loss
of his girlfriend, for whom he had the strongest feelings.
There are
significant indications of remorse in this case.  First, the guilty plea to this
charge shows his remorse by saving the need for the Crown to prove that he is
guilty of this charge, by saving the need for witnesses to come to court to
relive this experience, including the numerous bystanders and police officers
who would have been called upon and questioned to relive what was no doubt one
of the most traumatic experiences in their lives, of seeing this vehicle go
down under the ice in Lake Ontario in temperatures likely to cause hypothermia
within a few minutes.  They all made valiant efforts.  They acted with bravery
and courage to do anything they could to save Agnesa.  They grabbed whatever
they could to break the windows to get to her to bring her to safety.  It was
just not to be.  They could not succeed because she was trapped in the vehicle
and unable to be reached in time to be saved.
Mr. Serraj has
indicated his remorse to this court.  The court has also been advised that he
has suffered and continues to suffer every day with this guilt for what he
caused.  Today he, by his guilty plea, acknowledged in court his responsibility
for causing Agnesa’s death by his driving.  He has served a lengthy jail term
already.  There is going to be a need for him to continue to get therapy to try
and deal with the loss of the girlfriend he caused, the woman he pleaded for
others to save as he was by the water’s edge.  This is an image he will have
for the rest of his life, one which he will need to deal with, that hopefully
will be assisted by therapy.
Victim impact and
impact on victim’s family
While this is an
offence under the
Highway Traffic Act
, the court nonetheless takes into
account the impact of this tragic offence resulting in the very sad outcome of
the loss of life of Ms. Agnesa Shukulli.  She was a 25-year-old lady who had
her whole life ahead of her.  She was greatly loved by her parents, her sister
Anxhela Shukulli, and all of their family.
Anxhela Shukulli read
a very moving and emotional victim impact statement, which described the
excruciating impact of the loss of her little sister Agnesa, both on her life,
on her husband’s life, her parents’ life, and their whole family.  It is tragic
and trite to say that there is nothing the court can do to bring her back, as
much as the court would like to do that.  It is a loss that is unable to be
calculated, one that will be suffered over the lifetime of their parents, who
should never have had to bury their child at any age.  It is a tremendous loss
that her bigger sister Anxhela, who cared for her very deeply, and looked after
her as an older sister since the two of them were very young girls, will
probably never fully overcome.  That is not to say though that over time it is
hoped that the therapy that she is getting will ease the pain somewhat.  It is
nevertheless a hole in her life, and a hole in the lives of her parents and
family that will never be filled.  That is a consequence that this court
considers very carefully.  The court is deeply moved by that very tragic
consequence.  I am truly, genuinely very sorry for your loss.  My words cannot
convey how sorry I am for your tragic loss of Agnesa.
Legal parameters
for sentence
The offence of
careless driving is set out in the
Highway Traffic Act
.  The
Act
was recently amended to provide for the new offence of careless driving causing
death, which reflects the more serious outcomes when that type of driving
results in the death of another person.
That offence is set
out in s.130(3) of the
Highway Traffic Act
.  It provides that a person
is guilty of driving carelessly if the person drives a vehicle on a highway or
in a specified place, this time it was a parking lot, without due care and
attention, or without reasonable consideration for other persons, and causes
death to another person.
That law sets out
what type of sentence can be imposed by the court.  There can be a fine
imposed.  Neither lawyer is of the view that a fine is appropriate in this
case.  Or a term of imprisonment, which means jail, can be imposed for up to
two years.  And in addition, there is a maximum suspension of a driver’s
licence of five years.
In looking at that
range of sentence, the court considers among other things, whether the person
has a prior record.  Mr. Serraj has no prior record, either under the
Criminal
Code
or the
Highway Traffic Act
.  The court considers the mitigating
factors of entering the guilty plea, and the remorse of Mr. Serraj.  He has a
pro-social record, and strong rehabilitative prospects.
Counsel for the
Crown and the defence have agreed after a careful review of what all the
evidence would have been, and what the law suggests be done in this case, that
the appropriate sentence in this case is one of what’s called time served.  He
has already served a lot of time in jail.  Mr. Serraj was arrested at the time
of the offence, January 20
th
, 2025, and he remained in jail until he
was released on June 17
th
, 2025.  That is about six months in jail. 
In law, that would have been considered, with additional credit for each day,
according to what is referred to as the
Summers
credit, of one and a
half days credit for each day in custody.  That means Mr. Serraj has already
served the equivalent of nine months in jail for this charge.
Both lawyers have
agreed that is already a sufficient jail term for him.  Counsel have agreed
essentially to pre-sentence custody of real days of four months and enhanced
pre-sentence credit of six months less a day.
Following that the
counsel agree that he should be placed on probation for a period of twelve
months, with the terms I am going to mention in a moment, and that he also be
given a five-year driving suspension, which is the maximum time that he can be
suspended from driving.
When counsel agree
to a joint submission this is something considered very carefully by the
court.  Mr. Serraj has given up his right to trial on the basis that the Crown
and defence have agreed that given the time he has been in jail this is an appropriate
punishment for this offence.  The court must follow this according to the
direction of the Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Anthony Cook
,
2016 SCC
43
.  The Supreme Court directed all courts in Canada, including this court,
that the court should not give a different sentence than the joint submission
unless what the lawyers propose would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute, or be contrary to the public interest.  A joint submission should
not be rejected by a sentencing judge such as myself, lightly.
This court cannot
say that the joint submission for the offence of careless driving causing death
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.  Mr. Serraj has
already served the equivalent of a lengthy period in jail, and he had no prior
record whatsoever.  Considering the case law for this type of offence of a
careless driving offence which results in death, which is relatively new in
law, the court finds that it is a proper sentence in all of the circumstances.
As indicated then,
the sentence will recognize four months actual pre-sentence custody credit, and
six months less a day enhanced pre-sentence custody credit, after which the
court will impose a period of twelve months probation with the following
terms.  Report today to probation, and thereafter as directed, reside at an
address approved by the probation officer, and not change that address without
prior notification to the probation officer, not to be in the driver’s seat,
and counsel I am adding or to operate any motor vehicle.  Then I am adding
slightly, attend for any assessment and counselling, because sometimes one
needs to go to an assessment before they can go for counselling, as directed by
the probation officer for grief or other relevant issues.  You are also to sign
releases so that your probation officer can monitor your attendance at those
appointments.
There will also be a
five-year driving suspension.  The victim fine surcharge is mandatory.  Does
your client require more than six months to make payment of that?
MR. GOLD:  Yes,
please, because he has a – a big expense for travelling now, Your Honour.  So,
I would....
THE COURT:  What
period of time?
MR. GOLD:  Twelve
months, please, Your Honour.
THE COURT:  All
right, there will be twelve months to make payment of the victim fine
surcharge.  Is the Crown going to withdraw the other charge?
MR. SUNDERLAND: 
Yes, please, if the criminal charge can be withdrawn, please.  Thank you.
THE COURT:  Are
there any questions or clarifications sought?
MR. GOLD:  No.  I
just want to correct something, Your Honour.  I blame it on the Crown typo. 
They had 19 – sorry 2024 is the date of the offence.  I said they needed my
consent to waive the limitation period.  No.  I forgot in 2020 they doubled the
limitation period to twelve months, Your Honour.  So, I was showing my age when
I said that.  I apologize.
THE COURT:  No, that
is okay.  A lot of us have been around a long time and have had six months
stick in our brain rather than a year.  That is okay.
MR. GOLD:  Thank
you, very much, Your Honour.
THE COURT:  All
right.  So, he will need to sign his probation order in a few moments.  All
right.
Thank you, very
much, counsel.  I know a lot of work was put into this.  And again, I am very –
very sorry for the
victim’s loss, and for the victim’s family.
FORM 3
ELECTRONIC
  CERTIFICATE OF TRANSCRIPT (SUBSECTION 5 (2))
Evidence Act
I,
Cindy Suley
,
(Name
  of authorized person)
certify that this document is a true
  and accurate transcript of the recording of
R. v. Kristjan Serraj
in the
Superior Court of Justice
(Name
  of case)
(Name
  of court)
held at
10 Armoury Street,
  Toronto, ON
(Court
  address)
taken from Recording
4810_804_20251120_093827__6_BROWNBE
, which has been certified in Form 1.
December 4, 2025
(Date)
(Electronic
    signature of authorized person)
2084980202
Ontario
_____________________,
Canada.
A certificate in Form 3 is admissible in evidence and is proof, in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, that the transcript is a transcript of the
certified recording of evidence and proceedings in the proceeding that is
identified in the certificate.