ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Bomberry
, 2025 ONCJ 6
DATE: 
2025 01 09
COURT
FILE No.:  Hamilton 998 23 47104499
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
LARRY
BOMBERRY
Reasons
for Judgment
Before
Justice Davin M.K. Garg
Heard
on August 19-20, November 25, December 30, 2024
Reasons
released on January 9, 2025
Gordon Akilie............................... agent
for the Public Prosecution Service of Canada
Andrew Confente............................................................................ counsel
for the accused
GARG J.:
Overview
[
1
]
Larry Bomberry was arrested in an encampment while
possessing over 62 grams of methamphetamine and $1,400 in cash. The evidence is
thin that he was trafficking the methamphetamine at the time of his arrest. Can
the Crown still prove that he possessed the drugs for the purpose of
trafficking? That is the issue for me to resolve.
[
2
]
I am satisfied that a trafficking purpose is the
only reasonable inference in this case. The charge of possession for the
purpose of trafficking does not require proof of actual trafficking. While Mr.
Bomberry might not have been actively trafficking at the time of his arrest,
the quantity of drugs and cash establish beyond a reasonable doubt that he possessed
the drugs as part of an ongoing trafficking operation.
Background
[
3
]
Mr. Bomberry visited the Woodlands Park in
Hamilton one morning in July 2023. An encampment was setup in the park at the
time. Mr. Bomberry ultimately entered a friend’s tent. He testified that he
planned to use her tent to “do a bump” of his methamphetamine. But he was
arrested by the police before he could snort the drugs.
[
4
]
There is no dispute that Mr. Bomberry possessed 62.48
grams of methamphetamine.
[1]
I previously dismissed a defence application to exclude the drugs under
sections 8 and 24(2) of the
Charter
. The evidence
called by the Crown on the
Charter
application applied to the trial
proper on the consent of the parties.
[
5
]
Mr. Bomberry testified that he had purchased the
methamphetamine about three days before his arrest. He purchased roughly two
ounces (or 56 grams) worth. He paid $300. He purchased a greater quantity than
normal because he knew the seller, who gave him a discount. He combined that
purchase with a quantity of methamphetamine already in his possession.
[
6
]
The Crown called a police officer who was
qualified on consent to give expert opinion evidence about the conduct and
indicia of trafficking methamphetamine, which included evidence on pricing,
quantity, storage habits, consumption habits, and side effects on users.
Analysis of the Exculpatory Evidence
[
7
]
The
W.(D.)
principles apply in this case.
Mr. Bomberry testified and denied that he possessed the methamphetamine for the
purpose of trafficking. He asserted that he only possessed the drugs for
personal use. If I accept his account or am left in doubt by it, then I must
acquit on that charge. Although the
W.(D.)
analysis refers to three
steps, the overriding consideration is whether the evidence as a whole leaves
me with any reasonable doubt about Mr. Bomberry’s guilt. The
W.(D).
analysis ensures that my verdict is not based on a choice between the Crown
evidence and the defence evidence: see
R. v. A.J.K.
,
2022 ONCA 487
at
para.
22
. Exculpatory evidence is not limited to the defence case. It can arise
from the Crown’s case as well:
R. v. B.D.
,
2011 ONCA 51
at para.
114
.
[
8
]
For the following three reasons, I reject Mr.
Bomberry’s evidence and am not left in doubt by his evidence when it comes to his
stated purpose for possessing the drugs.
[
9
]
First, I find Mr. Bomberry’s evidence about the
source of $1,481.75 in cash in his possession to be implausible. Mr. Bomberry
received $350 a month from Ontario Works for basic needs. To supplement this
income, Mr. Bomberry testified that he bought broken e-bikes, repaired them,
and sold them. He testified that around the time of purchasing the drugs, he
had just sold an e-bike or two for roughly $400 or $500. When Mr. Bomberry was
reminded about the sum of cash in his possession, which surpassed the revenue
from selling two e-bikes, he added that he had cashed cheques received when
previous charges were “thrown out”. He initially said that he had received his
last cheque a couple months before the arrest in the amount of $500 or $600. He
shortened the timeframe in cross-examination. When asked how much of those
funds he had remaining, Mr. Bomberry explained how he had invested the money in
flipping e-bikes, which netted him roughly $300.
[
10
]
I do not accept that Mr. Bomberry was making the
claimed sums from repairing and flipping e-bikes. This is a situation where I
required more detail about the nature of Mr. Bomberry’s enterprise to accept
his testimony about it. I am mindful that Mr. Bomberry was answering the
questions that were put to him: see
R. v. R.C.
,
2008 ONCA 98
at para.
9
. But the scenario that he presented does not accord with common
sense without details lending credence to it: see
R. v. Duong
,
2014 ONCA
375
at para.
61
. E-bikes are a relatively high-value item. Prospective
customers might want to know some details about the provenance and reliability
of an e-bike before purchasing one. Some level of skill would be required to
change or repair electrical parts. I received scant details about how Mr.
Bomberry obtained the broken e-bikes, how much he paid for them, how he went
about fixing them, and how he found people to sell them to, beyond random
people responding to ads on Kijiji. I received limited details about where Mr.
Bomberry fixed the bikes, where he stored them, and what tools he used in his
work. Without these details, I find it implausible that Mr. Bomberry had sold
about $900 worth of e-bikes a few days before his arrest and continued to hold
the proceeds. The explanation is too convenient.
[
11
]
The financial calculation does not add up in any
event. At its highest, selling the two e-bikes gave Mr. Bomberry $1,000. He
netted about $300 after purchasing e-bikes with funds returned to him after previous
charges were thrown out. The $1,300 still puts him short of the $1,481.75 found
in his possession. The shortfall could have been made up through funds
remaining from his Ontario Works or from other proceeds returned to him after
charges fell through. But Mr. Bomberry clarified in cross-examination that he
had not yet received his Ontario Works payment for that month. Plus he had
expenses. In addition to his basic needs, Mr. Bomberry had recently paid $300
for the methamphetamine and an additional $300 or $350 for cocaine.
[2]
The methamphetamine was a
recurring monthly expense. All the while, Mr. Bomberry says he was saving money
to rent an apartment. I find that this income statement does not hold up to
scrutiny.
[
12
]
Second, I do not accept Mr. Bomberry’s
explanation for why he was keeping all the cash and methamphetamine on him if
he was only using the drugs for personal use. I appreciate that people
experiencing homelessness or housing instability may need to keep their
belongings on them for safekeeping. But Mr. Bomberry had stable housing. He had
been living with his girlfriend and her family in a three-bedroom house for
four years. It had various storage options, including his room, closets, and a
basement, even if Mr. Bomberry did not enjoy complete privacy there or entirely
trust the other occupants. Mr. Bomberry must have been keeping the e-bikes and repair
tools somewhere—there was no suggestion that he was always carting them around
with him. If a significant concern to Mr. Bomberry was the risk of losing his
drugs or money, then it does not make sense that he would bring the items to an
encampment, go inside a tent, and start chipping off a chunk from his stash.
The tent was not private. Mr. Bomberry had left open the tent’s front door. An
officer could see Mr. Bomberry and his drugs through a window.
[
13
]
Third, Mr. Bomberry gave inconsistent evidence
on his timeline for visiting the park that day. The inconsistency is significant
given that Mr. Bomberry’s actions and intentions when visiting the park were a
live issue in this case. In examination in-chief, Mr. Bomberry was clear that
he attended the park around “ten to eleven”
[3]
after leaving a friend’s place. He attended the park because he was just
passing through and happened to see a friend. Mr. Bomberry gave different
evidence in cross-examination. He testified that he went to the park around 3am
or 4am and stayed at the park until his arrest around 10am. I find that Mr. Bomberry
became defensive when confronted on the inconsistency in a manner that
undermined his credibility. For instance, I do not accept that he had been
referring to his arrival at a specific location within the park during his
examination in-chief.
[
14
]
While I reject and am not left in doubt by Mr.
Bomberry’s testimony that he possessed 62 grams of methamphetamine for entirely
personal use, I accept that he was addicted to the drug and regularly consumed
it. I also accept that Mr. Bomberry did not hold regular employment or earn a
steady stream of income, aside from his Ontario Works payments.
[4]
I can accept some, none, or
all of a witness’s evidence:
R. v. S.H.
,
2011 ONCA 215
at para.
8
.
Villaroman
Analysis
[
15
]
The Crown bears the onus of proving each and every
element of the offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt. Mr. Bomberry carries
no onus to prove or disprove anything. He is presumed innocent of all charges.
The burden of proof never shifts to the defence. It is not enough for me to
believe that Mr. Bomberry is probably or likely guilty of an offence. In that
situation, I would need to acquit. While the Crown is not required to prove its
case to an absolute certainty, proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls much
closer to an absolute certainty than the balance of probabilities. Reasonable
doubt can arise from the evidence or from the absence of evidence.
[
16
]
The Crown presents a circumstantial case to
prove Mr. Bomberry’s purpose for possessing the drugs.  I must conduct an
analysis pursuant to the principles articulated in
R. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33
. My assessment of the circumstantial evidence and the process of
drawing inferences is guided by the Court of Appeal’s decision in
R. v.
Gibson
,
2021 ONCA 530
at paras.
75-79
. I must decide whether a trafficking
purpose is the only reasonable conclusion on the cumulative effect of the evidence.
[
17
]
I must consider other reasonable possibilities
or plausible theories that are inconsistent with guilt to decide whether an
inference of guilt is the only reasonable inference. Reasonable possibilities
must be based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of
evidence. The possibility inconsistent with guilt that I must consider in this
case is whether Mr. Bomberry possessed the drugs for personal use. “[I]t is for
the trier of fact to determine whether any proposed alternative way of looking
at the case as a whole is reasonable enough to raise a doubt about the guilt of
the accused”:
R. v. Lights
,
2020 ONCA 128
at para.
39
.
[
18
]
I remind myself that my rejection of Mr.
Bomberry’s testimony does not add a brick to the Crown’s case. For example,
rejecting Mr. Bomberry’s evidence about the source of cash in his possession
simply means that I lack direct evidence about the source. It does not
necessarily mean that the source was illicit. As defence counsel rightly
emphasized, there was no onus on Mr. Bomberry to prove anything: see
R. v.
J.E.
,
2024 ONCA 801
at para.
20
.
[
19
]
Trafficking cases demand a fact-specific
inquiry. Drug quantities insufficient to make out trafficking in one case might
be sufficient in another:
R. v. Gordon
,
2018 ONSC 1297
at para.
65
.
[
20
]
The Crown presented two routes of liability. The
primary route is that Mr. Bomberry was trafficking, or intended to traffic
methamphetamine, in the encampment that day. Both parties elicited evidence relevant
to this issue, with the defence arguing that Mr. Bomberry lacked an ability to traffic
drugs at the time of his arrest. The secondary route is that Mr. Bomberry
possessed the drugs with the intention to traffic them, regardless of whether
he was trafficking them in the encampment. I will elaborate on why I am
satisfied that the Crown has met its onus on the secondary route of liability.
Trafficking in the Encampment
[
21
]
I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Bomberry was actively trafficking methamphetamine in the encampment. Through
cross-examination of the expert, the defence aptly elicited the absence of factors
that might be expected when a dealer is in the midst of trafficking
methamphetamine at “points” of 0.1 grams. Both a user and trafficker seek a
quick transaction. As the expert recognized, “in a tent setting at a park, as a
dealer, you don’t want a lineup constantly in front of your tent because that’s
going to draw more attention”. To enable quick transactions, the trafficker
needs to have points ready for sale in individual bags. The trafficker would
then receive $10 or $15 cash in return. But Mr. Bomberry was arrested without
any individual bags, the methamphetamine was largely in one chunk, there is no
indication that Mr. Bomberry could have weighed out individual amounts (e.g.,
he did not have a scale), and he had limited $5 and $10 bills in his possession.
Mr. Bomberry also did not have any weapons or debt lists on him, and he only
had one cell phone.
Ongoing Trafficking Operation
[
22
]
To be found guilty of possessing methamphetamine
for the purpose of trafficking, an accused need not be found in the act of
trafficking. Parliament has made this clear by creating two separate offences
in section 5 of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
. Whereas
subsection (1) makes it an offence to traffic a controlled substance, Mr.
Bomberry is charged under subsection (2), which prohibits the possession of a
controlled substance for the purpose of trafficking (also known colloquially as
“P4P”). Even when an individual is charged under subsection (2), they must
still have the necessary
mens rea
while possessing the drugs. The
individual must intend to traffic the drugs at the time of possession, even if
the trafficking will occur at some point in the future: see
R. v.
Rajczak-McGuigan
,
2024 ONCJ 403
at para.
49
.
[
23
]
Defence counsel agreed with these legal
principles but asserted that it would be speculative to conclude that Mr.
Bomberry intended to traffic the methamphetamine. I took this argument to mean
that the evidence was insufficient to prove a trafficking purpose as the only
reasonable inference.
[
24
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that a
trafficking purpose is the only reasonable inference based on the entirety of
the evidence that I accept. I draw this inference based on the quantity of
drugs and cash in Mr. Bomberry’s possession, in conjunction with the parts of
the expert’s evidence that I accept. I arrive at this conclusion after
considering the aforementioned absence of evidence (e.g., Mr. Bomberry was not found
with a weapon or multiple cell phones).
[
25
]
Of significance, Mr. Bomberry had over $1,400 in
cash. I accept his evidence that he received $350 a month from Ontario Works and
did not otherwise have a steady income stream. Beyond that, I lack direct
evidence that I accept to account for the cash in his possession. Mr. Bomberry bore
no onus to explain the source of the cash. But an inference is available that he
made the cash from selling the methamphetamine, given the absence of another
plausible explanation for the cash. I accept the expert’s evidence that drug
traffickers generally deal in cash and that a user-trafficker is unlikely to
deposit the funds in a bank account. I also accept that a user of
methamphetamine who lacks licit revenue streams tends to not have much money—yet
Mr. Bomberry did have a significant amount of money. While the absence of small
bills undermined the theory of Mr. Bomberry trafficking in the encampment, the
larger bills in his possession do not undermine the existence of an ongoing
trafficking operation.
[
26
]
I further accept the expert’s evidence that the
62 grams of methamphetamine represented 620 doses at the point level. I accept
that a typical user would consume two to three grams a day but would need to
take a break at some point during the “come-down” period when the body is
shutting down.
[5]
Putting aside any periods of non-consumption, the amount in Mr. Bomberry’s
possession would have lasted 20 days if he consumed slightly more than three
grams per day. This significant quantity tells against personal possession and
supports that Mr. Bomberry was also trafficking the drug.
[
27
]
I also accept the expert’s evidence that a mere
user would be unlikely to carry the quantities of drugs and cash found on Mr.
Bomberry due to the associated risks (e.g., theft, seizure by the police). I
accept this evidence given that I also make a finding of fact that Mr. Bomberry
had alternative storage arrangements available at his home. I accept the
expert’s evidence notwithstanding the defence argument that Mr. Bomberry had
attempted to conceal the drugs in a Naloxone kit.
[6]
Rather, I find that the kit
acted as a convenient form of wallet, as confirmed by Mr. Bomberry in his
testimony.
[
28
]
Finally, I accept that a mere street level user
would be unlikely to purchase at the ounce level given the nature of the
trafficking hierarchy and the financial impediments to such a purchase. It is
not contentious that Mr. Bomberry purchased at the ounce level. The packaging
of the methamphetamine was consistent with a mid-level purchase (i.e., a sandwich
bag) and inconsistent with a street level purchase (i.e., a dime bag). Mr.
Bomberry also testified that he purchased the methamphetamine at the ounce
level.
[
29
]
I have outlined above the specific portions of
the expert evidence that I relied on. I did not rely upon portions of the
expert’s evidence that were premised on things he had never seen. Anecdotal
evidence that an expert has never heard of something before does not carry
probative value. Otherwise, the accused would bear an onus to call evidence to
prove that something can occur: see
R. v. Sekhon
,
2014 SCC 15
at para.
50
.
In this case, for example, I put no weight on the expert’s evidence that he had
never heard about a person consuming more than three grams of methamphetamine a
day. Rather, I rely on his evidence that the usual consumption range is under
three grams. The defence did not strongly push that Mr. Bomberry was consuming
more than three grams per day—Mr. Bomberry’s own evidence was that he was
consuming “like two to three grams a day roughly, if not more”.
[
30
]
I find that this case is distinguishable from the
Ontario Court of Appeal’s decision in
R. v. MacAdam
,
2024 ONCA 13
. The
Court described the evidence of trafficking as “thin” and “meagre” for an
accused found in possession of 112 grams of cocaine. Each case must be examined
on its individual facts. I have no evidence on how, if at all, 112 grams of
cocaine compares to 62 grams of methamphetamine (the decision does not mention
whether the cocaine was in powder or crack form). Importantly, Mr. Bomberry did
not live in a remote location without ready access to dealers, which might call
for stockpiling drugs. Mr. Bomberry also possessed significant cash, whereas no
money is mentioned in the
MacAdam
decision. While the expert before me
recognized the frailties in a theory that Mr. Bomberry was trafficking in the
encampment, he held firm on his opinion overall.
[
31
]
I have considered an argument that the absence
of actual trafficking—or being in position to conduct actual trafficking—undermines
the inference that Mr. Bomberry possessed the methamphetamine for the purpose
of trafficking. As the argument goes, Mr. Bomberry was found somewhere that
likely housed the prime clientele for point level dealing. If he was not
positioned to sell drugs to this clientele when arrested, then I should doubt
whether he intended to ever sell the drugs in his possession. I reject this
argument. I cannot say whether people living in an encampment are the sole or
even prime clientele to purchase points of methamphetamine. Even if they are, the
people in the encampment were not leaving any time soon. Mr. Bomberry lived
nearby. He had ample opportunity to sell drugs to them, even if the
transactions would occur in the future. A person who possesses drugs for the
purpose of trafficking need not be in a perpetual state of readiness to deal
those drugs.
Conclusions
[
32
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Bomberry possessed the methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking it.
He had been trafficking, and he intended to continue trafficking, even if he
was not trafficking at the moment of his arrest. An inference of possession for
exclusively personal use is neither reasonably possible nor plausible in the
circumstances. I am also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Bomberry
knew that some of the cash in his possession had been earned from trafficking
methamphetamine.
Verdicts
[
33
]
I find Mr. Bomberry guilty of possessing
methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking and possessing property obtained
by crime. Guilty verdicts were previously entered for the simple possession of
fentanyl, cocaine, and psilocybin.
Released:  January
9, 2025
Signed: Justice Davin M.K. Garg
[1]
The police also seized a further 10.81 grams of suspected
methamphetamine. But since these substances were not certified as
methamphetamine by Health Canada, I will limit my analysis to the confirmed
62.48 grams.
[2]
The evidence is unclear on whether Mr. Bomberry also paid something for the psilocybin
and fentanyl.
[3]
It is unclear whether Mr. Bomberry meant he attended between
10am and 11am, or at 10:50am. The former interpretation is more likely. But
nothing turns on the distinction.
[4]
I do not consider the cheques from the police or the sale of e-bikes to
represent steady income streams.
[5]
This evidence fell within the “consumption habits” and “side
effects” of the expert’s scope (see Exhibit 7).
[6]
See Exhibit 6.