WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that
the following notice be attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.  This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code
, which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. J.E.,
2025 ONCJ 571
DATE: 
2025 10 28
COURT FILE No.:
20-627
Chatham,
Ontario
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
J.E.
Before
Justice Shannon L. Pollock
Heard
on July 9, 2025, August 25, 2025,
and
October 1, 2025
Reasons
Released on October 28, 2025
Melanie Nancekievill.............................................................. Counsel
for the Respondent
Simon Kim...................................................................................... Counsel
for the Applicant
RULING
ON CHARTER APPLICATION FOR STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
Contents
Introduction
..
2
The Charter Breaches
.
3
Section 24(1) – Stay of Proceedings
.
4
The Evidence
.
5
Analysis
.
7
Pollock J.:
Introduction
[
1
]        This matter is before me for a
retrial in relation to allegations of sexual assault and sexual interference.
The complainant is his stepdaughter. The Applicant was convicted on this matter
after a trial in the Ontario Court of Justice. That conviction was successfully
appealed. The Applicant seeks to have the charges stayed due to him being
overheld in custody for a period of sixteen (16) hours after the Court of
Appeal issued an Order for his release.
[
2
]         The Applicant was released on
bail pending appeal on June 30, 2022. The Applicant’s appeal was argued in September
of 2024. He surrendered himself into custody at Joyceville the morning of his appeal.
Judgment was reserved and the Applicant was re-released on bail pending
reasons. On October 29, 2024, appellate counsel was notified that the Court
would be releasing its judgment on October 31, 2024. The Applicant was required
to report back to Joyceville penitentiary that morning. The Court of Appeal overturned
the Applicant’s convictions and sent the matter back for retrial. There was an
Order re-releasing the Applicant on bail pending the retrial. The Order was
sent to Joyceville Institution at 4:39 pm on October 31, 2024. The Applicant
was not released. He was transferred to Quinte Detention Centre, a provincial
institution. He was released from there the next morning at 9:54 am.
[
3
]        It is not in issue that the
overholding of the Applicant was a breach of his Charter rights under the
Charter. The issue I must decide is whether there is an appropriate remedy in
the circumstances. The Applicant seeks a stay. The Respondent opposes that
relief.
The Charter Breaches
[
4
]        There are several sections of the Charter that
offer protection for the kind of breach that occurred to the Applicant’s rights
in these circumstances. Freedom against unlawful imprisonment is a basic,
fundamental right in our Society.
[
5
]        Section 7 of the Charter states that everyone has
the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be
deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental
justice.
[
6
]        Section 9 states that everyone has the right not
to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned.
[
7
]        Section 10(a) of the Charter states that everyone
has the right on arrest or detention to be informed promptly of the reasons
therefore.
[
8
]        Section 11(e) states that any person charged with
an offence has the right not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause.
[
9
]        Arguably, each of these Charter rights was
breached by the overholding of the Applicant in custody when there was a Court
Order for his release.
[
10
]      The issue is not whether the Applicant’s Charter
rights were breached. They very clearly were. The issue becomes what, if
anything, should be done about the breach of his rights.
Section 24(1) – Stay of Proceedings
[
11
]      Section 24(1) of the Charter states that anyone
whose Charter rights or freedoms have been infringed or denied may apply to the
Court to obtain a just and appropriate remedy.
[
12
]      The Applicant submits that a stay should be
granted. The Respondent opposes the granting of such relief.
[
13
]      A stay can only be granted “in the clearest of
cases”. There is a residual discretion in a trial court judge to stay
proceedings where compelling an accused to stand trial would violate those
fundamental principles of justice which underlie the community’s sense of fair
play and decency and to prevent the abuse of a court’s process through
oppressive or vexatious proceedings.: R. v. Jewitt,
1985 CanLII 47 (SCC)
at
paragraph
25
[
14
]      There are two (2) types of state conduct that may
warrant a stay: conduct that compromises the fairness of the trial, considered
the main category; and conduct that risks undermining the integrity of the
judicial process, referred to as the residual category. The test is the same
for both. The circumstances of this case fall under the residual category. There
are three (3) requirements: 1) there must be prejudice to the integrity of the
justice system that will be manifested, perpetuated or aggravated through the
conduct of the trial, or by its outcome; 2) there must be no alternative remedy
capable of redressing the prejudice; and 3) where there is still uncertainty
over whether a stay is warranted after the first two (2) steps, the court must
balance the interests in favour of granting a stay against the interest that
society has in having a final decision on the merits.: R. v. Babos,
2014 SCC 16
at paragraphs
31 to 32
[
15
]      The question for the residual category at the
first stage is whether the state has engaged in conduct that is offensive to
societal notions of fair play and decency and whether proceeding with a trial
in the face of that conduct would be harmful to the integrity of the justice
system. It requires asking whether the state conduct was so troublesome that
having a trial will leave the impression that the justice system condones conduct
that is offensive to society’s sense of fair play and decency.:
R. v. Babos
,
2014 SCC 16
at paragraph
35
[
16
]      At stage two (2), in a residual category case, remedies
must be directed towards the harm to the integrity of the justice system. The
goal is not to provide redress to an accused for a wrong done to them and is
whether an alternate remedy will adequately dissociate the justice system from
the impugned state conduct going forward.:
R. v. Babos
,
2014 SCC 16 (CanLII)
at
paragraph
39
[
17
]      The balancing at stage three (3) has added
significance when the residual category is invoked. The court must consider
things such as the nature and seriousness of the impugned conduct, whether the
conduct is isolated or reflects a systemic and ongoing problem, the
circumstances of the accused, the charges he or she faces and the interests of
society in having the charges disposed of on the merits. The more egregious the
state conduct, the greater the need for the court to dissociate itself from it.:
R. v. Babos
,
2014 SCC 16 (CanLII)
at paragraphs
40 and 41
The Evidence
[
18
]      The Applicant and his wife testified on the
Application. Affidavits were filed from the Applicant’s wife, a partner at the
law firm representing him and the Regional Manager of Sentence Management for
the Correctional Service of Canada. Evidence was also given by persons working
for the sentencing management team who were involved in the Applicant’s matter.
[
19
]      The Applicant’s wife, who is also the mother of
the complainant, stated that she was advised by counsel of the successful
appeal shortly after 10:30 a.m. on October 31, 2024. In her affidavit, she
indicates that counsel’s office remained in contact with her and the
Applicant’s other sureties in the ensuing hours in preparing an Application for
an Order for bail pending re-trial. The Crown consented and an Order was made.
[
20
]      The affidavit of the Applicant’s wife indicates that
after the release Order was sent to the institution, she had a conversation
with the Applicant and became aware he was being transferred. She testified
that she had made the Applicant aware earlier in the day that he was to be
released. She testified that she had spoken to correctional officers in the
afternoon when she was asked why she and the Applicant’s father were in the
parking lot of the institution. She stated that she and the Applicant’s father
were approached by correctional officers while they were waiting in the parking
lot and told to leave since the Applicant would not be released. She estimates
that this occurred between 4:30 and 5:00 p.m. She contacted counsel who she
says spoke directly to the correctional officers.
[
21
]      There were some difficulties with the reliability
of the Applicant’s wife’s evidence. She had a belief that the September 9
release order was just a bail change. However, the other evidence was that
September 9 was an occasion when it was the Applicant’s brother who was
involved in his attendance at the institution and release from there. That may
be why she was confused about what occurred.
[
22
]      The Applicant gave evidence that he had
surrendered himself on the day the appeal was heard and been released a few
hours later without issue. On October 31, 2024, he surrendered himself again to
await the Court of Appeal’s decision. He testified that towards the end of the
day a correctional officer came into cells to get him out. He said there was a female
in plain clothes and other correctional officers standing there. He testified
he signed paperwork and then went back to his cell. He then spoke with his wife
and told her he had signed paperwork and was getting released. This is
consistent with his wife’s testimony on this issue.
[
23
]      The Applicant testified that, as he was gathering
his belongings, another guard came and said he was being transferred to Quinte.
When he asked, they let him call his wife. He was transferred and released the
next morning. Other than the issue of being held when he should have been
released, he had no difficulties while in custody overnight.
[
24
]      Amy Burtch, who was acting as a chief of sentence
management at the time, gave evidence on the Application. She stated that the
sentence management team works 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday. These
are the standardized hours for all institutions. The Applicant’s case was
assigned to an officer who Ms. Burtch was overseeing at the time. Her recollection
is that the Court of Appeal judgment came in just before 3:00 p.m. via email.
As a result, she worked together with Angie Tebo, who had the Applicant on her
caseload, to make sure the information matched the warrant of committal. Ms.
Burtch contacted Quinte Detention Centre to ensure they would accept the
Applicant. She did this as he was no longer serving a federal sentence, given
the Court’s decision. Once everything was completely reviewed, the Applicant
was added to the release list. The evidence of Ms. Burtch was that at around
3:45 p.m. she confirmed that the Applicant could be escorted to Quinte. She
signed off from work at just after 4:00 p.m. She testified that there is a
general email account for the region and one for the specific institution. The evidence
disclosed that the Court of Appeal documents were sent to both.
[
25
]      Ms. Burtch testified that she received a phone
call on her work cell phone around 4:41 p.m. from the acting chief of
Joyceville, Kristina King, who indicated that correctional managers at
Joyceville had contacted her as there was some indication regarding bail. Ms.
Burtch confirmed she had only received the one (1) document and asked if she
needed to log back in. She was told she did not. Ms. Burtch testified that the
bail order was not signed by the Applicant on October 31
st
. She could
not think of any other occasion when an incident such as this had happened. She
testified that if anyone had logged back in after the Order was received via
email and seen the Order for release it would have been actioned even though it
was received after hours.
[
26
]      Kristina King who was working as an acting chief
of sentence management for Correctional Service of Canada testified. She stated
that she received a phone call from correctional manager, Alex McCormick,
around 4:33 or 4:34 p.m. on October 31
st,
2024. Alex McCormick was
making an enquiry about the Applicant and what was going on. Given that Ms.
King had not worked on site on the afternoon of the 31
st
, she was
unfamiliar with what they were speaking of. As a result of the call, Ms. King
logged onto her computer. She testified that she saw nothing authorizing the
Applicant’s release. She testified to calling Amy Burtch who explained that the
only thing the institution had received was the Court of Appeal’s decision to
order a new trial. She advised Ms. Burtch it was not necessary to log back in
and look as she had just done so.
[
27
]      Ms. King testified that the email accounts are not
monitored after 4:00 p.m. when those in the department are finished working for
the day unless something is brought to their attention. There is a correctional
manager who is monitoring a line that family and lawyers can contact
twenty-four (24) hours per day. If an issue arises, like it did in this case,
then the sentencing department personnel can be reached after hours.
[
28
]      Angie Tebo, a sentence management officer with the
Correctional Service of Canada, also testified on the Application. It was Ms.
Tebo’s evidence that she processed the Court of Appeal decisions when they came
in on October 31, 2024. She said this occurred around 3:00 p.m. She stated that
once the sentence was quashed that meant the Applicant was no longer viable in
their offender management system.
Analysis
[
29
]      The Applicant submits that, after engaging in an
analysis on the first two (2) stages of the test, I should reach the conclusion
that a stay is the appropriate remedy. In the alternative, they submit that,
after engaging in a balancing of interests at the third stage, they have met
their onus.
[
30
]      The Respondent takes the position that this was an
inadvertent or technical breach and that there are other remedies available,
including a reduction in sentence and/or denunciation of the conduct which
resulted in a breach of the Applicant’s rights. They submit that, should I
determine that I must engage in a stage three (3) analysis, on balance, this is
not an appropriate case for a stay.
[
31
]      The Applicant turned himself in at Joyceville
Institution the morning of October 31, 2024, as the Court of Appeal was going
to be releasing their decision. He had done this on a prior occasion. On that
occasion, he had been granted bail pending the outcome of the decision. The
sentencing team for Correctional Service of Canada are assigned caseloads. The
caseloads involve hundreds of inmates. The Applicant became part of Angie Tebo’s
caseload in May of 2023. The Applicant would have been part of Ms. Tebo’s
caseload when he previously turned himself in and was released as part of the
appeal process.
[
32
]      When the Court’s decision on the appeal was
received by the institution at approximately 3:00 p.m., it was determined he
was no longer serving a sentence as a federal offender. As a result, he was
processed and a decision made that he needed to be transferred out. No one did
any follow-up on whether his release had been granted as it had been in the
past.
[
33
]      The Applicant was held in custody despite there
being a Court Order for his release, without being advised of the reason and
despite the fact that multiple people communicated with corrections staff about
his release. His Charter rights were breached.
[
34
]      The breach commenced when the bail document was
sent over to the institution after 4:30 p.m., which was approximately forty
(40) minutes after the workday for the sentencing management team ended. There
is no one monitoring the email account which receives Court documents after
4:00 p.m. Further, efforts by the Applicant, his family members and his
lawyer’s office to alert institution personnel that a release order was in
place, had no result. It is clear the Applicant was not going to be released
without the sentencing department personnel seeing an Order. Responsible personnel
logging in after hours to check on this issue missed the email coming in by a
matter of minutes. After that, there was no further follow-up until parties
returned to work the next morning at 8:00 a.m.
[
35
]      On the one hand, there is no evidence before me
that this was a usual event. For one, the institution involved is not a remand
facility which deals with and processes bail orders daily. The evidence
revealed that the situation, that being the receipt of an Order after the
conclusion of the sentencing team’s workday, is not one which occurs regularly.
In addition, the sentencing personnel are available to be reached after hours
and ensure that action is taken on any release order received. Here, they did
that very thing however the timing and lack of follow-through is what resulted
in the Order not being seen.
[
36
]      On the other hand, if I accept the evidence of the
Applicant, there was a huge error made when he signed an Order for his release
and then was transferred to another institution. It is difficult to accept
this, given the time that the Order was sent over via email and the fact that
the parties responsible for executing the release were not working at that
time. In other words, there was no one working at the time who would have
processed it when it was received. There is no evidence the Release Order was
sent by the Court of Appeal at the time the Applicant said he signed it. I do
not accept the Applicant’s evidence that he signed a Release Order while still at
Joyceville. He may have signed something. His memory may be flawed. At the very
least, there were errors made by several parties involved that culminated in a
significant consequence.
[
37
]      A huge part of the problem is the fact that no one
on the sentencing team who are responsible for implementing these orders are working
after 4:00 p.m. While they are reachable after hours, no one is monitoring the
email account where Orders are sent. The evidence is that the hours for this
department are the same across the province. That is a systemic problem.
[
38
]      In addition, staff who were alerted by the
Applicant, his family and his counsel should have followed up before
transferring the Applicant out of their institution. Each person along the
chain could have and should have taken another step to communicate with the
others so that the staff on the sentencing team responsible for acting knew
that there was an Order in place.
[
39
]      More could have been done to ensure that this did
not occur. The parties responsible needed to communicate with each other. By
all accounts, the Order for bail pending retrial was not sent with the initial
documentation quashing the conviction and ordering a new trial. I question why
the institution did not follow up with the Court of Appeal to determine if any
other documentation was coming, given the result and the fact that the
Applicant had been released from the institution due to his appeal process on
two (2) prior occasions. It is concerning that multiple correctional officers
were told by the Applicant, his family and counsel that he was to be released
and that did not result in anyone bringing it to the sentencing management team
until the correctional manager reached out just after 4:30 p.m. Then there was
no attempt to reach out to the issuing Court for clarification nor any further
checking the system for the Order.
[
40
]      I have no evidence before me on why these steps
were not taken. What I do know is that, because of these failures, the
Applicant spent approximately sixteen (16) additional hours in custody. That
should never happen. Corrections needs to ensure that there are proper policies
and procedures in place to make certain that an individual in their custody who
has been granted bail is released immediately.
[
41
]      That being said, on a stage one (1) analysis, while
the conduct is offensive, for the reasons discussed, I have uncertainty about
whether it is so troublesome that allowing the matter to proceed to trial would
leave the impression that this conduct is being condoned. Receiving an Order
from the Court after regular working hours is not a common occurrence. Further,
the parties did take some steps after hours when it was brought to their
attention. However, there were staff along the way who did not take reasonable
steps to ensure this did not happen and the department hours of operation and practices
resulted in the Applicant spending sixteen (16) hours in custody as a result.
[
42
]       When looking to stage two (2), I am unable to
conclude whether a stay is the only appropriate remedy. While denouncing this
conduct may send a message to the institution, I am hesitant to conclude that
it would have that result. This breach occurred when a prior Court Order was
not acted upon.
[
43
]      After engaging in an analysis under the first two
(2) stages of the test, I am left with doubt over whether a stay is warranted.
As a result, I must conduct a balancing of the interests in favour of granting
a stay against the interest that society has in having a final decision on the
merits of this matter.
[
44
]      From one standpoint, the consequences of the
breach were serious for the Applicant. He lost his freedom for a period of
sixteen (16) hours. However, as soon as the error was discovered the following
morning, the Applicant was released. While the hours of operation for the
sentencing team are such that this situation was bound to happen, I have no
evidence before me that it has, in fact, occurred previously. Those whose
conduct resulted in the breach had no ill intent. In fact, several parties
(Alex McCormick, Kristina King and Amy Burtch) became involved after hours when
someone raised the issue. While being overheld, the Applicant suffered no
additional harm or hardship. The charges are ones involving allegations of
sexual abuse against a stepdaughter.
[
45
]      On balancing all of these factors, I have
concluded that a stay should not be granted. However, if this were to happen
again, another Court may reach a different conclusion than I have. This cannot
occur on another occasion. That may make this a systemic problem for which a
stay would likely be granted. Correctional Service of Canada needs to take
steps to ensure that there are policies and protocols in place so that an
individual who has been granted bail is released immediately. They are required
to make sure there are safeguards in place so that Court Orders are complied
with without delay.
[
46
]      The Application is dismissed.
Released:
October 28,
2025
Signed:
Justice Shannon L. Pollock