CITATION:
R. v.  Khoshaba
, 2025 ONCJ 624
DATE:  2025·12·01
COURT
FILE No.:
Toronto
4810 998 25 48107042-02
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS
  MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
   AND  —
NINOS
  KHOSHABA and ZAKKARIA WARDERE
Before
  Justice Peter Scrutton
Heard on June 2, 3, 4, July 10 and November 13, 2025
Reasons
  for Sentence released on December 1, 2025
S. Arnold / A. Verma.................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
V. Strugurescu.............................................................................  
  for the Accused, Ninos Khoshaba
A. Mamo .................................................................................   for
  the Accused, Zakkaria Wardere
Scrutton J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
Ninos Khoshaba and Zakkaria Wardere were
charged with the second-degree murder of Edwin Redmond.  Both defendants pled
guilty to manslaughter after a short preliminary inquiry.  The parties agreed
that the evidence tendered at the preliminary inquiry and a supplementary
Agreed Statement of Fact would form the basis for their pleas.  Ultimately,
both defendants admitted that they unlawfully assaulted Mr. Redmond and unintentionally
caused his death.  A third man, Liban Mohamed, was also involved in that
assault.  He was never arrested and is believed to have fled the country.
[
2
]
The evidence tendered at the preliminary
inquiry establishes that Mr. Mohamed caused the most grievous of Mr. Redmond’s
injuries and, among the three, was most culpable for his death. The parties
agree that, despite Mr. Mohamed’s relative culpability, the defendants’ role in
the assault warrants a significant penitentiary sentence but disagree on the
appropriate length.
Relevant Facts
[
3
]
Mr. Redmond lost his life while attending a
gathering in a Toronto Community Housing building on February 10, 2024.  Several
people were at Mr. Khoshaba’s apartment, drinking and using crack cocaine and
marijuana. This was a common occurrence there.  A friend of Mr. Redmond’s
brought him to the apartment that evening.  People came and went throughout the
night.  Around 5:00 a.m., after Mr. Redmond’s friend had left, the group
consisted of the defendants, Liban Mohamed, and two women, Jennifer Masih and
Muna Mohamed.
[1]
[
4
]
Mr. Redmond and Mr. Mohamed began to argue. 
It is not clear what triggered the argument – whether Mr. Mohamed wanted Mr.
Redmond to leave, was jealous of Mr. Redmond and Muna Mohamed, or was upset
that Mr. Redmond had made fun of Mr. Wardere’s clothes.  What is clear is that
the precipitating grievance did not foreshadow the terrible violence that was
to come.
[
5
]
The argument became physical.  Because
everyone present was intoxicated, what happened next, and the exact sequence of
events that followed, is unclear.  Mr. Mohamed and Mr. Redmond began to fight. 
The fight quickly became one-sided, with Mr. Mohamed violently beating Mr.
Redmond for some time.  For reasons that remain unexplained, both defendants
joined in the attack on Mr. Redmond.  They formally admitted to using their
hands and feet, and weapons of opportunity, including a wooden chair and glass
bottle, to punch, kick, and strike Mr. Redmond.  At the same time, Mr. Mohamed
used a hammer to repeatedly smash Mr. Redmond in the head, causing catastrophic
injuries.  The joint attack continued after Mr. Redmond lay prone.  The
witnesses to the attack yelled for help and for the men to stop.
[
6
]
Ms. Mohamed and Ms. Masih gave unreliable
accounts of how long the attack on Mr. Redmond lasted, even as long as 15
minutes.  It likely did not last
that
long but I am satisfied it took
place over at least five minutes, long enough for the security guards on the
main floor to receive a complaint, mistakenly attend the 4
th
floor
in response, and then attend Mr. Khoshaba’s unit.  When they stood outside his
apartment, they heard yelling, noises made by someone in pain, a woman yelling
for help, and what they thought were banging noises against the wall.  The
guards went back to the lobby and called 911 before reattending the unit.
[
7
]
Mr. Khoshaba fled the apartment and the
building.  Liban Mohamed escaped by jumping out of an apartment window.  Mr.
Wardere remained with Ms. Masih and Ms. Mohamed.  He was panicked and told them
to stay.  They all went to sleep in the bedroom.
[
8
]
When building security returned, no one
answered their knocks. Eventually the police arrived and broke through the
door.  They found Mr. Redmond lying dead in the hallway. A broken wooden chair,
glass bottles, and a bloody hammer were present at the scene.  Mr. Wardere was
asleep on a bed in the bedroom; Ms. Masih and Ms. Mohamed were asleep on the
floor.
[
9
]
Post-mortem examination determined that multiple
blunt impact injuries to the head, neck, and torso caused Mr. Redmond’s death. 
The most catastrophic injuries included multiple skull fractures which caused
brain bleeding.  Injuries to his torso damaged his ribs and lungs.  Injuries to
his neck included hyoid and thyroid cartilage fractures.  Some of the
contusions on his back resembled shoe tread marks.  Several contusions on his
lower back were consistent with having been hit with the leg of a chair.
Victim Impact
[
10
]
Edmond Redmond was 27 years old when he
died.  His mother spoke about the impact of this offence.  He was loved by
family and friends.  His death is an unimaginable loss. She poignantly observed
that no one involved in this proceeding, including the witnesses, defendants,
lawyers and judge, knew her son at all.  Her loss is made worse knowing that
her son’s death was senseless and inexplicable.  The reality is that no
sentence I can impose will remediate this loss.
The Offenders
[
11
]
Because of the violence described above, I
was surprised to learn that neither of the defendants had criminal records or
any previous involvement in the justice system.  Because of the milieu in which
the offence took place, I was not surprised to learn that both have had
difficult lives.
[
12
]
Mr. Wardere was 27 years old when he
committed this offence.  He had an unstable adolescence marred by conflict with
his mother and housing insecurity.  He has not worked in any sustained capacity
since 2019.  He began using alcohol and cannabis when he was 19 and quickly
became addicted to more serious drugs including fentanyl, heroin, and
methamphetamine.  He has never had any treatment for his addiction.  He
expressed remorse and regret for his crime and believes that his intoxication
impaired his judgment.  I have no trouble concluding that he was intoxicated at
the time he committed this offence.
[
13
]
Mr. Khoshaba is 51 years old.  He fled from
Iraq when he was 15.  He is a Canadian citizen who has lived in Canada since
2000.  He is divorced and has one adult son who lives in the United States.  He
began to use opioids after an injury in 2004.  In the two years preceding this
offence, he was a heavy user of fentanyl and methamphetamine.  He has been on a
methadone program since 2018 but has had no addiction counselling.  He was
homeless for a number of years before securing community housing in 2022, the
same apartment where Mr. Redmond was killed, which became a place frequented by
strangers who used drugs.  Like Mr. Wardere, Mr. Khoshaba expressed remorse and
sadness over Mr. Redmond’s death.
The Parties’ Positions
[
14
]
The Crown seeks a 10-year penitentiary
sentence less pre-sentence custody, emphasizing the protracted violence
involved in the assault and the obviousness that multiple hammer strikes to Mr.
Redmond’s head would be fatal.  The defendants are mature adults, and there is
no basis to distinguish them in terms of relative culpability or antecedents.
[
15
]
Defence counsel tacitly accept this latter
point, as both submit that 6-year sentences minus pre-trial custody are
appropriate sentences for their respective clients.  Ms. Strugurescu submits
that this offence was out of character for Mr. Khoshaba, given his age and the
absence of any history of offending.  It was unplanned and its main culprit was
Liban Mohamed.  She argues that this offence lacks many of the aggravating
factors present in cases that attract sentences at the higher end of the
manslaughter range, such as the use of a firearm or advanced planning.
[
16
]
Ms. Mamo emphasizes as mitigating Mr.
Wardere’s tumultuous upbringing, addiction issues, relative youthfulness, and
guilty plea.  The 6-year sentence she proposes is significant for a first
offender and properly accounts for some of the harsh conditions of his
pre-sentence custody.  She submits that I can take judicial notice of the fact
that Mr. Wardere, a Black man, has experienced systemic disadvantages that
contributed to his homelessness and addictions, which in turn contributed to
his commission of this offence.
Aggravating Facts
[
17
]
Some of the more common aggravating facts in
manslaughter cases such as serious criminal records, firearms, or causing death
in the commission of a separate criminal offence are absent here.  I am
satisfied, however, that the protracted, uncalibrated violence the defendants
perpetrated is sufficient to situate their moral culpability on the far side of
the spectrum.  Mr. Redmond’s death from Mr. Mohamed’s repeated hammer strikes
and the defendants’ assaults was more than foreseeable, it was virtually
certain.  The defendants used weapons of opportunity in a group attack on
someone who was being grievously injured by Liban Mohamed.  The
actus reus
and
mens rea
here are at the higher end of manslaughter, closer to murder
than to negligence:
R. v. Jones-Solomon,
2015 ONCA 654
at paras.
85-86
.  There
are innumerable contexts in which five minutes is a relatively brief period of
time but in the context of violence of this character, which occurred while
bystanders were crying for the defendants to “stop”, five minutes must have
seemed interminable.
[
18
]
Apart from the aggravating features of the
attack itself, Mr. Khoshaba fled his own apartment in an attempt to evade
arrest.  Mr. Wardere pressured the distraught witnesses to remain in the apartment
before he fell asleep in a bedroom, steps away from where Mr. Redmond lay.  I agree
that nothing differentiates the defendants’ relative culpability.
Mitigating Facts
[
19
]
The defendants’ pleas of guilt and
demonstrations of remorse are significantly mitigating factors.  The guilty
pleas are not particularly early ones.  They came after the preliminary inquiry
but do obviate the need for a trial which would not have taken place for at
least a year.  I accept that there would be triable issues there relating to
intent and the reliability of the eye-witnesses’ testimony.
[
20
]
Mr. Wardere and Mr. Khoshaba committed this
offence as mature adults.  I do not find Mr. Wardere’s youth relative to Mr.
Khoshaba to be mitigating. He was 27 years old when he committed this offence and
the pre-sentence report indicates he had been using and selling drugs within
this milieu for years. Nor is it mitigating that this senseless attack on Mr.
Redmond was spontaneous, or that it did not occur during the commission of
another criminal offence.  These are properly characterized as the absence of
aggravating factors.
[
21
]
Mr. Khoshaba and Mr. Wardere are first
offenders.  The fact that they have had no prior involvement in the justice
system, especially given their drug-fuelled lifestyles, suggests that this
violence was out of character and speaks to their positive rehabilitative
prospects.  The principle of restraint is engaged here but must be subordinated
to the primary sentencing objectives of deterrence and denunciation.  While a
significant penitentiary sentence is required, it should not be longer than
necessary to achieve these sentencing objectives.
[
22
]
I accept that the unfortunate circumstances
of both of the defendants’ lives – untreated addiction, housing insecurity, a
lack of family supports in the years preceding this offence and, in Mr.
Wardere’s case, potential systemic disadvantages – likely contributed to this
offending.  By this I mean that, absent some or all of these background
factors, the defendants may not have found themselves mired in a culture of
constant substance abuse where crime, violence, and erratic behaviour are more
likely to occur.
[
23
]
I do not have direct evidence that the
defendants have experienced particularly harsh conditions of pre-sentence
custody but infer from the length of time they have spent in custody, the many
recent decisions that have discussed conditions in the local detention centre,
and my own familiarity with the institutional records that are regularly
tendered in this jurisdiction that the defendants have experienced lockdowns
and over-crowding and that some mitigation for these conditions is warranted:
R.
v. Dowison
,
2022 ONSC 741
at paras.
58 and 59
;
R v. Shaikh,
2024
ONSC 774
at para.
15
;
R. v. Moore,
2025 ONCJ 441
at para.
15
and
R.
v. Belanger
,
2025 ONSC 3938
at paras.
79-81
.  I will factor this into my
assessment of what a proportionate sentence requires:
R. v. Marshall,
2021
ONCA 344
at paras.
52-53
.
The Appropriate Sentence
[
24
]
The fundamental principle of sentencing is
proportionality.  The other sentencing principles articulated in s. 718.2 must
be considered so as to produce a sentence that is proportionate to the gravity
of the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender. My task in
this sentencing is to balance the mitigating aspects of Mr. Wardere and Mr.
Khoshaba’s individual circumstances against the seriousness of the crime they
committed and the harm that they caused.
[
25
]
It is beyond dispute that denunciation and
general deterrence are the paramount sentencing principles for the offence of
manslaughter.  It is also clear that, because of the wide spectrum of conduct
that can ground liability for this offence, sentences for manslaughter can vary
significantly.  Counsel have provided me with a number of helpful authorities
in support of their respective positions.  I accept the Crown’s submission that
the range of sentence for manslaughter with aggravating features is 8-12 years
and that this range is appropriate here.  See, for example:
R. v.
Smith,
2022 ONSC 3800
;
R. v. Clarke,
2003 CanLII 28199 (ON CA)
, [2003]
O.J. No. 1966 (C.A.);
R. v. Starostin
,
2023 ONSC 3677
;
R. v. Tahir,
2016 ONCA 13
; and
R. v. Devaney
(2006),
2006 CanLII 33666 (ON CA)
, 215 O.A.C. 253 (C.A.).
[
26
]
In
R. v. Warner
,
2019 ONCA 1014
,
Pardu J.A. concluded that “jurisprudence suggests that 12 or 13 years is
generally appropriate for aiders or abettors to manslaughter, where those
offenders have a high degree of moral culpability.”  In support of this
conclusion, she cited
R. v. Thompson
,
[2005] O.J. No. 3351
, aff'd
2008
ONCA 693
;
R. v. Jones-Solomon
,
supra
;
R. v. Chretien
,
[2009] O.J. No. 2578
;
R. v. Dirie
,
2018 ONSC 5536
R. v. Monk
,
2003 BCSC 449
, aff'd
2005 BCCA 394
.
[
27
]
Thompson
was
a 19-year old who was found guilty of manslaughter and received a 13-year
sentence after a confederate in a robbery fatally shot a bystander.
Jones-Solomon
was part of a group who entered a man’s apartment and beat him before another
person fatally shot him; she received a 13-year sentence.  Goyette,
Chretien
’s
co-accused,
was found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to 13 years
after he kicked a man in the head in the course of a break-and-enter to steal
drugs (
Chretien
was convicted of murder).
Warner
received a
15-year sentence as a party to manslaughter and aggravated assault for
brandishing a gun to protect a co-accused (who was himself convicted of murder
and aggravated assault).
[
28
]
In my view, these cases warranted higher
sentences than the defendants’ crime because those offences took place during
other serious crimes, some of which involved firearms and some of which
involved advanced planning.  But here, unlike the offenders discussed above, the
defendants are not aiders or abettors but co-principals.  I am satisfied that
they have a high degree of moral blameworthiness that warrants a sentence
within the 8-12 year range for manslaughter with aggravating features, albeit
not at the higher end of this range.
[
29
]
I agree that the 10-year sentence that the
Crown seeks properly reflects the seriousness of this offence and the primary
sentencing objectives of denunciation and deterrence.  But, because of the
defendants’ guilty pleas and the other mitigating factors that I have referred
to, and the relevance of the principles of restraint and rehabilitation, I do
not think that a prison term of this length is necessary to achieve a fit and
proportionate sentence.
[
30
]
Conversely, I am satisfied that the 6-year
sentence sought by defence counsel would not sufficiently denounce and deter
this conduct and would be disproportionate to the seriousness of this offence.  In
my view, an 8.5 year sentence appropriately balances the aggravating and
mitigating factors.
[
31
]
Mr. Wardere has spent 661 real days in pre-sentence
custody, the equivalent of 992 enhanced days or 33 months. He will have a net
sentence of 69 months left to serve.  Mr. Khoshaba has spent 3 fewer days in
custody and his sentence will be adjusted accordingly.
[
32
]
Both
defendants will
also be subject to a lifetime prohibition from possessing prohibited firearms,
restricted firearms, prohibited weapons, prohibited devices and prohibited
ammunition pursuant to section
s. 109 (3)
of the
Criminal Code
and a DNA
order.
Dated:    December 1, 2025                                    ____________________________
Justice
Peter Scrutton
[1]
Muna Mohamed is
not related to Liban Mohamed.