ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Lye
, 2025 ONCJ 59
DATE: 
2025 01 30
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region 998 23 31109769
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
Kadeem Lye
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on November 4, 5, 6, 8, 29 & December 5, 2024
Reasons
for Judgment released on January 30, 2025
Ms. C. Agateillo
...................................................................................
counsel for the Crown
Ms. T.
Mohamed......................................................................counsel
for the accused
De Filippis,
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
In September 2023, Jaclyn Yasin visited her former
intimate partner,
Thomas
Guerrero-Fajardo,
at his apartment.  At the time, the
defendant also lived in this unit.  During the early morning hours, the two men
argued.  Ms. Yasin called the police to report the defendant had threatened Mr.
Gerrero-Fajardo and that she had seen a handgun in the defendant’s bedroom. 
The police arrived and took her out of the apartment.  Several hours later, a
search warrant was executed at the apartment unit. As this happened a satchel
was thrown from the unit.  It was found to contain a handgun and ammunition.
[
2
]
The defendant and Thomas
Guerrero-Fajardo were jointly charged with these offences:
1.
Possession of a restricted
weapon (handgun) knowing he was not the holder of a licence to do so – 92(2)
2.
Careless Storage of a
firearm (handgun) – s. 86(1)
3.
Possession of a loaded prohibited firearm
without authorization or licence - 95(1)
4.
Possess of firearm while
prohibited by an order under 109(2) - 117.01(1)
[
3
]
One week before this trial
began, the Crown withdrew all charges against Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo.  He was
called as a witness by the Crown.  A subpoena was also issued to Ms. Yasin.  In
the weeks leading up to the trial, the police were unable to find her.  Ms.
Yasin’s father reported that she had been threatened and was afraid to
testify.  There is no evidence before me to confirm this threat occurred and,
if so, who was responsible for it.  What became clear is that Ms. Yasin was
avoiding the police and failed to attend Court on the first day of trial.
[
4
]
The Crown moved to have a
material witness warrant issued against Ms. Yasin.  After a hearing, I granted
that Order. The trial commenced.  During the proceedings the Crown advised that
Ms. Yasin had not be found and that the police would keep looking for her until
the final day of trial.  Meanwhile, in the event she was not found, and to
avoid delay, the Crown moved to have three hearsay statements by Ms. Yasin
admitted into evidence; namely, a 911 call to the police, a statement made to
police when she was removed from the apartment unit and captured by an
officer’s body worn camera, and a formal statement later taken.  The Defence
opposed this application.  After a hearing, I reserved my decision until the next,
and last day, scheduled for this trial. A decision was not given because before
that return date, Ms. Yasin had been located.  She appeared in Court, not in
custody, and testified.
[
5
]
I heard from nine
witnesses called by the Crown.  The parties also filed an agreed statement of
facts and admissions. This document makes it unnecessary to summarize the
testimony of several police officers.
[
6
]
These reasons explain why
I find the defendant guilty of all charges.
FACTS AND ADMISSIONS
[
7
]
The parties agree to the following:
The o
ffences occurred on
     September 1, 2023, at 607-30 Hanson Road, Brampton [sic – Mississauga]. 
     During the execution of a search warrant a loaded prohibited firearm was
     thrown from unit 607 landing on a daycare playground below.
At
     the time the search warrant was executed, there were two occupants in the
     unit, the defendant and Thomas Guerrero-Farjado
The
     defendant is the person named in the Information
Proof
     of continuity of the items seized by police during the search warrant is
     not necessary
The
     firearm recovered by the police [from the playground], a SCCY Industries
     model CPX-1 9mm semi-automatic, with a barrel length of 79mm, is a
     functioning prohibited firearm as per the
Criminal Code
This
     firearm was found in a white satchel that had been thrown from unit 607-30
     Hanson Road
This
     firearm was loaded when found
Nine
     cartridges of 9mm LUGER center-fire ammunition were found in the magazine
     of the firearm.  The cartridges are ammunition pursuant to
s. 84
of the
Criminal
     Code
The
     defendant is not licenced to own or possess firearms
The
     defendant did not have a registration certificate for firearms
The
     Certificates of Analysis of and notes of Firearm Analyst Jeremy MacLeod
     are admitted
The
     contents of the Affidavits of Angie Mcklusky and Angela Dawn Fenton are
     admitted
At
     the time of this incident, the defendant was subject to an order under
     109(2) of the
Criminal Code
prohibiting him from possessing any
     firearms
All
     photographs taken during the investigation can be admitted without oral
     evidence [re authenticity]
EVIDENCE
[
8
]
Ms. Yasin was the final witness called by the
Crown because of the way this trial unfolded as described above.  However, the
events in question are best understood by beginning with her testimony.  On the
day in question, she visited Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo
at
his apartment.  She had once lived with him in this unit before moving to
Alberta and she had recently returned to Ontario.  Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo picked
her up in his car around 9:30 pm, purchased wine, and went to his apartment.
[
9
]
The apartment is described as follows:  The door
opens to a kitchen on the left and a hallway on the right.  Beyond the kitchen
is a balcony.  The first room in the hallway is a bedroom, followed by a
washroom, with a second bedroom at the end.
[
10
]
On arrival, Ms. Yasin saw the defendant asleep
in the living room.  She had met him between five and ten times, always at this
apartment. She knew him as Charlie but does not know much else about him.  She
understood that the first bedroom in the hallway was occupied by the
defendant.  On prior occasions she has heard him in that room with the door
shut.  The bedroom at the end of the hallway was occupied by Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo.
[
11
]
Soon after arriving, Ms. Yasin went to the washroom. 
The door to the defendant’s bedroom was open and as she walked by, she saw
clothing and other personal effects and a white chair inside the room to the
left of the door.  On this chair she saw a gun with a black handle and silver barrel.
She did not know if it was real or imitation but “it definitely stood out”. 
Ms. Yasin said nothing about this at the time or later when she and Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo retired to his room. She testified that, “I had been gone for
years [and] I didn’t know their lives”.
[
12
]
Ms. Yasin and Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo spent several
hours in his bedroom “catching up”. At times they went to the balcony to smoke
a cigarette.  The defendant was still asleep in the living room.  On one
occasion she knocked over a shopping cart.  This caused the defendant to awake,
and he said something.  She heard Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo say sorry.  Later, when
the Ms. Yasin and Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo returned to their bedroom, the defendant
started yelling from the living room.  He appeared upset with Ms. Yasin and
angry with Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo for “letting her walk all over you”. They went
to the living room and the argument between the two men became more heated. 
They were “in each other’s face” and the defendant said, “touch me, I dare you,
I’ll end this right now”.  Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo told Ms. Yasin to go back to
the bedroom.
[
13
]
Ms. Yasin went to get her bag so she could
leave.  She testified, “I felt unsafe, I don’t know this guy or why he is angry
at Thomas about me”.   Her fear was heightened by the fact she had seen a gun
in the defendant’s bedroom.  She was confused and upset.  Once in Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo’s bedroom, Ms. Yasin spoke with her father and some friends
before dialing 911.  Soon after, Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo came into the bedroom and
told Ms. Yasin the police had arrived and wanted to speak with her. It was
after midnight.  The police took her outside the unit and into the stairway. 
She provided a statement to them and again at the police station later that
day.
[
14
]
In cross-examination, Ms. Yasin was challenged
about why she investigated the defendant’s bedroom.  She replied that she saw
the gun as she walked by the open door.  She confirmed the day in question was
the first time she had seen Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo since returning from Alberta. 
She agreed that she was drunk and can be heard slurring her words when captured
on the body worn camera of one of the officers who spoke to her in the
stairway.  She told the officer that the black and silver gun she saw “is a
little longer than what a police gun looks like”.  When it was suggested that
she brought the gun to the apartment, Ms. Yasin replied, “definitely not, I
didn’t expect anyone to get arrested, I just wanted to get out of that
apartment”.  She later added that she has never owned or possessed a gun.
[
15
]
Ms. Yasin agreed that nobody waived the gun or
threatened her with it. She also agreed that she was not frightened when she
first saw the gun. She explained that she does not find guns “scary” and “it
depends on the person’s emotional state and whether they legally own it”. 
However, she became frightened when the defendant became loud and aggressive in
arguing with Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo about her.  This is why she called the police. 
She feared for her safety, not that of Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo as “he can handle
himself”.
[
16
]
Ms. Yasin denied she over-reacted because she
was drunk or that her reaction to the defendant was based on “the stereotype of
a black man being angry and erratic”
[1]
. 
She rejected the suggestion she wanted the defendant out of the apartment so
she could move back in with Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo and explained that “I was
happy living with my parents on my return [from Alberta] and trying to rebuild”.
When counsel asked why her testimony should be believed given that she was drunk,
Ms. Yasin replied, “I have no stake in this, I have no reason to lie…it is
nothing to me whatever the verdict is”.
[
17
]
Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo is the registered tenant at
unit 607, 30 Hanson Road.  His description of the
apartment accords with that given by Ms. Yasin. He confirmed that the defendant
was his roommate at the time of the events in question and
occupied the first bedroom in the hallway
to the right of the entrance door.  He testified that the
defendant goes by the name Charlie and that he is a musician.
[
18
]
Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo said that Ms. Yasin is his
ex-girlfriend and that she was often at his apartment before the defendant
moved in.  He had not expected her to spend the night on the occasion in
question.  He and the defendant argued that night, but he does not recall why. 
The police arrived for a wellness check on Ms. Yasin, and she left the
apartment with them.  The police returned the next day with a search warrant. 
He and the defendant did not leave the apartment, and nobody else came inside,
from the time Ms. Yasin left with the police and the execution of the search
warrant later that day.
[
19
]
In cross-examination, Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo
testified he has known the defendant since 2019.  He likes and trusts him, like
a brother.  The defendant is a musician and paid half the monthly rent. At
times the defendant would stay with his parents or the mother his child.  Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo has
never
possessed of any type of firearm and has never known the defendant to be in
possession of one. He does not know if Ms. Yasin has ever possessed a firearm or
if she brought one with her that night and placed in the defendant’s bedroom.
He has never known a guest to bring one into his apartment.
Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo did not throw any type of satchel from his
balcony during the execution of the search warrant, and he did not see the
defendant do so.
[
20
]
PC Babensee and PC Goodwin were dispatched to
the 30 Hanson Road in response to the 911 call.  They knocked on the door of
unit 607 at 3:07 am.  Both testified that a black man answered.  PC Babensee
added that this man appeared evasive when they asked about Ms. Yasin and went
back inside. Another man, who identified himself as Thomas then came to meet the
officers. He was followed by Ms. Yasim. She was taken down the hall to a
stairway. She was described as intoxicated, upset, but level-headed. She told
them why she was fearful and that she had seen a black and silver gun.  Ms.
Yasin was taken to the police station and another officer remained to watch the
door the apartment.
[
21
]
PC McCaig was one of the officers tasked to
assist in the execution of the search warrant. He and others were briefed on
the report of a firearm at 6:45 am and positioned himself on the west side of
the building, relieving officers on the night shift who had watching the unit
607 while an application was made for the search warrant.  At
12:43 pm, PC McCaig
saw tactical officers enter the lobby of the building.  Minutes later he heard
yelling and knew, based on experience, that it was the police shouting in
advance of entering the apartment unit.  Within one minute, he saw a white bag drop
from above, hit a near by shed, bounce off, and land on ground. A fence
separated him from the shed and the bag.  He did not see where the bag came
from.  At the same time, an elderly woman came onto the balcony of one of the
units on the 6
th
floor.  The officer asked her is she had dropped
anything, and she replied that she had not. Another officer, PC Giles was on
the other side of the fence.  PC McCaig told this officer to seize the bag.
[
22
]
PC McCaig looked up and
saw that the window to unit 607 was open.  In testimony he was able to identify
this unit based on photographs put to him and tendered as evidence.  The
officer added that no other window to any of the units on the west side were
open.  The officer now realized he had been focussed on the wrong unit.   He
had been watching the one to the immediate right of apartment 607.
[
23
]
PC Giles was outside the back of the 30 Hanson
Rd near a daycare playground associated with the apartment building.  He was
aware of the report of a gun in one of the apartment units.  At 12:49 PM he saw
a white bag on the ground. A fellow officer, PC McCaig, standing nearby on the
other side of a fence told him the bag had fallen from the building.  PC Giles
photographed the bag before and during his search of it. He saw a gun inside.
He removed the magazine, proved it safe, with a bullet coming out of the
chamber.  It was a loaded gun.   This is the firearm referred in the agreed
facts noted above.
[
24
]
PC Malabanan followed the tactical officers into
the apartment in question after they announced their presence. He heard a
report that something had been thrown from the building and landed near a shed
in the daycare playground immediately below until 607. The officer searched the
bedroom identified by Ms. Yasin in her police statement as belonging to the
defendant.  In this room he found a health card with a photograph of the
defendant and bearing the name Kadeem Jamal Charles Lye.
[
25
]
The execution of the
search warrant was assisted by the police arial support unit. A drone was used
as part of the surveillance of the west side of 30 Hanson Rd.  A video record
was identified by PC Malabanan and tendered in evidence.  An object can be seen
thrown from one of the units, bouncing off a shed, and landing on the ground
nearby.  Based on the drone record and floor plans for the sixth floor, also
tendered in evidence, the officer identified the object as having been thrown
from unit 607.
[
26
]
PC Malabanan learned that the defendant is a “rapper
who goes by the name Cuzzin Charlie”. He conducted an open source internet
search under this name and saved a video of a man singing.  This was tendered
in evidence.  The officer identified the singer as the defendant.  The
defendant can be seen singing while wearing a satchell that is identical to the
one thrown from unit 607, seized by PC Giles, and containing the firearm
referenced in the agreed facts noted above. The officer was shown photographs
of the defendant’s bedroom at 607 – 30 Hansen Rd.  He testified that the
background to the rapper video appears to be the same as that depicted in the
photographs of the defendant’s bedroom. In cross-examination, the officer
agreed that he understands that Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo was the defendant’s music
manager.  The officer could not dispute the suggestion that the white satchel
could belong to the manager and loaned to the musician for the purpose of
making the rapper video.
SUBMISSIONS
[
27
]
The Crown submits that all charges rest or fall
based on finding with respect to count 3;
possession of a loaded prohibited firearm without
authorization or licence, contrary to s. 95(1).
The
Crown acknowledges that no person testified that they saw the defendant in
physical possession of the firearm.  As such, he can be found guilty if such an
inference is the only reasonable one available from established facts.  If
there is any other rational conclusion to be drawn, all charges must be
dismissed. Counsel urges me to find that the circumstantial evidence proves the
defendant is guilty of the charges and that the suggestion of third-party
possession must be rejected as entirely speculative.
[
28
]
The Crown argues that Ms. Yasin had no motive to
falsely implicate the defendant.  Indeed, she was a reluctant witness who
appeared in court after a material witness warrant was issued compelling her
attendance. The reliability of her testimony is reflected by its internal
consistency and confirmation by external evidence.  The firearm that was seized
matches the description of the one she reported seeing in the defendant’s
bedroom.  The rapper video depicts the defendant
wearing a white satchel while performing in what appears to be the bedroom in
which Ms. Yasin saw the firearm. Counsel adds that there is no merit to the
suggestion Ms. Yasin is tainted by stereotypical views
of black men or by the desire to protect Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo and resume living
with him.
[
29
]
The Defence emphasizes that this is a
circumstantial case because there is no evidence showing the defendant in
actual possession of the firearm or depicting who threw the white satchel out
of the unit. In these circumstances, there is no proof of knowledge and control
by the defendant and there are other reasonable inferences available.  Counsel
added that mere presence in a shared place where a gun is found does not
establish constructive possession.
[
30
]
The Defence cautions that there is no proof that
the satchel in which the firearm was found is the same as the one worn by the
defendant as depicted in the rapper video.  In any event, it is argued that the
satchel could have belonged to Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo as he was the defendant’s
music manager and that this is the person who could have placed the gun in the
satchel and thrown it out of the unit. In this regard, the gun could have belonged
to Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo or brought into the unit by Ms. Yasin.  As such, Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo could have thrown it out of the unit to protect himself or his
former intimate partner.
[
31
]
The Defence concluded by noting that it is not
my role to figure out what happened but to decide if the Crown has proven guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.  In this case there is room for doubt and the
charges should be dismissed.
ANALYSIS
[
32
]
The Crown carries the burden of proving guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. This means that probable guilt is not the criminal
law standard of proof – it is closer to certainty.  A reasonable doubt is a
doubt based on reason and common sense which must be logically based on the
evidence or lack of evidence:
R v Villaroman
2016 SCC 33
.  In applying
this standard, I can accept some part, or none of what a witness says. The
testimony of a witness is assessed based on the person’s sincerity and accuracy.
[
33
]
I agree that all charges rest or fall on my finding
with respect to possession of the firearm.  It is conceded that the defendant
was not the holder of an authorization or licence to possess the firearm and
that he was bound by a court order not to do so.  There is also no question
that the offence of careless storage is made out if a person places a firearm
on a chair or throws it onto a playground.
[
34
]
Section 4(3)
of the
Criminal Code
provides that a person may be in possession of an item in several different
ways. The caselaw is well established.  A person may be in possession by actual
physical control of the item.  A person who knowingly has something in the
actual possession or custody of somebody else, or in some place for the use or
benefit of him/herself or somebody else, has that thing in their possession,
provided they have some control over that thing. Knowingly means awareness of
the possession or custody of the thing by another, or in another place. Several
persons may have possession of an item at the same time. Where any one of two
or more persons, with the knowledge and agreement of the others, has anything
in their possession or custody, all of them are in possession of that item,
provided each has some control over the thing. Knowledge, agreement, and some
control by the others who are not in actual possession of the item is
essential. Mere indifference or doing nothing is not enough.
[
35
]
These facts are not in dispute: A
white satchel was thrown from 30 Hanson Rd as the
police began executing a search warrant at unit 607 of that building. The
satchel landed in a daycare playground and
was immediately seized by police.  The satchel contained
a
loaded prohibited firearm,
namely,
a SCCY Industries model
CPX-1 9mm semi-automatic, with a barrel length of 79mm.  Nine cartridges of 9mm
LUGER center-fire ammunition were found in the magazine of the firearm
.
At the time the
satchel was thrown, there were only two occupants in unit 607, the defendant
and Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo.  That the satchel containing the firearm was thrown
from unit 607 is also not in dispute. In any event, the evidence given by PC
Malabanan with respect to the drone footage and the building floor plans, means
there can be no doubt about this.
In
this regard, the credibility and reliability of PC Malabanan, like that of the
other police officers, is not an issue at this trial.
[
36
]
I agree with the Crown that I can be confident
in the evidence of Ms. Yasin. The events leading to this trial began when she called
the police because the defendant caused her to be fearful.  Having been safely
escorted out of the premisses, she later tried to avoid her obligation to
testify.  When compelled to come to Court, she impressed me by her desire to be
truthful and accurate in testimony.  Ms. Yasin did not argue with counsel,
evade questions, or embellish.  She has no skin in the game. Her description of
the firearm matches that found by the police.  The challenges to her testimony fail. 
There is nothing to support the suggestion she acted on a “stereotype about
angry black men”, or that she brought that gun into the apartment, or that she
falsely implicated the defendant so she could resume living with Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo.  Crown counsel correctly points out that these suggestions
are entirely speculative.  Moreover, they do not make sense in the
circumstances.  For Ms. Yasin to bring the gun into the unit would expose her
former intimate partner to the accusation that he was guilty.  Indeed, he was
originally charged with several offences and the accusation forms part of the
Defence submission in this case. Similarly, there is no merit to the apparently
alternate Defence submission that the gun belonged to Mr. Guerrero- Fajardo and
Ms. Yasin is lying to protect him.  This assumes she is also lying about the
presence of the gun in the defendant’s bedroom.  If the gun had been in the
possession of Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo, why would she be frightened of the
defendant when the argument began?  Why call the police?  In addition to these
observations, the challenges to Ms. Yasin ignore other compelling evidence.
[
37
]
The video of “Cuzzin Charlie” shows a man
singing while wearing a white satchel.  The room in which this performance
takes place appears to be the same as the bedroom that Ms. Yasin and Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo identified as belonging to the defendant.  Police later found the
defendant’s health card in this room.  Both witnesses confirmed the accuracy of
photographs of that bedroom.  I find that it is the same one as depicted in the
rapper video.  There is also no doubt that the rapper in the video is the
defendant.  The performance took place in his bedroom.  Moreover, the
testimony, by PC. Malabanan, that the rapper in the video and the defendant
before me is one and the same is in accord with my own observation.
[
38
]
I am persuaded by the evidence given by Ms.
Yasin. That she was intoxicated when the police arrived to escort her out of
the apartment several hours later does not concern me.  It does not follow that
she was in this state when she saw the gun or that it affected her memory of
events afterwards.  Moreover, I am not troubled by the testimony of Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo or his potential guilt.
[
39
]
The white satchel was thrown out a window of the
apartment by either the defendant or Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo. Although Mr.
Guerrero-Fajardo confirmed in cross-examination that he never saw a gun in the
apartment, he was never asked about the white satchel or how it is that it came
to be thrown outside. In any event, Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo lied to me when he
said he did not know about the gun and has never seen one in the possession of
the defendant.  Ms. Yasin saw it in plain view as she walked past the
defendant’s bedroom.  It is inconceivable that Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo did not
also see it, either then or before the arrival of Ms. Yasin.  His testimony betrays
a concern that his knowledge that the defendant had a firearm in a place in
which he is the leaseholder means he could be jointly guilty of three of the
four charges
[2]
. 
 None of this affects my conclusion about the defendant’s guilt.
[
40
]
Proof of possession does not require proof of
ownership.  That said, I find the Crown has established these facts beyond a
reasonable doubt: The defendant owned and possessed the firearm.  It was on a
chair in his bedroom when Ms. Yasin visited.  The satchel in which the firearm
was later found is the same one worn by the defendant as depicted in the rapper
video.  The firearm was put into that satchel and thrown out of the
apartment into the playground below when the police announced their presence to
execute a search warrant.
[
41
]
The defendant has been proven to be guilty of
the four charges.
Released: January 30, 2025
Signed:
Justice J. De Filippis
[1]
The defendant is a black man.
[2]
There is no suggestion that Mr. Guerrero-Fajardo was bound by an Order not to
possess firearms.