CITATION:
R. v. Spencer
, 2025 ONCJ 125
DATE:  2025·03·04
Toronto
Region
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
NOAH SPENCER
Before
  Justice Peter Scrutton
Reasons
  for Judgment released on March 4, 2025
Matthew Bloch...........................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
Charlena Claxton....................................................................................................  
  for the Accused
Scrutton J.:
OVERVIEW
[
1
]
Mr. Noah Spencer committed very serious
offences.  He was found guilty of possessing a loaded prohibited or restricted
firearm and an over capacity magazine at a time when he was subject to a
weapons prohibition; he was also found guilty of possessing fentanyl,
methamphetamine, and crack cocaine, all Schedule 1 substances, for the purposes
of trafficking.  The combination of a loaded firearm and particularly deadly or
addictive drugs is something that must be denounced in the strongest of terms
because of the obvious and acute risk that these things pose to the community.
[
2
]
At the same, Mr. Spencer is a young Black
man who has suffered from both systemic disadvantages and a disadvantaged
upbringing that is specific to him.  He was 24 years old at the time he committed
these offences.  I accept that he has taken advantage of virtually every
rehabilitative program that has been offered to him over the course of his
pre-trial detention. I accept that, not only is rehabilitation a relevant
sentencing principle because of Mr. Spencer’s age and the fact that this will
be his first custodial sentence, but that he has demonstrated, through his
institutional efforts and expressions of remorse, that he is willing and
capable of making positive, pro-social changes in his life.
[
3
]
The Crown seeks a global sentence of 6 years
less pre-sentence custody: 3.5 years for the firearms offences, consecutive to
2 years for the
CDSA
offences, consecutive to 6 months for the breach of
a weapons prohibition. I accept that the Crown’s sentencing position is within
the middle of the relevant sentencing ranges for these offences.  See, for
example, Justice Boswell’s discussion of the range for trafficking small
amounts of fentanyl in
R. v. Campbell
2024 ONSC 2220
at paras.
46-47
and
the cases discussed therein, where amounts of less than 8 grams have received
sentences ranging from 18 months to 30 months. With respect to the possession
of a loaded prohibited or restricted firearm, see the sentences imposed in
R.
v. Morris
2021 ONCA 680
,
R. v. Jackson
2023 ONCA 746
,
R. v. Nur
,
[2015] 1 S.C.R. 553
,
R. v. Marshall,
[2015] O.J. No. 53
and, most
recently,
R. v. Burke-Whittaker
,
2025 ONCA 142
.
[
4
]
Both counsel agree on the principles that
govern this sentencing – denunciation, and deterrence followed by
rehabilitation and totality.  Defence counsel takes no issue with the fact that
the specific quantum of sentences Crown counsel seeks are within the
appropriate ranges but emphasizes the mitigating factors and the amount of time
spent in pre-sentence custody. Going forward, counsel seeks a one-year
conditional sentence, which she argues is fit in virtue of the time Mr. Spencer
has already spent in pre-trial custody and because it will better facilitate
Mr. Spencer’s rehabilitation.
Pre-sentence custody
[
5
]
Mr. Spencer has spent 557 real days in
custody and is entitled to enhanced credit of 836 days.  Counsel has tendered
evidence indicating that he was triple-bunked for at least 94 of these days;
was under lockdown for at least 141 of these days; and that on some days, the
lockdowns overlapped with the triple-bunking, making those periods particularly
onerous.  Counsel seeks an additional 6-8 months of credit for these harsh
pretrial detention conditions and for 4 months of restrictive bail conditions.  I
accept that consideration of difficult conditions in pre-sentence custody is
warranted in the circumstances.  I will treat this as a mitigating factor on
sentence as recommended by
R. v. Marshall,
2021 ONCA 344
and
R. v.
Brown,
2025 ONCA 164
and factor it in to my assessment of a what a proportionate
sentence requires.
I decline to award any credit for the 4 months Mr.
Spencer spent on a restrictive bail, given the relatively brief time that he
was on bail in the context of the length of these proceedings and the absence
of evidence about how he spent that time or about the specific impact of those
conditions on him.
Aggravating Factors
[
6
]
At the time of his arrest, Mr. Spencer was
in possession of a Glock 9mm pistol loaded with 9 cartridges in an overcapacity
magazine.  The pistol was in a satchel he wore across his body, such that the
gun was within his easy reach.  He was in actual possession of 3.52 grams of
fentanyl with an approximate value of $600; 7.03 grams of methamphetamine with
an approximate value of $350; and 6.02 grams of crack cocaine in one plastic
bag, with an approximate value of $480. These are relatively small amounts on
the spectrum of trafficking but for the reasons I provided finding Mr. Spencer
guilty on October 1, 2024, I am sure that he did not possess them for personal
use. It is aggravating that fentanyl, one of these substances, is particularly
deadly and addictive; the other substances are less toxic but are certainly
addictive. Each are capable of either ending lives or destroying the lives of
the members of this community.
[
7
]
Mr. Spencer possessed these items on a
Sunday afternoon in a busy part of the city at a time when members of the
community were out and about, going about their business. I accept the Crown’s
submission that the Jane and Wilson area in Toronto is one that has been
particularly affected by the unfortunate prevalence of firearms in this city.  Mr.
Spencer’s possession of such a deadly, loaded weapon at a time he was bound by
a s. 110 weapons prohibition not to possess any weapons is seriously
aggravating, as is the fact that he possessed this firearm in the context of
trafficking illicit drugs, an activity he was doing in concert with another man
while masked.
Mitigating Factors
[
8
]
Mr. Spencer was youthful at the time of his
arrest.  He is not a first offender but these offences differ significantly in
seriousness from the assault, uttering threats, and fail to comply convictions
and sentences he received in 2020 and 2021.  I am informed by the principle of
restraint here, given Mr. Spencer’s relative youth and the fact that this will
be Mr. Spencer’s first custodial sentence.
[
9
]
Mr. Spencer has a varied work history and,
while not employed at the time of these offences, I accept that he has some
experience in carpentry and an interest in working in that trade.  He has the
support of his mother, his girlfriend, and is anxious to build a place for
himself in his own young children’s lives.
[
10
]
It is not sufficient to describe Mr.
Spencer’s upbringing as simply “unfortunate” or “disadvantaged”.  He was placed
in Children’s Aid Society care at the age of six.  Prior to that, his family
situation was tumultuous.  He has never had a father or father figure in his
life.  His formative years were spent in socio-economically challenged
neighbourhoods.  He struggled in school because of his unstable living
situation and his diagnoses for Attention Deficit Disorder and Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, for which he was eventually medicated as a boy.
[
11
]
In 2022, Mr. Spencer was the victim of a
serious, life-threatening stabbing.  Apart from the obvious physical trauma
this caused, it contributed to significant anxiety.
[
12
]
He is a Black man who increasingly
identifies with what he believes to be is his Ojibway heritage on his mother’s
side.
[
13
]
I have no trouble concluding that Mr.
Spencer’s offending was influenced by his disadvantaged circumstances – that
there is a straight line or at least a slightly curved line between the way
that he grew up (without any meaningful family supports, with
psycho-educational impediments, in a socioeconomically disadvantaged community
where he was exposed to anti-social influences) to the choices he made that
culminated in his arrest.  I accept that, in Mr. Spencer’s case, the strictures
these circumstances placed on him were exacerbated by systemic disadvantages
and racism.
[
14
]
I also accept his own expressions of
remorse, and his mother’s attestation about how he has matured since he began
his time in custody.  While Mr. Spencer is not entitled to the significant
sentencing benefit of a guilty plea and the acceptance of responsibility that
it denotes, I accept that his expression of remorse is sincere.
[
15
]
My task in this sentencing is to balance
these mitigating aspects of Mr. Spencer’s individual circumstances against the
seriousness of the crimes he committed and the harm that they caused to the
community – that is what the fundamental sentencing principle of proportionality
demands.  I agree that the global 6-year sentence that the Crown seeks properly
reflects the seriousness of these offences and the primary sentencing
objectives of denunciation and deterrence.  But, because of the mitigating
factors that I have referred to, and the relevance of the principles of
restraint and totality, I do not think that a prison term of this length is
necessary to achieve a fit and proportionate sentence.  Conversely, I am satisfied
that the conditional sentence that defence counsel seeks would be insufficient
to achieve denunciation and deterrence here, and would result in a sentence
that would be unfit and disproportionate to the gravity of these true crimes.
[
16
]
In my view, a global sentence of 4-years
less pre-sentence custody is warranted and appropriately balances the relevant
aggravating and mitigating factors.  I would have a much different view of what
sentence is appropriate absent the mitigating factors that I have discussed.   Mr.
Spencer will receive consecutive sentences for the firearms,
CDSA
, and
prohibition offences.  While I have described what I view as the aggravating
circumstances under which these offences were committed, I am not relying on
them to “double count” these factors
vis a vis
my imposition consecutive
sentences.  I am also am mindful of the principle of totality here and as such
will impose shorter sentences than each of these offences would attract
standing alone.  That means, for the
CDSA
counts, that Mr. Spencer will
receive a sentence that could potentially be viewed as outside of the
appropriate range for trafficking small amounts of fentanyl.
[
17
]
The sentence will be apportioned as follows:
3 years for the firearms offences, consecutive to 6 months for the trafficking
offences, consecutive to 6 months for the breach of the weapons prohibition.  After
deducting time spent in pre-trial custody, Mr. Spencer will have a net sentence
of just over 20 months to serve, after which he will be subject to 12 months of
probation, which I view as necessary to help facilitate his rehabilitation and
to ensure that he continues the efforts he made in pre-sentence custody.
He will also be subject to a lifetime weapons prohibition pursuant
to section
s. 109 (3)
of the
Criminal Code
and a DNA order.
Dated:   March 4, 2025                                            ______________________________
Justice
Peter Scrutton