ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Hamilton
, 2025
ONCJ 67
DATE:  2025·03·12
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
MICHAEL
DAVID HAMILTON
JUDGMENT
Evidence Heard: February
4,5, 2025.
Final Reasons Delivered:
March 12, 2025
Ms. Ranya Taher.....................................................................................  
counsel for the Crown
Mr. Michael Hamilton  .................................................................................................   defendant
KENKEL J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
Mr. Hamilton is charged with the offence
known as “80+” – having a blood alcohol concentration in excess of the legal
limit (79mgs) within 2 hours of ceasing to operate a conveyance contrary to s
320.14(1)(b).
[
2
]
Mr. Hamilton drove to an LCBO and quickly
purchased several bottles of alcohol. On his way out he stared at a uniformed
police officer who was sitting near the entrance in an unmarked car. After
staring repeatedly at the officer Mr. Hamilton abandoned his LCBO purchases in
his truck and then walked away to nearby Leslie Street. Two officers
investigated him on the sidewalk. The odour of alcohol coming from Mr. Hamilton
led to an Approved Screening Device (ASD) demand. The failure of that test led
to further testing on an Approved Instrument at the station. The results of
those tests (149, 136mgs) led to the charge before the court.
[
3
]
At the outset of the trial, Mr. Hamilton
identified two related
Charter
issues. He submitted that after he abandoned his vehicle the
officers had no lawful authority to administer an ASD test or detain him for
that purpose. He had raised the same issues with the officers at the roadside. As
Mr. Hamilton was representing himself, the Crown was asked to identify any
other potential
Charter
issues
that arose on the evidence and the court monitored the evidence for that
purpose as well.
[
4
]
PC Hyde’s direct observation of Mr. Hamilton
driving on Leslie Street into the liquor store lot, the Certificate of
Qualified technician proved with notice, the Approved Instrument test records
and the testimony of the Qualified Technician all prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Hamilton had a blood alcohol concentration in excess of the
legal limit within two hours of ceasing to operate a conveyance as alleged.
[
5
]
The issues for decision at trial are the
same ones raised by the accused in his discussion with the officers that day –
whether the officers had lawful authority to investigate Mr. Hamilton after he
walked away from his car and whether the ASD demand and test were lawful.
ASD Test After Truck Abandoned
[
6
]
Mr. Hamilton drove into the LCBO lot and
parked. He quickly purchased numerous items then exited the store. He stared at
the uniformed officer PC Hyde who was sitting in an unmarked police vehicle. Constable
Hyde noted his face was red, which the officer thought was a sign of alcohol
consumption. Mr. Hamilton returned to his vehicle but kept staring back towards
the officer. Several minutes later after continued staring Mr. Hamilton
abandoned his purchases and his truck and walked to Leslie Street.
[
7
]
Mr. Hamilton submits the officers did not
observe any indicia of impairment up to the point they spoke to him on the
sidewalk. If they had seen indicia of impairment and wanted to investigate,
they lost their opportunity when he walked away from his truck. Mr. Hamilton
described the officers as angry, perhaps because he walked away. They were on a
“witch hunt”.
[
8
]
The two in-car camera (ICC) videos recorded
the investigation. The officers weren’t angry. On the contrary they were polite
with Mr. Hamilton. Once he agreed to stop and speak with them, he was polite
with them.
[
9
]
The investigation of Mr. Hamilton wasn’t a
“witch hunt” or arbitrary. When Mr. Hamilton exited the LCBO carrying his purchases,
his actions and his staring caught the attention of the officer. It’s very
unusual for a person to drive to a store, purchase multiple items then abandon
the purchases and the vehicle in a commercial plaza. The decision to leave the
car seemed directly related to the presence of the police officer to avoid
possible investigation. In that context the officer had good reason to speak
with Mr. Hamilton.
[
10
]
At first Mr. Hamilton did not stop to speak
with PC Hyde, he kept walking. He was not detained and he was free to do so. When
PC Johnson arrived shortly afterwards, he did stop and both officers spoke with
him. Both officers detected a strong odour of alcoholic beverage coming from
Mr. Hamilton when he spoke. An ASD demand based on reasonable suspicion
followed immediately. The test was conducted directly after the demand. A
self-test conducted as a demonstration for Mr. Hamilton resulted in a
0mgs/100ml reading for the officer which was consistent with the fact that the
officer had not consumed alcohol that day. The accused’s test resulted in a
reading of 163mgs/100ml. That’s double the legal limit and a “fail” result. The
device typically is set to display the word “Fail” instead of a numerical
reading, but PC Hyde confirmed that the ASD was properly calibrated and in
proper working order. The result was accurate and provided reasonable grounds
for arrest and an Approved Instrument demand.
[
11
]
Prior to 2008, the
Criminal Code
was
limited in the way Mr. Hamilton suggests.
Section 254(2)
of the
Criminal
Code
authorized an ASD test where the officer reasonably suspects a person
had alcohol in their body and that person “is operating” or “has care or
control” of a motor vehicle etc. The confusing use of the present tense in both
official languages implied that the demand could only be uttered as the accused
drove by or was found in care or control. Courts interpreted those words in a
manner that provided some limited “past signification” to allow for demands
after the vehicle had stopped. It will come as no surprise that much court time
was spent interpreting the boundaries of “past signification”.
[
12
]
Parliament addressed this issue in Bill C-2
which took effect July 2, 2008.
Section 254(2)
was amended to authorize an ASD
demand where an officer had reasonable grounds to suspect that a person had
alcohol in their body and had operated or had the care or control of a motor
vehicle within the preceding three hours. The present ASD demand section
320.27(1) has the same requirement – a belief that a person has alcohol in
their body and has operated a conveyance within the preceding three hours.
[
13
]
In this case Constable Hyde saw Mr. Hamilton
operating his truck a short time before the ASD demand. His subsequent
observations reasonably led him to speak with Mr. Hamilton on the sidewalk
along Leslie Street. The odour of alcohol coming from a person he had just seen
driving provided the reasonable suspicion required for the ASD demand and test.
[
14
]
PC Johnson patiently explained all this to
Mr. Hamilton at the roadside as recorded on his ICC video. He explained that
Mr. Hamilton’s driving combined with the odour of alcohol coming from his mouth
provided the basis for the demand. When Mr. Hamilton remained skeptical about
the legal requirement, P.C. Johnson looked up the
Criminal Code
reasonable
suspicion demand section on his mobile device and read that to Mr. Hamilton verbatim
so he would understand that the officers were authorized to investigate a
person who had operated a conveyance within 3 hours.
[
15
]
After Mr. Hamilton was taken from the scene
to One District a vehicle inventory search showed an open Tall Boy can of “Stella”
(Artois) on the floorboard below the driver’s seat. There were empty beer cans
throughout the vehicle.
[
16
]
It appears Mr. Hamilton walked away from his
vehicle in order to avoid being investigated for drinking and driving. He was
plainly aware of his jeopardy in that regard. He was mistaken though that
walking away from a vehicle can stop a police investigation. In this case it
was the contrary – it was his staring at the police officer over several
minutes then his abandonment of his purchases and his vehicle that led the
police to want to speak with him.
[
17
]
The ASD demand in this case was based upon
reasonable suspicion that met the criteria in s 320.27(1)(b) – Mr. Hamilton had
been operating his truck within three hours and the odour of alcohol showed he had
alcohol in his body. There is no evidence of a s 8 or s 9 breach.
[
18
]
The Crown called evidence to address other
potential
Charter
issues
not raised by the defendant. The evidence showed that the ASD demand was made
immediately, and the test was administered directly after the demand. Mr.
Hamilton was advised of his right to speak to a lawyer and his options in that
regard. He spoke to counsel at the station. The officers were right to call a
second duty counsel to ensure timely advice after waiting for the first duty counsel
lawyer to respond. Documents were prepared and served after the breath tests.
Mr. Hamilton was released shortly afterwards. There was no other apparent
Charter
issue at trial.
Conclusion
[
19
]
There’s no evidence of a
Charter
breach. 
I find the Crown has otherwise proved the charge alleged beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Delivered:  March 12, 2025
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel