ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Johal
, 2025 ONCJ 448
DATE: 
August 29, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 4810 998 25 104753
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
GURPAL SINGH JOHAL
Before
Justice David S. Rose
Heard
on April 7, June 26 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on August 29, 2025
Nathan Kruger..................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Brij Mohan........................................................ 
 counsel  for the defendant Gurpal Johal
Rose J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Johal pleaded guilty before me to the charge
of Attempted Abduction of a person under the age of 16 under s. 280(1) of the
Code.  The Crown proceeded summarily.  These are the reasons for sentence.
[
2
]
The Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) outlines
contact between Mr. Johal and a Toronto Police Officer who was using the
persona of a 14 year old girl.  At the start this was on a chatroom web site
“Chatib”.  There was brief initial exchange where Mr. Johal asked her about how
she thought about “cuddles, hugs, kissing with a guy” and “have  any older guys
ask you out”.
[
3
]
The discussion moved to private messaging over
Google Chat.  There Mr. Johal held himself out as “Paul”, although he used an
email with a user name Gary Singh.
[
4
]
Between September 12 and November 1, 2023 Mr.
Johal exchanged messages with the undercover officer frequently about many many
topics.  At all times Mr. Johal believed he was chatting with a 14 year old
girl.
[
5
]
The messaging turned to sexual activity, and the
officer’s persona expressed some reluctance about sexual activity because of
age and lack of physical development. Mr. Johal asked for a picture and the
officer sent a computer generated image of a 14 year old girl. Mr. Johal in
turn sent back an image of himself, which was later recovered on his laptop.
[
6
]
Mr. Johal’s communication with the officer
turned to opportunities to meet the persona to engage in sexual activity.  He
suggested a plan to meet the persona at a Go Station stop on the Lakeshore West
line and take her to a local motel to have sex.  When Mr. Johal’s laptop was
seized it had records of searches for stops on the Lakeshore West Go line and
motels on Lakeshore road.
[
7
]
Mr. Johal also discussed bringing the persona a
specific toy called a squishmallow,  He did an internet search for that too.
[
8
]
On November 1, as plans to meet were being
formed, Mr. Johal asked the officer if he could bring the person a hot
chocolate to her at school.  She declined and Mr. Johal expressed frustration in
the chats.  He then said that the officer’s persona was not genuinely
interested in him.
[
9
]
On November 2, 2023 Toronto Police executed a
search warrant on Mr. Johal’s residence in Mississauga. He was home.  The
police seized his cell phone and laptop. The messages between Mr. Johal and the
officer were recovered on his phone.  His laptop had data from consistent use
of Chatib in September 2023, including September 12, 2023.
[
10
]
Text messages between Mr. Johal and the persona
were filed at the time of the guilty plea. They ran from September 12, 2023 to
November 1, 2023.  The substance, volume, and expansive time frame of the
messages leads me to find that Mr. Johal was making efforts to groom the
persona for purposes of engaging in sexual contact.  In the initial exchange
the persona (P) says that she is in school.  Mr. Johal (J) asks:
J: Which subject
are you studying?
P: French BORING
I like school tho
But today im done
Within 10 minutes he replies:
J:
Would the French lessons be more exciting if you were allowed to practise
French
kissing lol
[
11
]
From this I find that Mr. Johal’s interest in
the persona is sexual from the beginning.  As the discussion continues through
September he took an interest in the athletic and social life of the persona –
to be sure – but it returns to sexual contact.  When the persona says that she
and Mr Johal could go for ice cream, which is relatively benign, he replies:
J: That sounds
amazing
French kiss with
ice cream filled mouth
[
12
]
Within one week  Mr. Johal asks for a picture of
the persona, and the officer complies, sending a stock photograph of a 14 year
old girl.  Mr. Johal refers to her as gorgeous and
“Can’t wait to
feel that tongue in my mouth”, and “will you let me kiss you”.
On September 21 he tells the persona:
I want to kiss you so much
Hope you want to kiss too
Persona: I think I will be
a bit nervous Ill Bt you will too right
Johal: That’s normal
Persona: Yeah
Johal: Yes I will be too a
little nervous
Persona: Same
Johal: But its something I
really want
Persona: It
is? Cause thers lots of older girls that are probably better than me bc I don’t
have any experience just a little I wud totally understand
Johal:
Experience is not matters to me It’s the person and from the very moment I felt
something for you
Persona:
That’s really nice of you to say that Paul!!! You don’t mind my age? Like I’m
14 but im actually going ti turn 15 soon.  My friends say im supre mature tho
[
13
]
The text messages have a theme running through
them, which is that Mr. Johal is raising sexualized content with the persona
and normalizing it by repeating that the sexual discussion and interests are ‘normal’. 
Mr. Johal is consistent throughout that he would like to be with the persona
physically.  He regularly used flattery to engage with the persona.  All of
this was evidence of grooming.
[
14
]
The expert Dr. Stirpe was qualified to give an
opinion in
clinical forensic psychology for the purpose of evaluating risk
of criminal recidivism including for sexual offences and performing and
interpreting psychological testing and rendering diagnoses of mental health
conditions and recommending treatment and case management
.  She did a
battery of tests on Mr. Johal.  Her opinion was based on a semi-structured
clinical interview.  The testing involved various actuarial and dynamic tests
for violent and sexual recidivism.  She was qualified as an expert.  Her
evidence covered the various interviews and tests that she performed on Mr.
Johal.  It was her opinion that Mr. Johal was at a very low risk to re-offend
sexually.  She based that, principally, on a clinical interview with Mr. Johal
and  the results of a battery of objective psychological measures he completed,
and calculation of his clinically adjusted actuarial risk estimates.  Dr.
Stirpe considered a broad source of information in developing the opinion,
including the disclosure, chat logs, summary of child abuse materials found on
Mr. Johal’s device, and the ASF filed at the sentencing.  She also reviewed TPS
documents dealing with the events leading up to Mr. Johal’s arrest and the PSR.
[
15
]
In her evidence Dr. Stirpe relied on the police
material to give her opinion.  That included police evidence that when the
search warrant was executed the police found 18 child pornography images, as
well as other pornographic images.  She was pressed in cross-examination about
whether that didn’t change her mind about Mr. Johal’s risk to re-offend. She
was steadfast that it didn’t. As she explained it, the actuarial assessment
which underscores the risk assessment is unchanged.  She assumed that the delict
in this case probably had some prior behaviour. I accept this explanation, and
therefore find that the Crown has not proven the aggravating factor of
possession of child pornography, see s. 724 (3) (e),
R. v. Marsden
2004
MBCA 121
. That was not part of the ASF. It only came into the case because it
was material Dr. Stirpe reviewed in order to provide a complete opinion.
[
16
]
For this reason, the purported child pornography
on Mr. Johal’s computer is not an aggravating factor on sentence.  It has a
very limited purpose.   It tends to enhance the weight of Dr. Stirpe’s opinion
because of the breadth of material which she considered.
[
17
]
I took Dr. Stirpe’s opinion to be principally
based on the actuarial assessments and less from the self reporting. As she
explained, the actuarial tests are based on a large data set and tend to
minimize if not eliminate examiner bias and error. Individually she found that there
was evidence that Mr. Johal was minimizing his involvement in the case, as was
his wife, although she did not interview her. In cross-examination she was
pressed on his openness to treatment.  Her evidence was that based on the
actuarial scores treatment is not likely to be of much assistance.  A treatment
order would need a clinical over ride because of Mr. Johal’s low risk of re
offending.  She testified that she got the impression that Mr. Johal’s wife was
closing ranks insofar as his wife has said that her husband has learned his
lesson. Dr. Stirpe’s opinion was that this will not predict how a patient does
in treatment because there is no evidence of obstruction or impediment to
treatment, and the low risk to re-offend indicates that treatment is unlikely
to help in any event.
[
18
]
Dr. Stirpe was cross-examined on Mr. Johal’s
minimization of the offence. She agreed that there was evidence of that, and it
was reasonable to assume that this was not the first time he had a sexualized
on line discussion with a young person.  When pressed about how that fit with
the conclusion that he was at low risk to re-offend, she testified that she
believes treatment is important in this case the goal of treatment in Mr.
Johal’s case is behavioural self-management, not a change of the root ideation
which causes such behaviour.
[
19
]
I would not minimize the weight of Dr. Stirpe’s
evidence, as Mr. Kruger suggests. She impressed me as giving a balanced opinion
of Mr. Johal.  When pressed she provided complete answers to the reasons she
scored each actuarial test the way she did.  She was candid with the Court
about the limitations of the actuarial tests and the reasons why they are used
in this setting.
[
20
]
I would describe the Pre-Sentence Report (PSR)
as neutral.  Mr. Johal is now 73 years old, and in a stable marriage.  He is impotent.
He is otherwise in good physical health.  The PSR documents his high blood
pressure and cholesterol levels.   He has been working gainfully for his whole
life but is now retired.  He has no criminal record.  Those are mitigating
facts.    What is concerning is his attitude to the offence.  He admitted to the
PSR writer that he viewed nude images sent to him on the internet in the past
and then keeping a collection of erotic images sent via chat sites.  He told the
PSR writer that he no longer keeps those images.  He denies any inappropriate
sexual interests.  His wife takes a similar view.  He said he committed this
offence out of boredom, for entertainment and to provide a sexual satisfaction not
possible physically because of his impotence.  He does not believe that
counselling is necessary but would participate if it is ordered by the Court. 
The PSR writer concluded that Mr. Johal “…minimizes his role and reportedly
excused his behaviour” because if he were to have met the persona he could not
have performed sexually because of his impotence.
[
21
]
Based on the foregoing I find the aggravating
factors to be:
-The messages
were sexually explicit;
-The messages
were frequent, sometimes many times a day;
-The persona
self identified as 14 years old;
-Mr. Johal was
actively seeking out a young person;
-The content
of the messaging is evidence of grooming.  Mr. Johal was normalizing sexual
contact between an adult and a 14 year old;
-He made
efforts to meet the persona in person;
-Sections
718.01 and 718.2 (a) (ii.1) are engaged as statutorily aggravating factors because
the Persona was 14 years old.  I find that Mr. Johal’s intention was to engage
with a 14 year old person sexually.  781.01 is engaged even where the persona
is a police undercover officer posing as a child, see R
. v. Friesen
2020
SCC 9
at par.
93
, which I find is engaged given the luring nature of this
offence.
[
22
]
There are mitigating factors:
-The opinion
of Dr. Stirpe is that Mr. Johal is at low risk to re-offend. The Crown asks
that I find that her evidence is confusing.  I disagree.  She was pressed on
many aspects and maintained her assessment of low risk to re-offend.  As she
said, counselling is of minimal effect on those with low recidivism concern. 
She said that it is a matter of management of risk, not change of the
underlying conditions.  Dr. Stirpe said that being caught will have a
significant impact on him managing his pedophilia.
I find that
Dr. Stirpe’s is entitled to full weight.  She completed an expansive analysis
of all the material in this case, including the pornography that he never
admitted to but was found on his hard drive.  She had complete answers to the
reasons why she scored the tests as she did.
-Mr. Johal
pleaded guilty and has accepted responsibility.  This factor is attenuated to
some degree because the plea happened days before the trial was to commence and
the evidence in the possession of the Crown is strong if not overwhelming;
-Mr. Johal has
no Criminal Record;
-He is 73
years old and jail will have an outsized impact on him as a septuagenarian.
-He has a
stable home life and supportive wife;
-he suffers
from depression.
[
23
]
In submissions Mr. Kruger argued for a 2 year
jail sentence, 3 years probation, DNA Databanking as a secondary designated
offence, SOIRA as a secondary offence under s 490.012 (3,4), and forfeiture of
the devices.  The Crown position is therefore for the maximum allowable
custodial sentence.   Mr. Mohan argues for a suspended sentence, or
alternatively a 2 year less a day conditional sentence. The defence takes no
position on the ancillary orders or the sought probation order.
[
24
]
In submissions the Crown argued that the Supreme
Court of Canada’s ruling in
R. v. Friesen
2020 SCC 9
applies.  The Crown
argues, and I agree, that this case must be considered as an inchoate offence
of child abuse.  The purported child in the case was in fact a police officer
but that is immaterial.  The delict here is that Mr. Johal believed he was in
contact with a 14 year old girl who he plotted to meet for sexual purposes.
[
25
]
While
Friesen
was itself a case about
sexual violence against children, the Alberta Court of Appeal found that
Friesen
applies to non-sexual offences of violence against children.  In
R. v. Mac
2023 ABCA 234
they said (at paras 48 – 50):
Impact
of Friesen
48      We must also consider
this sentence in light of the Supreme Court's
judgment in
Friesen
, the leading decision on sentencing for sexual
offences against children. The Supreme Court signalled that courts had not
treated offences against children sufficiently seriously. In directing that
sentences for sexual assault of children must increase, the court made two key
findings: (1) Parliament has introduced sentencing initiatives which
demonstrate that these offences must be taken more seriously; and (2)
contemporary society has a greater understanding of both the wrongfulness and
harm caused by these offences.
49      While Parliament has not
increased the sentences for common assault and assault with a weapon or by
choking, we continue to develop a greater understanding of the harm caused to
children, families and society by offences committed against children. Even in
non-sexual assault cases, acknowledging this harm reminds sentencing judges to
appropriately assess the gravity of any offence against children when
determining a proportionate sentence: see
R v Al Aazawi
,
2022 ABCA 361
at para
92
,
leave to appeal to SCC requested, and
R v Sinclair
,
2022 MBCA 65
.
50      A second way
Friesen
can impact the analysis is to remind judges that
when reviewing sentencing decisions that predate
Friesen
, they should consider whether those decisions
adequately account for the harm to the children who are victims. This does not
mean that all pre-
Friesen
sentencing decisions should automatically
be considered too low or irrelevant, rather that the sentencing court must
carefully consider those precedents
in light of
Friesen
and whether those sentences appropriately reflect
the harm to the children.
See also
R. v. J.B.
[2024] O.J.
No. 5512 (Gattrell J.)
, R
. v. Viera-Paulino
2023 ONCJ 563
(B. Jones J.)
[
26
]
When prosecuted by Indictment, and for the
offence of luring, the range of sentence is mid single digit penitentiary
terms.  See
R. v. Moola
2021 ONSC 3702
(5 years);
R. v. J.R.
2021
ONCJ 14
. At the lower end of the range for luring is
R. v. Collier
2021
ONSC 6827
(2 years less a day conditional sentence). Collier had additional
mitigating factors of a sentencing during the pandemic, long standing mental
health issues and weekly therapy sessions, and the impact of incarceration on
the offender.  With that said, McArthur J. recognized (at par. 115) that
conditional sentences post-
Friesen
are rare.
[
27
]
I find that denunciation and deterrence are the
most dominant factors in this sentencing.  Rehabilitation is a present factor,
but a challenging one to apply in the circumstances, because Mr. Johal is of
the view that he needs no counselling and Dr. Stirpe agrees. I struggle with
the argument that this offence calls for no further counselling or therapy.  If
that is true then Mr. Johal does not take the benefit of rehabilitation as a factor
on sentencing.
[
28
]
I find at the outset that the defence argument
for a suspended sentence is out of the range.  It simply does not reflect the
proportionality of the offence. A suspended sentence would be
disproportionate.  The sentencing range in this case is custodial and less than
2 years.  The upper end is capped by the summary election by the Crown.  The
real question here is should Mr. Johal receive a conditional sentence.  Given
the evidence heard at sentencing I find that Mr Johal would not endanger the
community. He is at a low risk to re-offend.  With that said, I do not find
that he is at zero  risk to re-offend.  His lack of interest in ongoing therapy
is concerning.  But for purposes of s. 742.1(a) I find that a conditional
sentence would not endanger the community.  The question I struggle with is whether
a conditional sentence would reflect the sentencing principles in ss. 718 to
718.2 as required in s. 742.1 (a)?  I recognize that a conditional sentence can
have a punitive effect which can achieve the sentencing goals of denunciation
and deterrence for less serious and non-dangerous offenders, see
R. v.
Proulx
2000 SCC 5
at paras.
21 and 22
.
[
29
]
On reflection I cannot, and do not find that a
conditional sentence meets those statutory sentencing goals.  The aggravating
factors in this case are too many, and a conditional sentence would be
disproportionate.
[
30
]
Under the circumstances I find that a 13 month
custodial sentence reflects the sentencing objectives I have outlined above.
This case could have attracted a longer sentence but Mr. Johal’s age calls for
some restraint, see
R. v R.(A.)
1994 CanLII 4524 (MB CA)
, 1994 CarswellMan 114 (C.A.).
Ancillary
Orders
[
31
]
Upon his release from custody Mr. Johal will be
on probation for 2 years.  The terms are as recommended by the Pre-Sentence
Report, namely:
(1)       Report to a Probation and Parole Officer/ as directed.
(2)        Attend and actively participate in any assessment,
counselling, rehabilitative program as directed by the Probation and Parole
Officer/ Conditional Sentence Supervisor and complete them to the satisfaction
of the Probation Officer.
(3)       Provide proof of attendance and completion as requested by
your Probation and Parole Officer.
(4)       Comply with the Ontario Sex Offender Registry
requirements.
(5)       To attend for a specific sexual behaviour assessment as
instructed by the Probation Officer, including but not limited to CAMH and/or
The Manasa Clinic
(6)       Sign any release of information forms as will enable your
Probation and Parole Officer to monitor your attendance and completion of any
assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed.
(7)       Not to access or participate in any chat rooms, bulletin
board or social media.
(8)       Not to communicate online via any device with any persons
under the age of eighteen unless approved of by the Probation and Parole
officer and the person’s parents.
(9)       Not to be in the company of any individual under the age
of eighteen years of age unless approved of by the Probation and Parole officer
and the person’s parents.
(10) Not to be in a position of trust or authority of persons under
the age of sixteen years of age.
[
32
]
This offence is a secondary designated offence
under s. 490.011. The Crown proceeded summarily. There will therefore be a SOIRA
Order for 10 years under s. 490.013 (2)(a). This a secondary designated offence
under s. 487.04 and I find under the circumstances of this case that it is in
the best interest of the administration of justice for Mr. Johal to supply of
sample of his DNA for transmission to the national DNA databank.  There will be
an order of forfeiture of all the seized electronic devices.
Released:  August 29, 2025
David S. Rose
Ontario Court of Justice