CITATION:
R. v.
Hunte-Green
, 2025 ONCJ 391
DATE:  2025-07-22
Toronto
ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
DAVID HUNTE-GREEN
Before Justice Mara Greene
Reasons for Judgment
released July 22, 2025
M. Rieger.….………………………………..……………………………………………………..….… for the Crown
B. Irvine………………………………………….....................…………………….... for David
Hunte-Green
Greene, J:
[
1
] Mr.  Hunte-Green is charged with
committing an indecent act in a public place and two counts of breaching
probation.  It is alleged that on May 7, 2024, Mr. Hunte-Green masturbated
under his clothes in a public elevator in front of Ms. Ginsberg.  He was on
multiple probation orders at the time to keep the peace and be of good
behaviour.  Two issues arose at trial.  First, whether the Crown proved beyond
a reasonable doubt that Mr. Hunte-Green did in fact masturbate in that elevator
and second, whether masturbating under one’s clothes in a public elevator is in
fact an indecent act.  On June 26, 2025 I found Mr. Hunte-Green guilty with
reasons to follow.  These are my reasons.
[
2
] On May 7, 2024, Ms. Ginsberg attended
at an office building located at 27 Queen Street East to meet with suppliers
and an appraiser.   Mr. Hunte-Green entered the elevator after Ms. Ginsberg.
The doors closed with only the two of them in the elevator.
[
3
] Ms. Ginsberg testified that upon
entering the elevator, she pressed the button for the 14
th
floor.    Mr.
Hunte-Green, who was unknown to Ms. Ginsberg at the time, entered the elevator
seconds after she did.  He pressed the button for the 12
th
floor. 
According to Ms. Ginsberg, Mr. Hunte-Green had a condom wrapped around two of
his fingers on his left hand.  He then put his hand into his pants and started
to masturbate.     Even though Mr. Hunte-Green’s penis was not exposed, Ms.
Ginsberg testified that she knew he was masturbating because she saw him put
his right hand into his pants and touch what Ms. Ginsberg described as a bulge
in his pants.  He then moved his hand back and forth rubbing the bulge.
[
4
] Ms. Ginsberg exited the elevator when
the doors opened on the 12
th
floor in order to get away from Mr. Hunte-Green
as she was scared.  Despite having pressed the 12
th
floor, Mr. Hunte-Green
did not exit the elevator on this floor.
Issues raised at trial.
A)
Has the Crown proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Hunte-Green
did in fact masturbate in the elevator?
B)
Does Mr. Hunte-Green’s conduct amount to an indecent act in law?
A) Has the Crown
proven that Mr. Hunte-Green masturbated in the elevator?
[
5
] In every case the Crown is required to prove every
essential element of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. This is a high
standard.   Reasonable doubt is based upon reason and common sense.  It is
logically connected to the evidence or the lack of evidence. It is not enough
for me to believe that Mr. Hunte-Green is possibly or even probably guilty. 
Reasonable doubt requires more.  As a standard, reasonable doubt lies far
closer to absolute certainty than it does to a balance of probabilities.   In
order to convict, a trial judge must be sure that every essential element of the
offence has been made out.
[
6
] In the case at bar, Ms. Ginsberg testified that in
her opinion Mr. Hunte-Green masturbated in the elevator under his clothes.  Her
opinion was based on her observation of Mr. Hunte-Green putting his hand in his
pants, putting his hand on his penis and rubbing it.   When asked to explain
why she believed Mr. Hunte-Green was masturbating,  Ms. Ginsberg testified that
she could see the action through his pants.  She saw a bulge in his pants, Mr. Hunte-Green
put his hand over the bulge and the moved his hand back and forth.    While
there was a video of the inside of the elevator, it did not capture Mr. Hunte-Green’s
actions.  What is visible from the elevator video is that Ms. Ginsberg was very
close to Mr. Hunte-Green and had a good opportunity to observe him. She had an unobstructed
view of the front of his body for the 50 seconds that they were in the
elevator.
[
7
] In my view the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Hunte-Green was masturbating under his clothes. I found Ms.
Ginsberg to be an honest and reliable witness, who took great care in
explaining her observation and the reasons for her conclusion.  She had an unobstructed
view of Mr. Hunte-Green for approximately 50 seconds and described seeing a bulge
in Mr. Hunte-Green’s pants that Mr. Hunte-Green proceeded to rub.   I accept
Ms. Ginsberg’s evidence and have no doubt that what she witnessed was Mr. Hunte-Green
rubbing his penis under his pants.
B)
Has the offence of Indecent Act been made
out?
[
8
] Counsel for
Mr. Hunte-Green argued that even if Mr. Hunte-Green did masturbate under his
clothes in the elevator, this does not make out the offence of indecent act
since his penis was never exposed.
[
9
] In
R. v. Labaye
,
2005 SCC 80
at paragraph
62
,
the Supreme Court of Canada summarized the test for indecency as follows:
[62] Indecent criminal conduct will be established
where the Crown proves beyond a reasonable doubt the following two requirement:
1. That, by its
nature,
the conduct at issue
causes harm or presents a significant risk of harm to individuals or society in
a way that undermines or threatens to undermine a value reflected in and thus
formally endorsed through the Constitution or similar fundamental laws by, for
example:
(a) confronting members of the public with conduct
that significantly interferes with their autonomy and liberty; or
(b) predisposing others to anti-social behaviour; or
(c) physically or psychologically harming persons
involved in the conduct, and
2.
That the harm or risk of
harm is of a
degree
that is incompatible with the proper functioning of
society.
Step 1 – Conduct causes harm or presents a
significant risk to individuals.
[
10
] There are a
number of cases where the courts have found that masturbating in public with
genitals exposed is an indecent act.  For example,
in
R. v. Smith,
2021
ONCJ 650
, Silverstein J. held that masturbating in a public place with one’s
penis exposed is an indecent act as it “clearly confronts members of the pubic
with conduct that significantly interferes with their autonomy”. The case at
bar differs from all these cases in that Mr. Hunte-Green’s penis was not exposed.
[
11
] Both counsel referred me to
the
case of
R. v. Pierce
2017 ONCJ 875
. This is because
in
Pierce
there
was an allegation that the accused masturbated in public without exposing his
genitals, which is similar to the case at bar.  In
R. v. Peirce
, supra,
Pringle J. found that given the specific facts of her case, the conduct did not
meet the test for indecency as there was no evidence of harm or risk of harm. 
Pringle J. stated at para 27,
Taking all of the evidence into
account, I am not satisfied that the Crown proved either actual harm or a
substantial risk of harm here.  This is not to say that actual or even
simulated masturbation is never a criminally indecent act, but rather that on
this evidentiary record, the offence was not made out.  Ms. Babzadeh was the
only civilian to testify.  She may have been the only person inside the coffee
shop when she first observed the defendant appearing to masturbate. She was not
afraid of the defendant. She did not seem to take what he was doing to be some
kind of sexual message or response to her.  And although a sexual context is
not required to establish an indecent at, the absence of any perceived sexual
context remains relevant to the consideration of harm.
[
12
] In my view,
the facts in the case at bar differ from those in
R. v. Pierce
.
Firstly,
in Pierce, the trial judge had a doubt as to whether Mr. Pierce masturbated or
merely simulated masturbation.  Secondly, observations of Mr Pierce were
limited to a few seconds.  Thirdly, no one expressed any fear as a result of
his actions.
In my view, given the
facts of this case, the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Hunte-Green
committed an indecent act when he masturbated under his clothing while in
elevator alone with Ms. Ginsberg.  In my view two types of harm are engaged in
this case: harm to Ms. Ginsberg autonomy and harm to participating individuals.
[
13
] In relation to the harm that
the Supreme Court of Canada referred to as harm to one’s autonomy,
in
R. v. Labaye
,
supra,
at para
40
, the Supreme Court of Canada explained that “indecent
acts are banned because they subject the public to unwanted confrontation with
inappropriate conduct”.  The Court went on to state in the same paragraph, “the
value or interest protected is the autonomy and liberty of members of the
public, to live within a zone that is free from conduct that deeply offends
them.”.
[
14
] While harm to personal autonomy
can meet the test for criminality, it often will not.  The Supreme of Canada
stated that it is high standard because “tolerance requires that only serious
and deeply offensive moral assaults can be kept from public view on pain of
criminal sanction” (
R. v. Labaye
, supra,
at para
41
).  This does not
mean that even in a tolerant society, all acts of public sexual conduct are
permissible.  The Supreme Court of Canada stated that “the loss of autonomy and
liberty to ordinary people by in-your-face indecency is a potential harm to
which the law is entitled to respond.  If the risk of harm is significant enough,
it may rise to the degree of the test for criminal indecency in
Butler
–
conduct which society formally recognizes as being incompatible with its proper
functioning” (
R. v.
Labaye
, supra
at para
41
).
[
15
] To make out harm or risk of
harm based on harm to one’s autonomy, the Court must find that the exposure is unwanted
or that the victim or public will be forced to significantly change their
conduct to avoid being exposed.
[
16
] In my view, not all instances
of masturbation where genitals are not exposed will amount to indecent acts.  This
is because is some cases, the conduct may not be willful (
see
R. v. Simon
2010
ONSC 6207
)
or
the conduct is so fleeting that there is no
reasonable risk of harm to anyone (
see
R. v. Pierce
, supra).
In the
case at bar, however, the circumstances of the masturbation are such that, even
without exposure of his genitals, I am satisfied that the conduct involved
meets the test for indecency as it had a significant impact on Ms. Ginsberg
autonomy and safety.  I reach this conclusion for a number of reasons.   Firstly,
they were in an enclosed space – the elevator with limited options to escape. 
Secondly, Mr. Hunte-Green was positioned relatively close to Ms. Ginsberg. 
Thirdly, Mr. Hunte-Green did not turn his body away from Ms. Ginsberg or make
any attempt to conceal what he was doing.  Fourthly, Mr. Hunte-Green had a
condom wrapped around his finger making it more sexualized event. Fifthly, Ms.
Ginsberg testified that she was fearful.  Lastly, I am satisfied that Ms.
Ginsberg suffered real harm by this action.  When testifying about the event,
Ms. Ginsberg became tearful and was clearly still troubled by what took place.
[
17
] It is my view that Mr. Hunte-Green’s
conduct also caused harm to “a participating individual”.
In
R. v. Labaye
,
supra
, the Supreme Court of Canada explained that this harm relates to
unwanted sexual activity and the harm associated with unwanted sexual
activity.  I am mindful that Mr. Hunte-Green did not speak to Ms. Ginsberg nor
did he touch her.  No sexual assault occurred in this case, however, given the
close proximity of Mr. Hunte-Green to Ms. Ginsberg, the fact that Mr. Hunte-Green
chose to continue facing outwards as opposed to turning his back to Ms.
Ginsberg while masturbating in the elevator and the condom on his fingers all contributed
to making this a sexualized event.  As Ms. Ginsberg was a nonconsenting party
to this, in my view, this type of harm is also engaged.
Step II:  The harm engaged was
of a degree that is incompatible with the proper functioning society.
[
18
] In my view, the degree of harm
engaged by Mr. Hunte-Green’s conduct is incompatible with the proper
functioning of society.  Given the proximity between Mr. Hunte-Green and Ms.
Ginsberg at the time of the masturbation, the sexualized nature of the conduct,
the fact that they were in a confined space and Ms. Ginsberg’s evidence that
she was fearful, it is my view that the conduct was of a degree that is
incompatible with the proper functioning of society.  People taking public
elevators in office buildings should not have to be subjected to such conduct. When
I consider all the evidence it is my view that Mr. Hunte-Green’s conduct had a
direct and significant impact on Ms. Ginsberg’s autonomy.
[
19
]  I therefore find that the Crown
has proven that Mr. Hunte-Green’s conduct amounts to an indecent act.  I find
him guilty of this offence.  It is conceded that Mr. Hunte-Green was on probation
at the time to keep the peace and be of good behaviour so I find him guilty of
these two offences as well.
Released July 22, 2025                                              __________________________
Justice
Mara Greene