ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Powell
, 2025 ONCJ 183
DATE: 
April 8, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  24-11100040
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
DALTON POWELL
Before
Justice Robert S. Gee
Heard
on March 18 and 25, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on April 8, 2025
X. Ruan.................................................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
N. Pawlowski and N.
Arski………………………………………counsel for the Accused
Gee J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
Dalton Powell is charged with operating his
motor vehicle while his ability to do so was impaired by a drug on December 22,
2023, contrary to
s. 320.14(1)
(a) of the
Criminal Code
.
[
2
]
On December 22, 2023, a civilian witness flagged
down an OPP cruiser as it sat at the side of a road in Dunnville, Ontario. The
witness advised the officers that he had just called 911 because he had been
following a suspected impaired driver who was at that moment directly behind
him.
[
3
]
At about 10:23 pm, the officers exited their
cruiser and directed the vehicle pointed out by the witness to stop. Officer
Taylor Accursi had some brief conversation with the driver, Mr. Powell, and
asked him to step out of his motor vehicle, that being a blue Ford pick up
truck.
[
4
]
When he exited she directed Mr. Powell to the front
of the truck. She continued to speak to him and based on the information
provided by the witness and her observations, at 10:26 pm she arrested Mr.
Powell for impaired operation, placed him in her cruiser and advised him of his
rights to counsel, caution and made a demand that he submit to an evaluation by
a drug recognition expert (DRE).
[
5
]
Officer Accursi transported the accused to the
Cayuga detachment where he spoke to counsel, then transported him to the Simcoe
detachment as that’s where the nearest DRE, Officer Janelle Sinclair, was
located. The DRE concluded Mr. Powell was impaired by a drug and made a demand
for a urine sample. After he provided that sample he was turned back over to
Officer Accursi who returned him to the Cayuga detachment and lodged him in a
cell at 2:39 am. The accused was later released on an undertaking at about 8:50
am on December 23, 2023.
[
6
]
Mr. Powell has alleged the police violated his
s. 8 and 9 Charter rights in two ways and seeks exclusion of the DRE evidence
and urine test results pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter. If that is not
successful, the accused argues the evidence falls short of proving the accused
was impaired at the time.
[
7
]
The issues to be decided then are threefold. The
first Charter based issue is that Officer Accursi lacked reasonable and
probable grounds (RPG) to arrest the accused and make a demand. The second
Charter based issue is an overholding argument. The accused states he should
have been released by 2:39 am upon his return to the Cayuga detachment and not
held until the morning. The last issue is if the Charter arguments fail,
whether the Crown has proven the accused was impaired.
ISSUE ONE – GROUNDS
[
8
]
In order to make an arrest without a warrant,
police need to have reasonable and probable grounds to believe the accused has
committed an offence. That means they must subjectively believe the accused has
committed the offence and that subjective belief must be objectively
reasonable. See: R. v. Storrey,
1990 CanLII 125 (SCC)
, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 241 at paragraph
17
and R. v.
Canary,
2018 ONCA 304
at paragraph
21
.
[
9
]
In a case such as this when assessing the
appropriateness of the arrest and demand, what must be assessed is the facts known
to the officer at the time. That other explanations for her observations may
come to light later, or that the observations are based on incomplete facts is
not necessarily fatal to a determination of whether the officer had RPG. What
needs to be assessed are the facts known to the officer at the time. See: R. v.
Bush,
2010 ONCA 554
at paragraph
66
.
[
10
]
In this case Officer Accursi testified she
relied on several factors to come to the belief the accused was impaired. First,
was the information from the civilian witness who stated he had observed the
accused driving and swerving and had just called 911 to report it. She also
stated when she approached the accused while he was still in the truck, he
failed to maintain eye contact with her. She expanded on that to say she meant
he kept turning his face away from her and would not stay facing her while she
spoke to him while in his vehicle. Next, she said when she asked him to get out
of the truck, he kind of slid out and nearly fell when his feet came in contact
with the roadway. She then asked him to walk to the front of the truck and in
the 6 to 7 steps it took for him to reach the front, he walked stiff-legged and
with a wide gait.
[
11
]
Based on all these observations, and the lack of
evidence pointing to any consumption of alcohol, she felt the accused was
impaired by drugs and arrested him.
[
12
]
The accused has argued that Officer Accursi’s
investigation was not thorough and she rushed to her conclusion. The accused
points out from the time Officer Accursi approached the truck until she
arrested the accused was only approximately three minutes. It is also pointed
out there may be other explanations for the observations made. The exiting of
the truck in the manner the accused did could be because the truck was lifted
or higher than average, his gait could have been caused by wearing work boots
that were untied and he asked for a roadside screening test, presumably an ASD
to be given to him. It was also pointed out after initially getting out of the
truck, the accused never fell or struggled to stand. The defence also argued
Officer Accursi’s opinion was coloured by the fact she had prior drug related
dealings with the accused and because of those dealings, she leapt too quickly
to presuming he was impaired by drugs.
[
13
]
The defence also argues there could be other
explanations for the driving behaviour observed by the witness. The accused it
is argued may have been on his phone or been aware he was being followed by the
civilian so his driving was impacted by that. Additionally, there was no
accident or near accident reported by the witness.
[
14
]
At best the defence argues, Officer Accursi had
grounds to demand a standard field sobriety test (SFST), but there were
insufficient grounds for an arrest. I was provided with several cases by the
defence where courts held the officer’s grounds were insufficient. Comparing
those cases to this one, I'm urged, ought to lead to the same conclusion. See
for instance: R. v. Cartier,
2015 ONCJ 731
, R v. Embry,
[2000] O.J. No. 4020
and, R v. Knight,
2013 ONCJ 478
.
[
15
]
All cases need to be decided on their own
facts, based on an assessment of the evidence as a whole as available to the
officer at the time. Based on the evidence as a whole as presented to Officer
Accursi I find she had a subjective belief the accused was at least slightly
impaired by a drug and that this belief was objectively reasonable.
[
16
]
The observations made by Officer Accursi are not
in dispute. It is what can be made of those observations that is challenged. As
noted, the defence points out that for most of the observations, other non-drug
related explanations are available for them. The truck was lifted, his boots
were untied, he may have been on his phone. When these factors are kept in mind
all it adds up to at best is a suspicion about drug impairment. Then what lead
Officer Accursi to believe the accused was impaired, was her prior dealings
with him which caused her to improperly fill in the gap between suspicion and
reasonable and probable grounds.
[
17
]
I find that Officer Accursi’s prior dealings
with the accused did not improperly influence her in this manner. She denied
that it did so and I accept her testimony in this regard. I found she testified
in a very careful and measured manner. She was well aware of her obligations
and the different foundational requirements needed to proceed with an arrest in
these circumstances as compared to only having a reasonable suspicion which
would allow her to make a demand for an SFST. She stated she had approximately
two prior dealings with the accused, and she was adamant that these prior
dealings did not influence her assessment of the situation on this night. In
the end, I believed her when she stated this.
[
18
]
Overall, I find she had a subjective belief the
accused was impaired by a drug and this belief was objectively reasonable. I
would first point out that RPG is not an onerous test. It is more than
suspicion but not proof beyond a reasonable doubt. As well it is not necessary
that the accused be in an extreme state of impairment before RPG exists, there
is no minimum time required before RPG can be formed nor are there a minimum
number of indicia that must be present. It is the totality of the circumstances
that must be assessed. Again see, R. v. Bush, paragraphs
54 to 58
.
[
19
]
In this case I find when the totality of the
circumstances are examined, Officer Accursi’s conclusion she had RPG is objectively
reasonable. It was helpful in this case that her observations of the accused were
captured on her body worn camera. Video evidence such as this can be a very
valuable tool in assessing such cases, but it cannot fully replace the live, on
the scene observations made in close proximity to the accused by those
involved. I have viewed the video here and should note I am not using it to
assess whether I can come to the same conclusion about the accused’s state as
Officer Accursi, did on the scene that night. She was in a better position,
that night than I am in now, when I view the video. I am viewing the video to determine
whether her assessment of her grounds that night is objectively reasonable. I
find it is.
[
20
]
The video does corroborate the observations she testified
to making. When approaching the vehicle, the accused consistently turned his
head away from her. When asked to exit the vehicle as Officer Accursi stated,
the accused seemed to struggle to get out and slid from the seat to the road.
His gait as he walked to the front was stiff legged and wide and appeared
unnatural. When these factors are assessed holistically and combined with the
information received from the civilian witness about the accused’s driving, I
find that the arrest of the accused and demand made by Officer Accursi was
objectively reasonable and proper. The other explanations proffered for these
observations do not undermine Officer Accursi’s RPG. Even assuming some of the
observations may have other explanations, does not require their elimination
from consideration of the totality of the circumstances presented to the officer.
See R. v. Bush, paragraph
57
.
[
21
]
As such, I find the accused has failed to
demonstrate his s. 8 Charter rights were violated by the police in making the
arrest and the demand.
ISSUE TWO – OVERHOLDING
[
22
]
When a person is arrested without a warrant and
the police have determined they are releasable without a bail hearing,
s. 498
of the
Criminal Code
requires them to release the person as soon as
practicable. Not releasing them as soon as practicable can lead to an arbitrary
detention and a s. 9 Charter breach. See: R v Iseler,
2004 CanLII 34583 (ON CA)
, [2004] OJ No 4332.  This
is what the accused is alleging here.
[
23
]
After Officer Sinclair completed her evaluation
and turned the accused over to Officer Accursi, she returned him to the Cayuga
detachment, arriving at 2:39 am. The accused alleges he should have been
released immediately upon his return. He was not. He wasn’t released until the
morning. At 8:51 am, Officer Whitall, attended the cell the accused was in,
woke him from his sleep and arranged for his release. Since the accused’s truck
had been impounded, the impound yard had his keys to the truck which also
contained the keys to his house. As a courtesy, since he had no other ride,
Officer Whitall drove the accused to the impound yard in Dunnville, where the
accused was able to get his house keys and from there, they departed company.
[
24
]
The period of overholding alleged by the accused
then is just over 6 hours, from 2:39 am to 8:51 am.
[
25
]
The accused referred me to the decision of
Justice Durno in R. v. Price,
2010 ONSC 1898
. In that case Justice Durno
suggested a list of non-exhaustive factors to consider in an alleged
overholding case. That was an alcohol related case, but the accused suggests
the same considerations should be applied in a case of impairment by drug.
[
26
]
In R. v. Price, Justice Durno held it would be
inappropriate to focus too narrowly on the accused’s BAC. All the circumstances
must be considered. The list of factors Justice Durno suggested be considered
were found at paragraph 93 as follows:
-           The
accused’s blood alcohol level;
-           Whether
the accused was charged with impaired operation;
-           The
accused’s level of comprehension;
-           Whether the accused was prohibited by statute form
driving a motor vehicle, including the administrative drivers’ licence
suspension;
-           Whether
the accused’s vehicle was impounded;
-           Whether
a responsible person was available to pick up the accused;
-           Whether
the accused had a criminal record and if so, its contents;
-           Whether
the accused had outstanding charges; and
-           The accused’s attitude and that by drinking and driving
the accused has recently exhibited poor judgment.
[
27
]
That the entirety of the circumstances must be
considered, almost goes without saying, but the helpfulness of this list
created by Justice Durno, does have its limitations. I find the comments by
Justice Heeney in R. v. Kavanagh,
[2017] O.J. No. 430
are apt. In that case at
paragraph 41 he had this to say about Justice Durno’s comments in Price and the
overholding analysis in general:
The comments
of Durno J. are interesting, although perhaps not quite as helpful as they
appear at first blush. Several of the factors cited -- the administrative
license suspension, the impounding of the accused's car, and the poor judgment
exhibited by drinking and driving -- are present in virtually every case of
"over 80", and are not a variable factor, like a blood alcohol
reading, that demands active consideration by the officer-in-charge.
Furthermore, the suggestion that an accused with a high blood alcohol content
can simply be off-loaded by the police to a civilian is open to valid debate.
The comments of Sgt. MacDonald, that once the individual is in custody she is
"on the hook" to look out for his safety, are compelling. If an
accused with a high blood alcohol content were released to a friend or family
member, and then fell and seriously injured himself due to his alcohol
consumption, the police should have a valid concern as to whether they might be
held liable for his injuries. Even worse would be the situation where the
accused chose to get behind the wheel of a different vehicle after his release,
notwithstanding the efforts of his chaperone.
[
28
]
I find these comments of Justice Heeney
convincing. Additionally, the licence suspension, vehicle impoundment and the
exhibition of poor judgment apply equally to cases of impairment by a drug, as
they do in cases of alcohol impairment. The off-loading as he calls it, of a
drug impaired accused to a civilian would prompt the same if not a more
compelling debate. I say more compelling because I find there is an important
distinction between cases of impairment by alcohol and impairment by drugs in
one respect. The science underlining impairment by alcohol, its effect on the
body and especially the elimination of alcohol from the blood, and consequently
the eliminating of its impairing effects on a person, is better understood. Alcohol
is eliminated from the blood at a very predictable and known rate. The same is
not true of drugs. The wide variety of drugs a person may ingest, how they
effect a person and the rate at which those effects dissipate is not as nearly
as predictable and well understood. To a great extent, the police are flying much
more blind in this regard when it comes to impairment by drugs as they are when
dealing with impairment by alcohol.
[
29
]
In assessing the overall circumstances of this
case, the Crown engaged in a risky trial strategy. It was Officer Accursi as
the officer in charge, who made the decision that the accused was to be
released, but it was also her decision to delay that release and not do it
immediately upon return to the Cayuga detachment at 2:39 am. Officer Accursi
went off shift at 6:00 am and the accused was released as noted by Officer
Whitall at 8:49 am on instructions from the Staff Sergeant. The risk the Crown
took was not calling the Staff Sergeant to testify why the decision to release
was made when it was.
[
30
]
As risky as that was, I find in the overall
circumstances of this case, it was not fatal to the Crown case. When the
circumstances are viewed in their entirety, I find the decision to release the
accused when they did in the morning, was reasonable and did not amount to an
arbitrary detention of the accused.
[
31
]
The circumstances to be considered are as
follows. Officer Accursi was presented with a person who a civilian had seen
operating a vehicle and according to him, swerving all over the road. When she
dealt with the accused, he was displaying signs that lead her to the conclusion
the accused was impaired by a drug. While transporting the accused from Cayuga
to Simcoe for examination by the DRE, the accused fell asleep in her cruiser. Upon
arrival in Simcoe, the accused was turned over to the DRE, Officer Sinclair who
conducted her examination after which she concluded the accused was impaired by
a central nervous system stimulant. Upon coming to that conclusion, she made a
demand for a urine sample from the accused and instead of providing one, he was
put in a cell and immediately fell asleep. Officer Sinclair had to wake him
several times to encourage him to provide a sample. She went as far as warning
him if he did not provide a sample, he would be taken to the hospital for a
blood sample or be charged with refuse. After more than an hour, the accused
eventually provided the sample of urine.
[
32
]
Upon completion of her investigation, Officer
Sinclair turned the accused back over to Officer Accursi and advised her of the
results of her examination and her opinion that the accused was impaired by a
drug. Upon return to Cayuga, Officer Accursi advised the Staff Sergeant that
the accused could be released when determined appropriate to do so.
[
33
]
In determining when it would be appropriate to
release the accused, in addition to his state of impairment as observed by the officers
involved, it is important to keep in mind the context under which this arrest
took place. First, it was late at night, in December when cold temperatures can
be expected in Canada. Next, it was in Cayuga, a small town in a rural part of
the province. There are no buses or other form of public transit available in
the area. The OPP detachment is on the outskirts of town, on a main road with
limited to no artificial lighting and, limited to no sidewalks in the area.
[
34
]
Further, there was no evidence there was anyone
available to pick the accused up and take responsibility for him. The defence
suggest his grandmother could be such a person as the police has phoned her
earlier in the night to get from her contact information for the accused’s
counsel. However, despite this, there is no evidence before me the accused ever
suggested she could pick him up, nor did he suggest anyone else. I would also note
when he was released in the morning, he didn’t suggest anyone to pick him up then
and in fact was agitated he was without assistance, so Officer Whitall as a
courtesy not often done, drove him to Dunnville to retrieve his keys to his
house. This also demonstrates if he had been released at 2:39 am as suggested
by the defence, he would have been without the keys to his house and without
the means to recover them.
[
35
]
Last, even though the Staff Sergeant did not
testify, the prisoner security check log demonstrated the accused was monitored
frequently in the cell, usually at no more than 15 minute intervals, and he was
asleep practically the entire time. The amount he was sleeping itself, both prior
to being lodged in the cell at 2:39 am and after, Officer Sinclair stated could
be a sign of the effects of the drugs on his system. She stated it was unusual
for a person, even a person genuinely tired and not under the influence of
drugs, to continually fall asleep like the accused was while they were engaged
in an active investigation and interaction with the police.
[
36
]
Keeping all these factors in mind, I am unable
to say the decision to hold him to be released in the morning was unreasonable.
Keeping him until then, to be released after getting the sleep he clearly needed,
when further time had passed to lessen the effects of the drugs on him, and when
it was daylight, I find was reasonable. For these reasons I find the accused
has failed to demonstrate his detention until the morning was arbitrary and
this alleged s. 9 Charter breach fails as well.
ISSUE THREE – IMPAIRMENT
[
37
]
Having dismissed the accused’s Charter application,
the remaining issue to decide is if the Crown has proven the accused was
impaired while operating his motor vehicle. In this regard the Crown need only prove
any degree of impairment ranging from slight to great. See: R. v. Stellato,
(1993)
1993 CanLII 3375 (ON CA)
, 12 O.R. (3d) 90.
[
38
]
Evidence of the accused’s impairment came from a
variety of sources. First were the observations made at the time of the stop by
Officer Accursi. At that time the accused when asked to exit his truck seemed
to struggle, then slid from the driver’s seat on to the roadway and nearly lost
his balance. He then displayed an unnatural, wide stance and gait as he walked
to the front of the truck.
[
39
]
Next, the DRE, Officer Sinclair examined the
accused by putting him through a variety of procedures. On several of these,
the accused performed in the average range but on several others, he did
poorly. On the walk and turn test he had to raise his arms several times to
maintain balance and he did not follow the DRE’s instructions when turning
around. He had to put his foot down when doing the standing on one foot test.
He probably did most poorly on the touching of the tip of the nose test, where
once he touched his nostril, once he touched the bridge of his nose and once he
missed his nose altogether and touched his cheek. Based on these results and
others, Officer Sinclair believed the accused was impaired by a drug, likely a
central nervous system stimulant.
[
40
]
There are also the results of the urinalysis.
Methamphetamine, amphetamine and cocaine were all detected in the accused’s
urine. Even though finding the presence of drugs in a person’s urine only
confirms past consumption and not impairment, this evidence does corroborate
the evidence of both Officer Accursi and Sinclair.
[
41
]
The accused has argued given the other
explanations for some of Officer Accursi’s observations mentioned earlier, the
fact that the accused fell within the average range on some of the procedures
Officer Sinclair put him through, and keeping in mind the presence of drugs in
his urine does not equate to impairment, the evidence overall is too equivocal for
me to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
42
]
In assessing this evidence in its totality, I
have cautioned myself not to simply defer to the opinion of Officer Sinclair,
the DRE. When the evidence is viewed in its entirety, I am satisfied the accused’s
ability to operate his motor vehicle that night was at least slightly impaired
by drugs. His lack of coordination and balance and his fine motor skills were
compromised that night as demonstrated in Officer Sinclair’s testing and
Officer Accursi’s observations. I am satisfied this would have reduced his
ability to perform the complex motor functions necessary to operate a motor
vehicle.
CONCLUSION
[
43
]
Based on all the forgoing reasons, I find the
accused’s Charter rights were not violated as alleged and that the Crown has
proven the accused was impaired by a drug while operating his motor vehicle. As
such, the accused will be found guilty as charged.
Released:  April 8, 2025
Signed:
Justice Robert S. Gee