ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Henderson
, 2025 ONCJ 9
DATE: 
2025 01 09
COURT
FILE No.:  21-75000278
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
RUBENS DE OLIVEIRA HENDERSON
Before
Justice David S. Rose
Heard
on January 6, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on January 9, 2025
Ms. Boehr............................................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
Mr.  Orr.................................................................. 
  for the defendant Rubens Henderson
Rose J.:
1
. Mr. Henderson was found guilty after trial of Dangerous
Driving; Refuse Roadside Testing and Assault Police officer. On January 6, I
imposed sentence and gave oral reasons. At that time I reserved the right to
release further reasons.
2
. The facts I found were essentially that Mr. Henderson was
seen on January 14, 2021 driving a Nissan on QEW at 5pm.  He hit a median wall
on the right side of the highway. He then sped off at speeds estimated to be as
fast as 140km h.  Another driver called 911 and followed him as he left the
Gardiner Expressway at Lakeshore Blvd.  Sgt. Young pulled him over on Carlaw
and began a standard roadside driver investigation.  Mr. Henderson displayed
bizarre behavior from the start, screaming, putting his hands to the sky referring
to Allah and wanting to kiss Sgt. Young’s feet, and falling to the ground. Mr.
Henderson was yelling, screaming and flailing about chaotically.  He poked Sgt.
Young in the chest.
3
. Ultimately Sgt. Young obtained a pass result on an Approved
Screening Device “ASD”, which lead to a demand for a Standard Field Sobriety
Test “SFST”, because Sgt. Young believed that Mr. Henderson’s behavior was
sufficiently bizarre that he suspected he had drugs in his system.
4
. At that point Mr. Henderson was taken to a nearby area
and given an SFST demand.  Because of Mr. Henderson’s behavior other officers
arrived on scene. One of them was PC Ng who became the demanding office for the
SFST. Ng read instructions to Mr. Henderson but Mr. Henderson took a defiant
posture. PC Ng described Mr. Henderson as being cyclical, one minute he was
cooperative, and the next he was not.
5
. Mr. Henderson did not comply with the SFST demand.  He
was cautioned by PC Ng and was told to comply.  Mr. Henderson called the
officers mother fucker. About 2 minutes later Mr. Henderson tried to walk away
from the testing scene but was blocked by two officers. Mr. Henderson then
pushed PC Angus with this right hand and PC Ng with his left to get them out of
the way.  There was then a scuffle and Mr. Henderson was taken to the ground
and arrested for assault police. At that time the refusal to comply with the
SFST crystallized.
6
. Once he was arrested and handcuffed to the rear he called
PC Ng “noodles”, which PC Ng took to be a racial slur.  He was heard to say
that the police officers are “stupid fucking fools”.
7
. When Mr. Henderson was booked in to the police detachment
he was uncooperative in the extreme.  He would not answer any questions and
threw racially charged terms about himself and PC Ng.
8
. The Pre-Sentence Report “PSR” discloses that Mr.
Henderson had a very difficult upbringing.  He was orphaned as a child and
spent his first several years in an orphanage in Brazil. He was eventually
adopted into a home in Ottawa.  His mother Ida is quite supportive of Mr.
Henderson and describes him as a wonderful adult.
9
. Mr. Henderson has a youth record.  Notably he was found
guilty of second degree murder in 1996 with life imprisonment and parole
eligibility set at 7 years.  In submissions it was agreed that this was a youth
offence for which Mr. Henderson was prosecuted in as an adult. I was told that
Mr. Henderson was released on full parole in 2018.  The balance of his youth
record covers minor property offences and is of no moment given the substantial
gap and nature of those entries.
10
. Mr. Henderson was working gainfully at contracting with
a specialty in drywalling before his arrest. He now works building fences.
11
. At the sentencing hearing Mr. Orr called one of Mr.
Henderson’s friends ,Mr. Liu, who self-described as of Chinese heritage.  Mr.
Liu employed Mr. Henderson from 2018 to 2021 at his contractor firm. Mr. Liu
said that his nickname is ‘noodle’ and that when Mr. Henderson called him that
he did not take it as a racial epithet. It is just a nickname.
12
. Helpful as Mr. Liu’s evidence was it does not explain
why Mr. Henderson chose to call a stranger, PC Ng in the same manner.  What I
am left with is that Mr. Henderson hurled a common racial epithet at a police
officer simply who was trying to conduct a standard field sobriety test.  His
assertion that the investigating officers were stupid fucking fools supports my
finding that Mr. Henderson was extremely belligerent to officers who displayed
professionalism throughout.  Mr. Orr suggests that Mr. Henderson was suffering
from some form of mental break at the time but there is no other evidence of
that.  The PSR identifies possible anger management issues, poor problem
solving deficits coping deficits and self management deficits.  None of that
rises to the level of mental health concerns.
13
. The Crown says that an appropriate sentence is 90 days
of intermittent custody with ancillary orders. Mr. Orr argues for a non
custodial sentence but does not specify any more than that.
14 I find that the aggravating circumstances in this case are:
i)
The manner of driving. Mr. Henderson crashed his car on a highway where
cars are travelling at 100km hr.  He was seen driving well beyond the speed
limit after crashing his car.  No one was injured by Mr. Henderson’s driving
that day but that is only by sheer luck.
ii)
Mr. Henderson’s level of belligerence toward the investigating officers
is aggravating.  This is one of many drinking and driving cases I have heard in
recent months which involve overt belligerence and, all too often, the use of
racial epithets towards a  police officer.  Mr. Henderson was in the habit of
calling his friend Mr. Liu “noodles”.  Be that as it may, PC Ng was a complete
stranger to Mr. Henderson and there was no such intimacy which might permit the
use of a racial term.    What is concerning is that a term which is racial and
derogatory is hurled in a situation which has no apparent connection to the
police civilian interaction.  PC Ng took it as a racially charged label.  Mr.
Henderson denied at sentencing being a racist.  I accept that but there is no
explanation for his words that night. Hurling racial insults at officers making
lawful demands under Part VIII.1 of the
Cod
e can be seen as attempting
to push back or intimidate the demanding officer and therefore avoid taking a
breath test.  That is an additional reason to denounce such conduct.
Being arrested is
often an emotionally charged situation, and police officers are expected to
perform their functions professionally in the face of difficult arrestees.   An
arrest is not an exercise in civility, but nor can it be taken as licence by
the arrestee to hurl racial insults and abusive language at police officers. 
Sentencing has a denunciatory function and will in this case.
15. The assault police officer is at the lower end of
gravity.  It is a push and there was, not surprisingly, no evidence of injury
to the officer.
16. I find that Mr. Henderson’s criminal record is so dated
as to not be aggravating.  With that said, Mr. Henderson is serving a life
sentence and a federal parolee.  He is not a first offender and my normal
reluctance to incarcerate a first time offender does not apply here.  In
submissions Mr. Orr asked that I mete out a sentence which would not put Mr.
Henderson in a poor light before his inevitable parole board hearing.  This
sentence must conform with statutory and common law principles.  Adjusting a
sentence for purposes of a future parole board hearing is not a consideration.
17. For these reasons the appropriate sentence in this case
is:
i)
Dangerous Driving:  40 days in jail;
ii)
Refuse Breath Sample: 40 days concurrent;
iii)
Assault Peace Officer ; 40 days concurrent.
18. Mr. Henderson is gainfully employed so he will be
permitted to serve his sentence on weekends. He will be taken into custody
today and released after processing.  He will serve his sentence starting this
Friday at 7pm until 6am Monday until it is served.
19. There will be a one year driving prohibition concurrent
on the Refuse Roadside Test and Dangerous Driving. Mr. Henderson’s driving
privileges stopped on the day of his conviction on July 23, 2024 because his
release was amended to reflect his impending driving prohibition.  He therefore
has 5.5 months of pre-sentencing driving prohibition, which must be deducted
from the statutory driving prohibition, see
R. v. Basque
2023 SCC 18
.
The net driving prohibition is therefore 6.5 months from this point.  When I
handed down this sentence in Court I referred to
R. v. Wolfe
2024 SCC 34
as the authority for deducting the pre-sentence driving prohibition from the
statutory period, but that is not the correct authority.
20. There will be a s. 110 for 5 years, and DNA orders. 
When Mr. Henderson completes his sentence he will be on probation for 12
months.
- report within 48 hours and
thereafter as directed.
- attend for counselling, complete
assessments.
- take back on track program
- no weapons.
- abstain from the consumption of
alcohol and illicit substances.
21.  There is a victim fine surcharge.
Released:  January 9, 2025
Signed:
Justice David Rose