ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Swales
, 2025 ONCJ 440
DATE: 
2025-08-19
COURT
FILE No.:  Newmarket 4911-24-91109656
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
ANTHONY SWALES
Before
Justice P. Bourque
Heard
on August 8, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on August 19, 2025
L. Young............................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
R. Sahota....................................................... counsel
for the defendant Anthony Swales
BOURQUE, J.:
I.
OVERVIEW:
[
1
]
In the late night hours of October 16, 2024, the
defendant and his spouse were at their home and were arguing. His spouse, Melanie
Macdonald, decided to leave the home at about 11 p.m. and went to get a “tea”.
On her return, she saw the defendant in the driveway (it was a long driveway on
a rural property) on a motorized ATV machine. As she came up the driveway and
stopped, the defendant bumped into her, causing some slight damage to the back
of her car. As a result of her call to the police and their attendance and
intervention, the defendant is facing charges of impaired driving, driving with
excess alcohol, and mischief.
II.
EVIDENCE:
A.
Melanie Macdonald
[
2
]
Melanie Macdonald has given the evidence
referred to above.
[
3
]
She stated that she could not remember the cause
of the argument, but he was consuming beer from a beer can at some point. She
cannot say whether the beer had alcohol in it. She did say that she was aware
that when she left the home, she had left a vodka bottle in the fridge with ¼
to ½ of the contents left in it. She stated that when she eventually returned
inside the house, the bottle was sitting on the counter, and it was empty. No
other persons but her and the defendant and their 6-year-old daughter lived in
the house. She stated that just before she left the house, she went upstairs to
see on her daughter and heard commotion downstairs. When she went downstairs,
she saw the kitchen table flipped over and some other items had been disturbed
although nothing was broken.
[
4
]
She stated that on her return to the house, she
went up the drive and he came up behind her and the ATV struck her car from
behind and pushed in a back up camera, which she said she simply pushed back
out without needing any repairs.
[
5
]
She believed that the argument lasted for half
an hour and started at around 10:30 p.m. She did say that she left the home at
about 11:00 p.m. She also said that she would have returned about 11:40 p.m.
[
6
]
After he struck her car with his ATV, she went
back down to the end of the driveway, and he followed. She got out her phone
and stated that she called the police at about midnight.
[
7
]
She believes the police came in about 10
minutes, (both Crown and defence say she must be mistaken about this time), and
she went up to the house with them. They went into the house. The defendant was
not there. The police went outside and found him and arrested him.
B.
Tyler Nash
[
8
]
Tyler Nash is a YRP officer with four years of
experience. He received a dispatch at 1:05 a.m. and arrived at the scene at
1:13 a.m. He saw Melanie Macdonald speaking to another officer and he went into
the house to search for the defendant. He states he saw the kitchen area in
“disarray”. He then went outside and saw the defendant coming from a grassy
area, near a camping trailer. At no time does he see an ATV. He does not see
the defendant on any vehicle.
[
9
]
He arrests him for mischief at 1:28 a.m. At the
direction of the duty sergeant, at 1:44 a.m.  He also arrests him for impaired
driving. The officer said that he could detect an odour of alcohol, he had slight
slurring of speech and had glossy eyes.
[
10
]
The officer stated that he dealt with the defendant
at the station and his signs of impairment did not change.
C.
Woll Morrison
[
11
]
Woll Morrison is a YRP officer of less than 1
year experience.
[
12
]
He received a dispatch at 1:05 a.m. and arrived
at the scene at 1:13 a.m. He saw the scene in the kitchen (he took the photo
marked Exhibit No. 4C) and went outside and saw the defendant being arrested by
PC Nash. He stated that he could smell some alcohol and walked with a slightly
unsteady gait, although the ground was a combination of grass and gravel. He
searched the defendant and discovered a “set of keys”.
[
13
]
He went behind the house and found a red ATV. He
arranged for it to be towed. He stated that the ATV had its key in the
ignition.
[
14
]
He inspected the damage to the motor vehicle of Melanie
Macdonald and two of his photos were marked as exhibits (4A and 4B). I must say
the damage on the pictures does seem greater than the damage as described by Melanie
Macdonald, but it is not inconsistent with her evidence.
[
15
]
He went back to the station and had further
interactions with the defendant but made no other notations of impairment.
D.
Paul Kimmerly
[
16
]
Paul Kimmerly is the breath technician. He read
the breath demand to the defendant at 2:30 a.m. and the first test was taken at
3:32 a.m. and the second breath test was taken at 3:58 a.m. He stated that the
defendant’s speech was slightly slurred, his eyes and face were normal and his
balance while standing and walking was sure. The certificate of the breath
technician had been filed, showing a truncated reading of 170 milligrams at
03:32 a.m.
[
17
]
The defence did not call any evidence.
III.
ANALYSIS:
[
18
]
I will deal with each charge separately,
although there may be overlapping. I note the general statement contained in
the criminal law that the burden remains upon the Crown to prove all of the
essential elements of each offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
A.
Mischief
[
19
]
The Crown alleges that the defendant damaged two
pieces of property (owned solely or partially by Melanie Macdonald) namely, the
kitchen table and her Ford Bronco automobile.
[
20
]
With regard to the kitchen table, he may have
turned it on its side, but there is no indication of any damage to it. While
this may be an interference with the property to a limited extent (the table
can simply be righted after all), it does not in my opinion constitute damage.
[
21
]
With regard to the damage to the rear of the Ms.
Macdonald’s automobile, her evidence was that the ATV ran into the back of her
vehicle when she came to a stop at the end of the driveway. While it is
possible that the defendant intended to run into the back of the Bronco and
cause some damage, I note that Ms. Macdonald made the statement that, “I may
have hit my brakes.” While that may not excuse the defendant, it may be more of
a case of negligence that an intention to actually run into the back of her
car. On this issue, I must say that I have a reasonable doubt and having doubt
about his intention, I find that I cannot make a finding of guilt on this
count.
B.
Driving With Excess Alcohol
[
22
]
The facts of this case are somewhat unusual. I
will set out the precise facts I rely upon:
(i)
Between 10:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., Melanie
Macdonald and the defendant were arguing in their home. The defendant was
drinking beer from a beer can. Melanie Macdonald cannot say for sure that the
beer was alcoholic as she agreed with the suggestion from defence counsel that
there is sometimes non-alcoholic beer in the home. I find that this was
alcoholic beer, as I accept that this may have been non-alcoholic was a mere
possibility and it was not stated as a probability. Ms. Macdonald stated that
she had a bottle of vodka in the fridge. She believed it had some ¼ to ½ volume
of alcohol still in it. She said that she saw this bottle on the counter empty,
when she returned to the house with the police. It is possible that the
defendant consumed this alcohol. No testimony was heard that he did. I note
that in Exhibit No. 4C (the picture of the kitchen) I can see no empty bottle
of alcohol on the counter. I do not make a finding that the defendant consumed
this vodka at any time that evening. I have no other possible evidence that he
consumed any alcohol between the time she returned, and the police attended.
(ii)
Melanie Macdonald left the home at around 11:00 p.m.
and returned at approximately 11:40 p.m. When she returned, the defendant was
riding on a Polaris ATV 4-wheel motorized vehicle and was for a time in the
driveway. She stated that he was still “angry” and that she was worried about
her safety and his safety. It was at sometime between 11:40 p.m. and
midnight that the vehicles had a minor
accident (as described above) and she drove down the driveway and decided to
call the police.
(iii)
The police arrived at 1:13 a.m.  They viewed the
state of disarray in the kitchen and looked for the defendant outside. The
defendant walked up to Officer Nash at 1:28 a.m. and he was arrested for
mischief. The officer received instructions from his sergeant to also arrest
for impaired driving and he did so at 1:44 a.m.
(iv)
The defendant provided samples of his breath at
3:32 a.m. and 3:58 a.m., with truncated readings both times of 170 milligrams
of alcohol in 100 milliliters of blood.
[
23
]
The defendant relies upon the provisions of
section 320.14 (5)
of the
Criminal Code
and states that I should acquit
him of the charge of driving with excess alcohol.
IV.
THE LAW:
[
24
]
S. 320.14 (5)
of the
Criminal Code
states: (5) No person commits an offence under paragraph (1)(b) if:
(a)  they consumed alcohol after ceasing to operate the conveyance;
(b) after ceasing to operate the conveyance, they had no reasonable expectation
that they would be required to provide a sample of breath or blood; and
(c) their alcohol consumption is consistent with their blood alcohol
concentration as determined in accordance with subsection 320.31(1) or (2) and
with their having had, at the time when they were operating the conveyance, a
blood alcohol concentration that was less than 80 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of
blood.
[
25
]
The first issue to be decided is the burden of
proof and evidence which may be required for this defence to be successful. I
believe that the issue has been decided in
R. v. Bell
,
2023 ONSC
2952
, as it was the superior court sitting as a summary conviction appeal
court.
[
26
]
The court stated:
In
my view, to avail himself of the statutory exception, the respondent was
required to show on the evidence that there was an air of reality to the
application of that defence.  The Crown is not required to negative or disprove
the elements of s. 320.15(5) in the absence of such a showing.
The
exception with which we are concerned here, on its face, plainly applies only
when all three elements have been established (or at least when they are not
disproven beyond a reasonable doubt by the Crown).
Accordingly,
an air of reality will exist only when there is an air of reality to each of those
three elements.  It is not enough, in my opinion, for the accused to say, as
the respondent does here, that in any case where there is evidence of drinking
after driving that there is an air of reality to this exception.  An air of
reality is established only where there is an air of reality to each of
s.
320.14(5)
’s elements. Some evidence of drinking after driving – without more –
provides an air of reality of nothing.
[
27
]
With regard to
s. 320.14 (5)
(a), I have already
reviewed the evidence. Melanie Macdonald spoke of a ¼ to ½ bottle of vodka. It
is not established in the photograph exhibit and there is no further evidence
that the defendant had any such drink after she called the police that morning.
(that was also the time of the last driving on the ATV). I find that such a
suggestion does not have an air of reality in this case. Even if such an air of
reality was raised, I find that I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that
the defendant did not consume any such alcohol (or any other alcohol) after he
finished operating the ATV.
[
28
]
With regard to
s. 320.14(5)
(b), the defence
points out that on these circumstances, the defendant could not possibly have a
reasonable expectation that after operating the ATV he would be asked to
provide a breath sample. I beg to differ. The defendant had just been in an
argument with his wife that caused her to leave. On her return, he was involved
in an admittedly minor motor vehicle collision. She then got on the phone, and
while he may not have known the police were coming, that was a real
possibility. The drinking and driving laws are known to all, even if one
probably does not know all of the intricacies. Again, I find that this does not
constitute an air of reality and even if it arose, I would say that it is proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that he clearly had a reasonable expectation that he
would be required to provide a blood sample.
[
29
]
With regard to
s. 320.14 (5)
(c), I believe that
the case law is clear that from a practical point of view, “expert evidence
will be required for the accused to take advantage of this element of the
exception”. (
R. v. Bell
,
2023 ONSC 2952
). No such evidence was led.
[
30
]
The Defendant states that they should be excused
from such a requirement in this case, as the Crown needed to rely upon the
“read back” provisions of section 320.31 (4) which provide that:
For
the purpose of paragraphs 320.14(1)(b) and (d), if the first of the samples of
breath was taken, or the sample of blood was taken, more than two hours after
the person ceased to operate the conveyance and the person’s blood alcohol
concentration was equal to or exceeded 20 milligrams of alcohol in 100 milliliters
of blood, the person’s blood alcohol concentration within those two hours is
conclusively presumed to be the concentration established in accordance with
subsection (1) or (2), as the case may be, plus an additional 5 milligrams of
alcohol in 100 milliliters of blood for every interval of 30 minutes in excess
of those two hours.
[
31
]
In other words, in this case, with the last
driving at 00:00 hrs and the first sample was taken at 03:32, the concentration
of alcohol in the body of the defendant at last driving was (170 + (3 x 5)) =
185 milligrams of alcohol in 100 milliliters of blood. The defendant argues
that to retain the services of an expert, the exact time of extrapolation would
not be known. I beg to differ that this puts up some real obstacle to obtaining
this evidence. The toxicologist bases his analysis upon information taken from
the defendant as to the quantities drunk and the time of each drink. If there
is a possibility of two different times of last driving, then that is simply a
matter of calculation. I do not think that this imposes a significantly greater
burden than simple requirement of an expert.
[
32
]
Without any of this evidence being presented, I
cannot find that there is an air of reality to the requirements of subsection c
of
section 320.14 (5)
.
A.
Impaired Driving
[
33
]
To prove impaired driving, I must be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was at the time of driving,
impaired to any degree.
[
34
]
The evidence of the impairment would consist of:
•
the collision in the driveway
•
the evidence of the officers which consists of a
smell of alcohol, glossy eyes, and some slurring of words. One officer spoke of
balance issues, but I note that the defendant was on uneven ground.
•
contrary to this evidence is the evidence of the
breath tech who describes the defendant as eyes and face normal, balance while
standing and walking was sure.
[
35
]
Based upon this evidence I find I am not
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was impaired by any
degree by the consumption of alcohol.
V.
CONCLUSION:
[
36
]
I therefore find the defendant guilty of count number
2 (driving with excess alcohol) but not guilty of count number 1 (impaired
driving) and count number 3 (mischief).
Released:  August 19, 2025
Signed:
Justice P. Bourque