CITATION:
R. v. Singh
, 2025 ONCJ 32
DATE:  January 13, 2025
ONTARIO
COURT OF JUSTICE
Central West
Region
Brampton Ontario
B E T W
E E N :
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
-and-
CHARAN
SINGH
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Duncan J.
1
.
The defendant is charged with fail/refuse to comply
with a demand to provide a breath sample for Intoxilizer testing, contrary to S
320.15 CC.
2
.
At about 3:33 am on April 12 2023 an OPP officer
travelling northbound on highway 410 in Brampton noticed a vehicle ahead of her
with no lights on. It exited onto Sandalwood and then made an abrupt turn at an
intersecting street. She stopped it. The defendant was the driver.
3
.
She told the defendant that she had stopped him
for having no lights. She requested the usual documentation which he provided.
She had an ASD with her and made a demand for a mandatory sample at 3:38 am. After
several attempts (she didn’t count them) she warned him of the consequences of
refusal. He then, at 3:43, provided a suitable sample, registering a Fail. He
was arrested for impaired operation, read RTC’s and cautions and, at 3:50 am, was
given a demand under 320.28 to provide samples for Intoxilizer analysis.
4
.
On the way to the police station, the defendant
was angry and argumentative. On arrival at 4:31 am the defendant spoke to duty
counsel and when taken to the breath room at 5:19 acknowledged that he was
satisfied with the consultation.
5
.
The arresting officer was also the Qualified Technician.
She enlisted the assistance of a Punjabi speaking officer though she had been
able to communicate in English with the defendant.
[1]
6
.
The breath room activity, as usual, was audio
and video recorded. The acoustics in the room and audio record left a lot to be
desired. It was often difficult to understand what was being said or even what
language was being spoken. To make matters worse, there was often considerable crosstalk
among those present. Further, the audio and video on the recording was sometimes
out of synch.
7
.
The recording showed that the breath demand and
cautions were read in English and, when the defendant appeared to be
non-comprehending, were also translated. The instructions from the QT were
brief:
Make a tight seal around the mouthpiece, take a deep breath and blow
until I tell you to stop
. There was no demonstration by the QT.
8
.
At 5:27 he made his first “attempt” but just
held his breath and did not blow at all. Over the next 13 minutes he was given
12 more opportunities some sounding short beeps and some sounding as long as 5
seconds- but none of the samples were adequate or suitable in the opinion of
the QT.
[2]
9
.
As mentioned, it was often difficult to make out
exactly what the defendant was saying but the gist of it was that he claimed he
was blowing as long and hard as he could and that it is hard or impossible for
anyone to blow out of their mouth while breathing in through their nose, as one
must do to not pass out.
10
.
In greater detail: After a few no blows and short
blows, around the 5
th
attempt, the defendant produced three
successive multi-second long blows, the longest being about 5 seconds. But they
were not suitable because they were not long enough - he stopped too soon. The
QT asked him “
Do you want to blow or not?”
to which he protested “
I
am blowing
.”
[3]
He then stood up and said something inaudible but apparently conveying
frustration. The QT directed that he sit down and he complied. He was then
presented with the mouthpiece again, took it in his mouth but did not provide
any air. He was again given the mouthpiece and provide a short inadequate blow.
11
.
The QT then said “
I am going to give you a
couple more tries”.
The defendant gave two very short blows. He then stood
again and gestured again as if to say
“That’s it
.”
[4]
She told him that he is going
to be charged with refusal. The time was 5:40. He was argumentative saying that
he did not refuse and that he blew as best he could
. He talked over her
and wagged his finger at her. She told him to sit down and, after slight
hesitation, he complied. He calmed down and spoke with the Punjabi speaking
officer. By the gestures he made he appeared to be again explaining that he was
trying to blow.
12
.
The defendant then turned to the QT who was
standing next to him at the Intoxilizer machine hunched over some papers and asked
her
“Do you want to try it again?”
She immediately answered
“No, I
have already refused it (sic)and have explained it and I am not giving you any
more time now”
. It was then 5:42 am. The defendant was soon removed from
the breath room.
13
.
The defendant did not testify.
Analysis:
14
.
The Court of Appeal in
R v Khandakar
[2024]
OJ No 3767 (CA)
recognized that these fact situations give rise to two
analytically distinct questions. The first is whether the defendant can come
within the “same transaction” window that permits a change of mind regardless
of other circumstances. But if he is too late and does not make it through the
window, the second question arises for determination. The court must consider
his offer together with the evidence as a whole to determine whether the
actus
reus
and
mens rea
have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
(Khandakar
para 3, 65).
On this question, the bona fides of his offer becomes an
important and often crucial consideration.
The Domik
window:
15
.
A detainee subject to a breath demand who
initially refuses to comply commits no offence if he later changes his mind and
agrees to provide a sample. However, the window for him to change his mind is
limited and he must offer his assent to comply as part of the same transaction
as the initial refusal or refusals:
R v Domik
[1980]OJ 642(CA)
Aff
(1979)
2
MVR 301
)
. This rule applies to demands for a sample for roadside screening
as well as for Intoxilizer testing though the interpretation of “same
transaction” is more limited due to the immediacy requirement for roadside
testing:
R v Khandakar.
16
.
The rule is not dependent on the initial refusal
being equivocal. The leeway is extended “even if their initial refusals were unambiguous”.
Khandakar para 55.
17
.
Further, the rule is not limited to a single
refusal followed by an offer to comply. Police officers routinely give the
subject more than one chance to blow and receive more than one refusal:
(Khandakar
para 32)
. The accused in
Khandakar
was given multiple chances to
blow over 13 minutes and refused those multiple opportunities before changing
his mind: (
Khandakar
para 7). The Court of Appeal did not suggest that
the trial judge was wrong in considering whether these events involved the same
transaction. Rather, the Court found error only in the trial judge not properly
considering the immediacy requirement applicable to the ASD situation before
him. In other words, he erred in treating the case before him as if it was an
Intoxilizer demand case.
18
.
As I understand
Khandakar,
the
bona
fides
of the offer is not a consideration at this stage. This does not mean
that a detainee can beat the breathalyzer or frustrate the process by making an
insincere or non-genuine offer to try again. It only means that his bona fides does
not have to be guessed at by the QT – or later determined by the Court - at
this stage. If the window is still open his sincerity will be quickly
determined if he makes good on his offer and then provides a suitable sample. (see
endnote to this judgment as well).
19
.
Cases of verbal refusal followed by change of
mind are straight forward and turn on the single issue of whether the change
and assent are part of the same transaction. In my view there is no reason in principle
why non-verbal failure/faking cases – refusals by action - should be treated
differently. In none of the cases that come before the Court has the detainee
actually provided the promised sample, so the sincerity or
bona fides
of
the offer is as questionable in the one case as the other.
20
.
In this case the relevant events flowed in a
continuous line. The offer to try again was made a couple of minutes at most after
his last blow and almost immediately after he was told he was being charged
with refusal. The QT and the machine were still readily at hand. The defendant’s
offer was in my view clearly part of the same transaction as his earlier
failures to provide samples.
21
.
The first question is therefore answered in the
defendant’s favour. His request was timely and accommodation of it would
involve no significant inconvenience or delay. The defendant therefore made it
through the
Domik
window. He had not yet committed the
actus reus
of the offence:
Khandakar para 1,3).
On that basis he is entitled to a
dismissal of the charge.
22
.
It is unnecessary to go further and examine the
second question, though I will do so briefly.
Mens Rea
23
.
The Crown must prove the elements of the offence
beyond a reasonable doubt. That includes proof of
mens rea.
24
.
As noted by the Court in
Khandakar (para 19)
there
is a division of opinion in the case law concerning the
mens rea
for
this offence, specifically, whether the Crown must prove that the accused
intentionally failed or refused to provide a breath sample, or whether it is
enough for the Crown to prove that the accused knew that their conduct would
have this result.
25
.
I have consistently adhered to the first view –
that the failure must be volitional and intentional and that bona fide attempts
to provide a sample, though failed, may negate or raise a doubt about such
intention:
R v Sullivan;
[2001] O.J. No. 2799
; R v Westerman
[2012]
OJ No 97
.
This view was also held and applied
by Durno J in the leading case of
R v Grant
2014 ONSC 1479
[5]
.
In
that case the Court provided a thorough discussion on how the bona fide issue
should be analyzed and determined (paras 80-86). It is lengthy and I will not
reproduce it here.
26
.
The task is to determine whether the detainee intended
to refuse or fail to provide a sample. But at what point in time? It is
apparent that in every case of verbal refusal he has such intention when he
initially refuses. The same could be said of those who fake and fail. But proof
of
mens rea
at that point in time cannot be determinative. A wider
inquiry is necessary, as demonstrated in
Grant
,
and evidence of
bona
fide
attempts to blow or a bona fide request or offer may support a
reasonable doubt that the subject had the necessary
mens rea
.
27
.
In this case the defendant’s initial short and non-existent
blows suggest that he was faking it, though it must be said that he received
very little instruction as to how hard and long to blow. On the other hand, the
longer blows suggest that he may have been making a genuine effort to comply on
at least those occasions.
28
.
Whatever his intention was to that point, I find
it impossible to conclude that his offer to try again was not genuine. Rather,
I think that, on being charged with refusal, he smartened up and, if he had
been playing games, decided to abandon that strategy and make a genuine effort
to provide a suitable sample.
29
.
I have a reasonable doubt that the
mens rea
has been proven. The charge must be dismissed.
Endnote:
30
.
As an endnote, I should not be taken as
suggesting that the QT has to be excessively indulgent of the subject’s whims
or that he has to devote hours attempting to coax samples from him. To the
contrary I think these situations can be handled quickly and efficiently. If the
subject offers or asks to try again and has not already been given a last
chance warning, I suggest it would be most efficient to give him such a warning
and then give him that last chance. The bona fides of his request will soon
become apparent. If he fails again, the conclusion is that either his offer was
not genuine, or he has some relevant medical condition which he can attempt to prove
at trial. In either case the breath testing will have come to a timely
conclusion.
January 13 2025
B Duncan J
C Hurley
for the defendant; M.
Otim
for the
Crown
[1]
The defendant represented by counsel did not request or
require an interpreter at his trial.
[2]
To that point the QT had conducted 220 breath tests. She
said that she had never had a fail/refuse but had always been able to obtain
samples from her test subjects.
[3]
While I have used quotation marks, I caution that these excerpts
are not to be considered completely accurate, given the audio difficulties mentioned.
[4]
On both occasions that he stood up he said that he wanted to
speak to the lawyer again. His request was denied. Counsel has not raised a 10b
issue but argues that this request is relevant to whether he was  refusing or
signifying that he only wanted to get further advice about continuing.
[5]
The continuing vitality and authority of
Grant
has
recently been affirmed:
R. v. Arutunian,
[2023] O.J. No. 4850
and cases cited therein