CITATION:
R. v. J.G.,
2025 ONCJ 700
DATE:
2025.12.30
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER
   MAJESTY  THE  QUEEN
—
   AND  —
J.G.
Before
Justice Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for sentence imposed on 3 April, 2025
Michal
Sokolski.............................................................................................................  
for the Crown
V.J.
Singh.........................................................................................................  
for the defendant, J.G.
Fergus ODonnell J.
Overview
1
.
Many of a
judge's most challenging decisions involve sentencing.
2
.
All the more so
when a very serious crime is committed by an offender whose background and
circumstances are very favourable.
3
.
This is such a
case.  I am called on to sentence J.G. for child pornography
offences.  These are repugnant and deeply harmful offences that have awful
and long-lasting effects on their victims.  They are offences for which
denunciation and deterrence are justifiably the dominant sentencing foci.  These
offences “normally” result in the offender being sent to real jail and, indeed,
the Crown here seeks a sentence of twelve to fifteen months’ imprisonment.  J.G.’s
counsel, by contrast, asks that J.G. receive a conditional sentence instead,
stressing that J.G. was twenty years old at the time of the offences, had
been isolated in an alien land and culture for two years, pleaded guilty, is
genuinely remorseful and has very positive antecedents and future
prospects.
4
.
For very good
reasons a conditional sentence is a rare outcome in child pornography cases.
 "Rare", however, does not mean "never".  I have
decided that this is one of those very rare cases in which a conditional
sentence is a fit outcome for this offender and these offences; indeed, I am of
the view that for this offender and these offences a sentence of real jail
would not be at all appropriate.
The Facts
5
.
J.G. pleaded
guilty to possession of child pornography between 23 October and 5 November,
2021, and to possession of child pornography in May, 2022.  He was a
twenty year old college student at the time of both offences.  As is common in
these cases, the first date relates to an internet event that came to the
attention of the police and the second event relates to what was found on the
offender’s device(s) when the police showed up with a search warrant.
6
.
J.G. came to
the attention of the police in the fall of 2021 as a result of public
complaints that three digital videos of child pornography had either been
uploaded to, or made accessible via, Snapchat.  The investigation traced
those events back to one of J.G.'s devices.  The police executed a search
warrant on 12 May, 2022.  That search disclosed three unique, accessible
stills of child pornography and forty-one unique, accessible videos of child
pornography, totalling about four hours (There were five unique inaccessible
stills and 32 unique inaccessible videos).
7
.
J.G. confessed
immediately upon his arrest.
8
.
As this was a
contested sentencing, I viewed a representative sample in chambers in the
presence of Crown and defence counsel and the officer-in-charge.  All
child-pornography is inherently odious, but even odious has ranges.  The
material in J.G.'s possession included penetration of infants and penetration
and bondage of young girls, including an adult female performing fellatio on a
young boy that was set to music, a detail that can only be seen as an
attempt by the creator of the material to normalize something that could never
be normalized.
J.G.'s Background and His
Testimony
9
.
J.G. testified
on sentencing.  He arrived in Canada in December, 2019 to attend college. 
He was eighteen years old and had never lived away from his family
before.  In his homeland access to higher education is dictated based on
religion and he is a member of a tiny religious minority and would have had to
have ranked in the 99th percentile in order to be able to attend an affordable
college.  He took loans to study in Canada, choosing Canada because its
policies permitted students to work while attending school and he needed to
work in order to pay for school and to send money back to his family.
10
.
With the help of a friend
from back home, J.G. rented a ten-by-ten foot room, sight-unseen, for
three-hundred-and-fifty dollars a month.  He described it as devastating
to see, "one of the worst places to live".  Addicts would find
their way into the house and pass out; on one occasion, a seemingly
drug-addicted woman made her way into his room while he was asleep, and
yelled "don't shoot" at him when he woke up.  He had
trouble sleeping in that environment. (He has also had trouble sleeping since
his arrest, at times managing only two or three hours of sleep a night.) He
wanted to move, but could not afford to. There was a homeless encampment across
the street.  It was depressing walking in the neighbourhood and he felt
unsafe after dark. He has since moved now that his elder sister has come to
Canada and they live together in a rented house with other room-mates.
11
.
The area J.G. speaks of is
not unfamiliar.  It lies perhaps five minutes' drive from this
courthouse.  J.G.'s description of it is, tragically, entirely apt. 
With its proximity to downtown St. Catharines and nearby support services
and vacant land, it is very much a magnet for some of the city's most
challenged residents, including those dealing with mental health issues,
alcohol and substance dependence, homelessness and poverty.   It is one of
that growing number of neighbourhoods where this country's
"left-behind" citizens congregate and live in very difficult
circumstances and with faint hope of any improvement.  To put it mildly, it
is both disheartening and invaluable in a country such as Canada to drive
through that area as I do regularly, thereby being faced with some of our
fellow citizens’ daily reality.  I accept that for J.G. it would have been
a culture shock compounded by a culture shock when he arrived and lived there.
12
.
J.G. began school about a
fortnight after he arrived in Canada and was very eager to start that new
experience and to make new friends in his classes.  But this was the
start of 2020, when Covid 19 reared its ugly head, and by March, 2020 J.G.'s
college cancelled all in-person attendance.  Indeed, although J.G. did
graduate, he never went back to school in person.  Even his graduation was
done on Zoom.  All of his education was done virtually, with him spending
almost every day "alone and lonely" in his room, not making new
friends at school as he expected.
13
.
J.G. has worked throughout
his time in college.  In the short period before Covid hit, he had a job
at a restaurant, but Covid shut that down.  He then found work at a nearby
care home as a dietary aide, staying there for two or
two-and-a-half-years.  It was a minimum-wage job in one of the cheapest
care facilities available and the patients suffered from addiction, depression
and a variety of mental health issues.  He was faced with a lot of racism
including suggestions from residents that he go back to his own country. 
He kept his feelings in, but would then cry in conversations with his mother,
who told him to come home; but he worked through it.  After graduation,
J.G. worked in a well-known local restaurant in St. Catharines until his work
permit expired in the fall of 2024.  He worked long hours, sometimes seven
days a week and was promoted to assistant kitchen manager.  He is now unemployed
and lives with and is supported by his elder sister, who came to Canada after
he did.
14
.
Another cultural shock for
J.G. on arriving in Canada was the internet.  Back home he had internet
access, but only up to about 1 GB a month, which he had to use sparingly for
school-related purposes.  In Canada his internet access was much more
affordable and his usage leapt as he was isolated and dependent on the internet
for virtual attendance at college and also for trying to establish virtual
social connections as a stranger to Canada in a Covid environment.  In
Covid, he said, nobody wanted to go out and nobody was interested in making new
friends.  He said a website called Omegle was very popular for making
connections and that it was also a target for people involved with child
pornography, which he did not have any idea about at the time.  He said
that one day he received a link and clicked on it and it was child
pornography.  He said this was not discussed back home; indeed, for sex
education back home his teachers in grade ten had simply had the students read
the textbook chapters on their own.  He had no prior experience with this
and said it disturbed him, although he said he did not know about its legality,
thinking that it must be legal if it was being distributed on the internet.
15
.
In his testimony in chief,
J.G. initially said that his period of accessing the child pornography was
limited to two weeks.  However, faced in cross-examination with the
question of what an analysis of his computer usage would demonstrate, he agreed
that he had gone back to the material over several months, blaming that on his
immaturity at the time.  He agreed that he had tried to minimize his
involvement in his original testimony because of the implications for his
sentence.  He had earlier agreed on his plea that he had also uploaded
some of the material or made it accessible.
16
.
It is clear that J.G.
sought to downplay the extent of his interaction with the child pornography in
his possession and this does not reflect well on him.  I am satisfied,
however, that otherwise his testimony, both about how he was first introduced
to child pornography randomly and about his life experience before his arrival
in Canada, since his arrival and since the prosecution is reliable.  Some
of what he says is notorious in the community and other parts are supported by
external materials filed.
17
.
J.G. broke down during his
testimony while describing what a supportive life he had had with his parents
back home and how guilty he was that his parents now faced shame at home
because of his "unethical and illogical decisions".  He said
that he himself had "completely broken down emotionally", but that,
in addition, when he was arrested somebody took his photo from his internet
profile and published it in the newspaper in his home country, resulting in
people going to his parents' house and portraying him as a pedophile. 
Sadly, the internet is not an environment dominated by accuracy, subtlety or
restraint and for some offenders the Wild West vigilantes of the internet will
impose consequences on offenders (or even suspects) far beyond what a court
would impose, or in many cases would even consider appropriate.
18
.
J.G.'s pre-sentence report
recites a positive, abuse-free upbringing, and confirms J.G.'s otherwise good character
through information from a family friend from back home who has known J.G.
since he was a baby, from a long-term room-mate who describes the offence as
out of character and who characterizes J.G. as "genuine and helpful"
and from his bail supervisor who describes him as being compliant,
hard-working, quiet and kind.  The probation officer found him to be
suitable for community supervision.
19
.
J.G. was assessed by
Andrea Bevan, MSW RSW and subjected himself to phallometric testing conducted
by Ms. Bevan's colleague.  No issue was raised with respect to Ms. Bevan's
qualifications or her report.  She is well known in the local court
community, having spent decades in the Ministry of the Solicitor General and
rising to the top ranks of the Niagara Detention Centre before taking on her
current career as a registered social worker, where her reports are often
tendered in criminal proceedings, with a heavy emphasis on issues of
sexual deviancy.
20
.
Ms. Bevan reviewed J.G.'s
family and personal background, along with his sexual history, which has never
involved another person and which involved a brief period of dependence on
adult pornography coincident with his greater access to the internet after he
came to Canada and which was in part a means of coping with loneliness and
boredom.  J.G.'s phallometric testing was conducted by a clinician with
thirty-nine years of experience in the field and showed a highest preference
for adult females, with, "no indicators of arousal to prepubescent or
pubescent children."  J.G. has had one brief girlfriend relationship
back home, which did not involve sexual contact and which was cut off by the
girlfriend's father, who told J.G.'s father that he did not want his daughter
dating anyone.  Since coming to Canada, J.G. has focused on school and
work.  He believes that sex should be reserved for committed
relationships.
21
.
J.G. initially manifested
some of the typical false beliefs about child pornography and the role of those
who possess or access child pornography in the victimization of children (I am
satisfied that he no longer holds any such beliefs).  Ms. Bevan outlined
the distinct risk profiles raised by offenders whose child victimization is
limited to child pornography as contrasted with those offenders whose offences involve
actual contact with child victims and the very low recidivism rates for the
former category.
22
.
Ms. Bevan makes the
following observations:
a.
"To summarize, when assessing CSEM [child pornography]-only
offenders [as opposed to child-pornography-and-child-contact-offenders],
evaluators are encourage to look at an individual's unique personality features
which can make them more or less likely to engage in maladaptive behaviour
(i.e. antisociality), sexual interests including arousal, fantasy and
masturbatory practices, as well as criminogenic variables linked to both
general and sexual offending....
b.
Some of what [J.G.] provided also included his experiences
transitioning to Canadian life, which, in my view, is a relevant consideration
given he was 18 when he arrived and only 20 when the offences occurred. 
The stress he encountered with his move to Canada combined with immaturity are
a part of the overall picture.
...
c.
The only relevant dynamic risk factors from the Stable 2007 include
the absence of a healthy romantic relationship which is known to be protective
against future risk for sexual offending.  In my view this has more to do
with age and circumstance rather than an actual deficit, which impacts the
weight this is given in the overall assessment of risk.  In other words,
[J.G.] possesses the requisite skills to attract a partner and engage in a
relationship but his young age and circumstances and more recently his criminal
charges have impacted his dating practices."
...
d.
From a general criminogenic risk perspective, [J.G.] falls into
the lowest risk category according to the LSI-R.  General criminogenic
factors include.....None of these are relevant factors for [J.G.].
...
e.
Overall, there are very few risk factors present, aside from
perhaps his young age, relationship status and having now been arrested for a
sexually based crime, at least by definition and title.....[J.G.'s] illegal
conduct was isolated and out of character for him and does not reflect
significant underlying issues that are more commonly seen in these types of
cases.  It is reasonable to conclude that his risk for further sexual or
general offending is low.
f.
Lastly, in my opinion the need for overt measures of control such
as limiting access to public parks etc. or the internet are unnecessary given
the absence of meaningful risk factors, and may make prosocial functioning more
difficult, particularly for someone of his age."
23
.
Mr. Singh filed a book of
support letters in relation to J.G.  These included:
a.
A letter of remorse and a statement from J.G. in which he
expressed his acceptance of responsibility, his appreciation of the harm
visited upon victims of child pornography and his regret for having let down the
community and his family.  Having seen J.G. in court and having heard his
testimony I accept that letter unreservedly.  The statement also sets out
how J.G.'s father suffered skull and rib fractures and a subdural haematoma
while J.G. has been in Canada and that J.G. had paid for his father's medical
costs.  He has worked full-time since the charges, navigating the world
despite his lack of access to a smartphone (as a term of his bail).
b.
A letter from Niagara Life Centre Counselling  reflecting his
attendance for counselling for how to deal with negative emotions, self-care
and anxiety concluded that J.G. has made significant progress in those areas.
c.
A letter from the proprietor of two well-known local restaurants,
who employed J.G. for three years.  With the benefit of thirty years as a
restaurant owner, she said the following about J.G.:
This brings [me] to talk about one
individual, [J.G.] who I am so proud to have on my team.  [J.G.] started
working at the [name of restaurant] three years ago at an entry level kitchen
position and has climbed his way to the top to assistant kitchen manager. 
Whether it's inventory, placing food orders, creating new dishes, or training
others he has proven himself to be a very talented cook and key employee. 
He has a very patient and calm demeanor and respects all his fellow
colleagues.  Even when others are making mistakes at critical times you
will never see him get mad or lose the smile from his face.  He will just
tell people not to worry and he will fix it.
I have come across a lot of employees in my
career but have never had one quite like [J.G.] on my team.  [He] always
shows up early for his shift and is willing to give a hand to anyone who needs
help before he starts his shift.  He is always there for others that need
help or just an ear to listen to them.  I can't think of a time where he
has called in sick to his shift.  [He] works around 44 hours a week and
sometimes more.  I can always count on him to pick up a shift if I am
short staffed. [He] is so well liked and in fact he is loved here at the [name
of restaurant].  I feel I am truly blessed to have him on my team....
d.
A letter from J.G.'s elder sister (by five years), who has since
come to Canada and who now lives with J.G. and other house-mates.  She
reflects on her brother's kind and supportive nature, to her and to their
parents, including both emotional and significant financial support.  She
also describes her brother's social isolation as a result of his shame and the
charges and the impact that the publicity in India has had on him and their
family as well as the impact it will have on her brother's future in terms of
employment and social integration.
The Arguments of the Crown
and Defence
24
.
I have reviewed the two
dozen sentencing precedents presented to me by the parties in the course
of their submissions.  As I have said in the past of fentanyl sentencing
precedents, another category of offences that has mushroomed over recent years,
the cases presented to me for this offence are also depressingly familiar. I
have no intention of getting into the nitty-gritty of all of them here.
25
.
Sentencing precedents
serve a number of functions.
26
.
One is that they
demonstrate the applicable principles of sentencing, both of a general nature
and of particular relevance to particular types of crimes.   By way
of example only, these would include general principles such as the relative
weight to be given to particular sentencing objectives for particular types of
crimes, ranges of sentence and their development (particularly important here
in light of increasing sentence maximums established by Parliament and growing
knowledge of the impact of contact-based sexual offences and of child
pornography on young victims), aggravating and mitigating circumstances, 
and more specific factors such as the limited extent of mitigation provided by
an offender's good reputation when the offence occurs in secret and is entirely
at odds with the offender's projected public reputation, the approach to be
taken to youthful first offenders, collateral consequences and the like.
27
.
Another function in
looking at sentencing precedents is to aim for parity in how different judges
treat similar cases, a key objective of any legal system because the imposition
of dramatically different consequences on two offenders whose backgrounds and
offences are the same is prone to undermine confidence in the justice
system.
28
.
A third objective, closely
related to the second, is to find a case that is on all fours with the case
before the court.  This, of course, is often a bit of a fool's errand
because the permutations and combinations of offence details and offender
characteristics is close to infinite.  But the closer a case is in its
various details to the case to be decided, there is real value in its use as a
benchmark to identify or validate the ideal sentence.
29
.
Certain cases stand out
among the sentencing cases presented to me.  Central among these are the
decision of
the Supreme Court of Canada in
R.
v. Friesen
,
2020 SCC 9 (CanLII)
,
[2019] S.C.J. No. 100
, the defining judgment on the appropriate
approach to sentencing for offences involving the sexual abuse of children and
the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario in
R. v. Scott
,
[2024] O.J. No.
3530
, a landmark decision of this province's highest court applying the
Friesen
principles to
child sexual violence as manifested specifically in child pornography
offences.  Despite its age, the landmark
decision of Justice Molloy in
R. v. Kwok,
2007 CanLII 2942
, remains of
significant value.
30
.
There are, of course,
other relevant sentencing cases of more general application that must count in
the analysis I undertake here.  Among those is the now dated, but
ever-enduring, decision of the late Rosenberg, J.A.
in
R. v. Priest,
1996 CanLII 1381 (ON CA)
, which
establishes that when dealing with a youthful first offender like J.G. a
court's focus should be on specific deterrence and rehabilitation, with jail
being relied on only as a last resort and, even then, as briefly as
possible.  More recently, the Supreme Court of Canada's
decision in
R. v. Lacasse,
2015 SCC 64
, cemented
proportionality as the "cardinal" principle to be applied in
determining a fit sentence, proportionality meaning the balancing of the
seriousness of the crime and the moral blameworthiness of the offender. 
Proportionality is a sentencing principle that rises to constitutional status
and the principle of parity cannot be used to impose a sentence that falls
outside a perceived appropriate range of sentence if that divergent sentence is
right for the specific offences and offender.
R. v. Proulx,
2000 SCC 5
is a seminal decision
of the Supreme Court of Canada, holding clearly that conditional sentences are
capable of addressing denunciation and deterrence in a significant way, although
there will be cases in which a conditional sentence is not sufficiently
deterrent.
31
.
Mr. Sokolski calls for a
sentence of real jail in the range of twelve to fifteen months, followed by
three years of probation.  He roots this submission in the objective
seriousness of J.G.'s offences and the precise nature of J.G.’s collection
(neither of which can be gainsaid).
[1]
In taking that position, Mr. Sokolski places substantial emphasis on the
judgment of the Chief Justice of Ontario in
R.
v. Scott
, referred to earlier and on the Supreme Court
judgment in
Friesen
.
His submissions appear to
assert--or come perilously close to asserting--that any role for what he calls
"exceptional circumstances" to justify non-real-jail sentences for
crimes of this nature is a feature of a bygone, pre-
Friesen
era. 
This position seems to be extremely close to, or at the point of, asserting
that a conditional sentence could never properly be imposed for an offence of
this nature.
32
.
Mr. Scott was a
76 year-old
first offender, found guilty
after trial
of possession and importation of
approximately
three thousand
files of child pornography consisting
of text, images and videos.  This had been a vicious predilection of Mr.
Scott's for
three decades
. 
Mr. Scott had been granted a twenty-three-month conditional sentence after
trial. The Court of Appeal found Mr. Scott’s conditional sentence to have been
unfit, a conclusion that seems indisputable in light of the underlined elements
above.
33
.
There is an omnipresent risk
whenever there is a “transformative” development in the criminal law (and the
Supreme Court
decision in
Friesen
fits that label, even if many of its
component parts were previously known).  The risk is that the new development
is treated as a tsunami, largely sweeping aside large swathes of what existed
before, even things that the development does not actually touch upon or
necessarily change.  But the criminal law in general and the law of sentencing
in particular are both made up of many component parts, developed over years,
decades and centuries, by Parliaments and by courts, optimally to serve the
law’s and society’s purposes.  That sentencing superstructure ought not lightly
to be demolished in the absence of clear and binding authority, whether from
the Supreme Court or from Parliament.  Conditional sentences have been part of
that superstructure for almost thirty years and the reality is that there is
nothing
in
Friesen
to change the general question of whether or not a
conditional sentence is available for child-pornography offences.
[2]
The law was
already clear that conditional sentences can, in appropriate circumstances,
deliver denunciation and deterrence which must be the central foci of the
sentencing judge’s analysis for child pornography cases.   When such offences
justify sentences in the reformatory range, it is still the sentencing court’s
role to assess whether or not a conditional sentence is fit for purpose in the
context of the specific offence and the specific offender.  To presume or
suggest a ban or near ban on conditional sentences runs counter to both the law
of conditional sentencing and the principles of individualized sentencing and
of proportionality in sentencing, which is
the
cardinal principle.
[3]
Indeed, paragraphs
179-182 of
Scott
make
it clear that this province's highest court fully recognizes that conditional
sentences will, in appropriate circumstances permit conditional sentences for
child pornography offences.  See, in particular, paragraphs 180-182, where
Tulloch C.J.O. made the following observations:
[180]
I must reconcile the “exceptional
circumstances” term that
M.M.
used to express this point with the
Supreme Court’s
decisions in
R. v. Proulx
,
2000 SCC 5
,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 61
, and
Parranto
. At first glance,
M.M.
’s
use of this term might seem contrary to these cases, which respectively hold
that appellate
courts can neither create presumptions that conditional
sentences are inappropriate for specific offences (
Proulx
, at paras.
80-83
), nor require
exceptional circumstances to depart from a range (
Parranto
, at para. 40).
[181]
But in my respectful view,
M.M.
did not and could not have
intended to depart from
Proulx
by creating an offence-specific
presumption against conditional sentences.
Rather, it used the “exceptional
circumstances” term to convey that, since
Proulx
, Parliament has
increased maximum sentences and prioritized denunciation and deterrence for
sexual offences against children and, further, that the courts’ understanding
of the harmfulness and wrongfulness of these offences has deepened:
Friesen
,
at paras.
109-110
;
see
M.M.
, at paras.
13-15
.
Thus, while there is no presumption against conditional sentences, these post-
Proulx
changes require
more compelling personal circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the absence
of aggravating factors, to justify a conditional sentence than might have been
the case when
Proulx
was decided more than two decades ago.
[182]
Nor, in my view, did
M.M.
intend to depart from
Parranto
by requiring exceptional circumstances
to impose a conditional sentence. Rather,
M.M.
used “exceptional circumstances” as
shorthand for personal circumstances and mitigating factors that are
sufficiently compelling to make a conditional sentence proportionate
, as
in
R.
v. Padda
,
2019 BCCA 351
, at para.
36
. Not only is there no closed
list of such circumstances and factors (
M.M.
,
at para.
16
), but
multiple seemingly non-exceptional factors taken together,
such as being a young first offender with family support who poses little risk
and takes responsibility for his actions, can collectively render a conditional
sentence proportionate
:
R. v. Faroughi
,
2024 ONCA
178
,
435 C.C.C. (3d) 1
, at para.
99
.
This is consistent with
Parranto
’s holding that
sentencing
must focus on proportionality, not pigeonholing cases into ill-defined
exceptional circumstance categories:
at para. 40;
see
R.
v. Ellis
,
2022 BCCA 278
,
417 C.C.C. (3d) 102
, at para.
118
.
(emphasis mine)
34
.
I must also position the
sentence sought for J.G. relative to other sentencing positions for child
pornography offences.  I do that in relation to the cases the Crown and
defence counsel have provided me in advance and have referred to in their
sentencing submissions.  I also consider my own experience in cases of this
nature and the position adopted by the Crown in those cases as reference
points, although every case is captive to its own facts.
35
.
A few months before these
proceedings an offender named David Gomes appeared before me and, like J.G.,
pleaded guilty to two charges of possession of child pornography, with the
Crown likewise proceeding by indictment.  Mr. Gomes's offences involved
over one-thousand unique and accessible child-pornography images, over three-thousand
similar images in the "age-difficult" category and over seven hours
of video involving penetrative activity including bondage.  He had no
criminal record.  He had a "promising" report from Ms.
Bevan.  He lost his job as a paramedic.  For his offences, I was
presented with a joint submission for sixteen-months' imprisonment plus
probation, i.e. one month above the upper end of the range proposed by the
Crown for J.G.  He was, however, fully adult--much older than J.G. and
thereby in a totally different universe from the moral responsibility
perspective--and had a much larger collection.
36
.
On the same day,
coincidentally, Brandon Muhlbeier pleaded guilty to two counts of possession of
child pornography for which the Crown proceeded by indictment.  He was
also twenty-eight years old.  His offences involved fifty-eight images and
no videos, although there had been a video upload as of the original access
date that was not present at the time of the search warrant.  There were
seven "age-difficult" videos and twelve-hundred
"age-difficult" images.  One description, which I shall not
outline here, was of an entirely different and especially disturbing nature
compared to any description I heard in J.G.'s or Mr. Gomes's cases.  There
was reference to a
family
history of schizophrenia and
psychosis, but no personal diagnosis of Mr. Muhlbeier directly as of the time
of the plea and sentencing. Yet, as a mature adult, the joint position on
sentence for Mr. Muhlbeier was nine-months' imprisonment plus probation, materially
lower than the position advanced in relation to J.G.
[4]
37
.
Apart from the material
difference in age and maturity between those offenders and J.G., neither of
them demonstrated any features comparable to the unique circumstances of J.G.,
having arrived here at the age of eighteen, adapting to a new culture, living
in an unfamiliar and unsafe environment and being thrust into the maw of Covid
19, where his entire degree programme was conducted virtually and where the
only realistic socialization he had was in his workplace, which was racially
toxic, at least from the perspective of a number of his patients at the care
home.  Despite this, however, the supporting material filed by J.G. is
surprisingly positive, a very promising factor in terms of his potential for
rehabilitation and the minimization of future risk to the public.
38
.
I do accept the Crown's
observation that Covid 19 affected everyone greatly, but it did not even
remotely affect everyone to the same extent.  The extent to which Covid 19
impacted people varied enormously in light of a host of factors including
economic status, nature of employment, loss of employment, familial and
non-familial emotional support networks and age.  Other than those who
were seriously afflicted with or died from Covid or whose family members
suffered those outcomes, few would have been as affected as J.G. who quite
literally landed in Canada, continents away from his home, with no local
support network, mere months before Covid 19 landed with a fury.
The Appropriate Sentence
for J.G.
39
.
To summarize, the offences
to which J.G. has pleaded guilty are not statutorily excluded from the
conditional sentence scheme established by Parliament.  It is not a joint
submission.  Defence counsel has asked for a conditional sentence.
[5]
Section 742.1
of the
Criminal Code
provides as follows:
742.1
If
a person is convicted of an offence and the court imposes a sentence of
imprisonment of less than two years, the court may, for the purpose of
supervising the offender’s behaviour in the community, order that the offender
serve the sentence in the community, subject to the conditions imposed under
section 742.3, if
(a)
the
court is satisfied that the service of the sentence in the community would not
endanger the safety of the community and would be consistent with the
fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in sections 718 to
718.2;
None of the subsequent
subsections of
s. 742.1
, which disqualify particular types of offences from the
conditional sentence regime is relevant here.  Accordingly, the questions for
me to determine are whether imposing a conditional sentence on J.G. would:
(a)
Endanger the
safety of the community;
(b)
Be consistent
with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing.
In doing this, I must
follow the guidance of
cases such as
R. v. Lacasse
2015 SCC 64
,
[6]
Friesen
and
Scott.
40
.
There is no disputing that
J.G.’s offences are very serious.  Any other characterization would be
perverse.  As with every user of child pornography, his offences perpetuated
the severe, sickening and trauma-inducing abuse of very young, vulnerable
victims, damage the consequences of which will likely resonate for years or
decades.  Yet, the reality of the criminal courts is that we are in the
business of measuring the most horrible and the least horrible and everything
in between when it comes to determining a fit sentence.  J.G.’s “collection”
was smaller than most, larger than some.  His period of engagement, while not
as short as he initially claimed, was, I am satisfied, measured in months
rather than years.
[7]
41
.
J.G. fits in the category
of a young adult first offender, being twenty years old at the time.
[8]
Like a great
many other people, he had travelled many thousands of kilometres to an
unfamiliar culture to pursue an education and personal betterment that were
very likely unavailable to him in his homeland.  He ended up in an area where addiction,
deprivation and mental health challenges are, shamefully, a large part of the
everyday reality.  He did that at the age of eighteen, with no support network
in this country.  Almost immediately upon his arrival, Covid 19 turned the
planet upon its head and the unique opportunity of social and cultural
development offered by post-secondary education evaporated, replaced by an
online existence where external socialization for someone with no established
ties here was effectively limited to minimum-wage work in an at-times toxic
environment.
42
.
J.G. has pleaded guilty.  He
has expressed his shame and remorse clearly and I accept them both as genuine. 
His sister’s letter speaks to his and his family’s reputational damage at home
and its likely consequences, reputational damage he has incurred at a very
young age.  He has presented evidence that he has a low likelihood of
reoffending, of his character beyond these offences and of a work ethic of
which any parent would be proud.
43
.
The sentence imposed upon
J.G. must denounce his crimes and serve to deter both him and any other person in
the community from committing similar offences.  For this category of crimes
those are the predominant emphases in sentencing; that much is very, very
clear.
[9]
However, “real jail” does not have a monopoly on deterrence and denunciation. 
The Supreme Court of Canada has stated that clearly.  In addition, in the
circumstances of this case, I am of the view that the need for specific
deterrence, i.e. in relation to J.G. personally is extremely low.
[10]
The sentence
imposed on J.G. must also contribute to his rehabilitation because an
offender’s rehabilitation is likely the most certain protection for society in
the future.
44
.
I am satisfied that
imposing a fifteen-month conditional sentence on J.G. would properly reflect
the magnitude of his offences and of his personal circumstances.  I am
satisfied that on these facts a conditional sentence would neither endanger the
safety of the community nor would it conflict with the “fundamental purposes
and principles of sentencing.”  His age, background, circumstances, general
character, remorse, counselling and minimal future risk all contribute to this
conclusion and are not overwhelmed by the seriousness of his offences.  Not
only do I consider a conditional sentence to be within the appropriate range of
sentences, I am of the view that a sentence of real jail for him would, on all
of the facts of this case, be inconsistent with his offences and his level of
moral responsibility and would be injurious to public safety.
45
.
The fifteen-month sentence
is broken down into twelve months of house arrest, followed by three months of
curfew, each with the “usual” exceptions.  The entire conditional sentence will
require electronic monitoring.  J.G. shall attend for counselling as required
by his supervisor and shall perform one-hundred-and-eighty hours of community
service at a placement approved of by his supervisor.
[11]
Released: 2025.12.30
[1]
Tulloch, C.J.O. deals with the history and development of the
guiding sentencing principles in relation to child pornography offences in
great detail in paragraphs 143-193 of the
Scott
decision.  That analysis includes
the deep, corrosive and enduring harms imposed on direct victims of such
offences, the links between child pornography offences and child pornography
users progressing to hands-on sexual violence in relation to children and the
predominance of victims’ interests in sentencing analysis, leading to
denunciation and deterrence taking on a particularly prominent role in sentence
calculations.
[2]
The
principal impact
Friesen
may have on conditional sentences for
child-pornography offences is this:  to the extent that individual sentences or
sentence ranges may increase under
Friesen
(which was largely the point
of the case in light of the damage to victims discussed therein), more
sentences for child-pornography are likely to fall within the penitentiary
range and thus be statutorily ineligible for a conditional sentence.
[3]
With respect, the decision of the Court
of Appeal for Ontario in
R. v. M.M.,
2022 ONCA 441
is an example of this
phenomenon.  Although the facts of the case undoubtedly excluded a conditional
sentence as an appropriate outcome, the panel’s language on the availability of
conditional sentences for child pornography offences (paragraphs 15-16) seems
to create a near absolute exclusionary zone for such offences, an exclusionary
zone by which at least one of the Crown’s sentencing authorities was engulfed. 
Although the Court of Appeal in
Scott
diplomatically seeks to downplay or
row back from the language in
M.M., M.M.
continues to serve as an
example of the phenomenon to which I have referred and there is a danger that
someone relying on the language of the Court of Appeal in
M.M.,
but
unaware of the more measured (and more accurate) language in
Scott
could
easily fall into error in disqualifying future offenders from conditional
sentences.  That is not to say that conditional sentences will be “normal” or
“routine” in child pornography cases, but the analysis needs to be gone through
in every case in which such an outcome is sought.
[4]
Both
the
Gomes
and
Muhlbeier
cases were joint submissions and thus
governed by the rules set out
in
R. v. Anthony-Cook
2016 SCC 43
.
In
neither case was a conditional sentence even mentioned as a sentencing option.
[5]
Given
all of the information presented to me, had defence counsel not sought a
conditional sentence, I would have asked both parties to address me on whether
or not such an outcome should be considered.
[6]
Proportionality,
which involves measuring the seriousness of an offender’s crimes and his or her
moral blameworthiness is the cardinal principle of sentencing.
[7]
I
do not repeat here, but have followed in my deliberations the guidance set out
by Chief Justice Tulloch (in
Scott
), updating (with the benefit of
almost two intervening decades of additional court experience in dealing with
child pornography offences) Justice Molloy’s analysis of mitigating and
aggravating circumstances first set out
in
Kwok
in 2007.
[8]
Being
a young adult offender, standing alone, will not necessarily suffice to bring
about a conditional sentence.
[9]
This
comes from
s. 718.01
,
s. 718.04
and
s. 718.2
(ii.a) of the
Criminal Code
and from judgments such as
Friesen
and
Scott.
[10]
The
other form of deterrence is general deterrence, i.e. sending a message to the
broader world, people other than the offender, who might be inclined to offend
or not offend depending on what they consider to be their level of exposure to punishment
for their offence.  There is an understandable concern that if sentences for
child pornography offences were
routinely
low or
routinely
involved
“house arrest” rather than “real jail”, some potential offenders might be more
likely to take the risk of getting caught and sentenced.  However, that theoretical
risk cannot obliterate the relevance of individualized sentencing and
effectively write conditional sentences out of the
Criminal Code
as an
available sentence for these offences.  The question, properly phrased, is
whether the average person considering offending would look at all of the
details of J.G.’s offences and background and other cases for other offenders
and say:  “You know, I’ll take a chance; it’s worth the risk.”  Given that
conditional sentences are in real life rare for child pornography offences, the
risk of offenders taking that chance based on a conditional sentence being
imposed on J.G. is extremely low (assuming potential offenders are even aware
of sentence ranges, which is probably unlikely other than in medium-sized communities
with an active press presence in the courts, of which Niagara is one).
[11]
Despite
the abhorrent nature of his offences, I do not consider that those offences
truly reflect who J.G. is or who he can be.  His references and work ethic show
him to have substantial promise and, these offences aside, to be prosocial and
a positive influence.  Those attributes would be of value to him in performing
community service and would achieve one of the objectives of sentencing set out
in the
Criminal Code
, namely making reparations to the community for the
damage offences like his cause to society.