WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Norris
, 2025 ONCJ 178
DATE: 
2025 04 04
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 4810 998 23 48114102
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
DRU NORRIS
Before
Justice R. Wright
Heard
on March 17 and 18, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on April 4, 2025
C. Tsilingiris......................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
N. Sandhu................................................................. counsel
for the defendant Dru Norris
R. WRIGHT J.:
[
1
]
Dru Norris stood trial before me on five counts;
four are for allegations that he breached the conditions of a release order.
The fifth and most serious allegation is that he committed a sexual assault on L.T.
while he was breaching conditions that he not communicate with her, be at her
residence, or be within a 100 metre radius of her. He also faces a further
allegation of breach for communicating with her the next day.
[
2
]
L.T. and Mr. Norris had been acquainted for
approximately 10 years. There is no dispute that their relationship was
sometimes sexual. L.T. testified that Mr. Norris had arranged to visit her on
August 13, 2023, and that he penetrated her vagina digitally and with his penis
without her consent while at her apartment.
[
3
]
L.T. was the only witness called by the Crown
and, with the exception of some text message communications that were entered
through her (which I will have more to say about), the only evidence called by
the Crown.
[
4
]
Mr. Norris testified in his defence. This is
therefore a case to which the framework from
R. v. D.W.
,
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] 1 S.C.R.
742 applies. If I accept the evidence upon which the defence relies, then I
must acquit. If I do not accept that evidence but am left in a state of
reasonable doubt by it, I must also acquit. Finally, I must acquit Mr. Norris
of the offences charged unless satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, on the
evidence I do accept, of his guilt. As a matter of logic, it follows that, if,
after a consideration of all the evidence, I cannot decide whom to believe, I
must find Mr. Norris not guilty.
[
5
]
Mr. Norris admitted he was bound by the
conditions of his recognizance
(1)
Not to be at [address removed], Toronto;
(2)
Not to be within 100 metres of L.T.; and,
(3)
Not to communicate with L.T.
He also acknowledges knowingly breaching
these conditions when he attended her apartment on August 13, 2023, and
communicated with her by phone on August 14, 2023. Therefore, the only issues
for me to decide are the credibility and reliability of the two witnesses I
heard from in the framework I have set out from
W.D.
to determine the
count of sexual assault.
Evidence of the Crown
[
6
]
L.T. testified that Mr. Norris attended at her
apartment, at [address removed], Toronto, on the afternoon of August 13, 2023.
He had called her and arranged to visit on his way to Mississauga.
[
7
]
She left the door open for him and he stopped to
speak to some neighbours. When he entered the apartment, she was in the
kitchen, which is the first room through the door. She was cooking plantain.
She was wearing a t-shirt and shorts without underwear. Mr. Norris offered to
order her more food. They had not seen each other in a number of months. He
told her he had been in custody and had not had sex for some time. He began
touching her flirtatiously and told her he “wanted to smack,” which meant he
wanted to have sex.
[
8
]
She told him she was seeing someone. She told
him she did not want to have sex. He expressed surprise. It was typical in
their relationship that she would initially not want to have sex but would give
in. On this date, she told him no several times before he seemed to understand
that she was serious.
[
9
]
He picked her up, put her over his shoulder, and
brought her to the couch. She was laughing while this happened. He asked again “are
you serious, you really don't want to have sex.” She kept repeating that she was
serious and that “it is a no.”
[
10
]
He asked her “would you call the Jakes if I
raped you?” Jakes meant the police. She had called the police on him in the
past. She could not recall if she responded specifically to this question; she
said she might have exclaimed “what the hell.”
[
11
]
Mr. Norris then penetrated her with his finger
for a brief time. He pulled her shorts down and pulled his penis out through
the front of his pants. He then penetrated her with his penis. Penetration
lasted less than a minute, perhaps only 30 seconds.
[
12
]
L.T. was crying before he penetrated her with
his penis. When he penetrated her with his penis she screamed, loudly, saying
words to the effect of what the fuck, get the fuck off of me. She described
herself as freaking out. He stopped and stood up. She stood up as well. He was
saying why are you freaking out, why are you being unstable.
[
13
]
He gathered his things and left within a couple
of minutes.
[
14
]
Shortly thereafter she received text
communication from him, screenshots of which became an exhibit at trial. They
show the following conversation:
Yesterday 5:01
PM
Are you telling your friend bout today
The food should be there in 20 min
Ur gonna have to go down for it
No
I'm not and okay thanks
But ur bless
Are you still on the phone
Yeah
The food is outside
In the lobby
!
Did you get it
How's ur vagina
Whatchu
mean
Does it hurt
From
what exactly?
Dru, you know
what happened. To be quite honest I'm worried. But please, don't ask me silly
questions
I didn't give
you permission to stick your dick inside of me
Why are you
worried
Delete that
last message
But what's ur
problem wid me let me
know so I could change
I did not
want to have sex. I said no plenty times… you didn’t give me a choice. That's
my problem
Yesterday 9:49
PM
U hungry?
Are you
sleeping?
Im looking at the last message you sent
and you kinda worded it crazy
L.T. are you
okay ?!?!
I'm good
Wydrn
Could you talk
on the phone?
Today 1:10 PM
You know
after what you did to me you could at least make sure I had weed
[
15
]
L.T. testified that Mr. Norris also phoned her a
number of times during this period. At some point she blocked his number. She
was deciding what her next step would be, whether she would report the assault.
[
16
]
She called a friend to ask her for support. She
decided she would report the incident to the police. Her friend was now dating
an ex of hers, who was staying with her at the time. The two of them came to
her residence later that evening and she discussed reporting with them. She
went to the police the next day and also went for a Sex Assault Examination
Kit.
[
17
]
In cross examination she responded to a number
of suggestions:
(1)
She agreed that she weighed 200 pounds. She did
not agree that Mr. Norris was slim, rather describing him as muscular and tall.
She maintained that Mr. Norris had no difficulty lifting her and carrying her
to the couch.
(2)
She agreed that she was quiet between when he
used his finger and the penile penetration.
(3)
She agreed that she screamed loud enough that
the neighbours would have heard.
(4)
She agreed that there were further texts after
the exchange with Mr. Norris.
(5)
She acknowledged some texts between her and Mr.
Norris’ partner Breanna, in which she indicated satisfaction that Mr. Norris
was taken into custody.
(6)
She did not agree with a suggestion that she
wanted Mr. Norris in custody, but she said rather she felt he deserved to be in
custody.
(7)
She did not agree that Mr. Norris had told her at
this visit that he was having another baby with Breanna; she testified that she
learned this directly from Breanna, after the date of the allegations.
(8)
She also disagreed with a suggestion that she
disliked Breanna, but she did agree to suggestions that their relationship had
been difficult.
(9)
Finally, she disagreed with the suggestion that
she fabricated her allegations because Mr. Norris was having another child with
Breanna.
Evidence of the Defence
[
18
]
Mr. Norris testified that it was L.T. who
invited him over; he agreed to visit. He attended [address removed] and spoke
with her neighbours for approximately half an hour before going into her apartment.
His evidence is that her neighbours warned him against going into her unit as
other men who had gone in had ended up charged by the police.
[
19
]
When he entered the apartment, she was in the
kitchen cooking plantain. He offered to order her food, which she initially
declined. He went through into the living room and spoke to her from the couch,
catching up. He told her that Breanna was pregnant with their second child. L.T.
looked shocked, and a bit angry. He then told her he was going into the second
bedroom or smoking room to have a smoke.
[
20
]
When he came back into the living room, L.T. was
sitting on the couch. He sat beside her. They continued talking about Breanna,
and he was also asking how L.T. and her son were doing. He told her that
neighbours had warned him against coming into her apartment, saying that
everyone who has been in the house has been charged. He asked her if they could
have sex. Her response was, “I am dirty and I need a shower.” He told her ok,
no problem.
[
21
]
He went into the smoking room to roll some weed.
He was in there for between 10 and 15 minutes. He heard the shower run. When he
came out of the smoking room, L.T. was dressed in a t-shirt and shorts and
seated on the couch. He went and sat next to her. His memory of their
conversation at this point was “cloudy” but he believed they had discussed
Breanna. He asked if they could have sex. L.T. replied, “not right now.” They
had further discussion and he asked her if he could put his arm around her. She
said, “yes you can.” He put his arm around her and put his arm on her leg.
[
22
]
She was right next to him and appeared
comfortable. She was smiling and laid her head on his shoulder. He asked her if
he could move his hand up. She said yes. He moved his hand to her vagina for
approximately 30 seconds. He asked again if they could have sex. She replied,
“just do it.”
[
23
]
She had been laying on the couch, on her back,
when he asked to have sex this time. He got up, “took it out,” and they started
having sex.
[
24
]
After they had been having sex for about 30
seconds, out of nowhere, L.T. kicked him. She let out a little scream and
kicked him. He flew back and landed on the floor. He said, “what was that for?”
He told her she was unstable. She said she did not want to have sex. Mr. Norris
stood up and pulled up his pants.
[
25
]
She immediately said sorry, and that it had been
an emotional outburst. He asked her what kind of food she wanted as he was
pulling up his pants. At first, he was standing, but he sat down with her after
she told him what she wanted. He ordered her food. He saw a book he was interested
in and asked her if he could have it. She asked him if he could still buy her
weed and he said yes. After about 15 minutes he told her he had to go to
Mississauga but that he would come back with weed.
[
26
]
He texted her when he received notification that
the food was being delivered. He also acknowledged asking how her vagina was,
and if it hurt. When asked in chief why he had posed this question to her he
stated, “Because she once told me that when women don’t want to have sex and
are uncomfortable their vagina is tight but when they are comfortable their
vagina opens up and it becomes comfortable so that is why I asked her if it
hurt.” He was then asked when he thought it has been uncomfortable for her and
said it was when she had kicked him.
[
27
]
He testified that the text messages provided by
the complainant were not complete. He had responded to her assertion with words
to the effect of I did not force myself on you, I did not do anything without
consent, you gave me consent, and that is when - I did not force myself on you.
That message had been deleted.
[
28
]
He also testified that they spoke on the phone.
It was approximately two days after police had called letting him know he was being
charged for sexual assault. She called him and he asked her why he was being
charged. She told him the police had told her they didn’t have enough evidence
to charge him. He told her that there was a warrant out for him. It was a brief
conversation, and then he blocked her. She kept calling; when he answered she
would tell him, “I hope you rot in jail, and that you never see your kids
again.” In other conversations she would tell him that she was sorry and that
she didn’t mean for this to happen.
[
29
]
His evidence was that he had experienced this
type of erratic behaviour from her before, in particular when she was using
cocaine. He was asked about her relationship to Breanna and, in his view, L.T. did
not like Breanna. This opinion was based on text messages he had seen exchanged
between them.
[
30
]
He testified that he weighed just over 160
pounds at the time and that he would have had a struggle carrying L.T. His
evidence was he had never done so before.
[
31
]
He denied asking her if she would call the Jakes
if he raped her.
[
32
]
In cross examination he was challenged on his
evidence that messages he had sent were deleted. He testified he had lost his
phone, so could not show the messages. He maintained that he had responded to
her allegations but agreed that many of the texts appeared to flow as
back-and-forth conversation. He explained he had asked her to delete the
question about whether her vagina hurt because it could be misinterpreted. He
further explained that he thought she meant to go to the police all along and
she was trying to get him to elaborate by sending the texts. But he was not worried,
he knew what direction things were heading, but the sex had been consensual.
[
33
]
He was asked to explain how L.T. kicked him. He
testified that she was lying on her back on the couch and he was standing up
while penetrating her. She kicked him once with both of her legs. She kicked
him, he flew back, and she screamed. He fell back, not very far, but he did
fall back when she kicked him.
[
34
]
His evidence about staying in the apartment
after was also explored. He said he did so because he was confused; she was
saying she did not want to do it, and then apologizing and saying that she was
a bit overwhelmed emotionally.
Legal Framework and Analysis
[
35
]
The Crown faces a high burden in a criminal
trial. Proof beyond a reasonable doubt requires credible and reliable evidence
in order to displace the presumption that the person charged and before the
court is innocent.
[
36
]
Credibility relates to a witness’s truthfulness.
One of the most valuable means of assessing it is to examine any inconsistency
between what the witness said in testimony and what he or she has said on other
occasions, or said differently at different times within testimony, or from
omitting to refer to certain events at one time while referring to them at
other occasions. Inconsistencies vary in their nature and importance. Some are
minor; some concern material issues. Where an inconsistency involves something
material about which an honest witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the
inconsistency may demonstrate a carelessness with the truth about which the Court
should be concerned. Evidence may also lack credibility where it doesn’t make
logical sense, or it is inconsistent with human experience and common sense.
[
37
]
Reliability relates to an account’s accuracy and
whether the witness may be mistaken in their memory or narrative. Reliability
of a witness’s evidence can be undermined by the circumstances under which the
observations were made, but it can also be undermined by a diminished
recollection of the events over time, evidence of tainting by other sources of
information, or other factors.
[
38
]
As I assess the testimonial accounts in this
case, I am mindful that I may accept some, none, or all of an account and can
give different weight to the portions of evidence that are accepted.
The Text Messages
[
39
]
The texts between L.T. and Mr. Norris must be
treated with special caution. L.T.’s statements are both hearsay and a prior
consistent statements. They are not admissible for the truth of their contents
or to bolster her testimony. As the Court of Appeal stated in
R. v. D.K.
,
2020 ONCA 79
:
[34]       
Prior consistent statements are presumptively inadmissible. There are several
rationales for this rule, including that prior consistent statements (1) lack
probative value; (2) are often self-serving; and (3) are hearsay: see S. Casey
Hill, David M. Tanovich and Louis P. Strezos, eds.,
McWilliams’ Canadian
Criminal Evidence
, 5th ed. (Toronto: Thompson Reuters, 2019) (loose-leaf
updated 2019), at p. 11-2;
R. v. Stirling
,
2008 SCC 10
, [2008] 1 S.C.R.
272, at para.
5
; and
R. v. Dinardo
,
2008 SCC 24
, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 788, at
para.
36
.
[35]       
The overwhelming danger is that a trier of fact may improperly use the mere
repetition of a statement as a badge of testimonial trustworthiness. As
Hourigan J.A. said for the majority in
Khan
: “[S]uch evidence cannot be
used for the prohibited inference that consistency enhances credibility, or the
incorrect conclusion that the simple making of a prior consistent statement
corroborates in-court testimony”: at para. 41; see also
Stirling
, at
para.
7
;
R. v. Divitaris
(2004),
2004 CanLII 9212 (ON CA)
, 188 C.C.C.
(3d) 390 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
28
;
R. v. D.C.
,
2019 ONCA 442
, at para.
19
; and
R. v. S.K.
,
2019 ONCA 776
, 148 O.R. (3d) 1, at para.
90
.
[36]       The
rule against prior consistent statements is subject to a number of exceptions.
For example, a prior consistent statement may be admitted for the limited
purpose of rebutting an allegation of recent fabrication:
Stirling
, at
paras.
5-7
.
[37]      
Prior statements may also be admitted where they are “necessary to the
unfolding of the events or narrative of the prosecution”: see
Dinardo
,
at para.
37
. On this basis, a prior consistent statement may be admitted to
assist with understanding how the case came before the court or to appreciate
the “chronological cohesion” of the case:
R. v. Fair
(1993),
1993 CanLII
3384 (ON CA)
, 16 O.R. (3d) 1 (C.A.), at p. 18;
Khan
, per Hourigan J.A.,
at para. 30. To be admissible under this exception, the statement must be
“truly essential” to the unfolding of the narrative:
R. v. M.C.
,
2014
ONCA 611
, 314 C.C.C. (3d) 336, at para.
91
.
[38]      
Further, prior statements may be admissible under the narrative as
circumstantial evidence exception. Admissibility on this basis of such does not
hinge on the mere repetition of the same information. As explained by Hourigan
J.A. in
Khan
: “A prior consistent statement can be used not to
corroborate the evidence of the witness, but to provide the surrounding
circumstances and context to evaluate the credibility and reliability of the
witness’s in-court testimony”: at para. 39; see
Dinardo
, at para.
31
.
See also
R. v. R.A.
,
2024 ONCA
696
;
R. v. Morin
,
2024 ONCA 562
.
[
40
]
L.T.’s text messages are admissible for
evaluating the context in which her complaint was made and in assessing what
the defence submitted was a motive to fabricate. There are portions that were
also put to her as inconsistencies in her cross-examination and they can be
used in assessing her credibility and reliability.
[
41
]
The messages from Mr. Norris were also used in
cross-examination as inconsistencies and can be used to assess his credibility
and reliability. While the Crown cross-examined Mr. Norris to suggest that
there was a tacit admission by him when confronted with her allegation, the
Crown did not pursue this argument in submissions, and I have not considered the
texts in this manner.
[
42
]
The second set of text messages put to and
acknowledged by L.T. are texts between her and Breanna. These texts were
tendered by the Defence through L.T. as supportive of a motive to fabricate. I
have considered these text messages in the context of that defence and as to
whether they are inconsistent with L.T.’s testimony.
My Analysis of the Evidence of Mr.
Norris
[
43
]
I was not impressed with Mr. Norris' evidence.
It contained a number of material internal inconsistencies, and inconsistencies
with his text communications. It was illogical and inconsistent with common
sense and human experience on a number of points. It was also somewhat evasive
in cross-examination. I will provide five examples.
(1)
Mr. Norris was inconsistent in his evidence
about the impact of L.T. kicking him off of her. In his evidence in chief, he
described flying back and landing on the floor. In cross-examination, this
evidence shifted to falling back, but not very far. This change came in the
context of the Crown suggesting that his account of her kicking him was
illogical. In my view, this is a material inconsistency; he was now downplaying
the force of what he had described as it was made clear that what he had
testified to in chief sounded illogical.
(2)
He was also inconsistent in his explanations of
his messages to L.T. He provided an overall explanation for sending messages
beginning with asking her if she was going to tell her friend as being because
she had been up and down emotionally, and he was a bit confused. He was asked
in chief to explain, in particular, why he had asked if her vagina hurt. He
provided his explanation that this question was asked because she had
previously told him that a woman's vagina is tight when she is uncomfortable.
He stated his belief she had become uncomfortable when she kicked him off of
her. Then, through cross-examination, it became clear that his position was he
had sent the messages to L.T. because he suspected she might be intending to
make an allegation against him. He had asked her to delete the message asking
about vaginal pain because he was concerned about how it would be interpreted.
It is significant that he omitted this rationale from his evidence in chief.
(3)
Portions of his explanation of these messages
are also inconsistent with logic and human experience. His explanation for
sending the question about vaginal pain, in particular, was illogical and did
not make sense in the context of their relationship.
(4)
He was inconsistent about the issue of missing
messages. He testified in chief that he had responded to her texts about
non-consent, saying that he did not force himself on her or do anything without
consent; his responses must have been deleted from her phone prior to her
giving them to the police. He was consistent on this in cross-examination. What
he was inconsistent about was where his response would have fallen in the
message chain as it appeared on L.T.’s phone. He was so inconsistent about this
point, that it struck me as evasive. He initially agreed in cross with a
suggestion that he had not sent her a message asking, “what was she talking
about.” After several more questions the crown then suggested to him that he had
not sent a message asking why she was making things up. He responded, “No, well
I did tell her, those are the messages that are deleted.” He agreed this was
different than what he had said earlier. He was asked to show where his denial
message would have been located. He positioned it as after she had written “I
didn't give you permission to stick your dick inside of me.” The Crown then
challenged him that that did not make sense because of the flow of the
messages. He agreed that the messages flowed and now indicated that the denial
was actually after his message where he asked her to delete the message. He
said he sent a lengthy paragraph of denial. He said it was before the “U hungry”
line of messages, because that was a different day (upon review of the
messages, that series of messages was not sent on a different day but later the
same day). He then said the denial was before she texted that she had said she
did not want to have sex many times. He now said he thought she sent this
message because she meant to go to the police all along and she wanted him to
say something she could take to the police. In my view, this shifting evidence
in cross-examination is a significant mark on Mr. Norris' credibility. It
appeared to be an ineffective attempt to answer difficult questioning.
(5)
His evidence about their conversations on the
phone after the incident also did not make sense. He testified that he blocked L.T.
after a specific call, but testified that she continued calling him and gave
details of further conversations that they had after he had, on his evidence,
blocked her. That does not make sense.
[
44
]
Given these concerns with Mr. Norris' evidence,
I do not believe it. I do not accept it. I also find that it does not raise a
reasonable doubt.
Analysis of the Evidence of L.T.
[
45
]
For much of her evidence, L.T. stuck me as a
careful and thoughtful witness. She listened carefully to questions and
responded to the questions posed, and her responses made sense.
[
46
]
In one area of cross-examination, she was
argumentative and somewhat combative with counsel. This related to several text
messages that were shown to her, messages that were between her and Breanna. I
note that those messages had been redacted to remove some portions. L.T. expressed
particular upset at the redactions. She argued with counsel about the relevance
of these messages, and responded that she had further messages that would
support her. If these messages were being shown, which cast her in a poor
light, she wanted the redacted content shown, as it would, I infer, cast Mr.
Norris in a poor light.
[
47
]
I have not considered these text messages for
anything other than how they impact L.T.’s credibility and the potential for a
motive to fabricate. They were shown to her to suggest an inconsistency with
her evidence about her relationship with Breanna. However, in my view, they are
not inconsistent with what L.T. testified to of her relationship with Breanna.
Rather, they would tend to confirm how she generally characterized their
relationship.
[
48
]
L.T. did not want to respond to questions in
cross-examination related to these messages, and her evidence could be viewed
as evasive in this area. I have carefully considered this portion of her
evidence and whether if causes me concern with her credibility and reliability.
It does not. I accept that she was caught off guard by this somewhat unexpected
area of questioning. Her focus was on what had been redacted from the messages
and the sense of unfairness. The manner in which she reacted to this line of
questioning makes sense in the circumstances.
[
49
]
It was also suggested that there were
inconsistencies in L.T.’s evidence about further texts and communication with
Mr. Norris. She agreed that there were further texts after the exchange that
formed part of the evidence. She also agreed that in her texts with Breanna,
she indicates satisfaction that Mr. Norris was taken into custody. The tone of
these messages can be best described as goading toward Breanna. Her explanation
for these messages was that she felt that Mr. Norris deserved to have been
taken into custody for what he had done to her. I accept that explanation. It
makes logical sense.
[
50
]
The purpose of this area of cross-examination,
and the messages with Breanna, was to support a suggestion put to L.T. that she
had fabricated her allegations because Mr. Norris was having another child with
Breanna, leading to animus toward him. L.T. disagreed with this suggestion,
stating she did not even know that Breanna was pregnant at the time of the
incident. The only evidence that would suggest she did know of the pregnancy
was Mr. Norris' testimony, which I have rejected.
[
51
]
I accept that L.T. has a difficult relationship
with Breanna and potentially animus against her. I do not accept that she has
fabricated her allegations that Mr. Norris assaulted her out of a motive to
punish him or Breanna for having another child. This potential motive to
fabricate did not make sense to me in the context of the evidence I heard. I
accept L.T.’s denial of it.
[
52
]
I have considered whether L.T. was inconsistent
in her evidence about whether she was quiet when Mr. Norris first penetrated
her. She agreed in cross-examination with this suggestion after having first
said she was talking. In my view, there was not an inconsistency here. She was focusing
on the specific moment when asked in cross-examination, and her answer was
responsive to that narrowing of time. Her evidence of her reactions as the
assault occurred made sense to me and was consistent throughout.
[
53
]
I have considered the further suggestion put to
her that it did not make sense that Mr. Norris picked her up and carried her to
the couch. I have been able to observe both L.T. and Mr. Norris in Court as the
trial progressed. As L.T. testified, Mr. Norris’ build is more muscular than
slim. Even accepting he weighed some ten pounds less at the time, there is
nothing implausible in L.T.’s evidence that he picked her up over his shoulder
and carried her the short distance to the couch.
[
54
]
I accept L.T.’s evidence. In my view, there were
no material inconsistencies in her evidence. It makes logical sense and
conforms to human experience.
[
55
]
Accepting L.T.’s evidence, I am able make the
following findings of fact:
(1)
Mr. Norris had called her and arranged to visit
on his way to Mississauga.
(2)
He attended at her apartment, at [address
removed], Toronto, in the afternoon on August 13, 2023.
(3)
He told her he had been in custody and had not
had sex for some time.
(4)
He began touching her flirtatiously and told her
he wanted to "smack," which meant he wanted to have sex with her.
(5)
She told him she was seeing someone.
(6)
She told him she did not want to have sex. She
told him no several times.
(7)
He picked her up, put her over his shoulder, and
brought her to the couch.
(8)
She was now laying down on the couch.
(9)
He asked again “are you serious, you really
don't want to have sex.” She repeated, “No.”
(10)
He then asked her “would you call the Jakes if I raped you?”
(11)
Mr. Norris then penetrated her with his finger for a brief time. He
did not seek her consent first.
(12)
L.T. was crying.
(13)
He pulled her shorts down and pulled his penis out through the front
of his pants.
(14)
He then penetrated her with his penis. He did not seek her consent
first.
(15)
Penetration lasted approximately 30 seconds.
(16)
She screamed, loudly, profanity, like “what the fuck, get the fuck
off of me.”
(17)
He stopped. He stood up. He asked her why she was freaking out and
why she was unstable.
(18)
He remained in the apartment for several minutes. He offered to and
did order her food. He offered to return with weed.
(19)
After he left, he commenced texting her. I find he was doing so to
gauge her intentions and to attempt to placate her. This is the only available
inference to be drawn from the content and context.
[
56
]
With those findings of fact, I find that that
Crown has proven the essential elements of the offence of sexual assault beyond
a reasonable doubt. He intentionally penetrated L.T.’s vagina with both his
finger and his penis. L.T. was not consenting and had not communicated any
consent to either act. Rather, she had specifically told him she did not
consent to having sex. He knew that she was not consenting and that she had
told him she was not consenting. This was clearly an act of a sexual nature
that violated L.T.’s sexual integrity. Mr. Norris is found guilty of count 4.
[
57
]
Mr. Norris has conceded that he is guilty of the
other counts of failing to comply with a condition of his release order. He
attended [address removed], Toronto, within 100 metres of L.T., and he communicated
directly with her while there on August 13, 2023. He further continued to have
communication with her by telephone the following day. Findings of guilt are
therefore also entered on counts 1, 2, 3 and 5.
Released:  April
4, 2025
Signed:
Justice R. Wright