WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
This
is a case under the
Youth Criminal Justice Act
and is subject to
subsections 110(1) and 111(1) and section 129 of the Act.  These provisions
read as follows:
110.  IDENTITY
OF OFFENDER NOT TO BE PUBLISHED
—
(1)  Subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a
young person, or any other information related to a young person, if it would
identify the young person as a young person dealt with under this Act.
.   .   .
111.  IDENTITY
OF VICTIM OR WITNESS NOT TO BE PUBLISHED
—
(1)  Subject to this section, no person shall publish the name of a
child or young person, or any other information related to a child or a young
person, if it would identify the child or young person as having been a victim
of, or as having appeared as a witness in connection with, an offence committed
or alleged to have been committed by a young person.
.   .   .
129.  NO
SUBSEQUENT DISCLOSURE
—
No person who is given access to a record or to whom information
is disclosed under this Act shall disclose that information to any person
unless the disclosure is authorized under this Act.
Subsection 138(1)
of the
Youth Criminal Justice Act,
which deals with the consequences of
failure to comply with these provisions, states as follows:
138.  OFFENCES
—
Every person who contravenes
subsection 110(1) (identity of offender not to be published), 111(1) (identity
of victim or witness not to be published)  . . .  or
section 129 (no subsequent disclosure)  . . .
(
a
)    is
guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding two years; or
(
b
)    is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. D.S.,
2025 ONCJ 169
DATE: 
2025 03 28
COURT
FILE No.:  Thunder Bay 21-Y4210111-03
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE
KING
— AND —
D.S., a young
person (or “young persons”)
Before
Justice M. G. March
Heard
on February 3 and13, and March 20, 2025
Reasons
for Sentence released on March 28, 2025
Ms. D. Wood........................................................................................ Counsel
for the Crown
Mr. M. Hargadon............................................................................ 
Counsel for the Defence
M.G. March J.:
[
1
]
On February 3
rd
, 2025, D.S., a young person within the
meaning of the
Youth Criminal Justice Act (“YCJA”)
, pleaded guilty
before me to a single count of sexual assault, contrary to
section 271
of the
Criminal Code
.  At the time of the commission of the offence, on or about
November 26 or 27, 2022, D.S. was 15 years of age. His victim was an
incapacitated, 17-year-old young woman, E.C.
[
2
]
The circumstances of the offence were nothing short of horrific.  In an
Agreed Statement of Facts filed upon the sentencing of D.S., the Court learned
that the victim, E.C., after copious consumption of alcohol and marijuana,
found herself outside the room of a local motel clad only in a sweater and
leggings.
[
3
]
Her underwear and other clothes were missing.  Next to her was a blanket
and microwave.  The latter was soiled with vomit.  She had no memory of how she
arrived at the motel and what occurred while she was there. Days later, E.C.
became aware at her school that videos of what had been done to her at the
motel on the night in question were circulating on social media.
[
4
]
When she saw the videos, she was able to identify one of her assailants,
B.G.  A short while later, E.C. courageously went forward to police to complain
about what happened to her.
[
5
]
Police uncovered through investigation six video clips depicting five
young males involved in a sexual assault upon E.C.  D.S. was amongst them. 
Ultimately, police sent to the Centre of Forensic Sciences the leggings she
wore the morning she awoke outside the motel.  In the crotch area, semen was
detected.
[
6
]
A young male, B.G., who E.C. was able to identify in the video clips,
was matched to a DNA profile of the semen found in the crotch area of the
leggings.  D.S.’s profile was excluded as a possible contributor.
[
7
]
Notwithstanding, D.S. was identified as one of the participants in the
sexual assault upon E.C.  In one particular video clip, he is seen fondling her
breast and touching her unclothed buttocks while she was in a state of
incapacitation.
[
8
]
Upon my review of the video clippings, it is clear that D.S. was an
active participant in a group sexual assault on E.C. In addition to his
touching of her private areas mentioned above, he was joking and encouraging
all his friends to engage in similar behaviour. He made derogatory remarks
about her such as:
a) “How many fucked her that
night?”,
b) “She doesn’t know how I
was.”
c)
“This is her
room tonight.”
d)
“She can wake up
and say - where am I?”
[
9
]        Further, he is depicted pushing B.G. into the
shower of the motel room where E.C. is naked. He issues the command, “Get the
fuck in their B.” D.S. also rallies the other four young men to join in a group
picture of what is occurring.  He then has his phone out in front of them all,
seeming to take a photograph of the event.
[
10
]      The Crown’s position on sentence was for a
four to six month Custody and Supervision Order pursuant to section 42(2)(n) of
the
YCJA
for the role played by D.S. in sexually assaulting E.C., to be
followed by an 18-month period of probation.
[
11
]      His treatment of E.C., the Crown submits, was
egregious. The ongoing offence he perpetrated upon her was serious. His conduct
must be denounced through the deprivation of his liberty. It is the one form of
disposition which would promote the greatest sense of responsibility in D.S. and
would bring about in him an acknowledgement of the harm done. The fallout from
the event was catastrophic for E.C.  It had a significant and profound impact
on E.C., the student body where D.S. and she attended classes, and the
community at large. A hard lesson must be taught to D.S, the Crown contends.
[
12
]     By way of ancillary dispositions, the Crown
asks for a DNA order seeking to have a bodily sample taken from D.S., a weapons
prohibition for a period of two years, and a forfeiture order for the cell phone,
possibly used by him to photograph and record E.C. in her state of undress.  I
pause to note that the security on his phone could not be defeated when
forensically examined.
[
13
]     Crown counsel emphasized that the guilty plea
entered by D.S. did not happen until the first day of what was to be his
trial.  In other words, it was offered extremely late in the day. The serious
psychological and emotional harm done to E.C. in consequence of the offence
committed upon her is highly aggravating, the Crown argues.
[
14
]      E.C. also suffered serious bodily harm. When
she mustered the courage to go to the police a few days after the incident to
make a report, she was still experiencing vaginal soreness. Crown counsel thus
contended that a Deferred Custody and Supervision Order (“DCSO”) is not
available as a sentencing option for D.S.
[
15
]      The Crown conceded that the presentence report
(“PSR”) prepared for D.S.’s benefit at his sentencing was positive. He has no
youth court record. He is clearly remorseful for what he did to E.C. He has
strong support within his community. He has good rehabilitation prospects. He
is gainfully employed and intent upon pursuing a trade. He suffered a tough
upbringing out of which he seems to have emerged well and is becoming a productive
member of society.
[
16
]      The defence seeks a non-custodial disposition
for D.S. of two years’ probation. He cautioned against lawyers and judges
importing adult sentencing principles into the youth regime.
[
17
]      He emphasized that sentencing under the
YCJA
is “purely, individually focused”. Section 38 of the Act articulates the
purposes and principles of sentencing youths. There is an aspect of punishment,
which is a “functional fact”, but not an aim of the statute. The
proportionality principle also applies under section 38(2)(c) of the
YCJA
.
[
18
]      Further, s. 38(2)(e) is mandatory. The
sentence
must
be the least restrictive that is capable of
achieving the purposes and principles of sentencing set out in the
YCJA
. 
It
must
be the one that is most likely to rehabilitate the young
person and reintegrate him into society, and to promote a sense of
responsibility in the person, and an acknowledgement of the harm done to the
victim or the community.
[
19
]      By contrast, section 38(f) of the
YCJA
is permissive. The sentence imposed
may
denounce unlawful conduct
and
may
deter the young person from committing an offence.
General deterrence has “nothing to do with youth sentences”, as defence counsel
emphasized.
[
20
]      In an unreported decision, which I gave orally
on February 10, 2025 involving another youth, D.M., who was a party to the
sexual assault committed upon E.C., I relied upon the decision of my colleague,
Camara J. in
R. v. T.M
.,
2024 ONCJ 257
to find that I had a DCSO open to
me as a sentencing tool under s. 42(2)(p) of the
YCJA
.
[
21
]       Defence counsel contended that
T.M.
was wrongly decided. I acknowledge that it is presently under appeal to the
Court of Appeal for Ontario.
[
22
]      In short, the submission of the defence is
that a DCSO cannot be imposed where a young person causes or attempts to cause
serious bodily harm. In
R. v. C.D.
,
2005 SCC 78
, the Supreme Court of
Canada settled upon a definition of “violent offence” as one which involves an
element of either threatening to, attempting to, or causing bodily harm to a
victim.
[
23
]      Indeed, the
YCJA
was then amended to
define “violent offence” as such. The gateway to the imposition of a DCSO can
be opened if this Court declines to find that D.S. specifically threatened,
attempted or caused serious bodily harm to E.C.
[
24
]      The essence of the harm caused to E.C. was
psychological, the defence submits. It resulted from the distribution of the
video taken within the motel room of what was being done to her. However, D.S.
had no knowledge of, nor participation in the decision taken by one of the
young males to distribute the video.
[
25
]      Defence counsel contends that D.S. was not a
party to the sexual assault upon E.C. by one of the young men, B.G., who
accompanied her into the shower of the motel room.  D.S.’s sexual assault
involved touching her breasts and buttocks.  Since D.S. did not aid or abet
B.G.’s sexual acts perpetrated upon E.C., he is eligible for a DCSO, because he
did not threaten to, nor attempt to, nor cause bodily harm to E.C.
[
26
]      Furthermore, D.S.’s PSR is extremely positive.
He is sincerely remorseful and has respected conditions of bail for over two
years. He has clearly demonstrated himself to be a person who can comply with a
DCSO or a probation order.
[
27
]      As a gainfully employed young man, he is
capable of paying restitution. He can also perform 80 hours of community
service. Further, he would willingly undergo any assessment and counselling for
appropriate sexual behaviours directed by his probation officer, and would sign
any releases to ensure he engages in it to the probation officer’s
satisfaction.
[
28
]      Defence counsel adds that D.S. is an anxious
young man by his very nature. This offence has hung over his head like
Damocles’ sword. When his own mother, a person who has long struggled with
substance abuse issues, attempted to extort him by asking for money from him in
order for her to continue on as his surety, he acted responsibly. He reported
the incident to his lawyer. A substitute surety was then found and arranged for
him.
[
29
]      A collateral consequence of being charged,
which D.S. suffered, was his expulsion from school. He did not complete high
school as a result.
[
30
]      In sum, D.S., it is submitted, recognizes that
what he did was “a stupid thing”.  It was out of character for him. He wishes
to put this whole affair behind him as quickly as possible.
[
31
]      When I called upon D.S. to speak at the
conclusion of sentencing submissions by Crown and defence counsel, he wished to
directly address the mother of E.C., who was present in court. He spoke of how
he thinks about what happened to her daughter every day. He is extremely
apologetic for the role he played in abusing her. He wants to put things right
again. He hopes that E.C. will be able to have a good life, and that she will
be able to forgive him someday.
[
32
]      As I turn my mind to the sentence I must
fashion for D.S., I begin with a review of the declaratory principles set out
in section 3 of the
YCJA
. I have a fundamental duty to protect the
public by holding young people accountable through measures that are
proportionate to the seriousness of the offences committed by them and their
degree of responsibility for them.
[
33
]      I must also promote the rehabilitation and
reintegration of D.S. into society. I must support him in preventing the
further commission of crimes by referring him to programs or agencies in the
community to address the circumstances underlying his offending behaviour. I do
not know how this matter has dragged on as long as it has over a period greater
than two years, but it seems the delay has inured to D.S.’s benefit. I agree
with his counsel that, to a large extent, he is genuinely remorseful for what
he did to E.C., and he has conducted himself in a prosocial way ever since.
Time appears to have been on D.S.’s side. I must, of course, also look to all
available sanctions other than custody that are
reasonable in the circumstances.  The sentence the Court must impose also has
to be the least restrictive, while being capable of achieving the overarching
principles and purposes of sentencing set out in subsection 38(1) of the
YCJA
.
[
34
]      The PSR chronicles the tragic life D.S. has
led. On September 18, 2021, D.S. lost his father to a fentanyl overdose. His
father was only 42 years old. D.S. has struggled with the passing of his
father. They were very close, and he loved him very much. Then in 2021, shortly
after his father’s death, DS lost both grandparents, with whom he was close as
well.  Sadly, they passed away within a month of one another.
[
35
]      D.S. grew up poor and spent most of his young
life living in a trailer park. As previously mentioned, D.S.’s mother still
uses substances, but forgivingly, he loves her very much. His mother candidly
admitted to the author of the PSR that her relationship with her son was, at
times, strained because of her tortured past.
[
36
]      She reported that her son was always well
behaved. He was a “sensitive type”, more prone to cry than to yell or to act
out. She feels he has not dealt with his father’s death, and she would like to
see him receive some form of therapeutic assistance. For his part, D.S. just
wants his mother to get the help she needs.
[
37
]      D.S. remembered being left alone and
unsupervised for large tracts of time as a child. He is insecure, and
“overthinks”, by his own assessment. He struggled in school and was often
absent, even though his teachers described him as “a joy to have in the
classroom and a pleasure to teach”. After his father’s passing, he rarely
attended school again. He is trying to complete his education online.
[
38
]      Prior to the sexual assault upon E.C., D.S.
fell in with a “bad crew”. He started drinking alcohol and smoking marijuana to
excess. Fortunately, everything changed after the incident which brings him
before this Court. He stated to his mother that he was “very drunk” on hard
alcohol during the commission of the crime upon E.C.
[
39
]      At present, he busies himself in his work at a
roofing and sheet metal business where he has been employed since July 2023. He
no longer uses marijuana, and very rarely drinks alcohol. Only occasionally
after a shift will he have a drink with coworkers.
[
40
]      D.S. emphasized for the author of his PSR that
he wants to “keep his head down and concentrate on himself” to achieve his
goals. They include owning his own home, a truck and a boat, and having a good
relationship with his intimate partner. He wants to be “comfortable in life”
and “happy”. He sees himself as being on the correct path now and in a “good
place”.
[
41
]     The PSR author identified the Children’s Centre
of Thunder Bay as a facility which provides intensive treatment programs for
youths who have been charged and convicted of committing sexual offences. The
author found D.S. to be “very polite, respectful and forthcoming”. She regarded
him as having taken responsibility for the role he played in the offence. He
described himself as “very disappointed” in his conduct.  He would not wish
that kind of treatment upon anyone. He hopes E.C. is doing well now.
[
42
]      His motto appears to be making his deceased
father proud of him by being a hard worker, and by being more honest with
people. He takes pride in the fact that he has “straightened out” since the
incident.
[
43
]      The author of the PSR identifies his
criminogenic risk factors as a lack of prosocial activities, his peers and
family factors. To a great extent, D.S. is to be credited for having addressed
these issues and removed negative influences from his life on his own.
[
44
]      My focus, as a sentencing judge, is not solely
placed on D.S.’s personal circumstances.  Equally, I must recognize the
inhumane treatment E.C. received at the hands of the five youths who took evil
advantage of her at the time of her incapacitation, video recording her abuse
and changing her life as a result, as well as the lives of her mother and
brother too.
[
45
]      Eloquently, E.C.’s mother, K.S.B., spoke of
the impact the crime has had on her helpless daughter in the companion case I
mentioned earlier,
R. v. D.M.
(unreported).  The harm caused will endure
indefinitely.  E.C. could not remain in Thunder Bay, knowing how the videos of
her abuse were shared with her high school peers.
[
46
]      The shame and embarrassment E.C. suffered
forced her to move to southern Ontario.  Literally, her family was torn apart
because her parents, understandably, through work commitments, were forced to
stay on.
[
47
]      Let me be clear.  I cannot fathom how these
five young men, even caught up in a pack mentality fueled by drug and alcohol
consumption with its accompanying diminished inhibitions, could have behaved in
such a callous, criminal manner toward E.C.  What they did to her was an
abomination.
[
48
]      The aggravating factors of D.S.’s offence are
numerous:
a)
he actively
participated in the assault visited upon E.C;
b)
it resulted in
serious psychological and emotional harm to E.C.;
c)
he made no
attempt to put a halt to or intervene to prevent the continuing abuse of E.C.
over a significant period of time; instead, he revelled in it;
d)
he was aware of
the recording of it, which had the potential of capturing all its ugliness for
time immemorial; and
e)
he encouraged
and goaded on further atrocities being committed upon the person of E.C.
[
49
]   There are nevertheless mitigating factors, as
follows:
a) he pleaded guilty;
b)
he saved the
Court and the Crown the expense of undertaking a trial and spared, as well,
E.C. the need to testify, albeit late in the day;
c)
D.S. was very
young (15) at the time he committed the offence, and his resulting diminished
moral blameworthiness must be recognized;
d)
he is a
first-time offender and restraint must be exercised in holding him to account;
e)
he has the
support and stability of his girlfriend’s family helping him at present to make
better life choices, and
f)
he is
genuinely remorseful for his actions.
[
50
]  The fundamental principle of sentencing, for
youths as well as adults, is proportionality.  The sanction I impose upon D.S.
must reflect the extreme seriousness of the offence he committed and his degree
of responsibility for it.  What D.S. and his cohorts did to E.C. on the night
of November 26, going into the early morning hours of November 27, 2022, was
heinous.  No one should be subjected to the indignities done to her.  Those who
do, and in almost all instances will, be subjected to a custodial sentence.
[
51
]  With respect, I disagree with Crown and defence
counsel that a DCSO is not an available sentencing option.  Serious bodily harm
resulted to E.C., mostly in the form of psychological trauma.  I find specifically
as well that D.S.’s conduct, both principally and as a party, endangered her
safety by creating a substantial likelihood of causing bodily harm.  Not only
did D.S. egg on and encourage an acquaintance, B.G, to, proverbially, have his
way with the incapacitated E.C., he was reckless or willfully blind as to what
he would do to her and as to what harm may befall her.
[
52
]  I point out additionally that in
R. v. N (H.T.)
2006 BCCA 218 (CanLII)
, 2006, 209 C.C.C. 3
rd
318(B.C.C.A.), a custodial sentence imposed on
a young person, who committed a violent offence as a party, pursuant to
section
21
of the
Criminal Code
, was upheld on appeal.
[
53
]  On another note, I must also emphasize that
psychological harm resulting from sexual assault can most assuredly constitute serious
bodily harm (see
R. v. Nelson
,
2014 ONCA 853 (CanLII)
, 2014 O.N.C.A. 853 at paragraph
353
, and
R. v. I.A.
,
2022 ONCJ 490 (CanLII)
, 2022 O.N.C.J. 490 at paragraph
24
).  All sexual
assaults are serious acts of violence (see
R. v. A.J.K
.,
2022 ONCA 487
at para.
47
).  A young person who commits a violent offence can be committed to
custody (see s. 39(1)(a) of the
YCJA
).  The sub-subsections of section
39(1)(a) to (d) are also disjunctive.  If any of the four provisions apply,
the young person becomes ‘custody eligible’.  Under
s. 39(1)(d) of the
YCJA
, this case may also clear the hurdle for an
“exceptional case”. (see
R. v. N.B.
,
[2011] O.J. 1715 at paras. 25 -29
).
[
54
]  Having satisfied myself that D.S. is custody
eligible, I must now decide on the form the custody must take.  I must, as
directed by the
YCJA
, impose the least restrictive sentence, which holds
D.S. accountable, but still promotes his rehabilitation and reintegration into
society.  The reality is – two whole years have gone by since D.S. participated
in a despicable sexual assault upon E.C. What I do today is hardly a “timely
intervention” or an act of “promptness and speed”, given D.S.’s “perception of
time” as a young person (see s. 3(1)(b)(iv) and (v) of the
YCJA
).
[
55
]   D.S. was 15 when he committed the offence.  He
just turned 18 on […] this year.  I ask myself – what purposes and principles
of sentencing, other than denunciation, and perhaps specific deterrence, are
achieved through incarcerating him now?  Can these objectives be fulfilled
through a lesser but appropriate sanction?  Further, I query, what point is
there to warehousing D.S. for effectively a period of four to six months, if I
accede to the Crown’s submission and jail him, when some greater measure for
the protection of the public can be attained through another vehicle?  More
squarely put, is a DCSO a more appropriate and a less restrictive sanction?
[
56
]   In answer to these questions, I am buoyed in my
confidence that it is, by the decision of my colleague, Camara, J. in
R. v.
T.M.
,
2024 ONCJ 257 (CanLII)
, 2024 ONCJ. 257.  The facts and issues at play in
T.M.
were set
out by Her Honour at paragraphs three to seven, as follows:
“On December 6, 2023, T.M.
pled guilty to one count of dangerous driving, causing the death of Jiale Tan. 
The facts in support of the guilty plea are that, on June 19, 2023, at
approximately 1:30 a.m., T.M.’s vehicle collided into the rear end of the
vehicle driven by Mr. Tan, as Mr. Tan entered the Lincoln Alexander Parkway. 
T.M. was driving 232 kilometres per hour. The impact propelled Mr. Tan’s
vehicle forward.  It rolled several times and caught fire.  T.M.’s vehicle
rolled onto its roof and sled — and slid approximately 340 metres before coming
to rest.
T.M. ran from his vehicle to
Mr. Tan’s vehicle and was able to pull Mr. Tan out of his vehicle and away from
the fire.  Mr. Tan was taken to hospital but sadly he died of his injuries two
days later.  T.M. was charged with dangerous driving causing death and criminal
negligence causing death.  On June 19, 2023, T.M. was 16 years of age.  He has
no prior youth record.  He is of both Indigenous and of black Canadian
descent.  The Crown will be seeking a custodial sentence.  The defence would
like to seek a deferred custody and supervision order (DCSO) pursuant to
section 42(2)(p) of the
YCJA
.  However, section 42(5)(a) of the
YCJA
makes this sentence unavailable for an offence in which serious bodily harm was
attempted or caused and section 42(2)(p) limits duration of such an order to
six months.
In contrast, an adult found
guilty of dangerous driving causing death would have a conditional sentence
available as a sentencing option.  These provisions give rise to a scenario in
which a youth court justice sentencing a young person for an offence involving
actual or attempted serious bodily harm has no sentencing option between
custody and probation.  T.M. argues that this is a scenario in which a young
person is liable to a greater sentence than a similarly situated adult.
The issues I am to determine
are:
a.
Does section 42(2)(p) and section 42(5)(a) of the
YCJA
violate
section 15
of the
Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms?
b.
Does section
42(2)(p) and section 42(5)(a) of the
YCJA
violate
section 7
of the
Canadian
Charter of
Rights and Freedoms?
[
57
]   Camara, J., in a very thorough and well-reasoned
analysis of the issues, went on to find that sections 42(2)(p) and 42(5)(a) of
the
YCJA
violated the equality and the life, liberty and security rights
of young people within the meaning of the
YCJA
under
sections 15
and
7
of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
respectively.  She held
that the provisions disentitling youths to a DCSO under the circumstances of
the case before her were constitutionally invalid.
[
58
]   I am keenly aware that no notice of
constitutional question was served and filed in this case by D.S.’s counsel.
Indeed, his lawyer told me he deliberately chose not to bring a
Charter
application.  I make no finding that I am bound by the operation of horizontal
stare decisis.  Irrespective of whether I should be or not, I am inclined to
follow the decision of Camara, J., for reasons grounded in logic and fairness.
[
59
]  To my mind, a community-based sentence available
for adults for violent crimes, but not for youths, smacks of fundamental
unfairness.  In the case before me, a DCSO permits me to employ the appropriate
vehicle and provide a proportionate response to hold D.S. accountable for the
role he played in the sexual assault upon E.C., and at the same time, to
promote his rehabilitation and reintegration into society, which will in turn
contribute to the long-term protection of society.
[
60
]  Again, I ask myself, how does the Court as an
institution try to prevent this type of atrocity from occurring in the future? 
How do I best deliver the message to D.S. that what he did is totally
unacceptable and criminal, but yet, at the same time, open his eyes and
rehabilitate him?
[
61
]  To be blunt, and to make D.S. understand, I will
tell him in plain English that what he did to E.C. was evil and wrong. 
However, he is not an irretrievable criminal.  He is a youthful, first-time
offender who can, in my estimation, be rehabilitated and reintegrated into
society without being sent to jail.  For young people like him, incarceration
most definitely must be the penal sanction of last resort.
[
62
]  The parity principle must also be respected.  The
sentence I settle upon for D.S. must be similar to the sentences imposed in
this region on similar youths found guilty of the same offence, and committed
in similar circumstances.
[
63
]  Crown counsel referred me to the disposition
imposed by my colleague Brochu, J. for S.M., the only adult, but just barely so
at age 18, who was amongst the five male participants in the sexual assault
upon E.C.  Her Honour imposed an 18-month jail sentence to be followed by two
years probation.
[
64
]  The decision of Brochu, J. can be distinguished on
two clear bases:
a) Firstly, S.M. was an adult
when he committed the offence and could not avail himself of the special
protection offered to young people under the
YCJA
.
He was also
being sentenced for additional offences
.
b) Secondly, S.M.’s delict was
very different and far more pernicious.  He was the one who published on social
media the inhumane treatment E.C. received at the hands of the five male
participants, who abused her mercilessly that night.  He made her a public
exhibit for all her peers to see.  That is not D.S.’s case.
[
65
]  Closer on its facts to this one is the role played
by G.E., another one of the five males, whose case was decided by another of my
colleagues, Burton, J.  In her unreported decision, she described what the five
young men did in the following passage:
“The aggravating facts in
this case are legion.  What was going on in that motel room was human behaviour
at its worst.  I don’t have enough adjectives in my vocabulary to properly
describe it.  It was disgusting, cruel, degrading, humiliating, and every one
of the participants should be ashamed of themselves.  It was pack behaviour. 
It was recorded for posterity while the boys laughed.  Mr. E. was there
throughout, caught on camera as others assaulted the victim and laughed.  He
was caught on camera whooping and smiling in the group selfie.”
[
66
]  D.S. was no less an active participant than G.E.,
perhaps more so.  As a fact, Burton, J., following trial, did not find that
G.E. sexually assaulted E.C.  He did not touch her or come closer than a foot
or two away from her.  He did not appear to speak to her at any point.  He was
guilty of participating in a selfie that constituted making child pornography. 
Accordingly, his act did not meet the test for a violent offence.  He was not
custody-eligible.
[
67
]  By contrast, D.S. fondled E.C.’s naked breast and
touched her unclothed buttocks.  His acts in doing so were an inherently
violent offence to the person of a defenceless E.C.  He played a role in
inflicting psychological scars that she may well have to endure her entire
life.  I can only hope that the passage of time and new surroundings will offer
E.C. some solace and comfort.
[
68
]  Nevertheless, in G.E.’s case, Burton, J. saw fit
to denounce G.E.’s conduct by imposing a two-year sentence of probation, the
first six months of which included a term of house arrest.
[
69
]  My sentence will do likewise.
[
70
]  I must also distinguish D.S. from G.E.  Unlike
G.E., D.S. is genuine in the remorse he expressed for his conduct toward E.C. 
D.S. has insight into the wrongfulness of what he did. I firmly believe that
D.S. wants to change and can take the high road to avoid further brushes with
the criminal justice system.
[
71
]  D.S.’s case is almost on all fours with the
companion case, which I recently decided for other young person, D.M.
Accordingly, the sentence I impose for D.S. will be nearly identical to the one
meted out to D.M.
[
72
]  I have reviewed the handful of authorities
provided to me by Crown counsel.  Suffice to say, no two cases are completely
alike.  The Crown’s cases referred to me all involved far more invasive,
egregious and degrading acts than what D.S. did, either principally or as a
party, to E.C.
[
73
]  Defence counsel also referred me to two cases. The
first was a decision of my colleague, O’Marra J., reported at
R. v. S.A.,
2024 ONCJ 663
. The offender there had intercourse with his biological sister on
numerous occasions spanning a period of several years. He also suffered from
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
[
74
] At paragraph 45, Justice O’Marra referred to a
decision of Monahan J in
R. v. I.A
.,
2022 ONCJ 490
, wherein he cited
with approval the observation made by his Honour at paragraph 52 as follows:
My review of Ontario cases
above demonstrates that the weight of judicial authority in this province for
serious sex assaults by a youth has almost invariably imposed a custodial
sentence.
[
75
]  O’Marra J. emphasized however that the case before
him was different because it involved a youthful offender with special needs
and cognitive difficulties. His Honour saw his way through to imposing a
two-year probationary period in what he considered to be “unique and/or
exceptional circumstances” (see paragraph 48 of
S.A
.). His Honour went
on to hold at paragraph 49:
Custodial sentences in sexual
assault cases are the norm and reflect “society’s growing understanding of the
pernicious long-term psychological damage that childhood sexual abuse causes to
people.” (citation deleted)
[
76
]   D.S. does not present before me with “any unique
and/or exceptional circumstances” such as S.A.
[
77
]  In the other case referred to me by defence
counsel,
R. v. J.D.
,
2021 ONCJ 204
, Harris J. imposed a two year period
of probation upon a 22 year old offender who had penetrative, nonconsensual sex
with his former girlfriend on four occasions while he was a youth.
[
78
]  Crown and defence counsel both took the view that
the crime committed was a “violent offence” because of the devastating
psychological harm caused to the victim. (see para. 71)  Both counsel were also
of the opinion that a DCSO was not available. (see para. 74)
[
79
] His Honour seemed most concerned that J.D., a young
man who had managed to stay out of trouble for 44 months since the discovery of
his crimes, would end up serving his time in an adult correctional facility,
should he impose any period of custody for him. (see paras. 82 and 102)
[
80
]   Under those circumstances, Harris J. handed down
a two year period of probation, the first six months of which, J.D. would be
subjected to house arrest.
[
81
]   Effectively, to my mind, Harris J. made a
probation order which was more akin to a DCSO. It is obvious too, of course,
that Harris J. did not have the benefit of
TM
before him.
[
82
]   I remain persuaded by the reasoning of Camara J.
in
TM
.  The appropriate sentencing option in this case is a DCSO.  It
reflects the seriousness of the offence D.S. committed.  It holds him
accountable for his criminal conduct.  It severely restricts his liberty, but
it avoids incarcerating him.  It protects the public.
[
83
]   Primarily for these reasons, I shall impose a
DCSO of six months duration upon D.S.  To do so would be most consistent with
the purposes and principles of sentencing set out in section 38 of the
YCJA
.
[
84
]   The terms of the DCSO will be as follows:
a) D.S. is to appear before a
Youth Court justice when required to do so by the Court.
b) He is to report in person to
a youth worker today, or by phone, and after that at all times and places as
directed by the youth worker or anyone designated by the youth worker to assist
in his supervision.
c)  He is to cooperate with his
youth worker.
d)  He must sign any releases
necessary to permit his youth worker to monitor his compliance with, and must
provide proof of compliance with, any condition of this DCSO to his youth
worker on request.
e)  For the entirety of this
DCSO,
he will be in his residence daily at all times
, subject to
the following exceptions:  for any medical emergency or hospital visit
involving him or a member of his immediate family; he may also travel directly
to, from and be at work or educational, vocational, or other programs as
approved by the youth worker; and he can be away from his residence for any
pre-arranged, good reason as long as he has on his person a copy of his DCSO
and the prior, written permission of his youth worker for such absence.
f)
He is not
to contact or communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, by any physical,
electronic or other means, with S.M., B.G., G.E. and D.M., except as necessary
in class, at school.
g)
He is not to
contact or communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, by any physical or
electronic or other means, with E.C.
h)
He is not to be
within 100 metres of any place he knows E.C. to live, work, go to school,
frequent or any place he knows her to be.
i)
He is not
to buy, possess, or consume alcohol or other intoxicating substances.
j)
He is not
to possess or consume any unlawful drugs or substances referred to in the
Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act
, except with a valid prescription in his name, or
those available to him over the counter.
k)
Most
importantly
, he is to attend and actively participate in all
assessment, counselling or rehabilitative programs, as directed by his youth
worker, and complete them to the satisfaction of the youth worker for healthy
sexual behaviours, bereavement and mental health, as recommended.
[
85
] His DCSO will be followed by an 18-month period of
probation.  That period of probation will also be on the same terms as the DCSO
but for the home confinement condition.  I considered at length whether I
should relieve D.S. from compliance with abstention from alcohol and
non-prescription drugs during his term of probation.  Ultimately, I decided
against it based on his complete and utter lack of judgment exhibited on the
night in question while in his intoxicated state.  For the next two years, D.S.
will be sober.
[
86
] By way of ancillary orders, I will order the taking
today of — or within 30 days of today’s date — a sample of his DNA, to be
maintained on the confidential database maintained by the R.C.M.P.
[
87
]  I will also order the forfeiture of the cellular
phone taken from him at or about the time of his arrest.
[
88
]  I will decline to make any weapons prohibition
order under section 51(1) of the
YCJA
.  Weapons played no role in the
assault on E.C.
Released:  March
28
th
, 2025
Signed:
Justice M. G. March