CITATION:
R. v. Murray
, 2025 ONCJ
604
DATE:  2025·11·19
COURT
FILE No.: 4810 998 24 48127934-00
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
GEORGE MURRAY
Before
  Justice Peter Scrutton
Heard
  on October 22, 23, 24 and November 10, 2025
Reasons
  for Judgment released on November 19, 2025
A. Singh.....................................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
O. Bedi.............................................................................................................. 
   for George Murray
Scrutton J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
George Murray is charged with criminal
harassment and uttering threats in relation to Laura Scott, a stranger he met
in a Toronto parking lot early one morning.  Both parties accept that Mr.
Murray and Ms. Scott spoke for approximately five minutes.  She alleges that he
made threats and hateful comments at the end of their interaction which caused
her to be fearful.  Mr. Murray denies this.  They were the only witnesses who
testified at trial because the parties very responsibly collaborated on an
extensive Agreed Statement of Facts that significantly streamlined the
proceedings.
THE EVIDENCE
Laura Scott’s Account
[
2
]
Laura Scott went to her local gym, in a
plaza at Danforth and Victoria Park Avenues in Toronto, around 5:00 a.m. on
December 1, 2023.  She left the gym shortly after 6:00 a.m.  As she walked out through
the parking she heard a car horn.  It was dark and cold outside.  The parking
lot was dimly lit.  She did not notice anyone else in the vicinity.
[
3
]
Ms. Scott turned around at the honk and saw
a man sitting in a silver car.  She thought he might need directions.  He
lowered the passenger window.  She was about 10-15 feet away when she first saw
him and walked toward the car.  The driver asked if she was “White”.  She
answered that she was Irish American but had converted to Islam as an adult. He
asked her how a White girl came to be a Muslim.  She told him that she had
studied, bought a Quran, and made a declaration of faith.  He asked where she
was from and when she told him she was from West Virginia, he told her about
his recent trip to Mississippi.
[
4
]
Ms. Scott began to feel uncomfortable.  It
was 6:00 a.m. and she did not know this person.  She generally preferred not to
speak to men outside of her work or her home.  At the same time, she was used
to people asking about her religious conversion and it was her habit to be
polite.  The man seemed genuinely interested so she obliged him.
[
5
]
The man next asked her why she had to cover
herself and dress the way she did (she was wearing a hijab).  She explained why
and he replied that he thought it was unfair that men did not have to cover
themselves in the same way.  She told him that some Muslim men did cover
themselves and he responded that he had not seen that.  They spent a few
minutes discussing Islamic religious practices.  Eventually, Ms. Scott became
curt in an effort to end the conversation.  She told the man that she did not
feel like debating religion in a parking lot at six o’clock in the morning.  He
continued providing his opinion about her religion, including that she should
not have to dress in the manner that she did.  She began to feel anxious when
she saw the direction that the conversation was taking.  She tried to end the
conversation politely, saying something to the effect of “good night” or “nice
talking to you.”
[
6
]
The man continued to speak and ask
questions.  When she conveyed that she did not want to keep talking, his tone
changed and became more serious and less friendly.  He began to make what she
interpreted as Islamophobic comments.  She tried to end the conversation
again.  Eventually, she told him that she did not want to speak to him and was
uncomfortable speaking to a man.  He replied, “Well, if I got out of this car
and raped you, you would have no choice but to talk to me,” before embarking on
what she described as a tirade. He referred to genocide and told her that she
should join Hamas or a terrorist organization – associations that greatly
offended her.
[
7
]
By the end of her interaction with the man,
Ms. Scott felt very unsafe and very fearful.  She estimated that the
conversation lasted about 5 minutes.  His comment about raping her had not been
precipitated by anything other than her saying that he did not want to talk
anymore.  She was concerned he was mentally ill.  She walked away from the car
and the man yelled after her.  She waited around the corner for her husband to
come.  She called 911 once he arrived.
[
8
]
Ms. Scott identified screen shots of a call
log on her cell phone.  She testified that when the conversation became less
friendly and she began to feel afraid, she called her husband, who was asleep
at home.  He answered her third call at 6:13 a.m.  She explained that she did
not speak to him but held the phone down hoping that he could hear what was
happening.  She also sent two texts, “help me” and “HELP” during the call, both
at 6:13 a.m.
Challenges to Ms. Scott’s
Account
[
9
]
Ms. Scott admitted that, given the passage
of time, she did not have a clear memory of all the details of the
conversation.  When asked why it took her so long to walk away, she said that
every time she was about to leave the man would say something else or ask
another question, along the lines of “just one more thing.”  She had politely
responded each time.  She did not step away from the vehicle when she became
uncomfortable but began shifting her body.  She did not walk away until the man
threatened to rape her.  He began to yell other comments as she walked away –
he had not been yelling until that point.  She agreed that their interaction
was completely verbal and that the man never left his car.  She testified that
she thought that her husband had heard some of their conversation when she
called him but agreed that she had told the police he had not overheard them
after seeing part of her police statement.  She called her husband rather than
the police first because she was more comfortable with him.
Agreed Facts and Exhibits
[
10
]
Ms. Scott called 911 and provided a
description of the car as a silver/grey older model sedan.  She described the
person she spoke to as a Black man, in his late 30s or early 40s, approximately
5’8 with a small build but with a belly.  Police investigators conducted a
video canvass of nearby businesses.  This surveillance footage eventually
enabled them to identify the car that Ms. Scott had described, which was
registered to the defendant.  The defence admits that Mr. Murray was the man
Ms. Scott spoke to that morning.
[
11
]
Exhibit 1A, video footage from a business
across the street from the plaza, shows parts of the interaction between Ms.
Scott and Mr. Murray.  At 6:10 a.m., Mr. Murray’s sedan drives into the plaza
and stops.  Just as he is pulling into a parking space, before he has completely
stopped, Ms. Scott is visible walking from the gym toward the street on the
sidewalk perpendicular to the front of his car.  She walks some distance past
the car at a relatively brisk pace and then turns around and walks more slowly
over to the passenger side of the car. She remains by the passenger side of the
car from 6:10 a.m. to 6:15 a.m., about 4½ minutes, before walking out of the
plaza.  Because of the distance between the surveillance camera and the car,
the footage does not capture Ms. Scott’s relative distance to the car or
whether that changed during the interaction.  The silver car begins to back out
within a few seconds of Ms. Scott walking away and drives out of the plaza.
George Murray’s Account
[
12
]
Mr. Murray left his home in Oshawa that
morning for work in downtown Toronto near the intersection of Dundas Ave. and
River Street.  He ran a cleaning company and was to begin work at 8:00 a.m. 
Highway 401 west was congested and the traffic made him tired. He called his
wife, who suggested he leave the highway, get a coffee, and rest.  He departed
from his usual route down the Don Valley Parkway and exited the highway east of
it at Victoria Park Avenue.  He drove south until Danforth Ave, saw a plaza,
and thought it would be a good place to stop and canvass for new business.
[
13
]
Mr. Murray pulled into the plaza and saw a
White lady wearing a hijab walk past his car.  Both his windows were already
down for fresh air.  He asked if he could ask her a question.  She said “yes,”
and he asked if she was a Muslim.  She said “yes” again.  He asked her how
things were in the current climate (referring to the aftermath of the October
7, 2023 attacks), noticed her gym bag, and asked if there was a gym in the
plaza.  She said “yes”, an all-female gym.  He asked if she was permitted to exercise
with men and she said yes but that she chose not to.
[
14
]
Mr. Murray inquired if he could ask another
question and then asked about the different dressing and grooming practices
between Muslim men and women.  She said she did not know the answer and
explained that she was a convert. He asked about prayers and whether men and
women prayed separately.  He told her about his business and a property that he
owned in Mississippi.  Eventually, she mentioned that she had to go, her
husband was coming to pick her up, and walked away.
[
15
]
When asked what prompted him to start this
conversation with a stranger, Mr. Murray said that he was curious, as he had
never seen a White Muslim person, and often spoke to strangers.  Essentially,
he described a normal, innocuous chat.
Challenges to Mr. Murray’s
Account
[
16
]
Mr. Murray could not recall why he left home
so early that morning, given that he was not scheduled to begin work until 8:00
a.m.  He did not recall what he planned to do until worked started.  He did not
stop anywhere on Victoria Park Ave after exiting the highway and could not
explain why he chose this specific plaza on the Danforth.  He did not do any
canvassing there.  He maintained that Ms. Scott was 3-4 feet away from his car
when he called out to her and disagreed that the surveillance footage
established she was considerably farther away.  He was shown surveillance
footage and disagreed that glare visible on his passenger window from an
overhead light subsequently disappeared because he had rolled his window down. 
He also disagreed that he had honked rather than called out to Ms. Scott but
allowed that his windows might not have been down when he drove into the
plaza.  When asked about whether it would be unusual to engage in a
conversation with a stranger at this time of day, he said that “he wasn’t aware
of the time, if it was early or late.”
The Parties’ Positions
[
17
]
Defence counsel emphasizes the burden of
proof and argues that the surveillance footage supports Mr. Murray’s version of
events as much if not more than it supports Ms. Scott’s.  She willingly
approached the car, willingly remained for five minutes, and did not seek the
assistance of any passersby (which I take to mean motorists).  He said he was
interested and curious and that is what Ms. Scott perceived him to be.  No
forensic evidence establishes that she called her husband.  Defence counsel
relies on Ms. Scott’s limited memory of the conversation and uncertainty as to
exactly when she told Mr. Murray that her practice was not to speak to men she
did not know to submit that her evidence cannot be relied upon.
[
18
]
The Crown argues that Ms. Scott
authenticated her own phone calls and texts. The prosecution does not seek to
rely on her messages as
res gestae
but argues that they are probative of
Ms. Scott’s state of mind at the time of the alleged conduct.  Her account was
clear and consistent throughout her testimony.  Mr. Murray’s evidence was void
of details, at odds with the surveillance footage, and internally
inconsistent.  The Crown emphasizes that the threats must be considered in all
the circumstances, which involve an unknown man engaging with a Muslim woman in
a dark and empty parking lot and directing threatening and Islamophobic comments
toward her.
Relevant Legal Principles
[
19
]
George Murray is presumed innocent of these
charges.  The burden of proof is on the Crown, who must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that he is guilty of criminal harassment or uttering threats. 
There is no onus on him to prove anything.  The standard of proof beyond a
reasonable doubt is an exacting one.  It is more than probable or likely guilt
and much closer to absolute certainty than proof on a balance of
probabilities.  Ultimately, I may only find Mr. Murray guilty if I am sure that
he committed the offence alleged.
[
20
]
Mr. Murray is entitled to the full weight of
the direction in
R. v. W. (D.)
,
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742.   If I believe his
evidence that he did not threaten Ms. Scott, then I must find him not guilty. 
If I do not believe his testimony but am nonetheless left in reasonable doubt
by it, he must similarly be found not guilty.  Even if I am not left in doubt
by his evidence, I must ask myself whether, based on the evidence that I do
accept, I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt of his guilt.
[
21
]
The purpose of this framework is to
emphasize the burden of proof and the presumption of innocence by ensuring that
criminal cases are not reduced to credibility contests. The issue is not whose
evidence I prefer but whether the Crown has proved the case against Mr. Murray
beyond a reasonable doubt.  There is no rigid order in which evidence must be
analyzed – reasonable doubt principles are a matter of substance rather than
form.
[
22
]
This case hinges on the credibility of each
witness.  No magic formula applies to assessing credibility.  A witness’
evidence is to be considered using a common-sense approach that is not tainted
by myth, stereotype or assumption.  Many factors may be relevant.  Some key
ones include whether the witness’ evidence is internally consistent, whether it
coheres with evidence from other witnesses or exhibits, whether the witness has
a motive to fabricate, whether inconsistencies in the evidence are about
important or minor matters, what explanations are given for any
inconsistencies, and whether the inconsistencies suggest that the witness is
lying. I must also be mindful of the distinction between credibility and
reliability.  The former relates to the sincerity of the testimony; the latter
relates to its accuracy.
CREDIBILITY FINDINGS
a)   Mr. Murray
[
23
]
I reject Mr. Murray’s evidence, almost in
its entirety.  Very little of it makes any sense or withstands even mild
scrutiny.
[
24
]
Mr. Murray could not explain why he set out
for work some three hours in advance of his scheduled start time that morning. 
He did not explain how he spent, or had planned to spend, the time between
leaving the plaza at 6:15 a.m. and beginning work at 8:00 a.m.  I do not accept
his testimony that he planned to canvass businesses in that plaza.  According
to him, the only reason he was in that area at that time was because he was
tired and wanted to rest. 6:00 a.m., hours before most businesses are open,
does not seem like a particularly good time to knock on doors to solicit prospective
business.  Further, Mr. Murray testified that he thought of canvassing when he
noticed an empty storefront at the end of the plaza.  He did not explain why a
vacant business or building might want to hire a cleaner.  In any event, Mr.
Murray spent the entirety of his time in the plaza speaking to Ms. Scott and
admitted that he did no canvassing, which is also evident from the surveillance
footage.
[
25
]
I reject Mr. Murray’s evidence that he left
the highway because he was tired and that his “plan” was to pull over to rest
and have a coffee.  He did neither of those things in the plaza.
[1]
All he
did there was interact with Ms. Scott before he drove away.  He would have
passed other places to stop and rest or have a coffee on his drive south on
Victoria Park Ave from Highway 401, which took him past major intersections
such as Ellesmere, Lawrence, and St. Clair avenues.  Yet, despite his professed
tiredness, he did not stop until he reached Danforth Ave., at a plaza he had
never been to, one for which he said he made a conscious, specific choice to
stop but for reasons that he could not explain. When he did stop, he did not
rest but initiated a conversation with a stranger. He did not stay to rest once
that conversation ended but immediately drove away.  I am even sceptical about
his claim that traffic was congested on the highway that morning, given that he
would have been driving before 6:00 a.m. but appreciate that this is a minor
point and that heavy traffic may have been attributable to a collision or
construction that Mr. Murray did not describe.
[
26
]
I do not believe Mr. Murray when he says
that his front passenger window was down when he entered the plaza.  This was
an early December morning on a day that Ms. Scott described as cold.  He was
clear about his windows being down in his examination-in-chief but allowed in
cross-examination that the passenger window may have been up.  I accept that
Exhibit 4, surveillance footage from Sally’s Beauty, establishes that Mr.
Murray’s passenger window was up when he parked the car and that he lowered it
once already stopped.
[2]
In infer this not only from the fact that the glare from the
overhead light on the window glass disappears after he stops but because the
window’s movement is faintly visible upon close review of the footage.  This aspect
of Mr. Murray’s testimony directly relates to his account of how he got Ms.
Scott’s attention.
[
27
]
I reject Mr. Murray’s description of Ms.
Scott being 3-4 feet away from his car when he first called out to her.  She
testified that she was 10-15 feet away when she heard a car horn.  Exhibit 1
shows that she walked back to the car from a number of paces away.  Given the
perspective of the camera, it is impossible to determine with any precision how
far Ms. Scott was from Mr. Murray’s car when he first caught her attention but
I am sure she was much farther away than 3-4 feet.  Because his passenger
window was up, and Ms. Scott was some distance from his car, I reject Mr.
Murray’s testimony that he did not honk at her but got her attention simply by
asking if he could ask her a question in a normal voice.  I accept her evidence
that he honked at her.
[
28
]
Based on common sense and human experience,
I am dubious about Mr. Murray’s claim that he did not think there was anything
strange or unusual about initiating a conversation with a stranger about race
and religion in a dark parking lot at six o’clock in the morning.  I do not,
though, reject his testimony in this respect for normative reasons.  I do so
because of his explanation that he “wasn’t aware of the time, if it was early
or late, I thought I would give her the opportunity to respond yes or no to
whether I could ask her a question.” It was dark, the plaza was virtually
deserted, and it was just after 6:00 a.m.  It could not have been lost on Mr.
Murray that this was “early,” and that Ms. Scott was walking away from the
plaza with purpose. Nothing in her body language conveyed receptivity to a
chat.
[
29
]
For these reasons and others that I will
expand on below, I reject Mr. Murray’s version of events.  I do not believe him
when he says that he did not threaten Ms. Scott and that they engaged in a friendly
conversation.  Nor does his account raise a reasonable doubt.
b)   Ms. Scott
[
30
]
Ms. Scott was a thoughtful and articulate
witness.  She repeatedly acknowledged in her examination-in-chief and in
cross-examination that she could not recall all of their conversation.  At no
point was there any suggestion that she was filling in gaps or speculating. On
both witnesses’ accounts, she was polite and patient with Mr. Murray, a
stranger to her.  In my view, Ms. Scott did not exaggerate any of her
evidence.  In fact, she did not seem to have any particular interest in the
outcome of this prosecution.  She appeared simply to be resigned to the fact
that Islamophobia is a feature of society that she has experienced and will
likely continue to experience.
[
31
]
Defence counsel did not allege any motive to
fabricate, which is a neutral factor insofar as Ms. Scott’s credibility is
concerned but certainly does not detract from it.  I am satisfied that her
inability to remember with precision the exact sequence and content of the
5-minute conversation does not detract from the credibility and reliability of the
material parts of her account.
[
32
]
Many parts of Ms. Scott’s testimony are
confirmed by independent evidence.  With the exception of its make, she
accurately described the car that she had seen and, with the exception of Mr.
Murray’s age, she accurately described its driver.  The surveillance footage
confirms that she accurately described the length of this interaction, where it
occurred, and the character of the location (dimly lit and devoid of
people).
[
33
]
I accept Ms. Scott’s evidence that the name
visible on the screenshot of her call log is her husband’s and that she both
called and messaged him during this interaction. While potentially admissible
as
res gestae,
I am not relying on the text messages she sent during
this interaction, “help me” and “HELP”, for the truth of their contents,
i.e.,
as evidence that Ms. Scott needed assistance that night. Nor am I relying on
them as a prior consistent statement that enhances Ms. Scott’s credibility in
virtue of the fact that her in court testimony is consistent with the texts she
sent during the interaction and with calling the police immediately after:
R.
v. Khan
,
2017 ONCA 114
at para.
25
.  I do, though, find that the
spontaneous nature of these texts, and their timing, which exactly coincides
with Ms. Scott’s interaction with the defendant, are probative of her emotional
state at the time she made the texts, which is something that is relevant to my
assessment of her credibility.
See
R. v. Khan
, 2017 ONCA 114 at paras.
41-44
.
[
34
]
I would have no trouble concluding that Ms.
Scott was credible absent these messages, given the clarity and fairness of her
testimony and how much of her account coheres with the surveillance footage.  I
accept her evidence that Mr. Murray got her attention by honking his horn, that
she engaged in what progressed from an inconvenient to irksome to
anxiety-producing conversation only out of a sense of politeness, and that she
walked away from this interaction once Mr. Murray became threatening and
hateful. I accept her evidence that he threatened to rape her and that she felt
unsafe and fearful, which is a completely understandable response to being
accosted by a strange man in a dark and empty parking lot.  I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that she gave a truthful, reliable account of her
interaction with Mr. Murray that night. I reject any part of his evidence that
is inconsistent with hers as failing to raise a reasonable doubt.
Analysis of the Counts
[
35
]
Mr. Murray is charged with criminally
harassing Ms. Scott contrary to
s. 264(2)
(d) of the
Criminal Code
.  The
Crown must prove that he engaged in threatening conduct, without lawful
authority, that harassed Ms. Scott, that he knew or was reckless to the fact
that his conduct harassed her, that this caused her to fear for her safety, and
that her fear was reasonable in the circumstances:
R. v. Kosikar
,
1999 CanLII 3775 (ON CA)
, [1999]
O.J. No. 3569 at paras.
15-26
.
[
36
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the Crown has proved each element of this offence.  Mr. Murray threatened
to rape a stranger wearing a hijab immediately before unleashing a tirade of
Islamophobic remarks toward her.  He did so in a dark, empty parking lot.  When
all of the circumstances are considered, I am sure that any person in Ms.
Scott’s circumstances would consider this conduct to be threatening.  It certainly
harassed Ms. Scott, who felt distressed, fearful, and unsafe.  I am satisfied
that Mr. Murray knew or was at least reckless to the fact that Ms. Scott was
harassed, a consequence that was virtually inevitable in the circumstances. I
am sure that he was not ever genuinely interested in Ms. Scott’s answers to the
questions that he asked about being a Muslim woman, even while acknowledging
that Ms. Scott initially believed that he was.  When asked why he was so curious
about Ms. Scott, Mr. Murray answered that he works with a lot of Muslims, whom
he regularly speaks with.  It does not make sense for him ask a stranger these
questions, at this time, given his familiarity with these religious customs. 
His own views about this religion became clear early in the conversation.
[
37
]
I am satisfied that Ms. Scott feared for her
safety and that a reasonable person in the same circumstances would feel that
way if threatened by an unknown man in a dark and empty parking lot.  Mr.
Murray certainly had no authority to engage in this conduct.  I find him guilty
of criminal harassment.
[
38
]
Mr. Murray’s uttering threats count alleges that
he “did by word of mouth knowingly cause Laura Scott to receive a death threat
contrary to
section 264.1
(a) of the
Criminal Code
.”  I have already
explained that I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Murray
threatened to rape Ms. Scott and that he did so knowingly.  There is no doubt
that this threat satisfies the bodily harm element of this offence, as sexual
assault is capable of causing serious hurt, injury, or psychological harm:
R.
v. McCraw,
1991 CanLII 29 (SCC)
, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 72.
[
39
]
The only legal question that must be
answered in respect of this count is whether, because of the specific wording
of the count as charged, the Crown must prove that Mr. Murray threatened to
kill Ms. Scott, an issue I invited the parties to make submissions on after
this matter was originally adjourned for judgment.  The prosecution submits
that the particularization of “threat to cause death” necessarily includes a
threat to cause bodily harm, such that there is no legal impediment to a
finding of guilt on the count as charged. In the alternative, the Crown seeks
to amend the count to conform with the evidence at trial by substituting the
word “death” with “bodily harm” or by deleting “to cause death.” Defence counsel
opposes an amendment, largely on the basis that the separate charge of criminal
harassment obviates concerns about technicalities or the multiplicity of proceedings
that animate the jurisprudence on the powers of amendment under
s. 601(2)
of
the
Criminal Code
.
[
40
]
The count in issue specifies that Mr. Murray
was charged under
s. 264.1
(a) of the
Criminal Code
, which makes it an
offence to knowingly utter a threat to cause death
or
bodily harm. As
charged, the count particularizes the more serious of two modes of committing
that offence.  In my view, Mr. Murray’s defence has not been misled and would
not be prejudiced by the Crown’s proposed amendment. I am also satisfied that
the amendment will not impact the fairness of the trial:
R. v. Bidwani
,
2018 ONCA 698
at paras.
33 and 50
;
R. v. Morozuk
,
1986 CanLII 72 (SCC)
, 1986 1 S.C.R. 31; and
R.
v. R.S.,
2023 ONCA 626
. Mr. Murray knew the case he had to meet. His
defence was a complete denial of the allegations.  Having regard to the merits
of the case, it is in the interests of justice to amend the count to conform to
the evidence that Mr. Murray threatened to rape rather than kill Ms. Scott. I
amend count one to substitute the word “death” with “bodily harm” and find him
guilty of that count.
Dated:      November 19, 2025       _________________________
Justice Peter Scrutton
[1]
Surveillance footage establishes that he did attend a McDonald’s
drive thru after leaving the plaza.
[2]
See approximately 4:40 on the Exhibit 4 video counter.