CITATION:
R. v. Hashimi
, 2025 ONCJ
673
DATE:  2025-12-16
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
—  AND —
MERAJ HASHIMI
Before Justice Mara Greene
Reasons
for Judgment released December 16, 2025
M. Sotirakos……………………………………….……………………..….… for the Crown
B. Galle 
.............………………………................................................ for
Meraj Hashimi
Greene, J:
[
1
] Mr. Hashimi is charged with failing to
stop for police, dangerous driving, driving while prohibited and obstruct peace
officer.
[
2
] It is alleged that on January 25, 2025,
Mr. Hashimi fled from police after having been pulled over for a minor traffic
violation. It is further alleged that he gave a false name to police and that
he was suspended from driving at the time.
Summary of the Evidence
[
3
] On January 25, 2025, Officer Johnson
saw a vehicle fail to yield to a pedestrian at an intersection.  Officer Johnson
put on his lights to alert the driver that he had to pull over.  The driver
pulled over moments later near 10 Tuxedo court.
[
4
] Officer Johnson approached the vehicle
and spoke to the driver who identified himself as Syad Mohdmahd Hashimi. The
driver advised that he did not have his driver’s license, or any other
identification with him and that he presently resides in Ottawa.    Officer
Johnson then went to his cruiser to look into the driver’s identity.
[
5
] Officer Johnson suspected that the
identity provided was false, so he returned to the vehicle to question the
driver further.  Officer Johnson asked the driver about his height and his
phone number.  Officer Johnson then advised the driver that he is going to run
some additional checks and that if it turns out that he is not who he claims to
be, he will be arrested.  Officer Johnson returned to his vehicle to look up
the MTO photograph of Syad Mohdmahd Hashimi.
[
6
] Once this was completed, Officer Johnson
returned to the vehicle and asked the driver to exit the vehicle.  Instead of
exiting, the driver started his vehicle and drove off.
[
7
] The driver, who was later identified as
Mr. Meraj Hashimi, drove a very short distance, stopped the vehicle and ran
from the car.    Back up officers were called to help in the pursuit of Mr.
Hashimi.
[
8
] Officer Samsom arrived on scene at 1:27
pm and located Mr. Hashimi in the plaza at 1260 Markham Road approximately ten
minutes later.   Officer Samson then placed him under arrest and cuffed him.
[
9
] During the search incident to arrest, Officer
Samson located a driver’s license with the name Meraj Hashimi on it.   He held
the license up to Mr. Hashimi and confirmed that the person in the photograph
was the person he had in custody.    Officer Samson then discovered that Mr.
Hashimi’s license was suspended, and he arrested Mr. Hashimi for driving while
suspended.
[
10
] Mr. Hashimi was advised of his right
to consult with counsel.  Mr. Hashimi stated that he wanted to speak to a free
lawyer.
[
11
] Officer Samson drove Mr. Hashimi back
to where Officer Johnson was to confirm that this was the same man that officer
Johnson had pulled over.  After Officer Johnson confirmed that the man in
custody was the man he pulled over, Officer Samson arrested Mr. Hashimi for
failing to stop for police.  Mr. Hashimi replied that he fled because he was
scared as his license was suspended.  Mr. Hashimi was then advised of his
rights to counsel. He was not advised of his right to remain silent.  Mr.
Hashimi was told that he could talk to counsel at the police station.
[
12
] A short time later, Officer Samson advised
Mr. Hashimi that he was also being arrested for the offence of dangerous
driving.  Officer Samson did not re-read to Mr. Hashimi his rights to counsel.
[
13
] After Officer Samson arrested Mr. Hashimi
on the failure to stop charge, Officer Johnson walked over to the cruiser and
asked Mr. Hashimi why he lied to him.   Officer Johnson asked this question without
even knowing if Mr. Hashimi had been advised of his right to consult with
counsel.  Officer Johnson testified that he asked this because he was
frustrated. He further testified that Mr. Hashimi did not have to answer him.
Issues
[
14
] The following issues were raised at
trial:
A) Did Officer Johnson violate Mr.
Hashimi’s rights as guaranteed by section 10(b) of the
Charter
by not advising
him of his right to counsel while investigating Mr. Hashimi for providing a
false name?
B) Did Officer Johnson violate Mr.
Hashimi’s section 10(b)
Charter
rights by asking Mr. Hashimi questions
after he was arrested but before he had an opportunity to consult with counsel?
C) Did Officer Samson violate Mr. Hashimi’s
rights under section 7 and 10(b)
Charter
rights by posing questions to
Mr. Hashimi while transporting him to the station?
D) If there is a
Charter
violation,
what remedy should be granted?
E) Has the Crown proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Hashimi committed the offence of obstruct police?
F) Has the Crown proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Hashimi committed the offence of failing to stop for police?
G) Has the Crown proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Hashimi committed the offence of dangerous driving?
[
15
] Counsel for Mr. Hashimi conceded that
Mr. Hashimi was operating a motor vehicle while disqualified from doing so.  As
such, I need not address this issue in detail.  I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Hashimi was operating a motor vehicle on the day in
question.  Officer Johnson testified that he saw Mr. Hashimi driving and that
he pulled Mr. Hashimi over.   Moreover, the Crown filed the relevant documents
confirming that Mr. Hashimi was disqualified from driving. Mr. Hashimi is
therefore found guilty of this offence.
A)
Section 10(b) and Officer Johnson at time of initial stop
[
16
] Mr Hashimi was pulled over for
committing a
Highway Traffic Act
offence.  Officer Johnson advised Mr.
Hashimi of the reason for the stop and asked for his driver’s license, insurance
and registration.   Mr. Hashimi told officer Johnson that he did not have any
of these documents with him.  Officer Johnson then asked Mr. Hashimi to
identify himself. At that point Mr. Hashimi gave a false name.  Officer Johnson
testified that he immediately suspected it was a false a name because Mr.
Hashimi looked at his phone prior to identifying himself and because often
times when driver’s deny having identification with them, they are not being
truthful.
[
17
] Officer Johnson testified that given
his suspicion, he went to his vehicle to do  some searches on his computer in
order to verify Mr. Hashimi’s identity.  Officer Johnson returned to the
vehicle and asked Mr. Hashimi a series of questions to help confirm if Mr.
Hashimi was lying to him.  On the body worn camera, Officer Johnson can be seen
advising Mr. Hashimi that he was going to look up his photograph on MTO and
that if the photograph did not match Mr. Hashimi’s face, he would arrest Mr.
Hashimi.
[
18
] Counsel for Mr. Hashimi argued that as
soon as Officer Johnson suspected that Mr. Hashimi gave a false name, he ought
to have advised Mr. Hashimi of his right to consult with counsel.   Mr. Hashimi
was detained as he had just been pulled over and the officer was no longer just
investigating the
Highway Traffic Act
offence, he was also investigating
the offence of obstruct police officer.
[
19
] Pursuant so section 10(b) of the
Charter
,
police are required to advise detained persons of their right to consult with
counsel immediately upon their detention.  While police are not required to
advise detainees of their right to consult with counsel if detained under the
Highway
Traffic Act, o
nce, however, the investigation shifts to a criminal matter, rights
to counsel are required (
R. v. Prosper,
1994 CanLII 65 (SCC)
, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 236 and
R. v.
Subaru,
[2009] S.C.R. 460).
[
20
] In the case at bar, it is my view that
during the first few minutes of the detention Officer Johnson was only
investigating the identity of Mr. Hashimi in furtherance of the
Highway
Traffic Act
offence.  In my view, he had not yet turned his mind to
investigating Mr. Hashimi for any criminal offence.  I am mindful that he had a
suspicion that Mr. Hashimi had provided a false name, but he was not in the
process of investigating an obstruct police charge.  He was still focused on
confirming the identity of the driver so that he could issue a ticket under the
Highway Traffic Act.
[
21
] It is my view, that the investigation
shifted to a criminal investigation the moment that Officer Johnson stated to
Mr. Hashimi that he was going to check MTO data base to view a photograph of
the person Mr. Hashimi claimed to be.  At this point, Officer Johnson’s tone changed,
and he was clearly contemplating arresting Mr. Hashimi for the criminal offence
of obstruct police.  It as this point in time that section 10(b) was triggered,
and Officer Johnson was required to advise Mr. Hashimi of his right to consult
with counsel.   Since he failed to do so, Mr. Hashimi’s 10(b) rights were
violated.
B)
S.10(b) violation by Office Johnson post arrest
[
22
] After Mr. Hashimi was arrested and
placed in the back of Officer Samson’s vehicle, he was advised of his right to
counsel.  Mr. Hashimi stated that he wanted to speak to counsel. His access to
counsel was delayed until arriving at the station. Prior to going to the
station, however, Officer Samson drove Mr. Hashimi to Officer Johnson and asked
Officer Johnson to confirm that the person in custody was in fact the person who
had fled.  Officer Johnson confirmed that Mr. Hashimi  was the person he
stopped.  Officer Johnson then approached Mr. Hashimi and asked Mr. Hashimi why
he lied.
[
23
] In my view, this is a violation of
section 10(b) of the
Charter
.  Mr. Hashimi had already indicated an
interest in exercising his right to speak to counsel.  If an arrested person
expresses a desire to exercise his right to consult with counsel, the police
are required to refrain from eliciting information from the arrestee until he
or she has a reasonable opportunity to consult with counsel (see
R. v.
Prosper
, supra
at paras
35-36
). While police are permitted to ask questions
necessary for procedural reasons, the question posed by Officer Johnson does
not fall into this exception. This question went to the heart of the obstruct
charge.
[
24
] I am mindful that Officer Johnson testified
that he was frustrated and did not expect a response from Mr. Hashimi.  In my
view, this does not alter the fact that Officer Johnson posed a question
directly about the offence under investigation prior to Mr. Hashimi having an
opportunity to consult with counsel.  I appreciate that Officer Johnson
testified that Mr. Hashimi did not haver to answer him, but how was Mr. Hashimi
to know this if he had not yet been afforded his right to counsel, nor had he
been advised of his right to remain silent.
[
25
] In my view, in asking this question of
Mr. Hashimi, Officer Johnson violated Mr. Hashimi’s rights as guaranteed under
section 10(b) of the
Charter.
C)
Officer Samson and Sections 7 and 10(b) of the
Charter
[
26
] All parties agree that Officer Samson advised
Mr. Hashimi of his right to consult with counsel at the roadside.  He failed,
however, to advise Mr. Hashimi of his right to remain silent and that if he said
anything it could be used in evidence.   All parties also agree that Mr.
Hashimi was not afforded an opportunity to speak to counsel until after he
arrived at the station.  It was also conceded by the Crown that on route to the
station, Officer Samson engaged Mr. Hashimi in conversation.  Counsel for Mr.
Hashimi argued that Mr. Hashimi’s section 7 and 10(b) rights were violated
because Officer Samson, by chatting with Mr. Hashimi, attempted to actively
elicit information from him.  Crown counsel argued that the conversion was only
small talk.  Any questions posed by the officer were conversational and not
about the charges.  To the extent the case was discussed, the officer was only
responding to questions posed by Mr. Hashimi. As such, it was the Crown’s
position that there was no
Charter
breach.
[
27
] The Crown’s argument is based on
Officer Samson’s evidence at trial that his intention when speaking to Mr.
Hashimi was to be nice and include him in on the conversation.  They talked
about an accident they saw on the road, and then Officer Samson merely
responded to Mr. Hashimi’s questions about the arrival of the canine unit.
[
28
] I accept Officer Samson’s evidence
that it was not his intention to illicit evidence.  The difficulty is that the
questions he posed ended up being relevant to the charges before the court.  As
they passed a car accident on the side of the road and started to discuss it, Officer
Samson specifically asked Mr. Hashimi if he still drives and discussed his
license suspension.  These questions and answers given were directly relevant
to his reason for arrest.  In my view, despite Officer Samson’s intention of
making small talk, the effect of his conduct is that he elicited evidence from
Mr. Hashimi after Mr. Hashimi indicated he wanted to speak to counsel but
before he was afforded an opportunity to consult with counsel.  In my view,
this amounts to a violation of section 10(b) of the
Charter.
[
29
] The section 7 argument, in my view is
slightly more complex.  Counsel for Mr. Hashimi argued that his client’s
section 7
Charter
rights were violated because the officer failed to
advise Mr. Hashimi that he had the right to remain silent. Crown counsel argued
that no violation took place since his section 7 rights were not triggered.  The
vast majority of cases addressing the failure to give the primary caution are
resolved through assessing the voluntariness of the statement.  In such cases,
section 7 is not really addressed because as the Supreme Court of Canda held in
R. v. Singh
2007 SCC 48 (CanLII)
, 2007 S.C.C. 48, that “…in the context of a police
interrogation of a person in detention, where the detainee knows he or she is
speaking to a person in authority, the two tests are functionally equivalent” (
R.
v. Singh, supra,
at paragraph 8). In the case at bar, however, there was no
voluntariness
voir dire
because the Crown did not lead at trial any of
the utterances made by Mr. Hashimi during the transport to the police station. 
I therefore must address the absence of the caution in the context of the right
to silence.
[
30
] The right to
silence can be conveyed in two different ways.  First through access to counsel
and second through the primary caution.  In the case at bar, Mr. Hashimi was
not afforded an opportunity to speak to counsel prior to the discussion with officer
Samson in the cruiser nor was he advised of his right to remain silent. In
other words, the two main ways in which the right to silence is normally
conveyed to a detainee were not provided in this case.
[
31
] Crown counsel argued that despite this
fact there was no violation of section 7 because the right to silence was not
triggered in this case.  Respectfully, I disagree.  In
R. v Tessier
2022
SCC 35
, the Supreme Court of Canada stated that the right to silence arises
upon detention (
R. v. Tessier
, supra,
at paragraph
39
).  Since Mr.
Hashimi was detained, section 7 was triggered.
[
32
] It is my view, that since the right to
silence and voluntariness are functionally equivalent, the section 7 analysis
does not differ dramatically from the voluntariness analysis.  The key
difference is that instead of the Crown having to prove that the Mr. Hashimi
voluntarily chose to speak to the police, Mr. Hashimi has the burden to establish
on a balance of probabilities that he did not know of his right to remain silent
and as such did not waive his right to silence and did not freely choose to
converse with Officer Samson.
[
33
] The link between voluntariness and the
caution has been subject to some judicial comment.  For example, in
R. v.
Singh
,
supra,
Charron J. held that “e
ven
if the suspect has not formally been arrested and is not obviously under
detention, police officers are well advised to give the police
caution . . .” (
R. v. Singh, supra,
at paragraph 33).  The
Court
in
R. v. Tessier
expanded on this sentiment.  The court stated,
One understands Charron J.’s sensible
intuition. While a proper caution will not guarantee that statements given
thereafter are voluntary, it stands to reason that proving the accused made a
free choice to speak to the authorities will be easier for the Crown if a
caution is given. Because a suspect is more vulnerable to making involuntary
statements than a mere witness or a person not involved in the crime, the
presence or absence of a police caution is an “important” factor in answering
the question of voluntariness upon which the admissibility of statements will
turn (
Boudreau v. The King
,
1949 CanLII 26 (SCC)
,
[1949] S.C.R. 262
, at
p. 267)
(
R. v. Tessier
, supra
at paragraph
8
).
[
34
] The Supreme Court
of Canada went on to state
in
R. v. Tessier
,
“I would recognize that
the absence of a caution for a suspect constitutes
prima facie
evidence
that they were unfairly denied their choice to speak to the police (see
S. N. Lederman, M. K. Fuerst and
H. C. Stewart,
Sopinka, Lederman & Bryant: The Law of
Evidence in Canada
(6th ed. 2022), at ¶8.119)”.
The Supreme
Court of Canada in
R. v. Tessier
,
further stated that once it is established
that the caution was not given, “it then falls to the Crown to discharge its
persuasive burden by proving either that the accused was not in legal jeopardy,
in that they were a mere witness and not a suspect, or that  the absence of the
caution was without consequence and that the statements were beyond a reasonable
doubt and in view of the context as a whole, voluntary”(
R. v. Tessier
, supra
at para
9
).
[
35
] One way in which
the Crown can discharge its burden is to show that despite the absence of a
caution, the accused knew he had the right to remain silent (
R. v. Tessier
,
supra,
at para
12
).
[
36
] In a recent trial decision,
R. v.
Singh
2024 ONSC 5561
, Harris J. held that the Supreme Court of Canada in
R.
v. Tessier
, supra,
revitalized the importance of the primary caution and
put it at the centre of the procedural protections due an individual in the
investigatory stage of the criminal process.  Harris J. stated at paragraph 17
“the salutary purpose of the caution is to convey the suspect’s right to
silence directly and plainly”.   The trial judge further noted that the right
to silence is a key facet of the right against self-incrimination (
R. v.
Singh, supra,
at para 34).
[
37
] In the case at
bar, Mr. Hashimi, did not testify. I have no direct evidence of what he  knew
or did not know about his right to remain silent. Having said that, there is
other evidence that strongly supports the finding that Mr. Hashimi did not know
of his right to remain silent and did not make an informed choice when he
waived that right and spoke to Officer Samson in the cruiser while being driven
to the police station.  First of all, Mr. Hashimi had not yet had an
opportunity to consult with counsel. Secondly, I have no evidence that Mr. Hashimi
would know  about his right to remain silent. Thirdly, the utterances made by
Mr. Hashimi were not conducted in an interview type fashion but were more part
of a casual dialogue in the police cruiser.  It is inconceivable that a lay
person would automatically understand the implication of talking to police in
these circumstances. Fourthly, as
noted in
R. v. Tessier
, supra,
the fact
of detention may cause a person to feel compelled to make statement (
R. v.
Tessier
, supra,
at para
75
).
[
38
] In my view, in
light of all these factors, there is a strong inference that Mr. Hashimi did
not know of his right to remain silent or the potential risks of speaking to
police.  As such, Mr. Hashimi could not have made an informed waiver of his
right to remain silent when he spoke to Officer Samson.  I am therefore
satisfied that Mr. Hashimi’s right to remain silent was violated.
D)  Remedy
[
39
] In the case at bar counsel for Mr.
Hashimi does not seek a 24(2) remedy.  Instead, he seeks a stay of
proceedings.   In my view all utterances made by Mr. Hashimi after Officer Johnson
advised Mr. Hashimi that if he gave a false name he would be arrested should be
excluded under 24(2) of the
Charter
due to the breaches of sections 10(b)
and 7.   While this remedy is not sought, it is my view that it would have been
the appropriate remedy.  In light of this, fairness dictates that I not
consider any utterance made by Mr. Hashimi after Officer Johnson began the
investigation into the offence of obstruct police.  I am mindful that the Crown
does not seek to rely on the vast majority of these statements as such, I will
not engage in a detailed 24(2) analysis.  Suffice it to say that there were a
series of breaches relating to section 10(b) and section 7 of the
Charter
. 
While not the most serious of conduct, the number of the breaches leads me to
conclude that the first prong of the
Grant
analysis favours exclusion. 
The impact on the
Charter
protected right was significant as it went to
the heart of what sections 10(b) and 7 were meant to protect.  While the
offences are serious and the third prong may favour admission of the evidence
when I balance all the factors, it is my view that admission of the statements
would put the administration of justice into disrepute.
[
40
] In relation to Mr. Hahimi’s argument that a stay of
proceedings should be granted,  pursuant to section 24(1) of the
Charter,
I
am permitted to impose any remedy that the court deems appropriate and just in
the circumstances.  In assessing whether a stay of proceedings should be
granted in this case, I note that the Supreme Court of Canada
has consistently stated that a stay of proceedings is a remedy that should only
be resorted to in the clearest of cases given society’s interest in having
matters tried on their merits.   In
R. v. Babos,
[2014] S.C.C. 16, the
Supreme Court of Canada summarized the relevant legal principles as they relate
to a stay of proceedings:
(1)
There must be prejudice to the accused’s right to a fair trial or
the integrity of the justice system that “will be manifested, perpetuated or
aggravated through the conduct of the trial, or by its outcome” (
Regan,
at
para 54).
(2)
There must be no alternative remedy capable of redressing the
prejudice; and
(3)
Where there is still uncertainty over whether a stay is warranted
after steps 1 and 2, the court is required to balance the interests in favour
of granting a stay, such as denouncing misconduct and preserving the integrity
of the justice system, against “the interest that society has in having a final
decision on the merits”.
[
41
] In my view, since none of the utterances
made as a result of the violations are being used at trial, trial fairness is
not affected by the breach.   Where there is no issue about trial
fairness, the question the court must consider is whether the state has engaged
in conduct that is “offensive to societal notions of fair play and decency and
whether proceeding with a trial in the face of that conduct would be harmful to
the integrity of the justice system (
R. v. Babos, supra
, at para 35,
R.
v. Somerville,
[2017] ONSC 3311 at para 115).
[
42
] As noted in
R. v. Somerville,
supra, at the
second stage the question is whether a remedy short of a stay of proceedings is
capable of redressing the prejudice.  At the third stage, the court must assess
whether “the integrity of the administration of justice is better protected by
a stay or by a trial, despite the impugned conduct”.  (
R. v. Somerville,
supra,
at paragraph 118).
[
43
] In assessing whether the breach negatively affects the
integrity of justice system, I need to consider Officer Samson’s evidence about
why this happened.  I accept Officer Samson’s evidence that he just forgot to
give the caution.  He was consistent in his answers on this point and there was
nothing in the evidence to lead me to doubt this aspect of his testimony.  At
the moment of the arrest, a lot was going on. The canine unit had arrived to
help look for a bag the police were concerned about, and a number of different
charges were being considered. I am satisfied that Officer Samson just made a mistake
and that he did not intentionally fail to advise Mr. Hashimi of his right to
remain silent.
[
44
] As for the failing to hold off questioning Mr. Hashimi,
as I previously stated I accept Officer Samson’s evidence that he was just
making small talk.  The conversation started when they passed a serious car
accident on the side of the road and was really focused on the issue of
accidents.  The second part of the conversation was largely Officer Samson
answering questions about the canine unit.  In relation to Officer Johnson, I
accept it was a momentary lapse in judgment.
[
45
] In my view, both Officer Johnson and Officer Samson
displayed bad judgment in having these conversations with Mr. Hashimi, but they
were not intentionally trying to gather evidence. As such, a stay of
proceedings is not necessary to protect the integrity of the administration of
justice.
(E) Obstruct Justice
[
46
] In the case at bar, it was effectively conceded that
Mr. Hashimi gave a false name to Officer Johnson.  Counsel for Mr. Hashimi
argued that this evidence was insufficient to make out the offence of obstruct
police.
[
47
] The offence of obstruct police requires the Crown to
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that:
a)
There was an obstruction
b)
That the obstruction affected
the police officer in the execution of his/her duty, and
c)
That the person did so
willfully.
[
48
]
In
R. v. Kiradziev,
2010 ONCJ 162
, Zuker J.
stated,
[173] It is not, in my view, sufficient for the
Crown to meet its onus by simply demonstrating that the police officer had been
inconvenienced to some degree. (
R. v. Hardgrove,
(1985)
35 MVR 217
). 
The police are inconvenienced daily in their duties, but that is not enough to
criminalize the actions of the person that has caused the inconvenience.  When
an inconvenience amounts to an obstruction, is of course, dependent upon the
individual circumstances of each case.  Suffice it to say that the
inconvenience or the extra work generated by the accused’s conduct must be more
than trifling or de minimis in nature”
[
49
] In the case at bar, I am satisfied that the Crown has
met her burden.  Officer Johnson was obstructed in his investigation into Mr.
Hashimi’s
Highway Traffic Act
offence by being provided a false name.  Officer
Johnson was unable to complete the ticket in a timely fashion and instead, had
to look up information on his computer to confirm Mr. Hashimi’s identity.  I
appreciate that the delay was not that long, but it was long enough that in my
view it amounts to an obstruction that is more than merely trifling or de minimis
in nature.
[
50
] In relation to whether the Crown has proven that Mr.
Hashimi had the requisite
mens rea
for the offence, it is my view that
the only inference available from the evidence is that Mr. Hashimi
intentionally provided a false name to Officer Johnson to avoid being identified
as a person with a suspended license.  I reach this conclusion for a number of
reasons.  Firstly, Mr. Hashimi is presumed to know his own name, therefore the
only inference is that he knew he gave a false name.  Secondly, Officer Samson
found a driver’s license in the name of Meraj Hashimi on Mr. Hashimi during the
search incident to arrest.  The only inference is that Mr. Hashimi lied to
Officer Johnson about not having his license with him.  Thirdly, Crown counsel
provided evidence at trial that Mr. Hashimi’s license was suspended at the time.
It is reasonable to conclude that Mr. Hashimi knew his license was suspended.
Fourthly, Mr. Hashimi fled the scene as soon as it became clear that he was
caught in the lie.   In my view all these circumstances combined support only
one inference which is that Mr. Hashimi intended to obstruct Officer Johnson
when he provided a false name in order to avoid prosecution. I am therefore
satisfied that the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Hashimi
committed the offence of obstruct police.
(F) Flight from police
[
51
] Pursuant to
section 320.17
of the
Criminal Code
,
“Everyone
commits an offence who operates a motor vehicle or vessel while being pursued
by a peace officer and who fails, without reasonable excuse, to stop the motor
vehicle or vessel as soon as is reasonable in the circumstances”.
[
52
] Counsel for Mr. Hashimi argued that on a plain reading
of the section, Mr. Hashimi has not committed the offence. At no point did he
fail to stop for police. Mr. Hashimi was pulled over by Officer Johnson.  He
complied with the demand to pull over.  He just failed to remain stopped and
chose to leave before officer Johnson could complete his investigation.
[
53
] Crown counsel argued that the offence is broad enough
to include the acts committed by Mr. Hashimi.  I agree.  A similar scenario
happened in both
R. v. Dumfeh,
2025 ONCJ 125
and
in
R. v. Parnell
2024 ONCJ 310
.    Justice Garg
in
R. v. Parnell
, supra,
identified the
issue as follows:
The only
question is whether the offence remains available in circumstances where the
accused had initially stopped as directed.  In a sense there was no active
pursuit after Mr. Parnell had pulled over.
[
54
]
In
R. v. Dumfeh
,
Justice Prutschi held that the
legislative purpose of
s.320.17
is “designed to criminalize the extraordinarily
dangerous act of fleeing police while in a car”.  Justice Prutschi went on to
state that had the arresting officer taken steps to follow the vehicle after it
peeled away, the offence of flight from police would be made out.  Justice Prutschi
noted “I cannot endorse the absurdity that would short-circuit a charge of
flight from police simply because police made a strategic decision, informed by
public safety concerns, not to engage in a highly dangerous chase”.
[
55
] I completely agree with this sentiment.  I further agree
with Justice Prutschi that “pursuit is a continuous act which, as Justice Garg
put it
in
R. v. Parnell
, “remains ongoing until the driver is free to
leave, and that the obligation to stop includes the obligation to stay
stopped”.
[
56
] Using this definition of “pursuit”, when Mr. Hashimi
was pulled over by Officer Johnson he was required to remain stopped until advised
that he was free to leave.  By leaving before the close of the investigation,
Mr. Hashimi violated his obligation to remain stopped and in doing so committed
the offence captured in
section 320.17
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
57
] Counsel for Mr. Hashimi further argued that I cannot
find beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Hashimi was intending to flee from
police because there is insufficient evidence that Mr. Hashimi would have known
that he was going to be arrested.  Respectfully, I disagree.  Officer Johnson
was very clear with Mr. Hashimi that he was going to look up the photograph of Syad
Mohdmahd Hashimi and that if it did not look like Mr. Hashimi he would be
arrested.   Officer Johnson then went to his vehicle, was in his vehicle for a
period of time.  He then walked towards Mr. Hashimi and ordered him to step out
of his car at which point Mr. Hashimi fled.  In my view, the only inference available
on this evidence is that Mr. Hashimi knew that his lie was discovered and chose
to flee.
(G) Dangerous
Driving
[
58
] The final offence before the court is
that of dangerous driving.  The driving that the Crown alleges was dangerous
relates to Mr. Hashimi’s flight form Officer Johnson after Office Johnson told
him to step out of the car.
[
59
] Pursuant to
section 320.13(1)
of the
Criminal
Code
,
”Everyone commits an offence who operates a convenience in a manner
that, having regard to all of the circumstances, is dangerous to the public”.
[
60
] The Crown need not prove that anyone
was actually harmed as a result of the driving.  The Crown need only prove that
Mr. Hashimi drove in manner that was a marked departure from the standard or
care of a reasonable person.
[
61
] In my view, the Crown has not met
their burden.  I am mindful that an average person would not drive away after
being pulled over by police.  It is my view, that the mere act of driving away
alone is insufficient to make out this offence.  The manner of driving, as
opposed to the act of pulling away, is the conduct captured by this provision.
[
62
] In the case at bar, Mr. Hashmi did
drive away when Officer Johnson told him to step out of the vehicle.  He then
drove only a very short distance, parked the car and fled on foot.  There is no
suggestion that Mr. Hashimi almost hit Officer Johnson. There is no evidence
that Mr. Hashimi drove in excess of the speed limit or that he broke any rules
of the road as he drove away from Officer Johnson.  Moreover, the distance he
drove was very short.    When I consider all this evidence, while it was wrong
to flee from police, I cannot find that the driving itself presented a marked
departure from the standard of care of a reasonable person.  Mr. Hashimi is 
therefor found not guilty of this offence
Conclusion
[
63
] In light of my findings, Mr. Hashimi
is found guilty of the offences of driving while prohibited, flight from police
and obstruct police.  He is not guilty of the offence of dangerous driving.
Released December 16, 2025                                           ____________________
Justice
Mara Greene