CITATION:
R.
v. Williamson
, 2025 ONCJ 412
DATE:  July 28,
2025
Toronto Region
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
—  AND  —
VANESSA WILLIAMSON
Before Justice Michael Waby
Reasons for Judgment released on July 28,
2025
Ms. Hunjan ……………………………………………………………………….
for the Crown
Ms. Zhang ………………….…..…………………………….…………………
for the Accused
Waby M.:
[
1
]
Ms. Williamson is
charged with a single count of assaulting a peace officer.
[
2
]
Ms. Williamson trial
commenced on July 21, 2025 and it concluded before me on July 22, 2025.
[
3
]
Having indicated to the parties that I would
provide a prompt decision in this case, the following is my judgement provided
today on July 28, 2025.
Overview
[
4
]
Briefly, it is alleged that following a Blue
Jays game in Toronto, Ms. Williamson became engaged in a heated verbal exchange
with Detective Constable (“D.C.”) Brown who was engaged in paid duty traffic
management duties.  The officer testified that after giving clear directions to
pedestrians, Ms. Williamson was the lone pedestrian ignoring her direction to
not cross the road while the officer allowed traffic to exit the area.
[
5
]
The officer testified that Ms. Williamson
was shouting and waving her arms at a vehicle the officer had directed to
travel along the road and across a crosswalk.  The officer testified that Ms.
Williamson then directed her attention at the officer and began berating her
for not seeing the light on the crosswalk and for the fact that she had a right
to cross the street.  The officer walked over to her and informed her that she
had advised the driver of the vehicle to exit and for the pedestrians to not
cross the street.
[
6
]
Upon speaking with Ms. Williamson, the
officer gave evidence that it was clear Ms. Williamson had been drinking and
she could smell alcohol coming from her breath from a few feet away.  The
officer gave evidence that Ms. Williamson then called
her a “pussy” and the officer responded “That’s very classy.”  She directed Ms. Williamson to clear the roadway
and determined that she was not going to become engaged in further argument
with her.
[
7
]
It is alleged that Ms.
Williamson then spat on D.C. Brown striking her on the
chin and her protective police-issue vest.
[
8
]
Ms. Williamson testified
in her defence and denied spitting on the officer.  She testified that while
she regretted some of her verbal interaction with the officer, she did not spit
on the officer but spat on the ground a few feet away from her and she denied
calling the officer a pussy.
[
9
]
Ms. Hunjan, for the Crown, submits that the
officer’s evidence was clear, compelling and consistent and that the evidence
of Ms. Williamson was lacking in credibility.  She
submits that the Crown has proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
10
]
Ms. Zhang submits that the evidence of the
officer was internally and externally inconsistent, lacked credibility and that
the officer was an unreliable witness.  Simply put, it is the case for the
defence that the officer fabricated her evidence and overreacted to Ms.
Williamson spitting on the ground and engaging her in an argument over how D.C.
Brown was performing her duties that day.  Ms. Zhang submits that the evidence
of Ms. Williamson should be believed or at the very least, it should raise a
reasonable doubt in the mind of the court.
Law and Analysis
[
11
]
It is common ground between the parties that
the Crown’s case stands or falls on my findings of credibility and reliability
on the whole of the evidence tendered at this trial.
[
12
]
The test that governs the analysis of
credibility in this context is proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  It was
explained by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. W.(D.)
(1991),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, 63
C.C.C. (3d) 397 (S.C.C.) and other case law as follows:
If I
believe Ms. Williamson’s evidence, I must acquit her.
Even if I
do not believe her evidence but I am left in reasonable doubt by it, or any of
the other evidence, I must acquit her.
Finally,
even if I am not left in doubt by his evidence, I still must consider it and
all of the evidence and ask myself, on the basis of the evidence that I do
accept, whether the Crown has proven guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
13
]
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt goes
hand-in-hand with the presumption of innocence which is a fundamental principal
of our system of justice.
[
14
]
The burden of proof in a criminal trial
always rests with the Crown.  The burden of proof is a heavy one.  It is proof
beyond a reasonable doubt in relation to each of the offence’s essential
elements.  A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched, or frivolous
doubt.  It is not a doubt based on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone
involved in this trial.  It is a doubt based on reason and common sense and is
logically derived from the evidence or the absence of evidence.
R. v.
Lifchus,
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC)
, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, 118 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at para.
39
[
15
]
I may accept some, all, or none of a
witness’ evidence.
[
16
]
To be clear, it is not sufficient that on
the whole of the evidence, I am satisfied that Ms. Williamson is
probably
guilty and a criminal trial is not a credibility contest.  Even if I believe the accused is probably guilty or likely guilty,
that is not sufficient.  In those circumstances, a judge must give the benefit
of the doubt to the accused and acquit because the Crown has failed to satisfy
the court of the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
17
]
In
R. v. J.H.S.
,
2008
SCC 30
, the Supreme Court qualified
the
W.(D.)
instruction with an additional prong, partly in
recognition that a trier of fact “may believe some, none, or all of the
testimony of any witness, including that of an accused” (para. 10).  This prong
is that where the trier of fact is unable to decide whom to believe, the
accused is entitled to an acquittal (paras. 11-12).
[
18
]
Put another way, it reflects that the trier
of fact must not treat “conflicting testimonial accounts” as a credibility
contest, in the sense of deciding whether they accept one or the other.  “The
main point is that lack of credibility on the part of the accused does not
equate to proof of his or her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt”:
J.H.S.
,
ibid
at
para.
13
.
[
19
]
The burden
never
shifts
to the accused to establish their own innocence, and the onus always lies with
the Crown to prove every essential element (
R. v. J.H.S.
,
2008 SCC 30 (CanLII)
, 2008 S.C.C.
30, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 152, at para.
13
).
Issues
[
20
]
The central issues in this case before me
are those of reliability and credibility.
Analysis
[
21
]
As Ms. Zhang rightly submits, professional
witnesses, including police officers of 32 years service, are not presumed to
be credible or owed any deference by the Court.  Their evidence is to be
subject to the same level of scrutiny and weighing as any other witness,
including that of the accused.
[
22
]
I found that D.C. Brown presented as a
compelling and credible witness throughout her testimony.  Contrary to the
eloquent submissions of Ms. Zhang, I did not find the officer to be combative
in cross-examination.  I accept the officer provided answers that sometimes
sought to anticipate addressing the issues defence counsel was seeking to
explore, however, this was simply a product of an experienced witness seeking
to address the issues it was clear defence counsel was raising.  It did not
undermine the officer’s credibility but represented an attempt to be fulsome in
her answers.
[
23
]
I do find D.C. Brown was consistent and
credible in her evidence and was unshaken in all material regards.  She did not
embellish her evidence and it is clear that this experienced officer was almost
resigned, with a somewhat world weary air, to deal with Ms. Williamson’s behaviour and abuse as a regrettable part of her
duties.   The video footage at the scene shows she was calm and professional in
her dealings with Ms. Williamson after the arrest and once Ms. Williamson had
begun to calm down.  Nothing in the officer’s observable dealing with Ms.
Williamson is indicative of any malice or hostility towards her and she showed
the required professionalism and courtesy towards Ms. Williamson despite the
conduct that was alleged.
[
24
]
D.C. Brown was not assigned a body-worn
camera but some footage from the cameras of other officer who attended in the
immediate aftermath of the incident formed part of the evidence at this trial. 
D.C. Brown was clear in her evidence as to the directions she had given to
pedestrian and vehicular traffic as part of her traffic management duties.  She
had used her whistle and clear hand signals to pedestrians to stop them
crossing the road while she directed a white Tesla to exit.
[
25
]
The officer did not claim to see from where Ms. Williamson first emerged but testified
that she became aware of her when Ms. Williamson began
berating the driver of the Tesla.  She testified that she had a clear
recollection of the day’s events and that Ms. Williamson was the only
pedestrian among approximately 60 others who failed to comply with her clear
directions not to cross the road.
[
26
]
Contrary to the submissions of Ms. Zhang, I
find that the officer engaged promptly and professionally with Ms. Williamson
to address her behavior and to direct her to clear the roadway.  From first
seeing Ms. Williamson to speaking with her was a matter of seconds.  The
officer described Ms. Williamson as being rude, “dropping f-bombs” and waving
her arms and being erratic and a large number of the public exiting the stadium
had congregated and were filming and watching Ms. Williamson’s antics.
[
27
]
The officer testified that she approached Ms.
Williamson to explain to her what the officer was doing and that she shouted “don’t
you see this car” and became abusive.
[
28
]
I accept that specific reference to the
phrase “f-bombs” is not in the officer’s notes, although reference to Ms.
Williamson being abusive is.  I also accept that the officer did not provide as
detailed a description of Ms. Williamson’s physical actions in spitting on her
in her notes as she did in her testimony which she physically demonstrated in
the witness box.
[
29
]
In her notes, the officer describes Ms.
Williamson leaning towards her and spitting on her.  In her evidence, she
demonstrated Ms. Williamson tilting her head back, taking a step towards her
and spitting.  Ms. Zhang submits that this significantly impacts the officer’s
credibility.  While I accept that sufficiently detailed and appropriate notes
are necessarily expected from officers in cases of which they are a part, any
consideration of an officer’s notes and any omissions necessarily require a
case specific analysis.  Officer’s notes are in large part an aide memoir to
assist them in the giving of their evidence as well as recording key elements
of their actions and involvement.  They are not a transcript of events not
intended to be so.
[
30
]
It is clear from the officer’s notes that
she referenced Ms. Williamson lunging towards her when she spat on her.  The
fact that the officer did not provide exactly the same wording or level of
description that she gave in her evidence does not, in this case, undermine her
credibility.  In all material regards, her evidence in court aligned with the
note that she had made of the mechanics of the Accused’s actions and I find it
unremarkable that in her notebook she did not seek to add further description.  It
is also important to note that the evidence before the court is the evidence
that the officer gave under oath, not the contents of her memo book, although I
accept the relevance and potential importance of discrepancies in any officer’s
notes.
[
31
]
I also accept that the officer failed to
recognize one of the Crown attorneys in Court as one of the Crowns, or the
Crown with whom she conducted a witness preparation meeting some 2-3 weeks
before this trial.  I accept that D.C. Brown was confidently wrong when she
testified that that Mr. Surmanski was not the Crown she met with.  However, I
do not accept Ms. Zhang’s submissions that this impacts the officer’s
reliability as to the alleged events.
[
32
]
While the issue was not explored in any
detail during the trial aside, there was an Agreed Statement of Facts tendered
that accepted Mr. Surmanski was at this witness preparation meeting.  It became
apparent during the course of submissions that the witness preparation meeting
was conducted via zoom and not in person.  I have no other additional
information before me as to whether any other Crown or other individuals were
present for this particular meeting, nor any other information about it.
[
33
]
Nevertheless, despite this acknowledged
mistake on the part of the officer, I see no linkage between mis-remembering
the face of a Crown Attorney and the suggestion that the officer was unreliable
in recalling the evidence of the events alleged.  This is not a case about identification
nor one in which identification is in issue.  The officer is not alleged by
defence counsel to have mis-remembered what happened but is alleged to have
fabricated the core allegations before the court.  It is with this in mind but
the analysis of credibility and reliability needs to focus.
[
34
]
Lastly, I accept Ms. Zhang’s submissions
that one might have expected the officer to have availed herself of wipes or
sanitizer at the scene to wipe her chin after being spat on.  This would not
have been remarkable for the officer to so had she chosen to do so.  However, D.C.
Brown was clear that she was satisfied that she had wiped the spit off her chin
at the time it occurred and it is clear that her focus in the immediate
aftermath was on that of arresting appropriately restraining and processing Ms.
Williamson with the assistance of her colleagues.  I do not accept that the
absence of any additional measures taken at the scene of the incident
necessarily reduces the officer’s credibility with respect to this incident,
particularly given the combative conduct of Ms. Williamson.
[
35
]
\The sustained struggle on the ground by
the officer with the physically larger Ms. Williamson
when trying to apply handcuffs is, in my view, a perfectly logical and
reasonable explanation as to why the close-up photo stills presented by defence
counsel of the officer’s police vest do not appear to show obvious sign of
saliva present.  It was highly likely any such residue would be dislodged
during these post-arrest struggles.
[
36
]
Similarly, the officer was very clear as to
why there was no notation in her memo book of the wrist injury she reported. 
This was not noticed by her until she was
en route
to the division with Ms. Williamson and she knew that she would have to file a separate
injury report through her Staff Sergeant.  This she did.  She followed the
required process and did as expected.  Doing so and not also noting it in her
memo book is unremarkable.
[
37
]
Turning to the evidence of Ms. Williamson, I accept Ms. Zhang’s
submissions that she was unshaken in her core assertion that she did not spit
on the officer.  I also accept defence counsel’s submission that there were
admissions made by Ms. Williamson in her evidence that
reflected poorly on her.  These included swearing at the officer, generally
acting disrespectfully towards the officer and failing to comply with her
directions.  Ms. Williamson also accepts that she had consumed alcohol on the
day of the incident and that, to use her words, she was “tipsy, drunk or
intoxicated.”
[
38
]
A considerable portion of time in the trial
was devoted to testimony by Ms. Williamson relating to her self-reported
tendency to accumulate larger than typical quantities of saliva in her mouth
when she became stressed or exerted herself and which required her to rid
herself of it through various means, including spitting.   Whether Ms.
Williamson is afflicted by such a condition, I cannot say and no medical
evidence was put before me in this regard.  I accept that post-arrest video
footage shows her spitting several times on the ground.  Nevertheless, the
central issue in this case is whether an angry Ms. Williamson spat on D.C.
Brown not whether she suffers from any such affliction that requires her to
spit in the street.
[
39
]
I do, however, accept the potential
relevance of the issue as it relates to the defence theory of this case.  That
being Ms. Williamson upset the officer by arguing with her and then spat on the
ground which sufficiently enraged D.C. Brown and prompted to her to arrest Ms.
Williamson for assaulting her.
[
40
]
While I find the repeated assertions that Ms.
Williamson spontaneously and involuntarily accumulates saliva questionable, it
is whether the Crown has proven that she spat on the officer as alleged that is
the central issue in this case.
[
41
]
Ms. Williamson is an educated and articulate
individual with a professional career.   Nevertheless, I found her to be
unpersuasive about several important aspects of her evidence.   I am satisfied
that she was considerably more combative with D.C. Brown from the outset of the
incident than she acknowledged.  This included her continuing to refuse to
follow clear directions from the officer about not crossing the road while
simultaneously shouting at and arguing with the officer while these appropriate
directions were being given.
[
42
]
Although Ms. Williamson would have been well
able to see the officer from where she testified she was first situated, I
accept she may not have seen the officer prior to her engaging with the motor
vehicle she encountered when crossing the road.  On her own acknowledged
evidence, she was “peeved and irritated” at the driver.  I am satisfied that
this considerably underplays her level of frustration at encountering the car
while she believed she had the right of way.  Ms. Williamson continued to be
dogmatic about the amount of time she believed to have to cross the road and
her right to do so.
[
43
]
I am also satisfied that this frustration
manifested itself, as the officer testified, by her shouting and gesturing at
the driver.  I am also satisfied that alcohol played a substantial part in the
actions of Ms. Williamson on the date of this incident and that it impacted her
decision making substantially more than she allowed.  The consumption of at
least a bottle of wine by her rendered her intoxicated and combative and this
manifested itself in her engagement with the officer and driver of the Tesla. 
It is clear that Ms. Williamson felt she was in the right and the officer was
in the wrong and she resented being spoken to by the officer about her conduct.
[
44
]
Although I accept there may have been an
initial moment of surprise, I do not accept Ms. Williamson’s evidence that she
did not know what was happening when she was being arrested or that she was
dealing with police officers.  D.C. Brown, in the partial video footage
available, is clearly seen standing at the head of Ms. Williamson and issuing
repeated instructions to her which Ms. Williamson spends some time resisting. 
The officer was in full uniform and her presence would not have been unknown to
Ms. Williamson.  Not least of all because of their interaction moments before.
[
45
]
The extent of Ms. Williamson’s combative
nature is reinforced by the fact that an off-duty officer identified himself to
D.C. Brown and rendered assistance as Ms. Williamson failed to comply with
repeated directions given to her once D.C. Brown was trying to handcuff her.
[
46
]
While I accept that for anyone a dynamic
arrest process can be shocking, I do not accept Ms. Williamson’s evidence that
either during or after the arrest she suffered a panic attack, was confused or
did not appreciate what was happening.  Understandably given her recent surgery,
the repeatedly issue directions to officers when she was on the ground to be
careful of her leg which had been subject to relatively recent surgery.  While
understandable, at no point does the footage show her asking “who are you”,
“what is happening” or “why is this happening”.  I do not attribute this to
shock but a legitimate concern by Ms. Williamson to prioritize the care of her
knee while comprehending who she is dealing with.   I find Ms. Williamson’s
assertions to the contrary do not assist her credibility.
[
47
]
More significantly, in none of the video
footage shown, does Ms. Williamson appear to be confused as to what is
happening and why.  On the two occasion she is shown being told why she is
under arrest, she registers no surprise and asks no questions about the reason
for her arrest or its circumstances.  She is sufficiently self-composed to ask
questions of the officers about the whereabouts of her phone and other
property.   I find Ms. Williamson’s assertions to the contrary do not assist
her credibility.
[
48
]
At various points in post-arrest, she tells
officers what she is going to be doing and seeks to direct events.  This
includes seating herself in the rear of the open door scout car, talking
relatively calmly on the phone to her partner about what is happening and
advising officers that she won’t be able to attend court on the date on the Form
9 because she is out of the country and engaging in discussions about an
alternate date (which the officers accommodate) and then speaking to an officer
about her upcoming European river cruise.
[
49
]
I accept that Ms. Williamson is seen to spit
on the ground several times after her arrest and advises officers she is going
to do so.  I do not accept that this is corroborative of her evidence that she
did not spit on the officer but only spat on the ground proximate to her.  I
also do not accept that in the presence of hundreds of members of the public
who were proximate, some of whom were filming this heated encounter, that D.C.
Brown decided to arrest the physically larger and stronger Ms. Williamson simply
because Ms. Williamson spat on the ground and upset her and then decided to
fabricate the allegation against Ms. Williamson to justify her actions.
[
50
]
To the extent that the officer’s evidence is
corroborated by the available video evidence, Ms. Williamson appeared combative
and highly resistant to following direction that she was given.  This occurred
upon and following arrest and I am satisfied it was the case beforehand too.  I
am satisfied that this occurred from the moment she encountered the Tesla and
berated the driver and then the officer.  I am also satisfied that, while Ms.
Williamson acknowledges some poor and disrespectful behaviour on her part, she
deliberately understated the true nature and extent of it as well as the impact
of the alcohol she had consumed and its impact upon her behaviour.
[
51
]
I am satisfied that she was highly agitated
and hostile towards the officer and, as agreed, swore at the officer and then
when challenged by the officer, I find this course of alcohol fuelled behaviour
led to Ms. Williamson calling the officer a pussy and spitting on D.C. Brown as
alleged.  I am satisfied that this was a deliberate act on the part of Ms.
Williamson.
[
52
]
Ms. Zhang helpfully provided the Court with
various case law in her submissions, this included
R. v. Pittiman
,
2006 SCC 9 (CanLII)
, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 381, which cautions triers of fact against seeking to
reconstruct events where they are not readily apparent and appropriately
reminds the court that the central task is to determine whether the Crown has
proven each and every essential element of the alleged offence.  I am amply
satisfied that there is no mystery as to what transpired on the date of the
alleged incident.
[
53
]
I reject Ms.
Williamson’s evidence that she only spat on the ground
and not on the officer and I reject her evidence that she did not call the
officer a “pussy” before doing so.  I am satisfied that her walking away
afterwards, rather than running as Ms. Zhang suggests would be more realistic,
was primarily a sign of her contempt of the officer and was a product of her
alcohol-fuelled disdain.  It may well also be consistent with the recent knee
surgery she reported.  I am also satisfied for the reasons I have given I do
not believe the evidence of Ms. Williamson where it
materially departs from that of the officer and nor
does it raise a reasonable doubt in my mind as to her guilt.  I find her actions belie Ms. Williamson’s assertion in her evidence
that “I may have been at a ball game but I’m still a professional woman”.   On
this occasion, this is clearly not how she conducted herself.
[
54
]
On the totality of the evidence and absence
of evidence I do accept, I am satisfied that the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that Ms. Williamson is guilty of the offence with which she is charged.   Accordingly, I
find her guilty of the offence of assaulting a peace officer.
____________________________
Justice Michael Waby