ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. P.T.,
2025 ONCJ 504
DATE:  September 23, 2025
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
P.T.
Before
Justice B. Green
Reasons
for Judgment on Sentencing
Released
electronically September 23
rd
, 2025
Ms. K. Beard ................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
Mr. D. Mcfadden....................................... 
 counsel for the defendant Mr. P.T.
A non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has
been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
. This
subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code
, which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4 Order restricting publication -- sexual offences
. -- (1) Subject to subsection (2), the
presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
) any of the following offences:
(i)
an offence under
section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1,
172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03,
280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)
any offence under this
Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which this subparagraph
comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred to in
subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
) two or more offences being
dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred
to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY ORDER ON
APPLICATION
-- In
proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
)
or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
) at the first reasonable
opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the victim
of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
) on application made by the
victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order.
486.6 OFFENCE
-- (1) Every person who fails to comply
with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
Green J.:
A.
Introduction:
[
1
]
On the first day that
this matter was scheduled to proceed to trial, Mr. P.T. plead guilty to one
count of sexual interference contrary to
section 151
(b) of the
Criminal Code
for kissing and groping the breast area of his teenage stepdaughter. The crown
elected to proceed by summary conviction which is important because of the statutorily
prescribed maximum penalty of two years less a day and the impact this election
has on the imposition of a
S.O.I.R.A.
order.
[
2
]
Counsel and the crown
worked diligently to prepare an agreed statement of facts. Their
professionalism and dedication to resolve this matter is commendable. The
agreed statement of facts was filed as an exhibit. Mr. P.T. admitted the
following facts:
Ms. M.G. and Mr. P.T.
were in a relationship and share a 5-year-old daughter together. Ms. M.G. has a
daughter from a previous relationship, Ms. N.S. Ms. N.S. resided with Mr. P.T.
and her mother. She was 14 years of age at the time of the offence.
In November of 2023,
Ms. N.S. confided in her mother that Mr. P.T. had previously inappropriately
touched her during an incident in the car. Her mother called Mr. P.T. to the
basement where the trio discussed the allegations. This discussion was recorded
on a cell phone. Mr. P.T. was aware that he was being recorded. He made an
inculpatory statement, confirming Ms. N.S.’s version of events. He claimed that
he was “swirling” with emotion at the time.
The matter was reported
to police and Ms. N.S. made a recorded statement that:
Sometime between May to
June 2023, Mr. P.T. picked her up from her boyfriend’s house and went for a
drive. The two were holding hands and talking about Mr. P.T.’s son who had
recently passed away. Mr. P.T. drove down a back road and pulled the vehicle
over to the side of the road and parked.
Once stopped on the
side of the road, Ms. N.S. reported that Mr. P.T. was looking at her weird,
making her uncomfortable. He then reached across the car and began kissing her
neck. She was wearing a tank top at the time. Mr. P.T. proceeded to pull at her
bra strap, touching Ms. N.S.’s breast area over her bra. She pulled her bra
strap back up. He had his hand on her thigh. Ms. N.S. pushed him away from her.
Mr. P.T. stopped his advances and drove home.
Mr. P.T. later
apologized to Ms. N.S. for what happened, saying it was inappropriate and that
he would not do it again.
[
3
]
Mr. P.T. was arrested
within a few days of the matter being reported to police. He was released on
bail. There has been no contact between Mr. P.T. and his stepdaughter since the
date of his arrest, almost 2 years ago, in November of 2023. He is also estranged
from the biological daughter that he shares with the victim’s mother. The
victim and her mother filed compelling victim impact statements outlining the
devastating aftermath of Mr. P.T.’s crime.
[
4
]
The crown emphasized the
egregious circumstances of the offence. A man who acted as a father figure to a
young teenage girl brought her to an isolated place and, at a time when they
were both grieving, he abused his position of trust and authority by violating
her sexual integrity. The crown forcefully submitted that the fit sentence is a
period of incarceration of 18 months to be followed by 3 years probation as
well as a 161 order for a period of 20 years to protect other young girls in
the future, a SOIRA order for 10 years and an order for the taking of a DNA
sample.
[
5
]
In contrast, counsel
focussed primarily on the circumstances of the offender as well as the absence
of certain aggravating facts. Counsel highlighted the mitigation of the plea of
guilty. Mr. P.T. expressed remorse almost immediately after the offence when
confronted by his wife. He has no criminal record. He was struggling with
extreme grief and mental health issues when he committed this crime. He has invested
in counseling and there is significant potential for his rehabilitation.
[
6
]
Considering the unusual
circumstances leading up to the commission of this offence and Mr. P.T.’s ongoing
commitment to getting mental health help, counsel urged the court to sentence
him to a conditional sentence in the range of eighteen months to two years. The
conditional sentence can be followed by three years of probation which will ensure
that Mr. P.T. is supervised in the community and Ms. N.S. has the comfort of
court orders protecting her from him for the next five years. Counsel initially
opposed the imposition of either a section 161 order or a SOIRA order because
they are disproportionately punitive for this offender and this offence. In
further written submissions, counsel conceded that there are grounds for making
a 161 order but submitted that certain terms are disproportionately punitive,
and it should only be 3 years in duration. Counsel maintained the position that
a SOIRA order should not be made because there is no connection between the
imposition of the order and the objectives of the legislation.
[
7
]
Since the Supreme Court
of Canada’s watershed
decision in
R. v. Friesen
,
2020 SCC 9
, the
sentences for these types of offences have been steadily increasing across
Canada. The Supreme Court and the Ontario Court of Appeal have repeatedly
stressed that, absent exceptional circumstances, a conditional sentence is not
a proportionate disposition. Of course, that does not mean it is not an
available penalty.
[
8
]
I must determine the
fit and proportionate sentence having regard to the aggravating and mitigating
facts, the guiding principles of sentencing as well as considerations of
restraint for a first offender and parity with sentences for similar offences
and similar offenders.
B.
Additional facts
and Legal analysis:
i.
Aggravating features of the offence:
[
9
]
Mr. P.T. assumed the
role of a parental figure and caregiver in Ms. N.S.’s life. She trusted him,
relied on him, and cared deeply for him. They were together that day to
commiserate and share their mutual grief. She was consoling her stepfather when
he breached her trust in him.
[
10
]
Undoubtedly, Mr. P.T. was devastated by the
sudden death of his son. However, he is not the only person who suffered from this
terrible loss. His stepdaughter, Ms. N.S., was also grieving the loss of her stepbrother.
Instead of offering Ms. N.S. support, guidance and empathy as her parent, Mr.
P.T. preyed on her emotional vulnerability.
[
11
]
As a 14-year-old girl in this situation,
Ms. N.S. was a susceptible child deserving of protection from harm.
In the seminal
decision of
R. v. Friesen
,
supra,
the very first footnote of the
judgement states:
For the purposes of
these reasons, the terms "child" and "children" mean
persons under the age of 18. References to "boys", "girls",
"young women", "young people", "youth",
"teenagers", and "adolescents" should all be understood to
refer to persons who are children. Where specific statutory provisions
distinguish between persons under the age of 16 and persons under the age of
18, we make this clear in the reasons.
[
12
]
In
R. v. Bertrand Marchand
,
2023 SCC
26
at paras
30 and 31
, the Supreme Court reiterated that more punitive sentences
are necessary to reflect the enduring harm caused by the sexual violation of
children:
Friesen
recognized that the focus of the legislative
scheme of sexual offences against children has shifted to protect a child's
personal autonomy, bodily integrity, sexual integrity, dignity and equality.
The Court outlined how sexual offences against children produce profound
physical and psychological harms to the most vulnerable members of our society.
It was deeply concerned with how the sexual assault of children may produce
shame, embarrassment, unresolved anger, a reduced ability to trust and fear
that other people would also abuse them (
Friesen
, at
para.
57
). It set out the disproportionate impact of violence on girls, women,
Indigenous persons and other vulnerable groups.
Friesen
sends the clear message that
sentences for these crimes must account for the far-reaching and ongoing damage
sexual violence causes to children, families and society at large, which may
take many years to manifest. Consequently, sentences for offences involving
sexual violence against children must generally increase to reflect society's
modern understanding of such offences and Parliament's choice to increase the
sentences associated with these crimes (paras. 3-5). [citations omitted]
[
13
]
Any violation of the sexual integrity of a child
is a grave offence that merits a denunciatory sentence because of the lasting
trauma and damage caused to the victims, their families and society. Counsel
and the crown were careful and thoughtful during their submissions. They referenced
that the nature of the offensive acts was not at the more serious end of the
spectrum while acknowledging the directions from the Supreme Court of Canada to
treat this type of offence as a serious crime. This sensitivity aligns with the
Supreme Court’s caution
in
R. v. Friesen
,
supra,
about the “dangers of defining a
sentencing range based on penetration or the specific type of activity at
issue” for four reasons:
At para.
141:
First, defining a
sentencing range based on a specific type of sexual activity risks resurrecting
at sentencing a distinction that Parliament has abolished in substantive
criminal law. Specifically, attributing intrinsic significance to the
occurrence or non-occurrence of penetrative or other sexual acts based on
traditional notions of sexual propriety is inconsistent with Parliament's
emphasis on sexual integrity in the reform of the sexual offences scheme.
At para
142:
Second, courts should not assume that
there is any clear correlation between the type of physical act and the harm to
the victim
. In assessing
the significance of the degree of physical interference as a factor, as
Christine Boyle writes, "judges should think in terms of what is most
threatening and damaging to victims". Judges can legitimately consider the
greater risk of harm that may flow from specific physical acts such as
penetration. However, as McLachlin J. explained in
McDonnell
,
an excessive focus on the physical act can
lead courts to underemphasize the emotional and psychological harm to the
victim that all forms of sexual violence can cause
.
Sexual violence that does not involve penetration is still
"extremely serious" and can have a devastating effect on the victim.
This Court has recognized that "any sexual offence is serious" and
has held that "even mild non-consensual touching of a sexual nature can
have profound implications for the complainant".
The modern understanding of sexual
offences requires greater emphasis on these forms of psychological and
emotional harm, rather than only on bodily integrity. [citations omitted and
emphasis mine]
…
At para, 144:
Specifically, we would strongly
caution courts against downgrading the wrongfulness of the offence or the harm
to the victim where the sexually violent conduct does not involve penetration,
fellatio, or cunnilingus, but instead touching or masturbation.
There is no
basis to assume, as some courts appear to have done, that sexual touching
without penetration can be [TRANSLATION] "relatively benign". Some
decisions also appear to justify a lower sentence by labeling the conduct as
merely sexual touching without any analysis of the harm to the victim. Implicit
in these decisions is the belief that conduct that is unfortunately referred to
as "fondling" or "caressing" is inherently less harmful
than other forms of sexual violence. This is a myth that must be rejected.
Simply stating that the offence involved sexual touching rather than
penetration does not provide any meaningful insight into the harm that the
child suffered from the sexual violence.
At para 145:
Third, we would emphasize that
courts must recognize the wrongfulness of sexual violence even in cases where
the degree of physical interference is less pronounced. Of course, increases in
the degree of physical interference increase the wrongfulness of the sexual
violence.
At para 146:
Fourth…
there is no type of
hierarchy of physical acts for the purposes of determining the degree of
physical interference… physical acts such as digital penetration and fellatio
can be just as serious a violation of the victim's bodily integrity as penile
penetration. Similarly, it is an error to assume that an assault that involves
touching is inherently less physically intrusive than an assault that involves
fellatio, cunnilingus, or penetration. For instance, depending on the
circumstances of the case, touching that is both extensive and intrusive can be
equally or even more physically intrusive than an act of fellatio, cunnilingus,
or penetration. [emphasis mine]
[
14
]
While making submissions about the nature
of the acts, the crown invited me to consider the frightening possibilities of what
“could” have happened if Ms. N.S. had not stopped Mr. P.T.’s sexual advance. I
agree that Ms. N.S. was courageous in the face of such a shocking event
especially when she was reeling from her own grief. Nevertheless, I cannot
sentence Mr. P.T. for speculative assumptions about what could have happened
next. For example, I would not have accepted a submission from counsel that his
client would have stopped himself even if his stepdaughter had not prevented
further harm. He will be sentenced for what happened that day, which was a
significant and detrimental breach of trust.
[
15
]
Tragically, this case is no different from
countless others in terms of the devastating impact of Mr. P.T.’s selfish
choice to violate his stepdaughter’s sexual integrity. The act itself may have
been momentary, but the effect is long lasting. That moment has played over and
over again in the mind of a child.
[
16
]
Ms. N.S. filed a victim impact statement that
outlined her continued suffering because of Mr. P.T.’s violation:
“The
offence” caused her to “lose sleep, have nightmares and be extremely upset at
random times”. She is suffering from “flashbacks”.
She feels
“scared to trust anyone” for fear she may be victimized again. She is “not
comfortable walking alone anymore”. Ms. N.S. is very scared to see Mr. P.T.
again.
She has
fallen behind in school from missing days to prepare for the trial and the
overall stress.
She is
struggling with the “huge effect on my family”. She is “so sad” for her little
sister. Moreover, she is shouldering a burden no child should bear. Her
stepfather was living with them for five years. She is worried about her mom
struggling to make ends meet with out his support payments. It is hard for her
mom to pay for any of her extra curricular activities.
[
17
]
Mr. P.T.’s partner, the mother of N.S.,
also filed a victim impact statement detailing the impact on her, their other daughter,
and the ripple effect of this crime. Every aspect of their lives has been
turned upside down. Many domestic and sexual offences are not reported to the
police because of legitimate fears about the financial impact of the loss of
income when one parent is suddenly extricated from the family home. Despite
these concerns, Ms. M.G. prioritized her daughter’s safety. She related that:
She is
“unable to work, due to anxiety and PTSD”. She lives in “fear for my children,
as the one person I thought I could trust with my most precious beings
committed an act of betrayal beyond measure. She has been “unable to sleep
without medication due to nightmares and panic attacks.” She is very scared to
see Mr. P.T. again.
She feels
“insurmountable grief and guilt as her (Ms. N.S.’s) childhood innocence was
stripped away by someone who played a significant parental role in her life”.
Their younger
biological child is confused about why her father left them and why he hurt her
“sissy”.
Ms. M.G. is
frustrated that Mr. P.T. has used his grief as “an excuse for this crime”. Their
“grief process was stunted” as they “were still hurting severely from the loss
of our son” and the victim’s stepbrother.
Ms. M.G. has
had to carry the “mental, emotional and financial load of being their only
parent”.
This crime
“has completely destroyed our family financially”. She is entirely responsible
for supporting both of her daughters on a limited income which “has become a
crushing weight”.
[
18
]
These predatory crimes destroy families, irreversibly
alter the course of young lives, and leave a path of financial, emotional and
psychological destruction. Regardless of the nature of the violation of Ms.
N.S.’s sexual integrity, the results are wretchedly the same.
[
19
]
It is essential to try to break this ongoing
cycle of sexual violence by adult predators of children through consistently
denunciatory and deterrent sentences in the hopes that it will help to protect our
society’s most vulnerable members. Nevertheless, to achieve a balanced sentence,
I must also consider any mitigating considerations with respect to this
offender, his potential for rehabilitation and the other applicable principles
of sentencing.
ii.
Mitigating circumstances of the offender:
[
20
]
Mr. P.T. is 52 years old. He has no prior
record. He entered a plea of guilty on the trial date. While it is not an early
plea, Mr. P.T. still has the benefit of some mitigation because it avoided the
necessity of Ms. N.S. having to endure the rigours of a trial.
[
21
]
Between the date of the offence and the
disclosure to police, there were no further attempts or advances towards the
victim. In addition, when confronted with the accusation, he immediately
validated the victim’s trauma and confirmed her account. He expressed remorse
and offered reassurance that it would never happen again.
[
22
]
A presentence report was prepared and
provided considerable background information. Mr. P.T. was raised in a
prosocial family with a positive upbringing. He did well in school. He was the
valedictorian of his class and an “Ontario scholar”. He maintained steady
employment for many years in the “film industry, promotional video creation and
media” (p. 5 PSR). Despite a steady work history, Mr. P.T. is currently unemployed
while attending to his mental health issues and awaiting the outcome of these
proceedings. Counsel advised that this conviction would make it difficult, if
not impossible, for Mr. P.T. to work in his chosen profession.
[
23
]
In terms of his family, Mr. P.T. maintains
a positive relationship with his mother. He is living with her while sorting
out his personal affairs. He has chosen not to confide in his mother or his
sister about the offence he committed against his stepdaughter. Mr. P.T.’s
mother and sister are supportive of him but neither one of them are aware of
the nature of his crime (p. 4 of the PSR). As a result, they are not well positioned
to reinforce denunciation of his crime and/or ensure that he gets the specific
counselling that he needs to address an attraction to and violation of a child
in his care.
[
24
]
Mr. P.T. was married to another woman many
years ago. He is the parent of three children from that union, including a son
who died suddenly in March of 2023 of an overdose at the young age of 19 years
old. His son died a couple of months before this offence. Mr. P.T. has “endured
considerable trauma and emotional upheaval” because of his son’s unexpected and
preventable death. He is not alone in this loss. All his children, including
his stepdaughter, and their mothers were suffering too.
[
25
]
Mr. P.T. was residing with Ms. M.G. when
his son passed away. His son was living with them, along with their 6-year-old biological
child and the victim, his stepdaughter. His son died in their home. Everyone in
that home was suffering with grief from such a tragic death. Mr. P.T.’s
misconduct exacerbated their continued suffering.
[
26
]
Mr. P.T. is estranged from his two
daughters from his first marriage. There is so much familial tension between
them that there were separate services for their son. Mr. P.T. has also alienated
the stepdaughter he purported to love, and he is estranged from his youngest
daughter because of this offence. He had the option of seeing his youngest
child at a visitation center, but he chose not to do so. Mr. P.T. presents as
an individual who is so focussed on his own opinions and his own feelings that
he has little regard for how his conduct alienated his family and his children
when they needed him the most.
[
27
]
Mr. P.T. invested in significant
counselling with a psychotherapist after the commission of this offence.
According to his therapist he has demonstrated a “high level of engagement” and
exhibited “strong commitment” to the process. He had a set back in March of
2025 close to the two-year anniversary of his son’s death. He tried to take his
own life although he quickly abandoned his intentions. He was taken to the
hospital and initially released but he was subsequently hospitalized for a
period of 7 days (p. 9 of the forensic assessment). He was prescribed mood
stabilizing medication. Since that time, he has been mentally incapable of working
and unable to pay child support which has exacerbated the financial toll that this
crime has had on his dependent family. In addition to counseling and reporting
to a psychiatrist, Mr. P.T. is meeting with a CMHA worker.
[
28
]
Mr. P.T. participated fully with a
probation officer for the purpose of the preparation of a presentence report. He
also engaged in a forensic assessment to determine the risk that he poses to
commit further offences. A
clinical and forensic psychologist reviewed the agreed statement of facts, the
presentence report, spent 7 hours engaged in interviews with Mr. P.T. “in
person” and performed a series of psychometric tests with him. In the
psychological assessment, the doctor noted the following discussions with Mr.
P.T. about the offence:
Mr. P.T.
stated that he is most attracted to women between the ages of 40 and 52. He
denied any interest or sexual attraction to pre-pubescent children (pedophilia)
and pubescent children (hebephilia) as well as postpubescent teens. He denied
ever viewing child pornography (p. 12).
Mr. T.
explained that the index offence occurred three months after his son died. On
that day he was picking up his stepdaughter, who was 14 years old at the time,
from a friend’s home. During the 15-minute drive home, a song that A. loved
came on which caused him to become emotional and cry. His stepdaughter grabbed
his hand, and they continued driving. Mr. T. stated that because life at home
was chaotic, sometimes he and the victim would go for drives to avoid being at
home.
When he
stopped, he said “sorry” and they drove home. Mr. T. relayed that he “should”
have told the victim’s mother when they returned home, but he feared her
reaction. Mr. T. believes that the information came forward in November when
the victim was encouraged by her boyfriend to tell her mother. He relayed that
when M. approached him about the incident, he took responsibility. Mr. T. chose
to leave the familial home after speaking with M. as he felt ashamed and was
experiencing depression symptoms. He “disappeared”, and police located him at a
motel. He was adamant that he was not a danger to himself at that time but did
not know what to do.
When
speaking about the offence, Mr. T. did not engage in denial, minimization, or
victim blaming. He stated that what he did was “inexcusable” and he “feels
awful” for what he did to the victim.
He
believes that his actions came from being overwhelmed with grief following the
death of his son, being estranged from his daughters, fighting with his
ex-wife, and believing that he had to care for everyone else at that time.
He explained that his behaviours were “a
breach of trust” towards his stepdaughter and that he is ashamed he has put her
through this. He commented that he wants to be sure she is ok and that she does
not take any blame for the event or the aftermath with the separation of him
and M. [emphasis mine]
[
29
]
Mr. P.T.’s genuine grief over the death of
his son is not a logical explanation, justification or excuse for preying on
his vulnerable stepdaughter. Quite the contrary, his moral culpability is
higher in these circumstances because he knew how helpless she was at that time
due to her own grief from their shared loss. He used the compassion and concern
of a loving child to opportunistically seek sexual gratification. His predatory
misconduct is appalling.
[
30
]
Although Mr. P.T. participated in various
psychometric tests to evaluate any paraphilias and/or future risk to other
vulnerable victims, the results of the tests are of very limited assistance
because of the possibility of “socially desirable responding also known as faking
or lying”:
Mr. T.’s
score is considered “probably” invalid in that he responded in a way that is
considered “faking good” or presenting himself in a favorable manner, endorsing
desirable traits and rejecting undesirable ones (p. 15 of the assessment).
And
further
Certain
indicators do fall outside of the normal range, suggesting that Mr. P.T. may
not have answered in a completely forthright manner. The nature of his
responses may lead to a somewhat inaccurate impression of Mr. P.T.
Specifically, with respect to positive impression management, Mr. P.T.’s
pattern of responses suggest he tends to portray himself as being relatively
free of common shortcomings to which most individuals will admit, and he is
somewhat reluctant to recognize minor faults in himself. Given this tendency to
repress undesirable characteristic, the interpretive hypotheses for this
measure should be reviewed with caution. Although there is no evidence to
suggest an effort to intentionally distort the profile,
the results may underrepresent the extent
and degree of any significant findings in certain areas due to Mr. P.T.’s
tendency to avoid negative or unpleasant aspects of himself
. Despite the level of defensiveness noted
above, there are some areas where Mr. P.T. described problems of greater intensity
than is typical of defensive respondents. These areas could indicate problems
that merit further inquiry. These areas include impact of traumatic events;
stress in the environment; thoughts of death or suicide; and feelings of
helplessness. With respect to negative impression management, there is no
evidence to suggest that Mr. P.T. was motivated to portray himself in a more
negative or pathological light than the clinical picture would warrant
.
[emphasis mine]
[
31
]
In addition to Mr. P.T.’s tendency to
underrepresent his issues, his attitude towards rehabilitation is quite troubling.
He does not possess any significant incentive to address the underlying issues
that motivated this offence to ensure that it won’t ever happen again:
Mr. P.T.’s
interest in and motivation for treatment is
somewhat below average
in
comparison to adults who are not being seen in a therapeutic setting.
Furthermore, his level of treatment motivation is substantially lower than is
typical of individuals being seen in treatment settings.
His responses
suggest that he is satisfied with himself as he is, that he is not experiencing
marked distress, and that, as a result, he sees little need for changes in his
behavior
.
[
32
]
It is not just his attitude towards
counseling that is disconcerting. The report referenced that Mr. P.T. exhibited
“defensiveness and reluctance to discuss personal problems which could lead to
early termination” of treatment. As a result of these findings in the report, the
opinion that he is in a “below average risk category for being charged and convicted
of another sexual offence in the future” is dubious.
[
33
]
In addition to the test scores, the doctor
relied on various other considerations like the impulsivity and brevity of the
offence, the lack of any expressed attraction to children or criminal
antecedents, Mr. P.T.’s history of relationships with adult females and his
altered mental state at the time of the offence. In spite of the noted
reservations, the author concluded that there were no concerns about
pedophilia, hebephilia or other similar paraphilias.
[
34
]
The doctor opined that addressing Mr.
P.T.’s current stagnation and healing from his grief could ameliorate any
concerns for recidivism. It would be beneficial for Mr. P.T. to get back to
work, make positive contributions and invest in his mental wellbeing. It was
recommended that he would benefit from “psychoeducation around consent as well
as victim empathy and impact”. The doctor was emphatic that Mr. P.T. should
not, however, participate in group therapy with higher risk offenders as that
may increase his risk to reoffend.
[
35
]
In terms of the request that has been made
by the crown for a lengthy 161 order, there is evidentiary support for the
crown’s application in the assessment report. The doctor, who spent a
considerable period interviewing Mr. P.T. and performing tests with him,
recommended:
Additional
risk management recommendations
for Mr. P.T. while being monitored in the community by the criminal
justice system would be not having unsupervised contact with children under the
age of 16 and avoiding public areas where children under the age of 16 are
likely to attend unless accompanied by a responsible adult. A responsible adult
is considered an individual who is aware of Mr. P.T.’s offence, does not
minimize the offence, and is willing to supervise him. Further, he should not
be able to obtain employment or volunteer in a capacity that involves being in
a position of trust or authority towards anyone under the age of 18.
[
36
]
While considerable attention was focussed
on Mr. P.T.’s grief and related depression, there appeared to be some deeper personal
issues that may have contributed to this offence. At first, Mr. P.T. reported
to the probation officer that he had not experienced any childhood trauma. That
was not true. Recently, he disclosed that he was the victim of childhood sexual
abuse. There are a multitude of decisions that speak to the lasting harm of
sexual abuse including the perpetuation of the cycle of offending misconduct.
The victims sometimes become offenders. Mr. P.T. needs help to come to terms
with his own past to ensure his rehabilitation.
[
37
]
Mr. P.T. has consistently expressed remorse
for the harm that he caused to Ms. N.S. and their family. The probation officer
reported that Mr. P.T. related “extreme regret over the harm caused to the
young victim, citing being grief stricken over the profoundly traumatic
mistreatment” of the victim (p. 5 PSR). Mr. P.T. made a public statement during
the sentencing expressing his deep shame and remorse with respect to the
commission of this offence.
[
38
]
While he has shown considerable remorse, it
is disturbing that he continues to attribute this sexual offence to his grief
even though his son died
3 months prior
to this offence. He feels that his ability to think rationally was compromised
at that time, “although admittedly this does not absolve him of accountability”.
Mr. P.T. lacks much needed insight into his real motivation for committing a
sexual offence against a child who was also grieving that day. Grief cannot
possibly explain or justify the predatory sexual abuse of a child by a parental
figure in a position of trust regardless of how impulsive or spontaneous the
act.
[
39
]
Mr. P.T. needs to develop much more insight
into the precipitating factors for his misconduct. I do not, however, agree
with the crown that his apologies to the victim rang hollow. Mr. P.T.
appreciates and seems to understand that what he did was wrong and extraordinarily
harmful to Ms. N.S. Moreover, I disagree that his expressed remorse through a
plea of guilty is disingenuous because it occurred on the first day this matter
was scheduled to proceed to trial.
In
R. v. Griffiths,
2025 ONCA 511
at
para
16
, the Court of Appeal cautioned that:
This
reasoning is legally flawed. First, the trial judge erred by equating the
appellant's decision to proceed to trial with a lack of remorse warranting an
increased sentence. As Di Luca J. explained
in
R. v. Lu
,
2022
ONSC 1918
, at para.
58
:
A plea of
not guilty is not inconsistent with [a] claim of remorse. While a guilty plea
is,
inter alia
, a sign of remorse, a person can be remorseful for having
committed an offence while nonetheless exercising their constitutional right to
a trial. The two are not incompatible.
Second,
although he did not expressly cite it as an aggravating factor, the trial judge
erred in appearing to increase the appellant's sentence because she exercised
her right to a trial rather than plead guilty. As this court
held in
R. v.
Reeve
,
2020
ONCA 381
at para.
20
:
"Accused persons are entitled to put the Crown to its proof and cannot be
punished or seen to be punished after-the-fact, simply because the Crown met
that burden."
[
40
]
By all accounts, Mr. P.T. immediately
accepted responsibility for the offence when he was confronted by his wife.
Thereafter, his life unravelled because of his deteriorating mental health
issues and dramatic changes in his life. He had to leave his home and
biological daughter. He lost his job. He contemplated suicide.
[
41
]
The Supreme Court indicated
in
R. v.
Lacasse
,
2015 SCC 64
at para
81
that “a
plea entered at the last minute before the trial is not deserving of as much
consideration as one that was entered promptly”.
Although a plea of guilty at the earliest opportunity
would have avoided further harm to his stepdaughter, there were many important factors
that contributed to the delay in standing up in a court and openly admitting
what he did to her.
[
42
]
Despite the timing of the plea, it is
mitigating that Mr. P.T. unequivocally accepted responsibility for this
egregious breach of trust. He reinforced that Ms. N.S. was not in any way
responsible for his acts. A finding of guilt by a court after a trial cannot
achieve the same closure and validation as a public plea of guilty.
iii.
Collateral consequences of incarceration:
[
43
]
Collateral consequences because of an offence
can be a factor in the ultimate determination of the sentence.
In
R. v.
Suter
,
2018 SCC 34
at para.
48
(S.C.C.)
, Justice Moldaver, writing on
behalf of the majority, explained that:
The relevance of
collateral consequences stems, in part, from the application of the sentencing
principles of individualization and parity:
ibid.
;
s. 718.2
(b) of the
Criminal
Code
. The question is not whether collateral consequences diminish the
offender's moral blameworthiness or render the offence itself less serious, but
whether the effect of those consequences means that a particular sentence would
have a more significant impact on the offender because of his or her
circumstances. Like offenders should be treated alike, and collateral
consequences may mean that an offender is no longer "like" the
others, rendering a given sentence unfit.
[
44
]
Notably, Justice Moldaver went on to
explain that when the collateral consequences are so directly linked to the
circumstances of the offence “as to be almost inevitable”, the mitigating
impact or attenuation of the sentence is substantially diminished:
Suter
,
supra
, at paras
49 and 50
.
[
45
]
The Ontario Court of
Appeal recently
reiterated in
R. v. Habid
,
2024 ONCA 830
at 42 and 43
that the impact of incarceration on an offender’s family is a relevant
consideration but it must not overwhelm the sentencing considerations:
As recognized
in
R. v. Spencer
(2004),
2004 CanLII 5550 (ON CA)
,
72 O.R. (3d) 47
(C.A.)
, at para.
46
,
leave to appeal refused,
[2005]
S.C.C.A. No. 4
, it is an
unfortunate reality that sentencing defendants to prison often harms their
families. Family members are deprived of the defendant's love and care and
suffer the emotional pain of separation.
They must often assume the added burdens of the breadwinning and
caregiving responsibilities that the defendant formerly performed. Further,
they may suffer financial hardship, educational deprivation, and even the loss
of the family residence.
As
well, being unable to care and provide for their families increases the
severity of incarceration for defendants.
The courts have been careful not to let these consequences
overwhelm the other principles of sentencing. As emphasized
in
Spencer
,
these consequences are not an excuse to overlook the harm that the defendant's
criminal conduct caused victims of crime, or the importance of protecting those
victims and society, or the need for denunciation and deterrence. Likewise,
family separation may have a reduced impact on the sentence if its effects on
defendants and their families are less strong. Further, these consequences
cannot justify imposing a disproportionate sentence. Thus, this court has
sometimes imposed or affirmed significant prison sentences to respect the other
principles of sentencing even after accounting for family separation
consequences. [extensive citations omitted]
[
46
]
To be fair, counsel for Mr. P.T. did not
urge me to consider the collateral consequences of incarceration. Mr. P.T. has
already lost access to his home, lost his job, and his marriage is irreparable.
This was an issue that I asked the crown to address because of the terrible
financial impact this offence has had on the victim, her sister and her mother.
Their standard of living changed considerably in March of this year after Mr. P.T.’s
suicide attempt and his spiralling mental health crisis. He has been unable to work,
and his estranged wife has been unable to make ends meet in their home. The
victim has not had the benefit of continued extracurricular activities that she
enjoys because of this lost familial income.
[
47
]
Mr. P.T. may not be able to return to his
former career, but there are other jobs available to people who are prepared to
work hard regardless of the nature of the employment. In addition, the doctor
opined in the assessment report that returning to work would assist Mr. P.T.’s
rehabilitation.
[
48
]
I queried whether the crown had considered that
a conditional sentence could require Mr. P.T. to seek and maintain gainful
employment and pay support as per the family court guidelines to lessen the
financial impact of the offence. Considering the uncertainty of the defendant’s
ability to obtain employment and/or pay support and the victim’s input, the
crown maintained the position that a period of incarceration is the only
proportionate penalty.
[
49
]
The crown’s position was informed by the
predominant sentencing principles and victim input. I appreciate that no
penalty, short of actual incarceration, would seem fair or just to Ms. N.S. However,
when sentencing this offender, my focus is not solely on one aspect of
sentencing; a conditional sentence vs. a custodial sentence. Rather, the entire
disposition including the punitive impact of any additional orders must be
considered in totality to achieve a proportionate sentence.
iv.
Potential risk of recidivism:
[
50
]
Considering the limitations of the
assessment of Mr. P.T.’s risk with respect to the commission of similar
offences or any offence in the future, I do not have confidence in the findings
that he is a low risk to reoffend. In addition, he is deliberately shielding
his support system from the true nature of his crime, so they cannot encourage
him to seek the specific help that he needs to avoid similar crimes. He seems
so entrenched in his own suffering and mental health challenges that he appears
to lack empathy for the members of his family who also experienced a traumatic
loss. Moreover, he continues to attribute his misconduct to grief and trauma
which cannot explain the choice to violate the sexual integrity of a child.
[
51
]
In
R. v. Walker
,
2021 ONCA 863
, the Ontario Court of Appeal observed that:
In
addition, in the case at bar, the thrust of the defence submission was that the
appellant posed a low risk to re-offend and that a conditional sentence was fit
in the circumstances.
In
considering that argument and the issue of future dangerousness, it was open to
the trial judge to consider that the appellant did not appear to understand the
seriousness of the offences
: [emphasis
mine]
[
52
]
Mr. P.T. appears to understand the
seriousness of the offence in terms of the harm that he caused to his
stepdaughter and family, but he has not honestly addressed why he committed it.
He continues to blame his grief instead of grappling with the real issue of his
sexual attraction to a child.
[
53
]
Any character evidence included in the
presentence report about his risk to commit further offences was obtained from
people who do not know what Mr. P.T. has done wrong so it is of limited, if
any, weight. More importantly, I am guided by the directions of the Supreme
Court of Canada in
R. v. Profit
, [1993] S.C.R. 637 that:
The reasons of the trial judge must be viewed in light of the
fact that as a matter of common sense, but not as a principle of law, a trial
judge may take into account that in sexual assault cases involving children,
sexual misconduct occurs in private and in most cases will not be reflected in
the reputation in the community of the accused for morality.
As a matter of weight,
the trial judge is entitled to find that the propensity value of character
evidence as to morality is diminished in such cases
.
[emphasis mine]
[
54
]
Similarly, in
R. v. K.M.
,
2017 ONSC
2690
, Justice Edwards reiterated that:
Sexual
offences are, by their very nature, generally perpetrated in private. It is
largely for that reason that many cases of sexual assault are characterized as
a "he said, she said" type of case.
The Supreme Court of Canada has made it quite clear that
the good community reputation of an accused has little probative value in the
overall assessment of an appropriate sentence in a case of sexual assault
.
[emphasis mine]
[
55
]
There are innumerable sentencing decisions,
across Canada, with offenders of supposedly stellar character and/or no
criminal records, committing inexcusable acts of depravity, violence and/or
sexual abuse. Generations of children, women and men, the socioeconomically
disadvantaged and the vulnerable have fallen prey to predators. When victims
find the strength or have the means to report their abuse, their abusers often
hide behind carefully constructed façades of respectability to avoid being held
fully accountable for their actions.
[
56
]
I do not know what risk Mr. P.T. will pose
to the safety of other children in the future. I have considered that this
sexual violence was an unplanned, spontaneous and momentary predatory offence. I
accept that Mr. P.T. is committed to getting help for his mental health issues and
he will invest in any counselling that he is directed to complete including
appropriate sexual boundaries and addressing his attraction to a young person
in his care. I accept that Mr. P.T. is likely to abide by court orders. Nevertheless,
I am concerned that there is some risk for recidivism if he finds himself in a
similar situation with another vulnerable child especially considering the
doctor’s observations about Mr. P.T.’s stagnation towards offence specific counseling.
Accordingly, there must be protective orders in place to ensure that other
young girls are not put at risk.
vi.
Principles
of sentencing:
[
57
]
The fundamental purpose of sentencing is to
contribute, along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and
the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a)
to denounce unlawful conduct
and the harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by
unlawful conduct
;
(b)
to deter the offender and other persons from
committing offences;
(c)
to separate offenders from society, where necessary;
(d)
to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e)
to provide reparations for harm done to victims or to
the community; and
(f)
to promote a sense of responsibility in offenders, and
acknowledgment of the harm done to victims and to the community.
[
58
]
Section 718
of the
Criminal Code
provides that
any sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender. As a result, d
epending on the circumstances of the offence and the circumstances of
the offender, a Court may focus on specific principles of sentencing as the
most important factors to guide the Court’s decision.
[
59
]
Unquestionably, the predominant sentencing principles
in sexual assault cases with vulnerable child victims are general deterrence
and denunciation. The
Criminal Code
was amended to reiterate the
primary
importance of these sentencing principles:
Objectives
— offences against children
718.01
When
a court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved the abuse of a person
under the age of eighteen years, it
shall give primary consideration
to
the objectives of denunciation and deterrence of such conduct
.
Objectives —
offence against vulnerable person
718.04
When a
Court imposes a sentence for an offence that involved
the abuse of a person
who is vulnerable because of personal circumstances
— including because the
person is Aboriginal and female —
the Court shall give primary consideration
to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence of the conduct
that forms
the basis of the offence. [emphasis mine]
[
60
]
In addition,
section 718.2
of the
Criminal
Code
specifically directs that a Court “
shall
also take into consideration”, when sentencing Mr. P.T., the following
statutorily aggravating factors:
(ii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s intimate
partner or a member of the victim or the offender’s family,
(ii.1)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a person under the age of
eighteen years,
(ii.2)
evidence
that the offender involved a person under the age of 18 years in the commission
of the offence,
(iii)
evidence
that the offender, in committing the offence, abused a position of trust or
authority in relation to the victim,
(iii.1)
evidence
that the offence had a significant impact on the victim, considering their age
and other personal circumstances, including their health and financial
situation,
[
61
]
All these statutorily aggravating factors are present
in this case. Unquestionably, the predominant principles of sentencing are
denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general, however, rehabilitation
remains an important goal with any sentencing particularly in a case involving
a person with no criminal record.
vii.
Principle
of restraint:
[
62
]
Sentencing is a delicate balancing act of
competing considerations to achieve a just disposition. Courts in Canada have
been unequivocal that the lack of any criminal antecedents should weigh very
heavily in terms of tipping the scales towards a more lenient sentence.
[
63
]
Except for very serious offences or crimes
of violence, the primary objectives when sentencing a first offender are
considerations of individual deterrence and rehabilitation. Please
see:
R.
v. Stein
(1974)
1974 CanLII 1615 (ON CA)
,
15 C.C.C. (2d) 376 (Ont.C.A.)
. These objectives are best
achieved by non-custodial sentences. This principle of restraint was codified
in
section 718.2
of the
Criminal Code
:
(d)
an offender
should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be
appropriate in the circumstances; and
(e)
all
available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances
and consistent with the harm done to victims or to the community should be
considered for all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of
Aboriginal offenders.
[
64
]
There are some offences, like the sexual
abuse of a child, that are so serious that the paramount principles of
denunciation and deterrence demand a lengthy custodial sentence despite a lack
of any criminal antecedents.
The Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Lacasse
, supra
,
at para
12
explained:
The more serious the
crime and its consequences, or the greater the offender's degree of
responsibility, the heavier the sentence will be. In other words, the severity
of a sentence depends not only on the seriousness of the crime's consequences,
but also on the moral blameworthiness of the offender. Determining a
proportionate sentence is a delicate task. As I mentioned above, both sentences
that are too lenient and sentences that are too harsh can undermine public
confidence in the administration of justice.
[
65
]
I
t would
be an error in principle to give “primary” consideration to rehabilitative objectives
by unduly focussing on the offender’s mitigating factors and the impact that a
custodial sentence will have on him. In
R. v. B.M
.,
2023 ONCA 224
at
paras
14 to 16
, the Ontario Court of Appeal considered
section 718.01
of the
Criminal
Code
and emphasized the Court’s obligation to give “primary consideration”
to deterrence and denunciation:
Section
718.01 of the Code requires that courts give "primary consideration to the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence" when imposing sentence for
cases involving the abuse of a person under the age of 18 years.
In
Friesen
,
at para.
105
, the Supreme Court held that "Parliament's choice to
prioritize denunciation and deterrence for sexual offences against children is
a reasoned response to the wrongfulness of these offences and the serious harm
they cause", given that "sexual assault of a child is a crime that is
abhorrent to Canadian society and society's condemnation of those who commit
such offences must be communicated in the clearest of terms."
The court
emphasized
in
Friesen
that the expression "primary
consideration" in s. 718.01 prescribes a relative ordering of sentencing
objectives that is absent from the general list of six objectives in s. 718(a)
through (f) of the Code: at para. 102. At para. 104, the court went on:
Section
718.01 thus qualifies this Court's previous direction that it is for the
sentencing judge to determine which sentencing objective or objectives are to
be prioritized.
Where Parliament has indicated which sentencing objectives
are to receive priority in certain cases, the sentencing judge's discretion is
thereby limited, such that it is no longer open to the judge to elevate other
sentencing objectives to an equal or higher priority.
However, while s.
718.01 requires that deterrence and denunciation have priority, nonetheless,
the sentencing judge retains discretion to accord significant weight to other
factors (including rehabilitation and
Gladue
factors) in exercising discretion
in arriving at a fit sentence, in accordance with the overall principle of
proportionality. [Emphasis added.]
The
sentencing judge erred by failing to adhere to this clear sentencing principle.
The reasons for sentence reveal an erroneous reordering of sentencing
principles in a way that clearly conflicts with s. 718.01 of the Code and the
Supreme Court's admonition that it does not fall to judges to reorder what
Parliament has already ordered.
[
66
]
Similarly,
in
R. v. Bertrand Marchand
,
2023 SCC 26
, the Supreme Court highlighted that Parliament has specifically
limited judicial discretion for these offences:
Parliament
has specifically indicated that in sentencing offences involving abuse of
children, including child luring, the objectives of denunciation and deterrence
must be given primary consideration or "
une attention particulière
"
(
Friesen
,
at para.
101
;
Criminal Code
, s. 718.01).
Section 718.01
's open
textured language limits judicial discretion by giving priority to these
objectives, but their primary importance does not exclude consideration of
other sentencing objectives, including rehabilitation (
Rayo
, at
paras. 102-8). The judge can accord significant weight to other factors, but
cannot give them precedence or equivalency.
[
67
]
Judges must balance competing
considerations to achieve a just sentence. Nevertheless, I must be cognizant of
the statutorily prescribed weight that sits on one side of that scale. Giving
too much weight to the mitigating considerations of the offender, including the
absence of any criminal antecedents, could result in an unjust sentence and an
error in principle.
[
68
]
Despite the absence of any criminal record, t
his offence is so egregious that some form
of a custodial term is essential to achieve the principles of sentencing. Even
with serious offences, the sentences meted out for first offenders must be the
shortest term of imprisonment, with consideration given to alternatives to incarceration,
that achieves the predominant sentencing principles in all the circumstances.
viii.
Whether a
conditional sentence is an available sanction:
[
69
]
Incarceration in a facility is not the only
means to achieve the sentencing goals of deterrence and denunciation. A
conditional sentence is a punitive sanction that can send a strong message of
condemnation to the public and the offender in certain circumstances. In
R.
v. Macintyre-Syrette
,
2018 ONCA 706
at paras
16 and 19
, the Ontario Court
of Appeal emphasized that:
We are
conscious of the Supreme Court of Canada's admonition
in
R. v. Proulx
,
2000
SCC 5
,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 61
, at paras.
22 and 90
, that we are to give
"serious consideration" to a conditional sentence in these
circumstances, and that a conditional sentence is generally more effective than
incarceration at achieving the restorative objectives of rehabilitation,
reparations to the victim and community, and the promotion of a sense of a
responsibility in the offender. Further,
a conditional sentence is itself a punitive sanction "capable
of achieving the objectives of denunciation and deterrence":
Proulx
,
at
para.
22
. A focus on denunciation and deterrence in sentencing does not
necessarily foreclose a conditional sentencing order in the circumstances
.
….
The scope
of s. 718.2(e) restricts the adoption of alternatives to incarceration to those
sanctions that are "reasonable in the circumstances": see
Wells,
at
para. 39. In keeping with this principle, there are circumstances in which the
need for denunciation and deterrence is such that incarceration is the
only
suitable
way to express society's condemnation of the offender's conduct:
Proulx
,
at
paras.
106-107
. As Doherty J.A.
noted in
R. v. Killam
(1999),
1999 CanLII 2489 (ON CA)
,
126 O.A.C. 281
, at para.
13
, "
a conditional sentence...does not, generally speaking, have the
same denunciatory effect as a period of imprisonment. Incarceration remains the
most formidable denunciatory weapon in the sentencing arsenal.
" [emphasis mine]
[
70
]
All available sanctions must be considered
when determining what is reasonable in the unique circumstances of this offence
and this offender. Counsel submitted that there is an effective, alternative
sanction of serving a jail sentence in the community that may achieve the
sentencing goals of denunciation and deterrence while reinforcing Mr. P.T.’s
need and potential for rehabilitation.
[
71
]
While a conditional sentence would be the
least restrictive penalty in these circumstances, I must consider whether it is
statutorily available and whether it would appropriately balance the competing
sentencing considerations.
Section 742.1
of the
Criminal Code
lists five criteria a judge must consider before
imposing a conditional sentence:
1.
The offender must not be convicted
of an offence that is specifically excluded;
2.
The offence must not be punishable by a minimum term
of imprisonment;
3.
The court must impose a sentence of imprisonment of
less than two years;
4.
The safety of the community must not.be endangered by
the offender serving his or her sentence in the community; and
5.
A conditional sentence would be
consistent with the fundamental purposes and principles of sentencing set out
in sections 718 to 718.2.
[
72
]
First, the offence is not specifically excluded
from the imposition of a conditional sentence. Secondly, the statutorily
prescribed minimum sentence of incarceration of 90 days has been found to be
unconstitutional in a binding summary conviction appeal judgement: please
see
R.
v. Drumonde
,
2019 ONSC 1005
and
R. v. B.J.T.
,
2019 ONCA 694
at para
78
.
[1]
Thirdly, since the crown
proceeded summarily, the maximum available penalty is two year less a day. Moreover,
both the crown and counsel agreed that the appropriate sentence is less than
two years incarceration. The last two prerequisites to the imposition of a
conditional sentence are more difficult to meet in this type of case.
[
73
]
With respect to the fourth consideration, I
have considered the lack of any record or any alleged breaches of Mr. P.T.’s
bail conditions in the last two years. I am also satisfied that by implementing
the recommendations outlined in the assessment report through court orders that
limit access to children, it would ensure that the safety of the community is
not endangered if he were to serve his sentence in the community. Any safety
concerns could be addressed by terms that prohibit him from communicating with
the victim or attending within a radius of where she is known to be as well as
prohibiting him from occupying a position of trust or authority and prohibiting
him from communicating with vulnerable girls.
[
74
]
It is the fifth consideration about whether
a conditional sentence would be consistent with the fundamental principles of
sentencing, that is the most challenging issue to address in cases involving
the sexual exploitation of children particularly by a trusted family member.
[
75
]
The Supreme Court in
Friesen
, supra
at para
106
, declined to set out specific sentencing ranges for these crimes.
Rather, this difficult issue was left to Provincial Appellate courts to decide:
We would
decline the Crown's invitation to create a national starting point or
sentencing range for sexual offences against children. Generally speaking, this
Court is reluctant to pronounce on the specific length of sentence. The
appropriate length and the setting of sentencing ranges or starting points are
best left to provincial appellate courts.
[
76
]
Despite this reluctance to set out ranges,
the Supreme Court was unequivocal
in
R. v. Friesen
,
supra
at
para.
114
that sentences must increase to reflect that “
our understanding of the profound physical
and psychological harm that all victims of sexual assault experience has
deepened”. It was emphasized that:
Nonetheless,
it is incumbent on us to provide an overall message that is clear (
D. (D.)
,
at paras. 34 and 45).
That
message is that mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences against
children are normal and that upper-single digit and double-digit penitentiary
terms should be neither unusual nor reserved for rare or exceptional
circumstances. We would add that substantial sentences can be imposed where
there was only a single instance of sexual violence and/or a single victim
, as in this case,
Woodward
, and
L.M.
In addition, as this Court recognized in
L.M.
, maximum sentences
should not be reserved for the "abstract case of the worst crime committed
in the worst circumstances" (para. 22). Instead, a maximum sentence should
be imposed whenever the circumstances warrant it (para. 20).
[emphasis mine]
[
77
]
Following the Supreme Court’s deferral to
provincial appellate courts, the Ontario Court of Appeal has provided very
clear directions to trial judges. Recently, in
R. v. A.L.
2025 ONCA 9
at
paras
19 to 21
, the Court of Appeal reviewed and summarized various binding
authorities that have considered whether a conditional sentence is contrary to
or consistent with the principles of sentencing in these types of cases:
This court
addressed the exceptionality of conditional sentences for sexual offences against
children in
R. v. M.M.
,
2022 ONCA 441
.
In
M.M.
,
at para.
16
, this court noted that, given the Supreme Court's instructions
in
Friesen
, "[c]onditional sentences for
sexual offences against children will only rarely be appropriate" and
"[t]heir availability must be limited to exceptional circumstances that
render incarceration inappropriate". As an illustration of an exceptional
circumstance, this court gave the example of medical hardship that could not be
adequately addressed within a correctional facility, expressly stating that
exceptional circumstances were not limited to that example.
Chief
Justice Tulloch made a similar point
in
R. v. Pike
,
2024
ONCA 608
,
440 C.C.C. (3d) 281
, at para.
182
, where he explained this
court's use of the term "exceptional circumstances"
in
M.M
.
He
stated that
M.M.
used
"exceptional circumstances" as shorthand for personal circumstances
and mitigating factors that are sufficiently compelling to make a conditional
sentence proportionate. He also noted that this interpretation is consistent
with the principle that "sentencing must focus on proportionality, not
pigeonholing cases into ill-defined exceptional circumstance categories".
While
exceptional, there is no rigid rule that conditional sentences can never be
imposed in the appropriate case
: see
, for example,
R. v. Faroughi
,
2024
ONCA 178
,
435 C.C.C. (3d) 1
. Reflecting the individualized nature of
sentencing, conditional sentences for sexual offences against children have
been upheld in exceptional cases where the court is satisfied that the
sentencing judge adverted to the relevant governing principles and there was no
basis to interfere with the factual findings of exceptionality: see
, for
example:
R. v. Singaqti
,
2024 NUCA 10
, at para.
15
;
R. v. T.J.H.
,
2023 YKCA 2
, at para.
27
;
R. v. Germain
,
2022 ABCA 257
, at paras.
84
,
85;
R. v. R.B.B.
,
2024 NSCA 17
, at paras.
41
,
45. That is the case here. [emphasis mine]
[
78
]
While a review of these recent Court of
Appeal decisions demonstrates that conditional sentences are  very unusual, that
is not the same as directing trial judges that there is a presumption that a conditional
sentence is contrary to the principles of sentencing in all child exploitation
cases.
In
R. v. Pike
,
supra
at para
180 - 182
, the Court of Appeal specifically stated that:
I must reconcile the
"exceptional circumstances" term that M. (M.) used to
express this point with the Supreme Court's
decisions in
R. v.
Proulx
,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 61
,
[2000] S.C.J. No. 6
,
2000 SCC 5
,
and Parranto. At first glance, M. (M.)'s use of this term might seem
contrary to these cases, which respectively hold that
appellate courts can neither create presumptions that
conditional sentences are inappropriate for specific offences (
Proulx
, at
paras.
80-83
), nor require exceptional circumstances to depart from a range
(Parranto, at para. 40).
His Majesty the King v Pike His Majesty the King v Scott [Indexed as:
R v
Pike
],
2024 ONCA 608 (CanLII)
,
173 OR (3d) 241
But in my
respectful view,
M. (M.)
did not and could not have intended
to depart from
Proulx
by creating an offence-specific
presumption against conditional sentences. Rather, it used the
"exceptional circumstances" term to convey that, since
Proulx
,
Parliament has increased maximum sentences and prioritized denunciation and
deterrence for sexual offences against children and, further, that the courts'
understanding of the harmfulness and wrongfulness of these offences has
deepened:
Friesen
, at paras.
109-110
; see
M. (M.)
, at
paras. 13-15.
Thus, while
there is no presumption against conditional sentences, these post-
Proulx
changes
require more compelling personal circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the
absence of aggravating factors, to justify a conditional sentence than might
have been the case when
Proulx
was decided more than two
decades ago
.
Nor, in my
view, did
M. (M.)
intend to depart from
Parranto
by
requiring exceptional circumstances to impose a conditional sentence.
Rather,
M. (M.)
used "exceptional circumstances" as
shorthand for personal circumstances and mitigating factors that are
sufficiently compelling to make a conditional sentence proportionate, as
in
R. v. Padda
,
[2019] B.C.J. No. 1951
,
2019 BCCA 351
, at para.
36
. Not only is there no closed
list of such circumstances and factors (
M. (M.)
, at para. 16),
but multiple seemingly non-exceptional
factors taken together, such as being a young first offender with family
support who poses little risk and takes responsibility for his actions, can
collectively render a conditional sentence proportionate
:
R. v. Faroughi
(2024),
171 O.R. (3d) 81
,
[2024] O.J. No. 1102
,
2024 ONCA 178
, at para.
99
. This is consistent
with
Parranto
's holding that sentencing must focus on proportionality,
not pigeonholing cases into ill-defined exceptional circumstance categories: at
para. 40. [emphasis mine]
[
79
]
While parliament has directed that a court
“
shall”
give
primary consideration
to the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence, other principles of sentencing are
still relevant. I am not precluded from ordering a conditional sentence. There
is no closed list of factors that I need to find before making such an order. Furthermore,
a culmination of different considerations can justify the imposition of a
conditional sentence in cases that involve the sexual exploitation of a child. In
the end, it is the principle of proportionality that will govern the outcome of
this sentence for this offence and this offender.
[
80
]
To arrive at a sentence that balances
opposing considerations, it is helpful to review any sentencing precedents that
have considered the appropriate sentence in cases with similar facts.
ix.
The
principle of parity:
[
81
]
In addition to the guiding sentencing
principles, the principle of parity set out in subsection 718.2 of the
Criminal
Code
requires that:
A sentence should be
similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances.
[
82
]
While this is a worthy goal, each individual case is
often so unique that it is difficult to achieve parity in sentencing.
Ultimately, considering the unfortunately
countless ways to commit a sexual assault, the distinctiveness of each offence
and each offender, it is often challenging to find comparable cases. As
Chief Justice Lamer stated in
R. v. M.
(C.A.)
,
1996 CanLII 230 (SCC)
,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 500
at paragraph
92
:
...Sentencing is an
inherently individualized process, and the search for a single appropriate
sentence for a similar offender and a similar crime will frequently be a
fruitless exercise of academic abstraction.
[
83
]
Sexual offences range from minimally intrusive
momentary occurrences to horrifying facts. Offenders can be responsible,
sympathetic and apologetic or they can be recalcitrant, unrepentant
recidivists. The Ontario Court of Appeal observed in
R. v. E.C.
,
2019
ONCA 688
that:
The offence of sexual
interference can be committed in any number of ways, and with varying levels of
moral turpitude.
The broad range of
available sentences is rooted in the "infinitely variable ways in which
the offence can be committed"
:
R. v. M.B.
,
2013 ONCA 493
,
at para.
21
. Within the wide range of available sentences, the court must
impose an appropriate sentence - one that is proportionate to the gravity of
the offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender, and, respecting
the principle of parity, is proportionate to sentences imposed for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances:
R. v. Lacasse
,
2015 SCC 64
,
[2015] 3 S.C.R. 1089
, at para.
53
.
[
84
]
Similarly, in
R. v. R.S.
,
2023 ONCA 608
at para
27
, the Court of Appeal reinforced the difficulty with achieving parity when sentencing
sex offenders:
The
difficulty in sentencing for sexual assault stems from the broad scope of the
offence. Sexual assault is defined in terms of sexual touching without consent,
a wide spectrum of conduct that ranges from touching to forced intercourse.
It may be that, in some circumstances, a
conditional sentence is appropriate for sexual assault at the lowest end of the
range of wrongful conduct.
But there is no basis to suppose that it is appropriate for sexual assault at
the higher end of that range. [emphasis mine]
[
85
]
The crown provided the decision of
R. v.
A.L.,
2024 ONCJ 330
. Not surprisingly,  the case is factually
distinguishable, so the sentence reflected that unique factual matrix.  Before
arriving at the conclusion, Justice Richardson engaged in a thorough review of
a multitude of decisions some of which had similar facts of a single event involving
nonpenetrative acts of sexual violence by a person in a position of trust or
authority:
Para 88: In
R.
v. T.J.
2021 ONCA 392
, the Ontario Court of Appeal dealt with the
sentencing of an offender who was found guilty after a trial of one instance of
sexual assault when the victim was six or seven years old. The sexual assault
involved the offender directing the victim to the bathroom and taking her hands
and telling her to rub his penis. The offender then invited the victim to
perform fellatio. At this point, the victim pulled away and left the room. The
offender had no prior record, had employment, had a history of substance use
for which he had gone to counselling. Because the child was a guest in the
offender’s home for a sleep over with the offender’s children, the offender was
in a position of trust. The offender did not express remorse. The trial judge
imposed a sentence of nine months and two years probation.
The Crown
appealed. At paragraph 33, the Court of Appeal, led by Justice Zarnett, found
that the trial judge’s sentence was “not consonant with
Friesen’s
message”
of priority to denunciation and deterrence and found that the appropriate
sentence was
two years in
the penitentiary followed by two years of probation
.
Para 95: In
R.
v. I.C.
2024 ONSC 1406
, Justice Spies sentenced an accused after trial
before a judge and jury to
ten
months in custody
. The
victim was his stepdaughter. There was one incident where he pulled her on top
of him while lying on the bed and began to move up down while playing “horsey”.
He held her by the arms and refused to stop when she asked him to. She felt an
erection as they bounced on the bed. The incident did not last longer than a
minute or two. There was no attempt to remove her clothing. [This was a
sentence imposed after trial.]
Para 96: In
R.
v. M.J.
2024 ONSC 1027
, Justice Hilliard was sitting on appeal in a case
where the trial judge convicted the accused after a trial of one instance of
entering his eleven-year-old step-daughter’s room, when he was intoxicated and
placed his hand on her vagina over her clothing and moved it in a circular
direction. The trial judge imposed a sentence of
fifteen months custody
. The accused was a first-time offender. Justice
Hilliard concluded the sentence imposed was not demonstrably unfit.
Para 109: In
R. v. Lloyd
(2021)
OJ 5163 (O.C.J.)
,
Justice Wheeler found the
offender guilty after a trial of touching the victim over the clothes in a
trailer on a camping trip. The offender was 53, had been sexually abused as a
youth and until the charges impacted his security clearance, had a successful
consulting business. The victim considered the offender as a father figure. It
affected her relationship with her mother who she initially blamed for the
offence. The victim went from being a good student to a person with significant
behaviour issues. Justice Wheeler found that the appropriate sentence with
15 months in prison followed by two years
probation
.
[
86
]
I also found the extensive review of related
sentencing ranges in another one of Justice Richardson’s decisions to be
instructive: please see
R. v. S.L.
,
2025 ONCJ 105
.
[
87
]
In each of these decisions, other than
R.
v. S.L.
, supra
, a carceral sentence was imposed by the trial judge because a
conditional sentence was not considered to be consistent with the guiding
principles of sentencing. However, n
one
of these cases,
other than
R.
v. S.L.
,
had the mitigating consideration of a plea of guilty
or unequivocal acceptance of responsibility for the offences. In contrast, Mr.
P.T. publicly acknowledged the harm that he caused to the victim, and he admitted
that he engaged in predatory sexual misconduct towards a victim who trusted him.
He did not try to downplay his intentions when he touched and kissed Ms. N.S. In
these unique circumstances, this acceptance of responsibility provides the
victim with a sense of validation that a finding of guilt after a trial could not
accomplish.
[
88
]
Most of the decisions relied on by the crown had
substantially more aggravating factors like grooming leading up to the offence
which demonstrated planning and deliberation and/or repetitive and/or more invasive
sexual violence involving direct contact with the victims’ genitalia and/or
more than one victim. There is no evidence of any kind of grooming of Ms. N.S.
Quite the contrary, before the offence, they shared a positive and constructive
relationship. They bonded in a supportive manner over their shared grief until
Mr. P.T. spontaneously and impulsively made a sexual advance on his teenage stepdaughter.
[
89
]
I have instructed myself that the absence of
additional aggravating factors cannot and must not be considered as mitigating
facts. Any sexual violation of a child by a person in a position of trust and
authority is psychologically damaging, emotionally devastating and has debilitating
long term effects on the victims. Ms. N.S.’s impact statement captures the harm
she has suffered and continues to suffer because of Mr. P.T.’s violation of her
sexual integrity.
[
90
]
The Ontario Court of Appeal and Supreme Court of
Canada has been clear that sentence of incarceration must be the norm.
In
R. v. Macintyre-Syrette
,
2018 ONCA 706
at 21,
the Court of Appeal observed
that “t
his offence requires denunciation,
as an affirmation of the dignity of the complainant, and no appropriate
sentencing proposal or sanction, short of a custodial disposition, appears to
be available”. I am cognizant of the important role a sentence plays in affirming
the dignity of the victims of sexual violence.
[
91
]
There are no individual facts or
considerations that would make this case exceptional. There are, however, a
culmination of factors that have influenced my decision that this is a rare
case that justifies the imposition of an unusual sentence.
[
92
]
First, this was an apparently spontaneous
and momentary occurrence amidst Mr. P.T.’s spiralling mental health issues that
negatively impacted his judgement and briefly unmasked a predatory
predilection. Of course, as noted throughout these reasons, grief and
depression do not explain Mr. P.T.’s attraction to a child which is something
that he needs extensive treatment to address.
[
93
]
Secondly, this was an isolated occurrence.
Mr. P.T. has no criminal antecedents and there was no suggestion of any kind of
grooming behaviour. Mr. P.T. stopped immediately when requested by Ms. N.S.
There were no other incidents of sexually inappropriate misconduct towards her
either before or after this offence. He admitted responsibility when confronted
by his wife a few months later. He left their home after the offence was
disclosed by Ms. N.S. Mr. P.T. invested in treatment and counseling for his
depression and grief. Once he was more stable, his counsel was able to get
instructions to agree to a statement of facts and he entered a plea of guilty.
[
94
]
Thirdly, Mr. P.T. has complied with his
bail terms, participated fully in the preparation of the PSR and engaged in an
assessment. He has demonstrated that he is willing and capable of abiding by
court orders and following through with directions.  He is making some progress
in terms of insight since he recently disclosed that he was the victim of
childhood sexual abuse, and he is willing to address his past abuse.
[
95
]
While he has been reluctant to invest in
offence specific counseling and there has been some “stagnation” as well as some
unwarranted self-satisfaction with his progress, a conditional sentence will
ensure that he has little choice but to attend and actively participate in
therapy for sexual offences. Extensive counseling will be a term of the
conditional sentence order. I wish to be emphatically clear that, if Mr. P.T.
does not follow the directions of a conditional sentence supervisor and fully
engage in all the counselling that I order, I will consider it a serious breach
of the court orders. Mr. P.T. will face the possibility of serving the balance
of his sentence in custody.
[
96
]
Fourthly, Mr. P.T. was employed and paying
support until March of this year when he attempted suicide. Now that he is more
psychologically stable, he can seek and maintain gainful employment to the
satisfaction of the conditional sentence supervisor. A unique term of the
conditional sentence will require him to pay support as per the family court
guidelines as soon as he obtains employment: please see
section 742.3
(c) of the
Criminal Code
. This term is intended to alleviate some of the financial repercussions
of this offence. The victim, her sister and her mother should not continue to
suffer from lost opportunities and necessities because of Mr. P.T.’s choices.
[
97
]
Finally, a sentence must be viewed
holistically. A conditional sentence will not stand alone. It will be followed
by a period of probation of 3 years which will ensure Ms. N.S.’s protection and
peace of mind for the next 5 years. I have also considered the punitive impact
of the additional orders sought by the crown. The cumulative impact of the
maximum term for a conditional sentence, the maximum term of probation, a lengthy
161 order to protect other children and a S.O.I.R.A. order will send a strong
message of denunciation for this offence and address both specific and general
deterrence.
[
98
]
While factually distinguishable, in many
drinking and driving cases, courts have increased the length of a driving
prohibition while shortening the period of incarceration to achieve
proportionality.
In
R. v. Frickey
,
2017 ONCA 1024
at para
10
, the Court
of Appeal observed that:
In
considering whether the sentence is manifestly unfit, the sentence must be
considered as a whole. While the driving prohibition may have been longer than
in the precedents provided by the parties, the custodial sentence was shorter.
In reducing the custodial sentence and lengthening the driving prohibition, the
trial judge exercised the principle of restraint and took into consideration
"all available sanctions, other than imprisonment, that are reasonable in
the circumstances", in accordance with
s. 718.2
(e) of the
Criminal
Code
. The longer driving prohibition was necessary for the
protection of the public. We see no error in the trial judge's decision.
[
99
]
I appreciate that nothing short of seeing Mr.
P.T. incarcerated for this offence will seem satisfactory or fair to Ms. N.S.
That is completely understandable since she feels imprisoned by the memories of
this betrayal and her ongoing suffering. This sentence does not devalue her pain
or the seriousness of this offence. She is a remarkable young woman. Because of
her strength and bravery, Mr. P.T. is being held fully accountable. He has been
branded as a sex offender. He will have a constant reminder of his crime for the
next decade. He will be subject to lengthy court orders to ensure that no other
child suffers in the same manner as Ms. N.S.
[
100
]
It is the cumulative impact of each of the court
orders that will send an unwavering message to Mr. P.T., to the public and to
likeminded offenders that a heavy price will be paid by anyone who sexually
assaults a vulnerable young victim. Sentences must unequivocally communicate
that these offences will not be tolerated or condoned by our courts. As the
Supreme Court
stated in
Friesen
, supra,
at para
45
:
The criminal
law in general and sentencing law specifically are important mechanisms that
Parliament has chosen to employ to protect children from sexual violence, to
hold perpetrators accountable, and to communicate the wrongfulness of sexual
violence against children. It is our duty to give Parliament's sentencing
initiatives their full effect.
[
101
]
Incarceration is not the only means to
achieve a punitive sanction in every case of child sexual assaults. It is
essential to consider the total sentence when considering whether a conditional
sentence is a proportionate disposition.
In
R. v. Bissonette
,
2022 SCC
23
at paras
49 to 51
, the Supreme Court of Canada explained that
The relative importance
of each of the sentencing objectives varies with the nature of the crime and
the characteristics of the offender. There is no mathematical formula for
determining what constitutes a just and appropriate sentence. That is why this
Court has described sentencing as a "delicate art which attempts to
balance carefully the societal goals of sentencing against the moral
blameworthiness of the offender and the circumstances of the offence, while at
all times taking into account the needs and current conditions of and in the
community".
But sentencing must in
all circumstances be guided by the cardinal principle of proportionality. The
sentence must be severe enough to denounce the offence but must not exceed
"what is just and appropriate, given the moral blameworthiness of the
offender and the gravity of the offence". Proportionality in sentencing is
considered to be an essential factor in maintaining public confidence in the
fairness and rationality of the criminal justice system. The application of
this principle assures the public that the offender deserves the punishment
received.
It follows that "a
person cannot be made to suffer a grossly disproportionate punishment simply to
send a message to discourage others from offending". In a similar vein,
Vauclair J.A. aptly stated that "striving for exemplarity to the detriment
of evidence of the merit of rehabilitation objectives is incompatible with the
principle of individualization". Proportionality has a restraining
function, and in this sense serves to guarantee that a sentence is
individualized, just and appropriate. [citations omitted]
[
102
]
I cannot focus solely on the outcomes in
other cases to guide my decision. I must consider the individual circumstances
unique to this offender and this offence to balance parity and
individualization to achieve a proportionate sentence: please
see
R. v. Lacasse
, supra
at para
53
.
[
103
]
In these unique circumstances, a
conditional sentence will reflect the primary considerations of denunciation
deterrence while also being consistent with the principle of restraint and the
guiding principles of sentencing. As the Court of Appeal observed
in
R. v. Faroughi
,
2024 ONCA 178
at
para
73
:
Nevertheless,
conditional sentences can be appropriate in circumstances where denunciation
and deterrence are the predominant sentencing objectives, as such a sentence
with punitive conditions can provide a significant amount of denunciation and
deterrence. And the restraint principle continues to be applicable in
circumstances where, like in this case, the primary sentencing principles are
denunciation and deterrence. This court has recognized that, in some
exceptional circumstances, a conditional sentence may be fit for an offender
convicted of sexual offences against children. [citations omitted]
[
104
]
After reviewing various authorities, I
determined that a period of incarceration in the range of 10 to 15 months could
have been justifiable. By imposing a lengthier conditional sentence of 2 years less
a day with punitive terms to be followed by 3 years of probation as well as a
161 order and the S.O.I.R.A. order, all the orders combined will result in a
just and proportionate disposition. The total sentence will not exceed this
offender’s overall culpability in these circumstances.
x.
The 161
order:
[
105
]
In the written submissions, the crown
requested a 10-year section 161 order with terms restricting Mr. P.T.’s
movements, access to children and preventing him from communicating with
children or occupying positions of trust or authority towards them. Counsel urged
me to impose a 3-year order with fewer conditions.
[
106
]
A section 161 order is a discretionary and
punitive sanction that requires a measured approach. The liberty interests of
the offender may be restricted for a substantial period. The Ontario Court of
Appeal provided the following guidance
in
R. v. Schulz
,
2018 ONCA 598
about
when and how a court should exercise this discretion:
The overarching protective function of
s. 161
of the
Criminal Code
is to shield children from sexual violence:
R. v. K.R.J.
,
2016 SCC 31
,
[2016] 1 S.C.R. 906
, at para.
44
.
An order under
s. 161
constitutes punishment and is not available as a matter of course: there must
be an evidentiary basis upon which to conclude that the particular offender
poses a risk to children; the specific terms of the order must constitute a
reasonable attempt to minimize the risk; and, the content of the order must
respond carefully to an offender's specific circumstances
:
K.R.J.
, at
paras.
48-49
. [emphasis mine]
[
107
]
Similarly,
in
R. v. Brar
,
2016 ONCA
724
, the Ontario Court of Appeal carefully reviewed the Supreme Court of
Canada’s decision on
section 161
orders
in
R. v. K.R.J
.
supra
and
explained at paras 17 and 18 that:
The
Supreme Court emphasized that these
orders are discretionary and flexible
,
as
s. 161
"was designed to empower courts to craft tailored orders to
address the nature and degree of risk that a sexual offender poses to children
once released into the community" (at para. 47). Because these orders can
have a significant impact on the liberty and security of offenders and can
attract a considerable degree of stigma, they will be justified where the court
is satisfied that the specific terms of the order are a reasonable attempt to
minimize the risk the offender poses to children (
J. (K.R.)
, at paras. 48, 54).
The terms
of such orders must, therefore, "carefully respond to an offender's
specific circumstances"
(at para. 48)
.
[emphasis mine]
[
108
]
Mr. P.T. lacks insight into the sexual deviance
of this offence and he made excuses for interfering with the sexual integrity
of a child. There are no excuses or justifications for what he did to Ms. N.S. Until
he gains more understanding of the true motivation for this offence and
honestly engages in offence specific counseling, he cannot be trusted around
vulnerable members of our community for a substantial period. I have also
considered the recommendation in the psychological assessment that was provided
by the defence.
[
109
]
To prevent future harm, it is essential
that he is not in a position of trust or authority over any children and
refrains from communicating with them, with a few exceptions, to avoid opportunities
to commit similar offences. Nevertheless, the crown’s proposed restrictions on
his liberty from attending public parks or the listed places are unnecessarily
punitive and may interfere with attending these places while travelling to and
from and while in the presence of his biological daughter. Instead, I have
considered additional terms that prohibit him from accessing or viewing sexualized
images of vulnerable children on the internet or communicating with them online
to avoid exposure to situations that could encourage his untreated attraction
to children.
[
110
]
A period of 10 years of preventative
measures to protect children without the additional restrictions on his liberty
interests to be able to attend the areas requested by the crown reflects a measured
approach. It is a substantial period of control in the community with terms
that are unique to the circumstances of this offence and this offender. Mr. P.T.
is ordered to abide by a 161 order for a period of 10 years during which he is
prohibited from:
(a.1)
being
within 250 meters of any dwelling-house where Ms. N.S. ordinarily resides or where
she is known to attend school or be employed:
•
Except pursuant to a
family court order made after today’s date, while outside of the family home,
for the purpose of travelling directly to, directly from and while picking up
your biological daughter
(b)
seeking,
obtaining, or continuing any employment, whether or not the employment is
remunerated, or becoming or being a volunteer in a capacity, that involves
being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under the age of 16
years.
(c)
having any contact — including
communicating by any means — with a person who is under the age of 16 years
except:
•
W
hile in the direct and continuous company of an adult
over the age of 21 who is aware of the nature of your criminal conviction; or
•
For brief incidental contact while
in public places during commercial transactions; or
•
For any biological children
pursuant to a family court order.
(d)
using
the Internet or other digital network for the purposes of:
•
engaging in any communications
with children under the age of 16 years old or who are purported to be under
the age of 16 years old, other than your biological children; or
•
directly or indirectly accessing
any social media sites, social network, Internet discussion forum or chat room,
or maintain a personal profile on any such service for the purposes of
communicating with any person known to be or purported to be under the age of
16 years old, other than your biological children; or
•
participating in chat groups with members
who are primarily under the age of 16 years old; or
•
accessing, viewing,
sharing, possessing, purchasing or distributing sexualized images of children
under the age of 18 years old.
[
111
]
In addition to the 161 order, the crown
requested a
S.O.I.R.A
order. Counsel submitted that this order should
not be made because there is no connection between the making of the order and
the purposes of these provisions of the
Criminal Code
.
xi.
SOIRA
Order:
[
112
]
Regardless of whether I impose
this order, Mr. P.T. will be subject to
Christopher’s Law
(Sexual
Offence Registry)
as a convicted sexual offender who resides in Ontario. Every
resident of this province who has been convicted of a designated offence must
present themselves and report to a designated place within a specified period.
The preamble to the Act explains that:
The people
of Ontario believe that there is a need to ensure the safety and security of
all persons in Ontario and that police services require access to information
about the whereabouts of sex offenders in order to assist them in the important
work of maintaining community safety. The people of Ontario further believe
that a registry of sex offenders will provide the information and investigative
tools that their police services require in order to prevent and solve crimes
of a sexual nature.
[
113
]
In addition to this provincial
legislation, the
Criminal Code
provides for similar registration of
designated sex offenders. The law recently changed with respect to the preconditions
for the imposition of
S.O.I.R.A.
orders.
[
114
]
Mr. P.T. has been convicted of
a desig
nated offence, the
crown elected by summary conviction and the victim was under the age of 18
years old. As a result,
subsections 490.012(3)
and
(4)
of the
Criminal Code
apply:
490.12
(3)
Order — other circumstances
(3)
Subject
to subsection (5), when a court imposes a sentence on a person for a designated
offence in circumstances in which neither subsection (1) nor (2) applies, or
when the court renders a verdict of not criminally responsible on account of
mental disorder for a designated offence, it shall make an order in Form 52
requiring the person to comply with the
Sex Offender Information Registration Act
unless the court is
satisfied the person has established that
(a)
there
would be no connection between making the order and the purpose of helping
police services prevent or investigate crimes of a sexual nature by requiring
the registration of information relating to sex offenders under that Act; or
(b)
the
impact of the order on the person, including on their privacy or liberty, would
be grossly disproportionate to the public interest in protecting society
through the effective prevention or investigation of crimes of a sexual nature,
to be achieved by the registration of information relating to sex offenders
under that Act.
Factors
(4)
In
determining whether to make an order under subsection (3) in respect of a
person, the court shall consider
(a)
the
nature and seriousness of the designated offence;
(b)
the
victim’s age and other personal characteristics;
(c)
the
nature and circumstances of the relationship between the person and the victim;
(d)
the
personal characteristics and circumstances of the person;
(e)
the
person’s criminal history, including the age at which they previously committed
any offence and the length of time for which they have been at liberty without
committing an offence;
(f)
the
opinions of experts who have examined the person; and
(g)
any
other factors that the court considers relevant.
[
115
]
Counsel urged me to consider
the absence of any criminal antecedents or any further offences since Mr. P.T.
was arrested. He was assessed as a “low risk” to reoffend. The offence was an
isolated incident with no evide
nce
of grooming, and it is at the lower end of the spectrum of seriousness. Counsel
also emphasized Mr. P.T.’s investment in counseling and his strong familial
support.
[
116
]
For the reasons provided throughout, I am
concerned about Mr. P.T.’s lack of insight into his sexual attraction to his
stepdaughter or any investment in counselling for this specific issue. While he
was assessed as a low risk to reoffend, he was not being honest during the
assessment of that risk. The doctor who prepared the report opined that he
should be prohibited from interacting with children under the age of 16 years
and expressed concerns about whether he will continue with any treatment. Mr.
P.T. has his own unresolved history of sexual violence to address on his road
to rehabilitation.
[
117
]
Mr. P.T.’s family cannot possibly provide him
with any meaningful support in terms of preventing similar harm in the future since
they are unaware of the nature of the offence or the need to protect vulnerable
children from him. Finally, the victim of this offence was a child with whom he
shared a relationship of trust and authority. She has been devastated by this egregious
breach of trust.
[
118
]
The Ontario Court of Appeal recently
explained
in
R. v. Eldon
,
2025 ONCA 348
that:
15
Section 490.012(3)
of the
Criminal
Code
creates a presumption in favour of making a SOIRA order upon
sentencing for a primary designated offence, or where a verdict of not
criminally responsible on account of mental disorder is rendered for a primary
designated offence. The presumption in favour of making a SOIRA order can only
be displaced in statutorily defined circumstances.
16
Therefore, the court
"shall" make a SOIRA order "unless" the offender
establishes that the criteria in (a) or (b) are met. In making that
determination, the court must have regard to the factors set out in
s.
490.012(4)
. Among others, these include, "the nature and seriousness of
the designated offence", "the victim's age and other personal
characteristics" and "the nature and circumstances of the
relationship between the person and the victim".
And
further:
44
Under each of these
exceptions, the threshold is high - there must either be "no
connection" between making the order and the purposes of SOIRA, or the
impact of the order would not just be disproportionate but "grossly
disproportionate" to the purposes of SOIRA.
Section 490.012(3)
of the
Criminal
Code
recognizes that the framework has a dual purpose - the "prevention"
of crimes of a sexual nature and the "investigation" of such crimes.
As the majority recognized in
Ndhlovu
, at para. 120, these are
"laudable" goals.
52
First, it is critical to begin the analysis under
s.
490.012(3)
with the statutory presumption front and centre, recognizing that an
order
shall
be imposed unless it can be established that the criteria
under (a) or (b) are met. This presumption accords with what was recognized in
Ndhlovu
,
that sexual offending is one of several "empirically validated predictors
of increased sexual recidivism":
Ndhlovu
, at para. 94. It also
accords with the recognition that the prevention and investigation of sexual
offending, through the assistance of the NSOR, is in the public interest:
Criminal
Code,
s. 490.012(3)(b); SOIRA, ss. 2(1), 2(2).
[
119
]
As a person who has not invested in
appropriate counseling to prevent the commission of similar offences in the
future and considering the nature and circumstances of this offender and the
consequences of this offence, there is a clear and obvious connection between
the goals of the
S.O.I.R.A.
regime for the prevention, detection and
investigation of sexual offences and the requirement for Mr. P.T.’s
participation. The impact of this order on Mr. P.T.’s liberty and privacy
interest is not grossly disproportionate to
the
public interest in protecting society’s most vulnerable members. Since the
crown elected to proceed by summary conviction, pursuant to subsection 490.013(2)(a)
the order shall be for a duration of 10 years.
C.
Conclusion
[
120
]
It is hard to reconcile Mr. P.T.’s strongest
attributes with the nature of this offence. I appreciate that he has expressed
remorse and admitted his responsibility for his crime. Through his plea of
guilty, he provided Ms. N.S. with some closure and a public validation of the detrimental
impact his crime has had on her young life. True remorse, however, is not merely
confined to expressions of regret for a person’s actions. It must include honest
insight into why he committed this sexual offence on a trusting child, related
rehabilitative efforts to make amends and accepting full accountability without
hiding it from the people who purportedly support him.
[
121
]
If Mr. P.T. continues to divest himself of
full responsibility by blaming his profound grief for his actions, he is
avoiding holding himself fully accountable and truly making amends. This
sentence is a rare opportunity for him to serve his custodial sentence in the
community but only if he complies with all the terms and conditions including
punitive terms like house arrest for the first year of the order and GPS
monitoring to ensure compliance. He will be required to invest in offence specific
counseling on an individual basis as recommended by the clinical psychologist. He
will also be required to immediately seek and maintain employment to the
satisfaction of his conditional sentence supervisor to ensure that he resumes
paying child support as soon as possible.
[
122
]
The length of the conditional sentence will
be two years which exceeds the carceral sentence that I would have otherwise
imposed to reinforce the primary considerations of denunciation and deterrence.
It will be followed by a period of 3 years of probation. The terms of each of
these orders are attached as schedule A and B.
[
123
]
In addition, there will be a 161 order for
a period of 10 years and a
S.O.I.R.A.
order for a period of 10 years. He
will be required to provide a sample of his D.N.A. There will be a
discretionary firearms prohibition order pursuant to section 110(1)(a) for a
period of 10 years. The victim fine surcharge will be waived as an undue
hardship in all the circumstances.
Appendix A
Terms of the 2-year less day Conditional Sentence
Order
•
Keep the peace and be of good
behaviour;
•
Appear before the court when
required to do so;
•
Notify the Court or supervisor in
advance of any change of name or address and promptly notify the court or supervisor
of any change in employment or occupation.
Reporting:
o
Report in person to a conditional
sentence supervisor:
o
Within 24 hours
and
thereafter at all times and places as directed by the conditional sentence
supervisor or any person authorized by a conditional sentence supervisor to
assist in your supervision.
o
You must cooperate with your
conditional sentence supervisor.  You must sign any releases necessary to
permit the conditional sentence supervisor to monitor your compliance and you
must provide proof of compliance with any condition of this Order to your
conditional sentence supervisor upon request.
Residence:
o
You must live at a place approved
of by your conditional sentence supervisor and not change that address without
obtaining the prior approval of the conditional sentence supervisor.
Travel
restrictions:
o
Remain in the province of Ontario
unless you have the prior written permission of your conditional sentence
supervisor.
Employment:
o
You must make reasonable efforts
to seek and maintain suitable work to the satisfaction of the conditional
sentence supervisor and provide proof of same as required by the conditional
sentence supervisor.
o
Within one month of securing
employment, you must pay child support as required by or in excess of the
Family Court guidelines.
House
arrest:
o
For the first 12 months of your
conditional sentence order, you will remain in your residence or on the
property of your residence at all times except:
o
Once per week on a day to be
chosen by you in consultation with your supervisor for a period of four hours
in order to acquire the necessities of life.
o
For any medical emergency
involving you or any member of your immediate family (spouse, child, parent,
grandparent or sibling) if written justification is provided to your
conditional sentence supervisor within 72 hours of any such absence during
curfew hours.
o
For the following exceptions, you
must provide notice to your conditional sentence supervisor, at least 12 hours in
advance of any such activity providing the anticipated times of your absence,
the purpose of your absence and the addresses that you will be attending:
▪
Between the hours of 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
while travelling directly to, directly from and while attending at
pre-scheduled legal, medical or dental appointments.
▪
While travelling directly to,
directly from and while attending at any prescheduled assessments, counselling
sessions or treatment programs.
▪
While travelling directly to,
directly from and during the course of prescheduled job interviews or your
employment.
▪
Between the hours of 8 a.m. to 8
p.m. while travelling directly to, directly from and while attending at access
visits with your biological daughter pursuant to a family court order.
o
With the prior dated written
approval of your conditional sentence supervisor to be carried with you at all
times while outside of your residence during your house arrest; and
o
For carrying out any legal
obligations regarding compliance with this conditional sentence order.
o
You must confirm the schedule and addresses for any of
these exceptions to your period of home confinement by telephone or in person
in
advance
with the conditional sentence supervisor setting out the times and
places for these activities.
o
You must present yourself at your doorway of your
residence upon the request of your conditional sentence supervisor or his/her
designate or a peace officer for the purpose of verifying your compliance with
your
home confinement
and
curfew conditions
.
o
While serving the house arrest
portion of this conditional sentence, within three business days, you must
comply with 24-hour a day GPS monitoring by the government-funded GPS
monitoring program in accordance with the Rules and Protocols attached in
Schedule “A”.
o
For the last 12 months of your conditional sentence
order, you will remain in your residence or on the property of your residence at
all times between the hours of 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. except:
o
For any medical emergency
involving you or any member of your immediate family (spouse, child, parent,
grandparent or sibling) if written justification is provided to your
conditional sentence supervisor within 72 hours of any such absence during
curfew hours.
o
For the following exceptions, you
must provide notice, in writing, to your conditional sentence supervisor, at
least 12 hours in advance of any such activity providing the anticipated times
of your absence, the purpose of your absence and the addresses that you will be
attending:
▪
While travelling directly to,
directly from and during the course of your employment.
o
With the prior dated written
approval of your conditional sentence supervisor to be carried with you at all
times while outside of your residence during your curfew hours; and
o
For carrying out any legal
obligations regarding compliance with this conditional sentence order.
Counselling
and Treatment:
o
Attend and actively participate in
all assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs as directed by your
conditional sentence supervisor and complete them to the satisfaction of your
conditional sentence supervisor including but not limited to:
o
Grief;
o
Psychological or psychiatric
issues;
o
Individual counseling for childhood
trauma;
o
Individual counseling
for sexually inappropriate conduct with children; and
o
Individual counseling
for understanding sexual boundaries and consent in
relationships.
o
You shall sign any release of
information forms as will enable your conditional sentence supervisor to
monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.
o
You shall provide proof of your
attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed.
Weapons:
•
Do not possess any weapons as
defined by the
Criminal Code
.
Communication:
•
Do not contact or
communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, by any physical or electronic
or other means with Ms. N.S.
•
Do not be within 250
meters of any place where you know Ms. N.S. to live, work, go to school or any place
that you know the person to be
EXCEPT
o
While attending at required court
appearances; or
o
Except pursuant to a
family court order, while outside of the family home, for the purpose of
travelling directly to, directly from and while picking up your biological
daughter
ADDITIONAL TERM TO
NON-CONTACT TERMS
•
You
are not to post any information about, depictions of, recordings of or
photographs of Ms. N.S. on any social media site.
Appendix B
Terms of the three years of probation
STATUTORY TERMS:
•
Keep the peace
and be of good behavior.
•
Appear before the
court when required to do so.
•
Notify the court
or probation officer in advance of any change of name or address and promptly
notify the court or probation officer of any change in employment or occupation.
REPORTING:
o
Report in person
to a probation officer:
o
Within 7 working days of the
completion of your conditional sentence;
o
and
thereafter at all times and places
as directed by the probation officer or any person authorized by a probation
officer to assist in your supervision.
o
Your reporting
requirements will end when you have satisfied your probation officer that you
have:
o
Completed all your counselling.
o
you must
cooperate with your probation officer. You must sign any releases necessary to
permit the probation officer to monitor your compliance and you must provide
proof of compliance with any condition of this Order to your probation officer
upon request
NO CONTACT TERMS:
•
Do not contact or
communicate in any way, directly or indirectly, by any physical or electronic
or other means with Ms. N.S.
•
Do not be within
250 meters of any place where you know Ms. N.S. to live, work, go to school or
any place that you know the person to be
EXCEPT
o
While attending at required court
appearances; or
o
Except pursuant to a
family court order, while outside of the family home, for the purpose of
travelling directly to, directly from and while picking up your biological
daughter
ADDITIONAL TERM TO
NON-CONTACT TERMS:
•
You
are not to post any information about, depictions of, recordings of or
photographs of Ms. N.S. on any social media site.
COUNSELLING AND TREATMENT:
o
Attend and
actively participate in all assessments, counselling or rehabilitative programs
as directed by your probation officer and complete them to the satisfaction of
your probation officer including but not limited to:
o
Grief;
o
Psychological or psychiatric
issues;
o
Individual counseling for
childhood trauma;
o
Individual counseling for sexually
inappropriate conduct with children; and
o
Individual counseling for
understanding sexual boundaries and consent in relationships.
o
You shall sign
any release of information forms as will enable your probation officer to
monitor your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or rehabilitative
programs as directed.
o
You shall provide
proof of your attendance and completion of any assessments, counselling or
rehabilitative programs as directed.
WEAPONS
:
•
Do not possess any weapons as
defined by the
Criminal Code
.
[1]
Please also see
R. v. Jahfari
,
2024 ONCJ 29
in which
the parties and the Court agreed that the decision of the Superior Court of
Justice sitting as a summary conviction appeal in
R. v. Drumonde
is binding
on the Ontario Court of Justice.