WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4 
Order restricting publication
— sexual offences.
—
(1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may make an
order directing that any information that could identify the victim or a
witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in
any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any of the
following offences:
(i)   an offence
under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171,
171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any offence
under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which this
subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two or more
offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an
offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at the first
reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and
the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on application
made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order.
.   .   .
486.6 
OFFENCE
— (1)  Every
person who fails to comply with an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v. J.H.
, 2025 ONCJ 654
DATE:  2025-12-04
Toronto
ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
J.H.
Before Justice Mara Greene
Reasons for Judgment
released December 4, 2025
M. Boissonneault..……………………………………………………..….… for the Crown
D. Gosby……………………….................……………………………………..…..... for J.H.
Greene, J:
[
1
] Mr. J.H. is charged with sexual assault and sexual
interference in relation to S.S. when she was three or four years old.   At the
time of alleged offence, J.H. was in a parental role in relation to S.S. as he
was living with S.S.’s mother.
[
2
] At trial, Crown counsel sought to admit S.S.’s statement
to police pursuant to
section 715.1
of the
Criminal Code
.  Counsel for J.H.
opposed this application.  After hearing the application, I advised counsel that
the statement was admissible under section 715.1 of the
Criminal Code
and that I would provide my reasons later so as not to delay the trial.
[
3
] In addition to hearing from S.S. at trial, the Crown
also called S.S.’s mother, A.S., who testified about the circumstances of J.H.
living with her and S.S. as well as what occurred when S.S. disclosed the
abuse.  J.H. testified at trial and denied committing any sexual assault on
S.S.
Summary of the evidence
Background
[
4
] J.H. met A.S. in 2016.  Shortly after meeting, they
moved in together and A.S. became pregnant.  At the time, S.S., who was born in
February 2015, was not living with A.S.  Later in 2016, S.S. moved in with A.S.
and J.H.  She would have been approximately one and a half years old at time. 
In March 2017, Su. was born.  She is the daughter of J.H. and A.S.
[
5
] Around the time of Su.’s birth, A.S.’s friend,
Angelica, moved in with J.H. and A.S.  Angelica was pregnant at the time and
her
fiancé
also moved in with them.
[
6
] J.H. and A.S. separated sometime in the middle of
2018.  None of the witnesses had the exact date of the separation, but J.H.
thought it was around the summer time because it was hot outside when he moved
out.  In the summer of 2018, S.S. would have been three years old.  In 2019 or
so, A.S. became involved with a man named Adrian.  He moved in with A.S., S.S.
and Su. around that time.  A.S. and Adrian have one child together.
[
7
] Between 2016 and 2018, J.H. acted in a parental
capacity to S.S.  He would help with all the childcare activities including
bathing.    When J.H. moved out in 2018, he continued to see Su., but did not
see a lot of S.S.  According to both A.S. and J.H., J.H. had some contact with
S.S. and Su. after he moved out, but over time the visits decreased in
frequency.  A.S. testified that there has been no contact with J.H. since
2022.
Evidence of A.S.
[
8
] In early 2024, when S.S. was nine years old, she
reported to Angelica that J.H. sexually assaulted her when she was three years
old.   Angelica relayed this to A.S., who then spoke to S.S. about the
allegations.  Eventually the police were contacted, and S.S. provided a lengthy
statement to the police.
[
9
] A.S. testified that she did not obtain a lot of
details about the allegations from S.S.  She did report, however, that S.S. was
inconsistent on a few points.  First, S.S. reported at one point that she was
sexually assaulted on only one occasion.  At a different time, S.S. reported
that she was sexually assaulted multiple times.   Second, S.S. reported at one
point that she had pants on when the assault started.   She later reported that
she was naked.  A.S. also testified that during one of her discussions with
S.S. about the sexual assault allegations, she expressed to S.S. how important
it was that this really happened as the allegations were very serious.  S.S.
replied that it maybe it was a dream.
[
10
] A.S. testified that in 2017 she shared a bedroom with
J.H.  S.S. and Su. shared the second bedroom in the apartment and Angelica
slept on the couch with her fiancé and infant child.
[
11
] A.S. testified that during the time when J.H. lived
with her and S.S., she never noticed any blood on S.S.’s underwear or linens.
[
12
] In relation to bathing, A.S. testified that S.S.
and Su. would often take baths together and would play in the bath.  This ended
once S.S. was older, perhaps around five years old.  A.S. further testified
that while both she and J.H. would bathe the girls.  If A.S. started the bath
it was uncommon for her to not finish bathing the girls herself.
[
13
] A.S. testified that S.S. does not like being
bathed, in particular she does not like having her vagina and bum washed.
S.S.’s Evidence
[
14
] S.S.’s evidence-in-chief was mostly the video of
her statement to the police in March of 2024.  During this statement, when S.S.
was asked about the sexual assaults, S.S. was very uncomfortable verbalizing
what took place. Instead, she wrote down some words to describe what happened,
drew a picture and physically demonstrated the sexual assault.
[
15
] According to S.S., J.H. sexually assaulted her
multiple times right after she had a bath. She was three or three and a half
years old at the time.  S.S. told police that her mother would put her in the
bath or shower and then leave the residence with her friend.  J.H. would then
step in and help with the bath.  When the bath was done, J.H. put his penis
inside her bum.
[
16
] S.S. told the police that this happened multiple
times.  Sometimes she would say it hurt and he would stop other times she
stated that she had to go to the bathroom.
[
17
] S.S. told police that J.H. would put her on the
toilet seat and put his penis inside her.  Or sometimes she would be on all fours
and he would put his penis in her bum.  S.S. also told police that each sexual
assault took ten minutes. She knew this because she would look at the clock in
the bathroom and would see that ten minutes had passed.
[
18
] S.S. told police that she can still picture what
happened and that she remembered that it hurt. The sexual assault that she
recalls most clearly occurred on a Sunday.  She knew this because she saw on
the calendar it said Sunday.  Her birthday was on a Sunday and her mom had
taught her to read the word Sunday.
[
19
] S.S. did not report the abuse earlier because she
was scared, and J.H. was strong.   The last time she saw J.H. was two years
before she spoke to police.  He had come by to see his daughter, Su.
[
20
] At trial, Crown counsel asked S.S. if there is
anything from the statement she remembers differently now.  S.S. testified that
she told police that she was three at the time of the abuse but now believes
she was four years old.
[
21
] Crown counsel asked no further questions of S.S. 
During cross-examination, S.S. testified that at the time of the allegations
she and Su. slept together on a couch in the living room.  J.H. slept in one of
the bedrooms and her mother slept in the other bedroom with Adrian (A.S.’s
husband).  S.S. also testified that Angelica, her fiancé, and their baby Ab.
also slept on a couch.
[
22
] S.S. testified that when J.H. was living with her,
she had both baths and showers but that she never bathed with Su.   She further
testified that the sexual assaults always started with her mom putting her in
the shower or bath and placing her clothes on the toilet seat.  Su. would be in
the other room watching television.  Her mom would then go out with a friend
and J.H. would come in and commit the sexual assaults. S.S. further testified
that the sexual assaults stopped after J.H. moved out of the residence.
[
23
] S.S. testified that while she told the police that she
looked at the clock and as such she knew that the sexual assault took ten
minutes, she now knows that she was not able to tell time when she was three or
four years old and thinks the sexual assault lasted around five minutes instead
of ten.
[
24
] S.S admitted that she told her mom that she thought
it all might have been a dream.  S.S. further testified that she was not lying
when she told her mother this.  S.S. later testified that it was not dream and
that she only told her mother that it might have been a dream because S.S.
thought that her mother thought she was lying.  In light of this answer, S.S.
was asked again if she was telling the truth when she told her mom that it
might have been dream.  S.S. replied that she did tell the truth to her mother.
J.H.’s Evidence
[
25
] J.H. testified that he lived with A.S. from 2016
until 2018. He believes that S.S. moved in with them in early 2017, prior to Su.
being born.  J.H. testified that S.S. and Su. shared one bedroom while he and A.S.
shared the other bedroom.  According to J.H., his relationship ended with A.S.
in the summer of 2018.  He moved out two weeks after they broke up.  J.H.
testified that he did return to the apartment to visit Su.  Sometimes S.S.
would be home, and he would see her for approximately twenty minutes.  J.H. admitted
to bathing and washing S.S. during the time that he lived with A.S. and S.S., but
denied ever sexually assaulting her.  He also admitted to bathing her alone and
even when A.S. was not home.   J.H. further admitted that there were occasions
when he had spanked S.S.
[
26
] J.H. testified that at the time of his breakup with
A.S., he was unstable and not in a good place to be a good parent.  He had lost
his job and was working through personal challenges.
ISSUES AT TRIAL
[
27
] The main issue at trial was whether the Crown had
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that J.H. committed the offences of sexual
assault and sexual interference on S.S.  Counsel for J.H. submitted that while
S.S. was a very credible witness, she was not sufficiently reliable to support
a conviction.  He further argued that J.H. was both a credible and reliable
witness who ought to be believed.  Counsel for J.H. candidly conceded that he could
not possibly provide a motive for S.S. to make up this allegation nor could he
provide an explanation as to how S.S. would know about the sexual acts
alleged.    While these may be compelling factors that would support a finding
of guilt, the inconsistencies within S.S.’s evidence and between her evidence
and A.S.’s evidence should leave me with a reasonable doubt about the
reliability of S.S.’s evidence.
[
28
] Crown counsel, on the other hand argued that while J.H.
was a very good witness and there is nothing in his evidence that would lead to
a rejection of his evidence, this is the kind of case where I should reject his
evidence because I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the offence
occurred based on S.S.’s evidence.  Crown counsel argued that while S.S. was
inconsistent about a host of peripheral issues, she was consistent about the
core elements of the offence.
General Legal
Principles
[
29
] The starting point in understanding any decision in
a criminal court is understanding the burden of proof.  The burden lies on the
Crown to prove each essential element of the offence beyond a reasonable
doubt.  This is a high standard.   Reasonable doubt is based upon reason and
common sense.  It is logically connected to the evidence or the lack of
evidence. It is not enough for me to believe that J.H. is possibly or even
probably guilty.  Reasonable doubt requires more.  As a standard, reasonable
doubt lies far closer to absolute certainty than it does to a balance of
probabilities.   In order to convict, a trial judge must be sure that every
essential element of the offence has been made out.
[
30
] In Canadian criminal law, there is a clear process for addressing
evidence where the defendant testifies.  The court must consider whether she
believes the defendant’s evidence.  If the court does not believe the
defendant, she must go on to consider whether the defendant’s evidence leaves
her with a reasonable doubt about the commission of the offence.  Where there
are competing versions of events the court is not permitted to merely decide
which version of events the court likes better.  In assessing whether to accept
the defendant’s evidence the court must consider all the evidence, including
the evidence of the complainant.  A considered and reasoned acceptance of the
complainant’s or any other witness’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt is a
sufficient basis to reject the testimony of the defendant (
R. v. J.J.R.D.
2006 CanLII 40088 (ON CA)
, [2006]
O.J. No. 4749 (CA)
,
at paras
53- 54
,
R. v. T.S.
2012 ONCA 289
at para
79
and
R. v. R.E.M.
2008 SCC 51
at para
66
)
[
31
] The issues in the case at bar are directly linked to the reliability
of S.S. and the credibility of J.H.    I can accept some, none, or all of a
witness’ testimony.  Given the passage of time since this event occurred, I am
mindful that some inconsistencies may not have the same import as they might have
if the witnesses had been interviewed closer in time to the event.   Moreover,
not all inconsistencies mean a witness is being dishonest. I must look at the
nature of the inconsistency to assess what impact, if any, it has on my
assessment of the witness’ evidence.  I am also mindful that honest witnesses
can be mistaken.
[
32
] S.S. was only three or four at the time of the allegations, she was
nine when she spoke to police and was ten at the time of trial.  I need to be
mindful that factors which may otherwise reasonably impugn a witness’ evidence,
like an inconsistency in time or place, may not negatively impact the trier of
fact’s view of a child’s evidence (see
R. v. Barusa
2014 ONCA 34
at para
25
).  Assessment of the credibility and reliability of a child witness must
take into account specific characteristics of young persons.  As was stated by
the Court of Appeal in
R. v. Barusa
, supra,
at paragraph
25
,
[25]
The complainant was 10 years old when he
testified.  There was also one other child witness.  The trial judge
was obliged to tell the jury that it must take into account the age of the
complainant and the other child witness in assessing the evidence of those
witnesses.  Factors which may have a decisive effect on the reliability of
the evidence of an adult witness—for example, material inconsistencies in
details as to time and place—may play a significantly lesser role in assessing
the reliability of the evidence of a child witness.  That is not to say
that the child’s evidence is subject to a less rigorous standard of assessment
before it can be accepted in a criminal trial.  Rather, it is to say that
the assessment of the credibility and the reliability of any witness is to be
tailored to the
individual characteristics of the
witness.  Where the witness is a young child, age is one of those
individual characteristics:
R. v. W. (R.)
,
1992 CanLII
56 (SCC)
, [1992
] 2 S.C.R. 122
, at pp. 133-34
.
[
33
] I am further mindful that minor
testimonial inconsistencies not related to the substance of the allegations may
have little to no impact on the overall assessment of a child’s evidence.  As
was noted by the court in
R. v. M.L
.
2014 ONCA 640
at paragraphs
41 and
42
,
[41] There were
some inconsistencies in the evidence of the complainant. These inconsistencies,
however, were not significant or material to the substance of the allegations.
Furthermore, the appellant's counsel at trial had the opportunity to conduct a
very thorough and extensive cross-examination of the complainant to address the
inconsistencies head on.
[42] G.B. was an
11-year-old child when she gave her statement to the police and 12 years old
when she testified at the preliminary inquiry. Minor testimonial
inconsistencies in the evidence of children are not unusual. I agree with the
respondent that while there were inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence,
they related only to timing and venue issues, and not to the substance of the
allegations.
[
34
] Most recently, Justice Shaw in
R. v. R.C.
repeated that
children experience the world differently from adults and as such, trial judges
should not apply adult standards to child witnesses.  Justice Shaw stated at
paragraphs 26-27
[26]  
   Adult standards should not be applied when assessing the credibility
of a child witness. Children may experience the world differently from adults,
and, as such, important details like time and place may be missing from their
recollection, and they may experience confusion about sequence, frequency and
separation of days:
R. v. W. (R.)
,
1992 CanLII 56 (SCC)
,
[1992] 2 S.C.R.
122
, at p. 133
and
R. v. C. (T.)
(2005),
2005 CanLII 371 (ON CA)
,
74 O.R. (3d) 100
(C.A.)
at paras.
19
and 40
.
[27]  
   Flaws in a child’s evidence may not toll so heavily against
credibility and reliability as they do against the testimony of an adult:
R.
v. C.(H.)
,
2009
ONCA 56
and
W. (R.)
, at p. 133, citing
R. v. B.
(G.)
,
1990
CanLII 7308 (SCC)
,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 30
, at pp. 54-55
. A common sense approach must
be used when assessing the testimony of young children and not necessarily he
same exacting standard as applied for adults. They may not be able to recount
precise details and communicate the when and where of an event with precision,
but that does not mean they have misconceived what happened to them and who did
it:
B. (G.)
, at p. 55. To be clear, however, this does not mean
that a child’s evidence is subject to a lower level of scrutiny for reliability
that that of adults:
B.(G.).
at pp. 54-55.
Section 715.1
[
35
] At the beginning of the trial, Crown counsel brought
an application to admit S.S.’s statement to police for the truth of its
contents.  Counsel for J.H. opposed the application on the basis that the
statement was not taken in a reasonable time.  I admitted the statement
indicating that I would provide written reasons at a later date.
[
36
] Section 715.1 allows for the admission of a
statement made by a victim under the age 18 at the time of the alleged offence as
long as the statement was made within a reasonable time of the alleged offence,
it describes the acts complained of and is adopted by the victim on the stand. 
The trial judge has the discretion to exclude the statement where its admission
would interfere with the proper administration of justice.
[
37
] In assessing whether a statement should be admitted
under
section 715.1
, it is helpful to consider the purpose of the provision. 
In
R. v. F.(C.C.)
1997 CanLII 306 (SCC)
, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1183, the Supreme Court of Canada held
that the purpose of the provision is two-fold.  First, it helps the trial judge
ascertain the truth by allowing the trial judge to consider what is likely the
best recollection of the event.  Secondly, it helps to reduce the trauma to the
child witness (see paras 20-22).  More and more trial judges are using a
“trauma informed’ approach to trials mindful of the harm associated with
testifying.
[
38
] The reasonable time requirement within section
715.1 relates directly to reliability.  No specific time is captured by this
provision.  Instead, trial judges must consider all the circumstances
surrounding the making the statement.  The following factors have been
identified as being relevant to this assessment:
a)
Age of the child;
b)
Explanation for the delay;
c)
Impact of the delay on the child’s ability to recall the events in
issue;
d)
The child’s relationship with the accused;
e)
The length and frequency of the alleged offences;
f)
Any development stages the child may have gone
through since the last alleged offence;
g)
The child’s emotional makeup; and
h)
Any intervening events between the alleged offense and the making of
the statement.
[
39
] In the case at bar, S.S. first disclosed the
alleged offence six years after it allegedly occurred.  S.S. explained that the
reason for the delay was that she feared the accused.  She told police that he
was strong and she was worried he would hit her.  I should note that while J.H.
moved out in 2018, he had continued contact with the family through his
daughter, Su., until 2022.   It is also important to note that S.S. was very
young at the time of the allegations and that J.H. acted as a father figure to
her in 2017 and 2018.
[
40
] In the case at bar, defence counsel was concerned
with the six-year delay between the event and the statement because S.S.’s
version of events changed over time.  For example, S.S. at one point told her
mother that the sexual assault only occurred once.  At another point she told
her mother that it occurred on multiple occasions.  S.S. was also inconsistent
on whether or not she was clothed at the time of the sexual assault.
[
41
] Of particular concern to counsel for J.H. was that
S.S. reported to her mother that this may have all been a dream.  At no point
during the statement with the police did they ask S.S. about this.
[
42
] In my view, counsel’s concerns about the statement
are valid.  Six years is a very long time, especially when the child was three
or four years old when the alleged event took place.  Moreover, by the time
S.S. spoke to the police she had already spoken to a family friend and her
mother about the allegations and was not consistent about some of the details.  The
comment that it may have been a dream is equally concerning.  Having said that,
I watched the video of S.S.’s statement to police. It was clear to me that S.S.
had a very hard time discussing the allegations and had to resort to drawing
pictures to express herself. In my view, if the statement is not admitted,
there is a real risk that S.S. would not be able to meaningfully testify and as
such, her evidence would be lost. Moreover, given her young age, and her
discomfort in discussing the alleged offence, compelling her to repeat the
events on the stand would be traumatic.
[
43
] I am mindful of the reliability concerns raised by
counsel for J.H.  Six years for someone under the age of ten is a long time and
the comment about the dream is something that defence rightly wants to explore.
In my view, all these concerns can be easily addressed during
cross-examination.  If the statement is admitted, S.S. will still be testifying
and can be questioned about the dream issue.  Moreover, counsel can still
identify the inconsistencies and explore any other potential inconsistency
during his cross-examination of S.S.  When I balance these concerns against the
risk of losing S.S.’s evidence in its entirety and the potential harm to her by
having her repeat the allegations yet again, I am satisfied that the Crown has
met his burden of establishing that the statement was made in a reasonable time
and that the admission of the statement will not interfere with the proper
administration of justice.
Has the Crown proven the case beyond a reasonable
doubt.
[
44
] Both counsel agreed that were inconsistencies in
S.S.’s evidence and that J.H. was a good witness. They disagree on the import
of the inconsistencies within S.S.’s evidence and whether or not it matters
that J.H. was a good witness.   Crown counsel argued that the inconsistencies
in S.S.’s evidence were peripheral to the essential elements of the offence and
that when S.S.’s evidence is viewed in the context of her age, she was a
compelling, credible and reliable witness.  He argued that her evidence was so
compelling that it would be unreasonable to be left in a doubt by J.H.’s evidence.
[
45
] In support of his argument, Crown counsel identified
a number of factors that support a finding that S.S. was truthful.   Firstly,
she was uncomfortable discussing the allegations.  This is a sign that she
experienced the trauma attached to the offence. Secondly, she had particular
details that were compelling, like putting her clothes on the toilet seat.    Thirdly,
she was consistent in how the sexual assault took place. Fourthly, she was
committed to telling the truth and even corrected the officer during the course
of her statement. Fifthly, she was not challenged directly on the specific acts
and sixthly, the fact that she remembers that one sexual assault occurred on a
Sunday is corroborated by external evidence.
[
46
] I agree with Crown counsel that S.S. testified
without guile, was uncomfortable describing the sexual assaults, presented as
an honest witness and provided details around the offence.
[
47
] I do not agree that S.S was consistent on the
details of the sexual assault.  I am mindful that I must approach S.S.’s
evidence with the appreciation that she is a child and that her memory of
events will not be like that of an adult.  Inconsistencies in her evidence on
whether she was three or four at the time of the abuse, whether she slept on
the couch or in her bedroom at the time of the allegations or even whether
Adrian was living with them at the time, are the kinds of things that one would
expect a child might not remember accurately and are quite peripheral to the
event.  There were, however, other inconsistences that in my view are not so
peripheral to the allegations and are relevant to the reliability of S.S.’s
memory of the allegations.
[
48
] Firstly, there were internal inconsistencies within
S.S.’s evidence about the sexual assault.  A.S. testified that S.S. told her
that event happened once only but also said that it happened many times.  This
is an inconsistency about the actual abuse.  A.S. also testified that S.S. told
her that the assault happened while she was dressed but also stated that it
happened when she was naked.  This inconsistency was also apparent in her
statement when S.S. at one point commented that J.H. would tell her to take her
pants off. Yet later in the statement S.S. stated that her pants were still off
from the bath when the sexual assault started.  Another inconsistency that in
my view is relevant to reliability relates to S.S.’s evidence about how long
each incident of sexual assault lasted.  Generally, the length of time
associated with a particular assaultive conduct is the kind of thing that if
the evidence changes, it is of no moment.  It is the kind of inconsistency one
might expect.  People are notoriously bad at estimating time, especially during
a traumatic event.  This is even more so with children.  Had the evidence been
that at one point S.S. said the assault lasted ten minutes then on a different
occasion said it lasted five minutes, I would not view this as an indication
that she was not a reliable witness.  In the case at bar, however, in addition
to telling the police that the sexual assault lasted ten minutes, S.S. told the
police that she knew this because she looked at the clock and saw that ten
minutes had passed. S.S. gave specific details about looking at the clock.  In
my view, S.S. appeared to be saying that she had a memory of looking at the
clock and noticing the ten minutes had passed.  At trial, S.S. testified that
this was not correct as she could not tell time when she was three or four.  In
my view, the fact that S.S. at one point had a memory of looking and reading
the clock, when that just did not happen is a material inconsistency not at the
periphery of the allegation.
[
49
] There were also, in my view, important
inconsistencies between S.S.’s memory of the allegations and A.S.’s memory of
what took place in the residence during the relevant time frame.  In
particular, A.S. testified that when she would put S.S. in the bath, it was
uncommon for her to not complete the task.  In other words it was uncommon for
her to start the bath and then go out leaving J.H. to finish the bath.  A.S.
also testified that Su. and S.S. would often bathe together. This evidence was
directly contrary to S.S.’s evidence.  A.S., in  my view, was a reliable
witness, who was being truthful with the court.  She had no motive to protect J.H.
and was clearly invested in protecting and supporting her daughter.  In my
view, A.S.’s memory of how baths worked when her children were little is
reliable and credible.  Given the inconsistency between A.S.’s evidence and
S.S.’s evidence about bathing, it is my view that S.S.’s memory about bath
time, and her mother’s presence and absence at bath time is unreliable.  I
further find that the evidence about A.S.’s presence or absence at bath time is
linked directly to S.S.’s memories of the actual sexual assaults and as such is
not peripheral to the allegations and reflects a lack of reliability in S.S.’s
memory of events surrounding the alleged sexual assaults.
[
50
] I reject the Crown’s argument that S.S. should be
found reliable because the core of the allegations went unchallenged.  Counsel
for J.H. consistently took the position that his client did not commit the
offence and that S.S.’s reliability was in issue.  This position was made clear
when he opposed the
section 715.1
application and in my view was also clear
from the questions posed to both A.S. and S.S. in cross-examination.  Counsel
for J.H. did a comprehensive, well thought out cross-examination that served to
high-light important inconstancies within S.S.’s testimony without compelling
S.S. to repeat her allegation that J.H. put his penis in her bum. 
Cross-examining children is a very difficult task.  In my view, counsel for J.H.
handled his task with respect and kindness while still preserving his client’s
ability to make full answer and defence.  I note that in particular, he
specifically asked S.S. about whether she had told others that it all might
have been a dream, a fact S.S. admitted and one that can reasonably go to the
issue of reliability.
[
51
] Crown counsel further argued that S.S.’s evidence
is confirmed in one way that is quite compelling.  S.S. testified that the
sexual assault she remembered the clearest occurred on a Sunday.  She knew this
because she saw the date on the calendar.  S.S. testified that she knew how to
read the word Sunday because her birthday that year landed on a Sunday and her
mom had taught her to read the word.  Crown counsel argued that in 2019, S.S.’s
birthday would have landed on a Sunday, making S.S.’s memory of the timing
quite accurate.  On its face this may look like a compelling argument, but when
all the evidence is considered, in my view, it is not.  First of all, in
February 2019, J.H. was no longer living with S.S.  He moved out in the summer of
2018.  S.S. testified that the sexual abuse stopped after J.H. moved out.  If
this is true, the sexual assault could not have occurred in the months leading
up to her birthday in 2019.  Secondly, A.S. testified that it was uncommon for
her to start a bath and them have J.H. finish it while she went out.   If this
was uncommon when they lived together, in my view, it was even less likely to
have occurred after J.H. moved out.
[
52
] I am mindful that S.S. was also inconsistent with
A.S. on issues around who was living in the apartment in 2017 and 2018.  S.S.
told police that Adrian was living with them and that he shared a bedroom with
A.S. while J.H. used the second bedroom. This cannot be accurate.  Adrian is
A.S.’s present husband.  She did not become involved with him until 2019.  In
2018, A.S. was romantically involved with J.H.   I also note that S.S.
testified that since J.H. had the second bedroom, she and Su. slept on the
couch.  Both A.S and J.H. testified that in 2017 and 2018, A.S. and J.H. were
romantically involved and shared a bedroom.  The girls shared the second
bedroom and Angelica and her family slept on the couches.  In my view, these
inconsistencies are truly peripheral to the allegations and given the number of
people living in that residence over different time frames, it is the kind of
mistake one would expect and does not, in my view, detract from S.S.’s reliability
as it relates to the core of the allegations before the court.
[
53
] The final piece of evidence that must be addressed
is the evidence about the dream.  The issue of S.S. telling her mother that
this all might have been a dream first arose when counsel for J.H. opposed the Crown’s
715.1 application.  One of counsel’s reasons for opposing the application was
because they had evidence that A.S. had told the CAS workers that S.S. told
A.S. that it all might have been a dream. Despite knowing this, the police
failed to ask any questions about it during their interview with S.S.  Crown
counsel argued at the time that his could be dealt with in cross-examination.  It
was very clear that this was an important issue, and that defence counsel would
ask S.S. about it.
[
54
] Despite knowing this, Crown counsel did not ask
S.S. any questions about it during his examination in chief.  This was a
tactical decision made by the Crown.  In cross-examination counsel for J.H.
asked S.S. whether she had told her mom that she thought it all might have been
a dream.  S.S. replied that she did tell her mom this.  Counsel for J.H. then
asked S.S. if she was telling the truth when she told her mom this and S.S.
replied that she was telling the truth.
[
55
] Crown counsel then sought to re-examine on this
point.  I had some concern about the Crown addressing it for the first time in
re-examination when he had been clearly put on notice that this was an issue. 
In order to ensure a fair trial for all parties, I allowed the Crown to
re-examine on this point, but also advised that I would allow defence counsel
to ask further questions arising from this re-examination.
[
56
] In re-examination Crown counsel asked S.S. if the
sexual assault she testified to was a dream.  S.S. replied, “no”.  Crown
counsel then asked why she told her mother that she thought it was a dream. 
S.S. replied that she thought her mom thought she was lying.  This, in my view,
is somewhat consistent with how A.S. described the conversation and supports
the finding that S.S. never thought it was a dream and was not being truthful
when she said it might have been a dream.    In light of this now apparent
inconsistency,  counsel for J.H. asked some additional questions on this point.
[
57
] Counsel for J.H. asked S.S. whether she was lying
to her mom when she said she said it might have been a dream.  S.S. replied,
“no”.  He then asked, “were you lying to me yesterday when you said you were
telling the truth to your mom” and S.S. replied “No”.
[
58
] The following exchange then occurred:
You said you were telling mom the
truth when you said it was adream? Yes, it might have been a dream but it is
not
Why do you say it might have been
a dream? You are confusing me.  All I know is that it is not a dream.
But you told your mom the truth
when you said was a dream? No, I thought it was a dream
So you thought it was a dream? Yes
[
59
] Crown counsel argued that I should place no weight
on this inconsistency because the only inference from this exchange is that
S.S. was confused by the questions.  Respectfully, I disagree. I appreciate
that one inference is that S.S. became confused by the questions.  I am also
mindful that S.S. was pointing out the distinction between saying “it was a
dream” and thinking it “might have been a dream”.  However, what remains, is
that S.S. testified that she knows that what took place was not a dream and only
told her mom that she thought it might be a dream because she was worried her
mother thought she was lying.  S.S. also testified, however, that she was being
truthful with her mother when she said it might have been a dream.  Is this a
signal that perhaps S.S.’s definition of truth and a lie are different from an adults?
Is it possible, that in S.S.’s mind an untruth told to help someone is not a
lie? Or that somehow saying “it might be” makes it not a lie.  I do not know. 
I cannot speculate.  While this one piece of evidence is not determinative, it
is another inconsistency on an important fact that in my view detracts from the
reliability of S.S.’s evidence.
[
60
] As I have now stated many times, S.S. was a
credible witness. There were some compelling elements to her evidence.  How
does someone her age know about putting a penis in her bum if it did not
happen.  How did she know to demonstrate the act if it did not happen.  Why
falsely accuse a man she has not seen in a long time? These questions make it
more likely that S.S. is telling the truth.  Having said that, J.H. is not well
positioned to answer these questions as he has not been in S.S.’s life in any
meaningful way for a long time.
[
61
] In my view, there were some significant reliability
issues with S.S.’s evidence that must be considered.  That is not to say that I
reject her evidence, as I do not.   I highlight this because the Crown has argued
that her evidence was so reliable that it would be unreasonable to be left in a
doubt by J.H.’s evidence.  Despite the exceptional submissions of Crown
counsel, I respectfully disagree.
[
62
] J.H. was, in my view, an exceptional witness.  He
admitted to bathing S.S.  He admitted to having opportunity to commit these
offences.  He even admitted to spanking S.S. and that at the relevant time he
was facing his own challenges and was not well positioned to parent his
daughters.  Nothing arose during his evidence that gives me cause to reject his
evidence.   Moreover, while I do not reject S.S.’s evidence, given the
reliability issues noted above, S.S.’s evidence, when considered with all the
other evidence, does not lead me to reject J.H.’s evidence.
[
63
] When I consider all the evidence in this case, I am left in a doubt about
whether or not J.H. sexually abused S.S. and as such I find him not guilty of
the offences.
Released December 4, 2025                                 _____________________________
Justice
Mara Greene