CITATION:
R. v. Mackenzie
, 2025 ONCJ 420
DATE: 
2025 08 11
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
DANIEL MACKENZIE
Before Justice Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for Sentence Delivered
Orally on 11 July, 2025
Written Reasons Released on 11
August, 2025
Alannah Grady....................................................................................  
for the Crown
Alexandra Valeri.....................................................  
for the defendant, Daniel Mackenzie
Fergus ODonnell J.:
Overview
1
.
Daniel Mackenzie has
pleaded guilty to three charges arising out of two separate incidents exactly
seven months apart. The two incidents were, first, a threat aimed at a
corrections officer and, second, an assault with a weapon against
his domestic partner that included a breach of his bail order not to
possess weapons.  As of today, Mr. Mackenzie has been in custody a total
of seventy-six real days.
2
.
Before Mr. Mackenzie
entered his pleas, he addressed me directly and made a fairly impassioned plea
that I keep an open mind before I heard his case and his background.  At a
later point he said, "whenever I say something, nobody
listens."  When he asked me to keep an open mind, it struck me as
rather odd that he would feel the need to ask a judge to do that.  Having
heard and reviewed his history, I think I understand why he could feel it
necessary to ask for something that should be taken as a given.
The Offences
3
.
The threatening
occurred on 6 October, 2024. Mr. Mackenzie was outside the Hamilton Wentworth
Detention Centre when he called out to corrections officer Collison, who
happened to be leaving work, telling Collison he was waiting to "pop
off" the "tall blonde guy who can't keep his mouth shut". 
The synopsis detailed, as a presumably relevant fact, that Mr. Mackenzie was
holding a lunch-bag mid-torso.  The "tall blonde guy" was
determined to be corrections officer Chaisson.  At the time he made
this threat, Mr. Mackenzie was bound by a peace bond to keep the peace. 
Mr. Mackenzie was released on bail with a surety, his partner Colleen Hunter.
4
.
The Crown's original
description of this event was that Mr. Mackenzie told the corrections officer
Collison that he was waiting to "shoot" a corrections officer, but
the detailed facts read out show that the word "shoot" was not used,
but instead the phrase used was specifically "pop off", which Mr.
Mackenzie said in court meant to fight.  The words are obviously ambiguous
in the abstract, but I have no reason to reject Mr. Mackenzie's
expressed intention in using them as that assertion is logically
consistent with his assertion that the guard he wanted to "pop
off" had earlier challenged him to a fight.  Mr. Mackenzie also said
that his presence at the jail was purely coincidental; he was not lurking
there, but rather passing by on his way home.  As for any implication to
be drawn from the fact that Mr. Mackenzie had a lunch bag mid-torso, there is
no rational basis to read anything into that for the purpose of sentencing. 
Countless people going to or returning from work or school take their lunch
with them.  Sometimes a lunch bag is just a lunch bag.
[1]
5
.
Seven months later,
on 6 May, 2025 Mr. Mackenzie and Ms. Hunter were at a property in Hamilton that
he uses as a yard for his construction business.  A neighbour called the
police, reporting that he or she had overheard an argument between them and a
threat by Mr. Mackenzie to Ms. Hunter.  The neighbour said he had seen Mr.
Mackenzie chase Ms. Hunter while holding a knife and that he had shoved her,
which the neighbour had captured on CCTV.  The CCTV footage was not played
on the plea.  Ms. Valeri and Mr. Mackenzie advised that the incident on 6
May, 2025 was at a work site and that the "knife" involved was a tool
that Mr. Mackenzie was using to strip wire when he got in the confrontation
with Ms. Hunter.  The Crown said that on arrival the police tried to
de-escalate/disengage a supposedly belligerent Mr. Mackenzie; Mr. Mackenzie's
characterization of that interaction was not at all the same.  I have no
basis at all to favour one version or the other so any supposed belligerence or
resistance on Mr. Mackenzie's part cannot play any role in my sentencing
decision.  Mr. Mackenzie said that he had been harassed by the police
before at that location, his workshop, and that his Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder originates from being beaten by the police in the past.  Ms.
Hunter, the victim on the assault charge, said that she had witnessed Mr.
Mackenzie being harassed by the police over the past two years (the length of
their relationship) and she had been subjected to the police following her
also.
Positions on Sentence
6
.
The Crown seeks a
seven-month sentence (less pre-sentence custody) plus three years of probation,
along with the usual ancillary orders.  The Crown takes the position that
seven months is at the extreme low end of the sentencing range
here.
7
.
Mr. Mackenzie says
that, in addition to his time in pre-sentence custody, he should be
sentenced to ninety days in custody to be served intermittently, which would
bring his custodial period close to the Crown's position.  That outcome
would also allow Mr. Mackenzie to return to his business and support himself
and Ms. Hunter, who is in financial distress managing the household expenses
plus Mr. Mackenzie's payments, such as for his truck, which is used for the
business, with no income coming in from his side over the past two-and-a-half
months.  He agrees there should be a probation order.
Mr. Mackenzie’s
Record
8
.
Mr. Mackenzie has a
very troubling criminal record.  At the age of twenty-nine, he has
twenty-five criminal convictions, twenty-eight including his convictions before
me.  There are about ten failure-to-comply/failure-to-attend-court
convictions.  There are also about ten convictions for threatening,
assault and weapons-type offences, including a conviction for aggravated
assault in 2018, for which he received a six-month sentence.  That number
also includes a 2020 conviction for possession of a firearm contrary to a
prohibition and related offences, for which his effective sentence was
four-and-a-half years consisting of twenty-nine months of pre-sentence custody
credit and a twenty-five-month penitentiary sentence.  There is no doubt
that this is the sort of record that causes one to sit up and take notice.
9
.
By a rough
calculation, Mr. Mackenzie would have been twenty-three years old when he
committed the firearms offences that got him the equivalent of a four-and-a-half-year
sentence in November, 2020.
10
.
When I said Mr. Mackenzie's
record is troubling, however, I did not mean that it was troubling
only
because of the number or types of entries on his record.  There are at
least two other reasons why the record is troubling and those reasons do not
reflect poorly on Mr. Mackenzie, but rather poorly on the administration of
justice.
11
.
The first of these significant
concerns is that, at the age of twenty-nine Mr. Mackenzie has
never
had
the benefit of any of the following:  a pre-sentence report or a Gladue
report or a Gladue letter.  To approach that from the other side, the
people making significant decisions about Mr. Mackenzie, Mr. Mackenzie's moral
culpability and Mr. Mackenzie's freedom have
never
had the
benefit of a pre-sentence report or of a Gladue report or of a Gladue
letter.
12
.
The other significant concern is
that, with the exception of Mr. Mackenzie's first criminal record entry (for
failing to comply with a recognizance and failing to attend court when he was
fifteen years old), all but two of his eleven sentencings have resulted in real
jail sentences (He was given a thirty-day conditional sentence for possession
for the purpose of a controlled substance in 2017 and a suspended sentence for
an assault in Midland in 2019.)
[2]
Mr. Mackenzie’s Background
13
.
With respect to Mr. Mackenzie's
background, I am told that his father died when Mr. Mackenzie was only six
months old.  Mr. Mackenzie then did not learn about his indigenous roots
until shortly before his grandfather died and he has since done sweats and
pow-wows but has had limited exposure due to his upbringing.  The
Crown says he has shown limited engagement with the Hamilton Indian Centre, a
contention that Mr. Mackenzie disputed, saying contact opportunities were
limited.
14
.
Mr. Mackenzie was raised as one
of three children of a single mother, who had to work to support the
family.  As a result, she used her boyfriends and others as babysitters
and Mr. Mackenzie was repeatedly physically abused by them and locked in his
room, which led to him acting out in school and bullying.  He was taken
into care, but only briefly.  He changed schools often.  These are
among the classic seeds of poor outcomes.  As the American abolitionist
Frederick Douglass is
reputed
to have said, "it is easier to raise
strong children than it is to fix broken men."  (It may be that Mr.
Douglass is in the same category as Mark Twain, to whom many comments may have
been attributed falsely, but the sentiment is both consistent with Mr.
Douglass's perspective and, even more importantly, a brilliant encapsulation of
an enormous social failing in this country and others).
15
.
Around the time that Mr.
Mackenzie was fifteen or sixteen years old (also around the time of his first
interaction with the criminal courts), his mother left him behind in Cayuga
because she was unable to cope with his behavioural issues.  She left Mr.
Mackenzie in the care of a person who taught him trades, which was good. 
That person, however, also sexually abused Mr. Mackenzie, which is another seed
of future harm, both to Mr. Mackenzie and to others.
16
.
Mr. Mackenzie has worked at
various jobs including at Ford Motor Company and various roofing
companies.  He lost his most recent roofing employment as a result of a
previous charge relating to Ms. Hunter.  He has also run his own company
doing roofing, demolitions, scrap removal and the like.  He is also
training as an electrician.  He runs the business with Ms. Hunter and it
has lost projects during his incarceration on these charges.
17
.
He has been diagnosed from a young
age as bipolar and suffering from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,
Attention Deficit Disorder, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, major depression
and insomnia.  Ms. Valeri advises that Mr. Mackenzie deals with these
issues through medication, that he is fairly compliant with the medication
regimen and that he has been making efforts to have those medications provided
while in custody.  She said that he had run out of medications at the time
of the offences involving Ms. Hunter and acted out in their absence. 
  She also said that Mr. Mackenzie's Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
sometimes causes him to lash out in anger in situations where he feels
threatened.
Mr. Mackenzie’s and Ms. Hunter’s
Comments to the Court
18
.
I also heard from Mr. Mackenzie
directly and from Ms. Hunter.
19
.
Mr. Mackenzie spoke very
well.  He agreed that events sometimes trigger him, leading to anger and
to him doing "dumb stuff”. He said, "I try".
20
.
Mr. Mackenzie pointed to a
missing tooth and said that C.O. Chaisson, the corrections officer he
threatened to "pop off", was responsible for that, but that he
himself (Mr. Mackenzie) needs to learn to keep his mouth shut.  He said
that Chaisson had himself offered to meet Mr. Mackenzie across the street at
the time he allegedly caused Mr. Mackenzie to lose his tooth.
21
.
Mr. Mackenzie said he had a
traumatic childhood, which he volunteered was "no excuse”, adding, "I
need to stop my shenanigans".
22
.
Mr. Mackenzie presented a sheaf
of certificates from the Hamilton-Wentworth Detention Centre demonstrating his
completion of multiple programmes, workbooks and individual sessions focusing
heavily on anger management, relapse prevention, relationships and life
skills.  He had also done five DBT group sessions as of a week-and-a-half
ago.  These have all been done in the course of a couple of months.
23
.
Mr. Mackenzie said that in his
time in custody he has been engaged as a bathroom cleaner and that he
encounters black mold everywhere, including on food, the portions of which he
describes as tiny.  He did not see a doctor until after he had been in
custody for a month and that only happened after a call to the ombudsman. 
Even at that, he said, he is only getting some of his required medications. He
described conditions of serious overcrowding.  Mr. Mackenzie's
descriptions did not seem at all exaggerated; to the contrary they had the ring
of truth to them.  And his comments about overcrowding and access to
medical care and medications have long been asserted by defendants and their counsel
and triple-bunking at least has long been substantiated by institutional
records.  It all seems sadly reminiscent of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's plaintive
comment over a century ago that:
“A society
should be judged not by how it treats its outstanding citizens but by how it
treats its criminals.”  It is not that prison should be a luxury resort,
or that offenders should be able to cast all blame for their behaviours on
external factors, but rather that society should demonstrate by its own example
and behaviour toward its inmates the kind of treatment that society expects
inmates to show to other members of society, rather than disinterest,
deprivation and neglect (and sometimes worse), of the kind that many inmates
have already experienced elsewhere in their lives.  Experience suggests
that Dostoyevsky's enlightened perspective does not permeate the world of
corrections.  Indeed, recent scandalous events at Maplehurst Detention
Centre and the provincial government's tepid response (to use a charitable
word) to them lend real credence to inmate complaints about a broken
correctional system that the powers-that-be care nothing about.  The reality,
of course, is that badly run prison systems are perpetuators of criminal
behaviour, as are social conditions of poverty, child neglect, child abuse,
housing insecurity and limited access to mental health care among other
things.  Society’s entitlement to complain about much criminal behaviour is
hypocritical so long as society does not bother to deal with that criminal
behaviour’s roots.
24
.
Ms. Hunter, the victim of the
assault, was present in court throughout Mr. Mackenzie's sentencing
hearing.  She said that the police refused to take a statement from her
unless it incriminated Mr. Mackenzie.  She said the Crown's office refused
to accept a statement from her.  She said she had spoken to the Victim
Witness programme multiple times about her views.  She confirmed Mr.
Mackenzie's recent history and that he had reached out for help many times
leading to dead ends.  She has met with the Hamilton Region Indian
Centre.  She said that Mr. Mackenzie has volunteered his time to assist
her with her work in inner-city education.
Sentencing Principles
25
.
The
Criminal Code
defines
the objective of sentencing as the protection of society and enhancement of
respect for the law and of a just, peaceful and safe society.  To do this,
any sanction must focus on the denunciation of crime, deterrence of the
individual defendant and other potential offenders, as well as allowing for
reparations for harm done, the rehabilitation of the defendant and the creation
of a sense of responsibility in the offender.  It is worth noting that the
"separation of an offender from society", is explicitly qualified as
only "where necessary" and s. 718.2(d) specifically cautions against
the use of jail where other options may suffice.  In addition, s. 718.2(e)
says that all reasonable options other than jail should be considered for all
offenders, but especially for indigenous offenders.  No such restraint in
the use of imprisonment appears to have been exercised in most of Mr.
Mackenzie's sentencings.
The Present Case
26
.
There are obvious aggravating
factors present here.  A threat against a correctional officer arising
from his work in that role cannot be condoned, even where there may be
provocation, a factor that I am not in a position to accept or reject on the
record before me.
[3]
27
.
The assault on Ms. Hunter
occurred in the context of a domestic relationship, which is also an
aggravating feature, although I note that Ms. Hunter clearly wants to maintain
her relationship with Mr. Mackenzie, clearly perceives the police treatment of
Mr. Mackenzie as a bigger problem than Mr McKenzie is and feels more victimized
than protected by the process.  As with Mr. Mackenzie's assertion that
corrections officer Chaisson had injured him, I again cannot determine the real
facts underlying Ms. Hunter's comments, but if the police declined to take her
statement because it would not help in the prosecution of Mr. Mackenzie, that
would be a fundamental and shameful breach of their duties as keepers of the
peace; it is not the role of the police to determine the right and wrong of
allegations or to filter out narratives that do not match their preferred
outcome.  With respect to the demonstrated facts on the plea, however,
they are limited to the fact that Mr. Mackenzie chased Ms. Hunter and shoved
her while holding a knife.  That technically makes out the offence of
assault with a weapon, but the record before me does not go beyond the idea
that the assault happened
while holding a knife
as opposed to the knife
specifically being used to cause injury.  Mr. Mackenzie's version that he
had been stripping wire with the knife before the confrontation cannot be
ignored.
28
.
Mr. Mackenzie's record is obviously alarming,
as I have said before.  Although there is limited violence on it, one of
those violent offences is an aggravated assault and there are several weapons
offences and a history of disobeying court orders.  Sentences will tend to
increase as an offender's criminal record expands.
29
.
The "cardinal
principle" of sentencing, however, is that it must be proportional; it
must match the objective seriousness of the offences and the offender's moral
responsibility.  While Mr. Mackenzie, to his credit, is right that his
conduct cannot be excused by his awful childhood (which is rather an
understatement for chronic neglect, deprivation, parental abandonment and
physical and sexual abuse by people entrusted with the care of a child), his
moral responsibility cannot be properly measured without reference to that
history and to the mental health consequences that, entirely unsurprisingly,
ensued from that.  To expect him to have emerged from that background and
conducted himself flawlessly in society would be the height of delusional
thinking.
30
.
It is not my role to conduct a
royal commission on Mr. Mackenzie's historic treatment by the criminal justice
system.  I was not there.  I do not know what was said or unsaid in
the past.  However, some of the items I mentioned earlier are glaringly
incomprehensible, so it is also not my role blindly to use those
sentences as determinative of the outcome before me in light of what I
have noted in these reasons.  Mr. Mackenzie's second sentence as a youth (for
breach of recognizance and threatening), which involved sixty-three days of
pre-sentence custody as a seventeen-year old, did not happen under the
dystopian, early twentieth-century
Juvenile Delinquents Act
, or
even the intervening
Young Offenders Act
of 1984
,
but a whole
decade after the introduction of the
Youth Criminal Justice Act
in 2003,
which was supposed to herald a new age in the treatment of young offenders and
a genuine understanding of the fundamental differences between young offenders
and mature adults in relation to criminal behaviour.  That sentence, as
well as his first adult sentence, at age nineteen, of an equivalent eight
months' imprisonment for simple possession of a controlled substance and
possession of a prohibited or restricted weapon (most commonly switchblades,
flick-knives, mace, brass knuckles and the like) are very hard to reconcile
with the long-established proposition calling for real restraint in the use of
prison for youths and for youngish adult offenders.  That proposition was
not
established
almost thirty years ago by the judgment of
Rosenberg J.A. speaking for the Court of Appeal
in
R. v. Priest,
1996
CanLII 1381
, although it was very clearly
emphasized
there; to the
contrary, the
Priest
court was simply reaffirming what the Court of
Appeal  had said in a 1974 decision, twenty-one years before Mr. Mackenzie was
born.  These sentences, first two months as a young offender and then
eight months as a nineteen-year-old, even if those courts knew
nothing
of
Mr. Mackenzie's awful upbringing and nothing of his indigenous antecedents, are
as hard to fathom and as hard to reconcile with established principles of
sentencing as they are likely to have further damaged Mr. Mackenzie.  The
absence of a pre-sentence report is also hard to understand.  Most
recently, we have Mr. Mackenzie being sentenced to a mid-single-digits
penitentiary equivalent, for offences committed as a twenty-three year old,
again without a pre-sentence report.
31
.
The absence of a Gladue report
on these various historical sentencings is harder to measure as the
chronology is not clear as to when Mr. Mackenzie became aware of his indigenous
background.  I stress, however, that his lack of knowledge of that
background does not make the background irrelevant as a sentencing
consideration now that it is known:  it is the generational damage lurking
in his history that deserves attention, not his personal knowledge of that
history.  (I note that a Gladue report was waived in this instance; I
certainly understand that as:  (a) the Crown's position on sentence, a
remnant of perhaps three months would almost certainly have disqualified him
for a Gladue report, and (b) the same would likely be true for a Gladue, and
(c) the timelines required to do either would, in this case (but not in the
2020 firearms case) have been self-defeating.)
32
.
In coming to what I consider to
be a fit sentence for Mr. Mackenzie, I have taken into account the nature of
his offences, including their aggravating circumstances and including his
criminal record.  I also take into account his guilty pleas, which are
widely recognized as, at a minimum, saving court time, which continues to be of
significant concern as the courts continue to try to achieve timely outcomes in
a post-Covid and
Jordan
world.  Quite apart from that, having
listened to Mr. Mackenzie at substantial length, I take him to have meaningful
insight into his issues and challenges, a real desire to stick to his
medications and control his impulses and a desire to do better in the future. 
None of this will be easy because his challenges are great, because the damage
done to him has been great and, with respect, I am not confident that the
criminal justice system has done a very good job of improving his chances of
success.  This, of course, does not excuse Mr. Mackenzie of all
responsibility and he has over the years paid a substantial cost for his
offences, but it would be unjust to deny that which is glaringly obvious
here:  that Mr. Mackenzie's moral responsibility is shared with the society
that created him.  In the words of the poet W.H. Auden:
I and the public know
What all schoolchildren learn
Those to whom evil is done
Do evil in return.
33
.
Mr. Mackenzie has
an uphill battle to avoid future offences; indeed there is no guarantee that he
will not re-offend, perhaps in a small way, perhaps in a greater way.  But
criminal sentences are not capable of guaranteeing safe outcomes unless we
"warehouse" offenders, the very word of which is offensive.  If
society gives him the supports he needs and if he commits himself to engaging
with that support, to picking himself up and starting again when he trips up,
to complying with his medication needs and to learning to ignore every real or
perceived provocation, which he seems to be trying to do, then this could turn
out well.
34
.
As for the
appropriate sentence, I see no valid role for additional jail time here. 
I share with Ms. Hunter the view that whatever mechanism will assist Mr.
Mackenzie to rehabilitation and thereby to make society safer, jail is not that
mechanism.
35
.
I am satisfied
that the appropriate sentence to be imposed here is as follows:
a.
On the
charge of threatening, thirty days of pre-sentence custody will be noted as the
equivalent of forty-five days.
b.
On the
charge of assault with a weapon, twenty days of pre-sentence custody
consecutive will be noted as the equivalent of thirty days.
c.
On the
charge of failing to comply with a recognizance, four days of pre-sentence
custody consecutive will be noted as the equivalent of six days.  (This
reflects the fact that the knife's brief status as a weapon was both brief and
very much situational).
36
.
This amounts to a
total of fifty-four real days of pre-sentence custody, the equivalent of
eighty-one days at the usual ratio of one-and-a-half to one day.
37
.
In addition to the
pre-sentence custody, I suspend the passage of sentence and place Mr. Mackenzie
on probation for two years on the following conditions:
a.
Report
to probation within four days and thereafter as required.
b.
Not to
have any contact or communication with Mackenzie Chaisson unless required while
in custody.
c.
Not to
be within twenty metres of Mackenzie Chaisson or any place he lives, works,
attends school or is otherwise known to be unless required while in custody.
d.
Attend
for assessment and counselling as directed by probation, including but not
limited to intimate partner violence, trauma, mental health and substance
abuse.  It is recommended that this incorporate indigenous-focused
programming including in cooperation with the Hamilton Regional Indian Centre
or similar indigenous organizations.
e.
Sign
releases and provide proof of compliance.
38
.
There will be an
order under
s. 100
of the
Criminal Code
for five years.
39
.
The assault with a
weapon is a primary designated offence for the purposes of the DNA
registry.  Mr. Mackenzie will have thirty days to provide a DNA sample.
40
.
In light of what I
have heard from Ms. Hunter about the family's financial situation, I am
satisfied that imposing the victim surcharge would cause a substantial hardship
and so the victim surcharge is waived.
Released:  11 August,
2025
[1]
I do not recall “lunch bag” as
being among the “characteristics of an armed person”, although obviously one
has to be cognizant that any form of baggage “could” carry a weapon as easily
as it carries legitimate items.  That fact may be one relevant consideration
for a public officer assessing his or her safety and public safety in dealing
with an individual, but the establishment of reasonable suspicion or reasonable
grounds is very, very different from proving a fact beyond a reasonable doubt,
which is the standard for any aggravating fact on a criminal sentencing
hearing.
[2]
The record did not say whether
or not there had been pre-sentence custody on either of these sentences.
[3]
There was no victim-impact
statement from C.O. Chaisson and no evidence led with respect to Mr.
Mackenzie’s allegation that C.O. Chaisson had injured him, so I cannot reach
any conclusions, but I did notice throughout Mr. Mackenzie’s comments that he
was not shy about admitting his own shortcomings.