CITATION:
R. v. Culp
, 2025 ONCJ 698
DATE:
 December 15, 2025
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HER  MAJESTY  THE  QUEEN
—  AND  —
SHANE CULP
Before
Justice Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for judgment released on 15 December, 2025
Michael
Lucifora....................................................................................................  
for the Crown
Mark
Evans.................................................................................  
for the defendant, Shane Culp
Fergus
ODonnell J.:
Overview
1
.
Most people go
through life without ever being investigated for impaired driving.  Some
get investigated once in their lives.  An even smaller number get
investigated for impaired driving twice.  It is exceedingly rare, however,
for a person to be investigated for impaired driving twice in the same
day.  Shane Culp is one of that exceedingly small number of people. 
He was investigated by the police twice in the same evening, in very similar
circumstances, about three hours and twenty kilometres apart.  On the
first occasion the two responding officers sent Mr. Culp on his way, much
to the consternation of the citizen who called them.  The responding
officer on the second occasion, however, arrested Mr. Culp for operating or
having care and control of his car while allegedly being impaired by a drug, a
charge that Mr. Culp contested over a two-day trial.
2
.
The facts are
fairly straightforward, being unusual mostly in their slightly
deja-vu
character.  It is mid-October, 2023.  Victoria Cardill's neighbour in
Niagara Falls alerts her to a man in a parked car and Ms. Cardill accompanies
her neighbour and sees Mr. Culp slumped over in the driver's seat of his car,
with the engine running and the interior light on.  He is holding a
lighter in one hand and some tin foil with something crystalline on it in the
other.
[1]
There are other pieces of tin foil on the passenger seat.  Ms. Cardill
calls 911, not knowing if Mr. Culp is alive or dead.  After a while two
police officers attend and speak with Mr. Culp and Ms. Cardill shows them
videos of what she had seen when she first approached Mr. Culp's car.  
The officers said there was no reason to hold Mr. Culp and Ms. Cardill berated
them, asking what if it was their child that Mr. Culp killed on the road. 
This tongue-lashing apparently did not cause the officers to reconsider their
appraisal of Mr. Culp's driving condition.  Ms. Cardill provided her video
and photo of Mr. Culp in his car to the police after being told the next day
that Mr. Culp had been arrested by another officer in Stevensville later that
night.
3
.
Neither the
Crown nor the defence called either of the two responding Niagara Falls
officers at the trial.
4
.
Perhaps an hour
later and about twenty kilometres away, Lorelai Laverne is rounding out her
evening shift at Tim Horton's in Stevensville when she sees Mr. Culp's car
parked across the street in a plaza whose businesses are all closed at
that hour.  When she finishes work two hours after that first observation,
she rides past the car and sees Mr. Culp inside, his head bobbing up and
down.  She thinks he is drunk or high, more likely the latter. 
 She rides to grandma's house nearby and returns with grandma, Donna
Burton, who also testified, whereupon they call the police. She is worried about the
driver's and other people's safety.
5
.
Constable Kayla
Bays responds to the Stevensville 911 call; she also has access to the details
of the police response in Niagara Falls earlier that evening.  Her trial
testimony demonstrates her to be a capable, clear and balanced
witness.  She finds Mr. Culp in the driver's seat of his
car, "not awake",
[2]
with his head slouched down. On his lap she sees tin foil with burn marks and a
glass pipe, also with burn marks. The engine is running.  Mr. Culp is
non-responsive, but wakes up, seemingly startled, when Constable Bays opens the
driver's door.  She sees him put the tin foil and pipe on the passenger
seat.  He is unable to find his driver's licence, although it was also on
the passenger seat, but there are a lot of things on that seat.  He
is very nervous, speaking quickly and stuttering.  He turns off the car as
directed and is very cooperative.  Constable Bays arrests him for
drug-impaired driving. She finds only drug paraphernalia (there is no
realistic dispute about its nature) in his car, not any non-prescription
controlled substances. In her cruiser Mr. Culp starts to blurt out comments
about how any drug paraphernalia or drugs in the car are not his and about the
many travails he has been enduring in his personal life.  In her
communications with Mr. Culp, Constable Bays says he seems to understand what
she is saying and that his responses make sense.
6
.
At the station
Constable Bays describes everything she has observed to the drug recognition
expert ("DRE"), Constable Frank Chadwick before handing Mr. Culp over
to him for examination.
7
.
Constable
Chadwick is both a breath technician and a DRE.  He obtained his DRE
qualifications about sixteen months before these events, including training in
Canada and the United States.  In performing his duties as a DRE he is
guided by that specialized training and by a script of factors to test for and
assess before coming to a conclusion about whether or not a test subject is
impaired by a drug and, if so, what drug or drugs he believes to underlie that
impairment.  If a DRE makes a finding of impairment by drug, he or she can
then require a urine sample which is then sent for laboratory analysis to
determine the presence of particular drugs in the subject's urine.  The
DRE could also require a blood sample, a more powerful evidentiary tool than
urinalysis, but that was not done here.
8
.
In his
testimony Constable Chadwick first went through the various steps involved in
DRE examinations, explaining the relevance of each test in general terms. 
He thereafter went through Mr. Culp's particular results on each step, explaining
the possible significance of various results within the context of indicators
of use of various drug types, what are deemed to be "normal" ranges
for people (e.g. a range of blood pressures or pulses or measured time
estimates) and some external factors that might affect the outcomes on some of
the stages.  He stressed on a couple of occasions that no individual
marker was determinative and that his conclusion was based on a consideration
of all of the results, negative and positive (my words, not his) taken
cumulatively as run through his DRE "matrix" (his word).
9
.
Constable
Chadwick testified in a thorough and detailed way, clearly familiar with
and comfortable with the subject matter of his expertise.  Constable
Chadwick concluded that Mr. Culp was impaired by a central nervous system
stimulant, which would include cocaine and amphetamines,
and
by a narcotic analgesic, which would
include fentanyl, methadone and suboxone.  A urine sample was taken from
Mr. Culp in light of Constable Chadwick's conclusion and the lab report was
entered in evidence; drugs from the two categories identified by Constable
Chadwick were indeed identified in the urinalysis from the lab, along with
various prescription drugs.  As a matter of science, the report makes
it clear that the presence of a drug in a urine sample demonstrates only prior
drug use or exposure and that drugs present only in urine in no way impair a
person's ability to operate a motor vehicle, nor do they prove the presence of
those drugs in a person's blood at the time of the sample.
10
.
A blood sample, along with
very brief scientific evidence, would provide more robust evidence of what, if
any, drugs were actually active in Mr. Culp's system.  As noted, there was
no blood sample taken in this case.  It is, of course, a decision for the
police to make about whether or not to seek a blood sample.  Resource
issues may play into that decision. If the case can be proved beyond a
reasonable doubt with only a urinalysis, so be it.  If the case falls
short as a result of the absence of a blood sample and supporting expert
evidence, that is an outcome that the state must live with in light of the
investigative choices made.
11
.
With respect to the DRE
examination, Constable Chadwick testified that it was recorded, but no video of
the DRE examination was presented in court.  Here again, those are choices
outside the court's control.  How the parties present their case is their
business, but those choices may affect the strength of either the Crown or
defence case depending on the circumstances.  Generally speaking, however,
the old adage that "a picture is worth a thousand words" is magnified
a thousandfold when it comes to video evidence: a witness's verbal description
of an event, hampered by normal human frailties such as limits on observation,
retention, recounting and objectivity
[3]
pales vastly compared with the harshly objective camera lens and its ability to
see all, capture all and recite all unbound by those human limitations. 
Universally speaking, the onus is on the Crown to prove its case beyond a
reasonable doubt, whereas the defence almost never bears any onus (other than
perhaps to rebut a legal presumption that runs contrary to the defendant's
interests).
12
.
The following provisions
of
s. 320.31
of the
Criminal Code
are relevant to Constable Chadwick's
evidence:
(5)
An
evaluating officer’s opinion relating to the impairment, by a type of drug that
they identified....of a person’s ability to operate a conveyance is admissible
in evidence without qualifying the evaluating officer as an expert.
(6)
If the
analysis of a sample provided under subsection 320.28(4) demonstrates that the
person has a drug in their body that is of a type that the evaluating officer
has identified as impairing the person’s ability to operate a conveyance, that
drug .....is presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to be the
drug.... that was present in the person’s body at the time when the person
operated the conveyance and, on proof of the person’s impairment, to have been
the cause of that impairment.
13
.
Thus:
(a). The Crown is not
required to prove Constable Chadwick's expertise; his expertise is established
by the
Criminal Code
and
by his designation as a drug recognition expert accredited by the International
Association of Chiefs of Police (the criterion for an "evaluating
officer" established in the regulations under the
Criminal Code.
)
(b). If a blood or urine
sample shows the presence of a drug or drugs matching those identified by the
DRE as a result of his physical testing of Mr. Culp, the court is required to
accept that that drug or those drugs were also present at the time of the
alleged offence (since the DRE testing and urine or blood samples may be some
hours apart from the time of driving).  Also, if the court determines that
Mr. Culp's ability to operate the conveyance was impaired to any extent, the
drug(s) identified are presumed to have been the cause of that impairment.
(c) The two presumptions
established above can be overcome by "evidence to the contrary", for
example evidence that creates reasonable doubt about the validity of the
presumption.
14
.
Given Constable Chadwick's
opinion and the urinalysis which showed the presence of drugs of the classes he
identified in Mr. Culp's urine and as a result of s. 320.31(6) there is thus a
rebuttable presumption that those drugs were in Mr. Culp's body at the time he
had care and control of the car in Stevensville (i.e. that his state of
impairment was the same at the time of arrest as it was at the time of evaluation)
and, if he is proved to have been impaired in relation to operating a
conveyance, that those drugs were the cause of the impairment.
15
.
Mr. Culp testified. 
The first question he was asked was whether he was nervous and he said he
was.  My very strong impression from watching Mr. Culp through the whole
of the trial was that he is a person who spends a lot of his life being
nervous.  Indeed, he testified to suffering from an anxiety disorder as
well as borderline personality disorder, attention deficit disorder and
depression.  Constable Bays’s evidence also supports Mr. Culp’s evidence
about being anxious.  Mr. Culp is 37 years old.  He testified that he was
born with one leg shorter than the other, which causes him problems with
balance and which specifically affected his ability to perform the heel-to-toe
test and the one-leg balance test.  He says he has trouble walking
straight at the best of times. At five feet and three inches tall, Mr. Culp
weighs two-hundred-and-fifty pounds.  His physical ailments include high
blood pressure.
16
.
Mr. Culp has also been a
user of non-prescription controlled substances, starting around 2017.  He
began with morphine and has used fentanyl and cocaine (the latter two of which
were in his urinalysis), but not methamphetamine (which was also one of the
substances in his urinalysis).
[4]
He testified that as of the time of the trial the only controlled substance he
was on was methadone (also in the urinalysis), which he had been on for about
six years in order to control his addiction.  He testified that he is
allowed "full carries", which means he only has to visit the
methadone clinic once a week, whereupon he is allowed to leave with his
methadone for self-administration for the next six days.  He said that he
is subject to urinalysis every two weeks and that failing a test would
disqualify him from his full carries and require him to attend daily for his
methadone.  He testified that he had had clean urine tests for almost two
years, which would have taken him back to around the time of the alleged
offence (nineteen-and-a-half months before the trial).  He said that with
the help of the methadone he has his drug issue under control.  He said
that his arrest scared him straight and that he no longer associates with the
people he had been associating with the weekend of his arrest.
17
.
Mr. Culp said that when he
was stopped by the police he was on his way home to Ridgeway on a Sunday night
after spending Saturday and Sunday at a friend's birthday celebration in
Niagara Falls, where he and some now-former friends hung out and
"chilled."  He said that he  didn't sleep much at all
because he was sleeping on the couch and people were arguing during the night. 
He said that around midday on Saturday he had taken some fentanyl and some cocaine. 
He was unaware that either of those was adulterated with any of the other
street drugs in his urinalysis.  He didn't take any other drugs after
about five o'clock on Saturday afternoon because he ran out.  He had last
taken his prescribed methadone when he left his home on Saturday morning.
18
.
Mr. Culp testified that he
pulled over only a few blocks after leaving his friend's house in Niagara Falls
because he was too tired and wanted to sleep.  This would have been in
front of Ms. Cardill’s home.  He was awakened by the first police
officers.  He testified that he had not used any drugs in the car because
he didn't have any but admitted the presence of the foil, lighter and so
on.  He said that the officers searched his car and let him go.  He
then proceeded on his way home but stopped again about twenty minutes later
because he was tired and didn't feel it was safe to continue the last ten or
fifteen minutes to his house.  He said that he was awakened again, this
time by Constable Bays who he said rushed him and didn't really allow him time
to find his documents.  At the station he described his anxiety as a 10/10
and said he was shaking and fidgeting.  He attributed his failure to tell
Constable Chadwick about his balance and other issues to his nervousness:
 "I was a mess."
19
.
When cross-examined about
why he had a lighter in one hand and tin foil in the other when he was passed
out in Niagara Falls, Mr. Culp said he had just picked up the foil and that he
might have been planning on smoking a cigarette.  To be charitable to a
witness I consider to have been mostly reliable, this was not the most
convincing part of his evidence; even he agreed that most people wouldn't
believe it and would think he had just smoked drugs.  His testimony that
he was surprised that there was any methamphetamine in his system, that he had
lent his car to another person at the party on Saturday and that another piece
of foil and crack pipes in the car were not his was more convincing. 
Within the context of the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
R. v. W. (D.),
that testimony at a minimum
creates doubt about the relevance of some pieces of evidence to Mr. Culp’s
guilt.
20
.
In cases of this nature,
the key questions a court has to address are whether or not the Crown has
proved beyond a reasonable doubt that:
(a)
Mr. Culp was
operating or had care and control of a conveyance.  Mr. Evans made no
contest about this issue, reasonably so.
(b)
Mr. Culp's
ability to operate that conveyance was impaired at least to some extent.
(c)
That impairment
was caused by alcohol or a drug.
21
.
Those determinations have
to be made on all of the evidence.  The Crown has the benefit of certain
"helping hands" in making its case, including, for example, the
statutory recognition of the DRE officers as experts and the rebuttable
presumption that if the DRE's drug identifications are consistent with the
urinalysis results, then those drugs are proved to have been in the defendant's
body at the time of driving and, if he was impaired, to have been the cause of
the impairment.  It goes without saying that a rebuttable presumption is
not necessarily determinative of the outcome of the trial, nor is the DRE's
status as a statutorily recognized expert.  As in any trial, the ultimate
question is whether or not the Crown has proved its case beyond a reasonable
doubt, taking into account the quality of the Crown's evidence and the impact
of any defence evidence.
22
.
The defendant, Mr. Culp,
has the benefit of certain helping hands in this case also.  These include
the presumption of innocence, the burden of proof on the Crown to prove its
case in a criminal prosecution and the Crown's burden being to prove its case
beyond a reasonable doubt, a very high standard.  Having testified, Mr.
Culp's evidence must also be assessed as described by the Supreme Court of
Canada in
R. v. W.(D.),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
.
23
.
In
R. v. Bingley,
2017 SCC 12
, the Supreme Court of
Canada made the following observations about the roles of different players in
drug-impaired driving cases:
[
30
]  
    The statutory framework does not undermine a trial judge’s
important role as gatekeeper to safeguard the trial process and ensure that it
is not distorted by improper expert opinion evidence. The trial judge always maintains
residual discretion to exclude evidence if its probative value is outweighed by
its prejudicial effect. Limitations, such as the absence of a standardized
approach to weighing the various tests in reaching a determination, may affect
the probative value of a DRE’s opinion evidence. A DRE may be unable to explain
how he or she made the determination based on the application of the 12-step
evaluation. If the probative value of an individual DRE’s evidence is so
diminished that the benefits in admitting the evidence are outweighed by the
potential harm to the trial process, a trial judge retains the discretion to
exclude that evidence. I reiterate here that the focus of the analysis must be
on the DRE’s administration of the evaluation, not on the reliability of the
steps underlying the evaluation, which have been prescribed by
Parliament.
[
31
]
It is also important to note that the determination
of the DRE is not conclusive of the ultimate question of whether the accused
was driving while impaired by a drug. The DRE’s task is to determine whether
the evaluation indicates drug impairment. The DRE’s evidence does not presume
the ultimate issue of guilt; it is merely one piece of the picture for the
judge or jury to consider.
[
32
]
That Parliament has established the reliability of the
12-step drug evaluation by statute does not hinder the trier of fact’s ability
to critically assess a DRE’s conclusion of impairment or an accused person’s
right to test that evidence. Cross-examination of the DRE may undermine his or
her conclusion
. Evidence of bias may raise doubt about the officer’s
conclusion. The officer may fail to conduct the drug recognition evaluation in
accordance with his or her training.
A
DRE may draw questionable inferences from his or her observations.
Bodily sample evidence obtained
under s. 254(3.4) may refute the DRE’s assessment, as may evidence of
bystanders or other experts. It will always be for the trier of fact to
determine what weight to give a DRE’s opinion. Any weight given to a DRE’s
evidence will necessarily respect the scope of the DRE’s expertise and the fact
that it is not conclusive of impairment.
(emphasis added)
(Obviously, the comments above are subject to
the post-
Bingley
statutory changes, such as the presumption that is
now found in
s. 320.31(6)
of the
Criminal
Code
).
24
.
Mr. Evans suggested that
Mr. Culp should be found not guilty because, to Mr. Evans's recollection
Constable Chadwick referred in his conclusion only to Mr. Culp being
"impaired" and not to "his ability
to drive
being impaired".  Mr. Evans
may be correct that Constable Chadwick did not use that precise incantation in
his final statement of opinion in the stand (my notes show that he did not use
the word "drive" or something similar), but he did say earlier, right
after outlining the process, that the entire purpose of his examination was,
"to determine if his ability to operate a conveyance was impaired by a
drug or alcohol".  I have no doubt that Constable Chadwick's
conclusion related specifically to Mr. Culp's ability to drive.
25
.
The Crown opened his
submissions with an admonition
[5]
that in determining the outcome of the case the court should consider that
Constable Chadwick was "right" because in his DRE examination he
properly identified two classes of substance that were later identified in Mr.
Culp's urinalysis.  I, "need to keep that in mind in considering his
evidence," he said.
26
.
I am forced to demur on
the relevance or at least the force of that conclusion.
To the extent
that it applies
, I am obviously bound by the presumption set out in the
Criminal Code
, but I am also
bound to remember that it is a rebuttable presumption and by the simple reality
that the DRE is not the trier of fact, the court is.
[6]
Presumptions can be rebutted in a variety of ways, including from weaknesses in
the evidence of the party relying on the presumption or in contradictions or
strengths from other evidence.  With respect to Constable Chadwick
"getting it right", there is one glaring counterpoint (as well as
more issues below):  the classes of drugs identified by Constable Chadwick
happened to coincide perfectly with the paraphernalia observed by Constable
Bays in Mr. Culp's car.  While the drug recognition framework is set out
by Parliament and by regulation, it remains that the framework is only one
piece of evidence and that it must be measured like any other piece of evidence
(albeit with a rebuttable presumption, where triggered) in terms of any
weaknesses or counterpoints (indeed weaknesses and counterpoints may on the
facts of a given case be what rebuts the presumption).  If this were a
case in which Constable Chadwick had not been given any helping hand with his
analysis based on items found in Mr. Culp's vicinity, then the Crown's
submission would have greater force, but the inclusion of those factors within
his determination does force one to be alive to the issue of
potential pre-judgment based on criteria arguably outside those
established in the regulations.  It is obviously Parliament's prerogative
to establish the DRE scheme (and regulations) to combat a real and present
danger to users of the roads, but the determination of any given prosecution
will necessarily involve consideration of any weaknesses in the evidence,
including any features in the legislative formula that could undermine
reliability of the DRE's conclusions in some cases.
(I also note that when challenged in
cross-examination with an alternate explanation for Mr. Culp's test results,
Constable Chadwick's response was that he was right because Mr. Culp was in a
car with a crack pipe and the drugs he identified matched the urinalysis
results.
Ex post facto
“confirmation”, especially
ex post facto
confirmation only of the presence of some undefined amount of various
substances in the defendant’s body at some undefined point in the past, which
is what the urinalysis results are limited to, is far from the sturdiest of
backstops).
27
.
I also disagree with the
Crown's position that Mr. Culp admitted his driving was affected by his
sleepiness.
[7]
It is true that he admitted he stopped driving on two occasions because he felt
it was imprudent to carry on because of sleep (not drugs), but he also
testified that he had not fallen asleep at the wheel and felt it would be more
responsible to park because he was losing focus.  That thought process,
which I accept as true, is a sign of rational decision-making, not impaired
judgment.  There is, in this case, absolutely no evidence of unsafe or
erratic driving.  To the contrary, there is evidence of Mr. Culp pulling
over, even despite being close to his home, parking safely and sleeping for up
to two hours before being roused, all of which could be taken as evidence of prudence
rather than impairment.
28
.
Obviously, the greatest
weakness in Mr. Culp's testimony is the image of him holding a lighter and tin
foil when he parked the car in Niagara Falls.  I agree with the Crown that
that piece of his evidence does not make much sense.  It is, by far, the
most challenging part of Mr. Culp's evidence, so much so that even Mr. Culp
recognizes that to be so, a recognition he offered with no
resistance.  At the same time, the evidence establishes to my satisfaction
that the first two police officers (in Niagara Falls) interacted with Mr. Culp,
searched him and told him to drive home (despite being berated by Ms. Cardill
for endangering the public by doing so), hours before Constable Bays arrested
him.  I am not satisfied that Constable Bays's evidence about his
difficulty getting his driver's licence is more reliable than Mr. Culp's
evidence that she allowed him no time to get it before arresting him.  If
he ingested anything in Niagara Falls, there is no strong evidence of what it
was, what effect it would have had on his ability to drive or how long those
effects would have lasted (a blood sample might well have determined those
issues one way or the other).  There is no evidence of ingestion in
Stevensville.  There is no suggestion that alcohol was involved at any
point.
29
.
Realistically, what we
have in this case is Ms. Cardill's observations in Niagara Falls, the
observations of the civilian witnesses and Constable Bays in Stevensville and
Constable Chadwick's analysis, plus Mr. Culp's own evidence.
30
.
I accept Mr. Culp's
evidence about his physical and emotional health issues and, at a minimum I am
left with a reasonable doubt about his actual ingestion of controlled
substances at any time after around 5 p.m. on Saturday (the arrest having taken
place about thirty hours later).  I accept that he failed to notify Constable
Chadwick about some of those health issues that would have been relevant to the
administration or analysis of the DRE examination, but I do not doubt the
existence of those issues as described by Mr. Culp and I accept his anxiousness
as the reason he failed to mention them.  Some of his various issues seem
plausible or probable simply upon his physical presentation (e.g. the anxiety,
balance issues) and some of them are consistent with the Crown's own
scientist's urinalysis notes (e.g. medications for depression and high blood
pressure).
31
.
The Crown's DRE evidence suffers
from the following weaknesses:
(a)
I have only
Constable Chadwick's description of events rather than the video evidence of
the examination.  As noted earlier, this is a poor substitute for the
video, not because of any weakness inherent in Constable Chadwick but because
the video will almost always provide a more complete, more nuanced and more
reliable record.  I do not propose to get into a detailed discussion of
the ambit of the "best evidence" rule, but commend the comments of
the Alberta Court of Appeal some thirty years ago (albeit in a very different
context) at paragraphs 6 and 7 of
R. v. After Dark Enterprises Ltd.,
1994 ABCA 360
, wherein the general
benefits of video evidence over fallible human descriptions of events are
noted.  This is not to say that I think Constable Chadwick was making
things up, only that better evidence was available and not presented so I
cannot be as confident as I might be about the details, for example, of the
physical coordination tests.
(b)
Constable
Chadwick was self-contradictory about the relevance of a test subject's
personal details for his testing.  At one point in cross-examination, he
specifically said that age, height, body shape, etc. had no relevance to the
testing (and presumably the conclusions).  When asked if Mr. Culp's body
shape ("carrying an extra sixty or seventy pounds" in Mr. Evans's
words, which is consistent with Mr. Culp's own evidence) would not create more
difficulty with the coordination tests, Constable Chadwick answered, "I'm
not a doctor. I can't say."  Quite apart from those dismissive
answers being patently absurd on the facts of this case, in re-examination
Constable Chadwick said that he would take into account if a person needed extra
accommodation for age or fitness, adding, "I'm not going to expect a
one-leg stand to go well for a ninety-year-old".  The inconsistency
in his responses seemed to align with whether he was being examined by
defence or Crown counsel.
(c)
As with other
legal concepts such as reasonable grounds, the DRE conclusion is supposed to be
a totality of the circumstances process, where individual results are not
determinative.  That being said, when there are weaknesses or real
ambiguities in multiple factors, the ultimate conclusion necessarily becomes increasingly
frail.  I am not confident that Constable Chadwick truly recognized that
reality and meaningfully applied it in his analysis and conclusion.  For
example, Mr. Culp was one second out of the "normal" range in his
estimate of how long thirty seconds was.  Obviously it was outside
"normal", but only by the smallest of measures, and Mr. Culp
explained that he got to that point by counting it out-individual results may
vary.  Mr Culp's failure of the one-leg balance test including his tremors
at that time strike me as having zero reliability as a consideration in the
circumstances of this case; I would suspect that the likelihood of someone with
his body composition passing the one-leg balance test is approximately
nil.  I accept Mr. Culp's evidence about his legs being unequal since
birth, which undermines any reliance on loss of balance.  As set out herein
there were sufficient of the criteria being assessed by Constable Chadwick that
suffered from such frailties for his ultimate conclusion to become
unsupportable.  It is not so much a situation of “nothing plus nothing makes
nothing” as “not much plus not much plus maybe plus perhaps does not equal
proof beyond a reasonable doubt.”
(d)
It also seemed
that whenever there was a result that appeared neutral or innocent, Constable
Chadwick was a bit too ready to reject any innocent explanation.  For
example, Mr. Culp's muscle tone was normal.  Some drugs would cause
rigidity he said, some drugs would cause muscles to be flaccid, but he went on
to explain that antagonistic drugs might even out for normal muscle tone. 
He chose to go with the antagonistic explanation rather than another
explanation, the rejection of which he did not explain, i.e. that, the absence
of
any
drugs could lead to normal muscle tone just as readily as the
presence of multiple antagonistic drugs.  Any weight to be given to a
factor like that seems dubious when it is so ambiguous.  The same was done
with Mr. Culp's pulse and pupil size, which were normal.
(e)
Mr. Culp's
vital signs were generally fine, other than his blood pressure, for which he
was taking medication.
(f)
Mr. Culp's
drowsiness could have been the effect of a narcotic analgesic as Constable
Chadwick opined or it could have been the effect of someone who had slept very
poorly as Mr. Culp testified.
32
.
Having considered all of
the evidence, I accept the bulk of Mr. Culp's evidence as being truthful,
although I have concerns about what exactly he was doing before he passed out
or fell asleep in his car in Niagara Falls with the lighter and tin foil in his
hands.  In particular, leaving that aside I accept his evidence about his
drug consumption otherwise ending late in the afternoon of Saturday, a version
that is implicitly bolstered by the fact that when the police officers in
Niagara Falls interacted with him they took no steps to stop him from driving,
even in the face of condemnation from the redoubtable Ms. Cardill.
33
.
I have no reason to doubt
the honesty or for that matter the reliability of any of the Crown's factual
witnesses, but as noted I have precious little reason to doubt Mr. Culp's
honesty or reliability, subject to my concerns about what Ms. Cardill saw in his
hands in Niagara Falls.  More than that, I accept much of what he said as
true. The simple reality is that the Crown's case here leans very, very heavily
on Constable Chadwick's opinion evidence and given the concerns I have raised
that evidence is simply not convincing enough.
34
.
In the result, having
considered all of the evidence and argument:
(a).  I am not
satisfied that the Crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Culp's
ability to operate a conveyance was impaired that day.
(b).  Even if his
ability to operate a conveyance was impaired in any way by some influence, the
evidence does not establish that that influence was alcohol, a drug or a
combination thereof.
(c).  To the extent
that the presumption in
s. 320.31(6)
of the
Criminal
Code
might have been triggered, that presumption has clearly been
overcome by the weaknesses in Constable Chadwick's evidence and the strengths
in Mr. Culp's.
It is for these reasons that I have  found
Mr. Culp not guilty
Released:
15 December, 2025
[1]
There was no analysis of any of the
items or residue on them that were observed in Mr. Culp’s car during either of
his police interactions that evening, although judicial notice can certainly be
taken of the fact that the foil, lighter, glass pipes, etc. are consistent with
the inhalation by someone at some prior time of controlled substances.  In
particular, whether the crystalline substance on the foil during Mr. Culp’s
first police interaction was a controlled substance that he was ingesting or
simply evidence of the past consumption of a controlled substance remains
unclear, at least unclear to the required evidentiary standard in a criminal
trial.
[2]
Different terminology was used to
describe Mr. Culp’s condition at the outset of the two stops.  “Not awake” is
probably the most neutral formula used, with “asleep” and “passed out” also
being used at different times.  “Asleep” is probably the most innocent-sounding
descriptor.  “Passed out” is not inherently pejorative but does carry a greater
likelihood of implying a state brought about by drink or drugs.
[3]
Subject, of course, to technical
issues.
[4]
Traffickers in illicit controlled
substances are not known for their truth in marketing and the adulteration of
the drug they say they are selling with other substances, either inert or
different controlled substances that are cheaper, is commonplace, so I am
inclined to accept Mr. Culp’s evidence about the methamphetamine.
[5]
“Admonition” is a word with a broad
range of meanings, from stern chastisement at the high end to enthusiastic
advocacy at the low end.  To be clear, I use it in the latter meaning here; Mr.
Lucifora was a model of professionalism throughout the trial, as was his
slightly older opponent, each representing their client with focus and skill.
[6]
I do not believe the presumption
actually serves in any way to reinforce the DRE’s conclusions or to safeguard
them from scrutiny based simply on the fact that his or her drug selections
ultimately match the urinalysis or blood analysis.  The presumptions are
narrower, focused on two specific issues.  That is to say, the coincidence of
DRE and analysis conclusions about drug type:  (a) creates a presumption of
identity between what drugs were present at the time of the DRE examination and
the time of driving, thus avoiding a debate about some intervening change in
facts that would make the driving innocent; (b) creates a presumption of
causation, i.e. that if the court finds impairment and if the DRE and the
urinalysis (or blood) both identify the same substances, then those substances
are the cause of the impairment.
[7]
Unless
sleepiness is drug- or alcohol-related, driving while sleepy does not make out
the criminal offence of impaired driving, although it might make out another
offence.