ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Saini
, 2025 ONCJ 732
DATE: 
September 7, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  Brampton 998 31110442
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY
THE KING
— AND
—
KIRANJOT SAINI
Before
Justice G.P. Renwick
Heard
on 05 March and 03 September 2025
Reasons
for Judgment Released on 07 September 2025
S. Beuerle................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
P. Dhaliwal.......................................................... counsel
for the Defendant Kiranjot Saini
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT FOLLOWING A TRIAL
RENWICK J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
The Defendant is charged with assaulting Bhupinder
Singh with a weapon (a dustpan) and simple assault upon him as well.
[
2
]
This trial was very brief and took place over
two days. The complainant and his now ex-wife, the Defendant, were the only
witnesses who testified. There were photographs introduced respecting injuries
each party claimed to have suffered during a physical fight alleged between
them.
[
3
]
At the conclusion of the trial, the sole issue raised
by the parties is whether the allegations have been proven beyond a reasonable
doubt.
GOVERNING LEGAL PRINCIPLES
[
4
]
The onus during a criminal trial begins and ends
with the prosecution to prove the guilt of a defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt. Everyone charged with a criminal offence is presumed innocent and that
presumption remains throughout the whole of the trial, unless and until the
court is satisfied that the charges have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
The prosecution’s burden of proof never shifts during the trial. In this case,
if at the end of my consideration of the evidence and submissions I am not satisfied
that the prosecution has proven any element of an offence charged beyond a
reasonable doubt, and more specifically, if I have a reasonable doubt that the
Defendant committed an offence, she will be acquitted of the charge.
[
5
]
A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary or
frivolous doubt. It must be based upon reason and common sense and it logically
derives from the evidence or the lack of evidence adduced during a trial. While
likely or even probable guilt is not enough to meet the criminal standard, proof
to an absolute certainty is inapplicable and unrealistic. The Supreme Court of
Canada has cautioned that there is no mathematical precision to proof beyond a
reasonable doubt, but it lies much closer to absolute certainty than to proof
on a balance of probabilities.
[1]
If after considering all of the admissible evidence, I am sure that
the Defendant committed an alleged offence I must convict her since this
demonstrates that I am satisfied of her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Likewise, if I am not sure, then I have a reasonable doubt and an acquittal
must follow.
[
6
]
This case involves conflicting evidence and credibility
assessments. In assessing witness credibility and reliability I have considered
the general capacity of the witness to make their observations, to remember
what they perceived, and their ability to accurately testify and communicate their
recollections. It is also important to determine whether the witness was trying
to tell the truth and whether or not the witness was sincere, candid, biased,
reticent, and/or evasive. A trier of fact is entitled to accept some, none, or
all of what a witness says while testifying.
[
7
]
A valuable means of assessing the credibility of any witness is
to examine the consistency between what the witness said in the witness box and
what the witness has said on other occasions. I must also assess what is
testified to in the context of all of the evidence in the case and not on an
isolated basis. This is true for any inconsistencies and whether these are significant
or inconsequential to the case. If the inconsistency is significant, then I
must pay careful attention to it when assessing the reliability of the witness'
testimony.
[
8
]
Given the conflicting evidence in this case, I must apply the
framework provided by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R.
v
. W.(D.)
,
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] S.C.J. No. 26, as it is now understood. I rely heavily upon the article
written by Paciocco J.A. entitled, “Doubt about Doubt: Coping with
W.(D.)
And Credibility Assessment” found at 2017 - 22 Canadian Criminal Law Review 31.
Justice Paciocco reduces the
W.(D.)
framework into five propositions:
(i)
I cannot properly resolve this
case by simply deciding which conflicting version of events is preferred;
(ii)
If I believe evidence that is inconsistent with the
guilt of the Defendant, I cannot convict the Defendant;
(iii)
Even if I do not entirely believe the evidence
inconsistent with the guilt of the Defendant, if I cannot decide whether that
evidence is true, there is a reasonable doubt and the Defendant must be
acquitted;
(iv)
Even if I entirely disbelieve evidence
inconsistent with guilt, the mere rejection of that evidence does not prove
guilt; and
(v)
Even where I entirely disbelieve evidence
inconsistent with guilt, the Defendant should not be convicted unless the
evidence that is given credit proves the Defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt.
[
9
]
Also, I have reminded myself to treat the
evidence of both witnesses the same. Specifically, I am not to determine the
value of a particular witness’ testimony because of their station in life or
role in the proceedings. That would be unfair, and it would completely
undermine the presumption of innocence and the duty of the court to act
impartially. Regardless of a witness’ role, I must apply even scrutiny to all
of the evidence to determine the facts in the proceedings.
[
10
]
Lastly,
circumstantial evidence has been produced during the trial. Evidence
of the result of the alleged assault, apparent injuries said to have been
caused by the other party were allegedly photographed to support a particular
narrative of events. As with all matters to be proven by circumstantial
evidence, in order to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the Defendant
caused the complainant’s injury, I must be satisfied that it is the only
reasonable inference available on the evidence.
[2]
In assessing the case, I must consider the evidence cumulatively and as a
whole. Given that each circumstantial piece of evidence may be insufficient on
its own to support the required inference, I must consider all of the
individual pieces of evidence together to determine whether the prosecution has
met its high burden.
[
11
]
In the next part, I will outline some of the evidence and provide an
assessment of the testimony, with references to specific portions of the
evidence. Although I will not refer to all of what a witness said, I listened
to each witness carefully, I have taken detailed notes, and I have assessed all
testimony for intrinsic and extrinsic consistency, plausibility, balance,
possible interest, and the witness’ ability to recall and communicate.
[
12
]
I do not propose to recapitulate all of the evidence received during
this trial. Suffice it to note that I have used ample and many opportunities
during the trial and subsequent to the completion of the submissions to review
my notes and to listen to parts of the digital recordings of the proceedings. I
have thoroughly reviewed the evidence in this case, and I will only discuss
parts of the evidence where they serve to underscore my findings. Lastly, I
came to no conclusions about any of the testimony I heard until all of the
closing submissions were made, and my review of the evidence was complete.
THE
EVIDENCE RECEIVED
The Testimony of the Complainant
[
13
]
Bhupinder Singh was the sole witness for the
prosecution.
[
14
]
He was married to the Defendant in India in April
2022. The complainant and Defendant had only lived together in Canada for about
two months prior to the events in question. The police were not called to
investigate the allegations until three weeks after they occurred.
[
15
]
The complainant testified about an incident in
their home after a day they had spent together handing out the Defendant’s
resume to look for work as a personal support worker. He described hearing the
Defendant talking while in the bathroom of their basement apartment. The
complainant opened the door to see if everything was all right and an argument
ensued. The Defendant refused to tell the complainant who she was speaking to
on her cell phone. He threatened to tell her parents. She threw a dustpan at his
head. Then, the Defendant took the complainant’s cell phone, to prevent him
from calling her parents, and she went into the living room. The complainant
described the struggle that followed as he tried to retrieve his cell phone. At
some point, because his elbow was near the Defendant’s mouth, she bit his elbow
and held it for 30 seconds.
[
16
]
The complainant described trying to open the
Defendant’s mouth to free his arm. He got his phone from the Defendant and she
pursued him into their bedroom. There, she allegedly bit his left shoulder. Somehow,
his phone and hers fell into the gap between the bed and the wall. After some
time, the complainant located both phones and gave the Defendant hers. The
complainant did see the Defendant do something to her face and take a
photograph of it. He also saw her making a call in the living-room, but she
apparently cancelled it and no police came. He was also clear in his evidence
in chief, that the Defendant was “chasing” him onto the driveway, so he locked
himself in his car before driving to his relatives’ home in Caledon. One of his
relatives took photographs of the injuries to the complainant’s back, elbow,
and forearm. These four photographs became exhibits 1A-1D.
[
17
]
The photographs are disturbing. The complainant allegedly
suffered scratch and gouge marks on his back and bite marks on his forearm and the
inside of his elbow.
[
18
]
In cross-examination, it was learned that the
complainant met the Defendant on a matrimonial website and they had an arranged
marriage after it was discovered that they are relatives. The complainant came
to Canada approximately eight or nine years ago and sponsored the Defendant to
come here as his wife.
[
19
]
The complainant was questioned about the
Defendant’s paycheques being deposited in their joint bank account. Initially,
the complainant was “100%” certain that this had not happened. After some
cross-examination, the complainant testified, “I don’t remember, if it is, I
may be giving her cash. I don’t remember to be honest.”
[
20
]
The complainant also testified that he had
called police three weeks after the allegations took place because he was
rushing to go to a religious function and the Defendant was not letting him go.
[
21
]
The complainant admitted that when the police
came he told them that he had pushed the Defendant away and he put his fingers
in her mouth to open her teeth.
[
22
]
He also admitted possibly leaving marks on the
Defendant’s arms when he was trying to retrieve his phone.
[
23
]
During the cross-examination, it was also
learned that the “dustpan” that had been thrown was actually a small brush that
comes with the dustpan, rather than the dustpan itself. The court also noticed
that when the complainant pointed to the right side of his head to indicate
where he was hit, but he testified that he was hit on the “left” side. He also
said she “tried” to hit his head, but later he clarified that she had actually
hit his head.
[
24
]
The complainant denied slapping the Defendant’s
face, pulling her hair, dragging her to the living-room, or punching her arm
during cross-examination. After also denying hanging up the phone when the
Defendant had called 9-1-1, the complainant said that the Defendant took a lamp
and hit him on the head.
[
25
]
When asked why the complainant told the
Defendant’s employer that she had been charged, he testified, “as a Canadian, I
take responsibility” that the Defendant did not harm anyone here and that it
was his “goal” that all Canadians are safe.
FINDINGS ON
THE EVIDENCE
[
26
]
Overall, I did not find the complainant to be a credible
witness. Parts of his narrative were implausible (how both phones ended up in
the gap between the bed and the wall). Also, there were significant
inconsistencies in his testimony (whether the brush or the dustpan was thrown
at his head, which side of his head was hit, and whether the Defendant had
thrown the item or “tried” to hit his head with it). In the end, although there
is some corroboration found in the photographs introduced, I am unable to rely
upon the complainant’s testimony to accept that the photographs accurately
represent injuries caused by the complainant and that the injuries were
obtained in the manner explained. To be frank, given the concerns expressed, I
have a reasonable doubt about the cause of the complainant’s injuries.
[
27
]
To be complete, the Defendant was a compelling witness.
If I were not left in a reasonable doubt about the allegations as a result of
the complainant’s testimony, I would have had a reasonable doubt arising from the
Defendant’s evidence. The Defendant was credible as a historian.
[
28
]
I had few concerns about the implausibility or
inconsistency of the Defendant’s testimony and it easily raises a reasonable
doubt about the complainant’s injuries and the likelihood that the Defendant
was physically attacked by the complainant, requiring her to use reasonable
force to repel the attack and protect herself.
CONCLUSION
[
29
]
On all of the evidence, I am not satisfied that
the allegations of an assault with a weapon and an assault allegedly committed by
the Defendant upon the complainant have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
30
]
As a result, I find Kiranjot Saini not guilty of
both charges on the Information.
Released:  07 September 2025
Justice
G. Paul Renwick
[1]
R.
v
. Starr
,
2000 SCC 40 (CanLII)
, [2000] S.C.J. No. 40 at para.
242
.
[2]
R
. v.
Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33 (CanLII)
, [2016] S.C.J. No. 33 at paras.
17
, 18, 22, 26-36,
41, 42, 55, and 56.