ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Scott
, 2025 ONCJ 220
DATE:  2025 01 06
COURT FILE No.:  Toronto
23-48117812 &
23-48117813
BETWEEN:
HER
MAJESTY THE QUEEN
— AND —
SHAGGHARRY
SCOTT
Before Justice Patrice F. Band
Reasons re. s. 8
Charter
Application
– “Step 6
Garofoli
” and s. 9
Charter
Ms. C.
Josic .............................................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
[1]
Mr. C. Zeeh......................................................................... counsel
for the Applicant, Mr. Scott
BAND
J.:
I.
Background
[
1
]
On September 19,
2023, members of the Toronto Police Service obtained
Criminal Code
search warrants for two residential addresses and one motor vehicle believed to
be associated with Mr. Scott. He was required by judicial interim release to
live at one of those addresses (in Scarborough). The warrants were executed on
September 20.
[
2
]
The warrants
were based on information received from a confidential source (CS) and other
investigative measures. On the strength of the information police had received,
they decided to place Mr. Scott under arrest at a gas station that he attended
with his co-accused, Mr. Cassells-Watson. When they searched Mr. Scott incident
to arrest, police found a loaded Glock handgun in his satchel along with a
quantity of cocaine, marijuana and cash. Police found more cocaine and a scale
in plain view on his bedroom desk when they executed the warrant at the
Scarborough home.
[
3
]
On behalf of
Mr. Zeeh, Mr. Scott applied to quash the search warrants on the basis that they
were founded on insufficient grounds, contrary to s. 8 of the
Charter
. If
the warrant could not have issued, then Mr. Scott’s arrest was arbitrary,
contrary to s. 9 of the
Charter
.
[
4
]
I have already
advised the parties of my finding that the warrants in this case met the
required standard and complied with s. 8 of the
Charter
.  These are my
reasons for that conclusion.
II. Procedure
[
5
]
This was a
straight-forward
Garofoli
hearing.
[2]
The ITO relied heavily on the information provided by the CS. As such, it was heavily
redacted. On behalf of the Crown, Ms. Josic conceded that the warrant, as
redacted, could not have issued and sought to rely on “Step 6” as
described in
Garofoli
.
To that end, the Ms. Josic created draft judicial summaries of the redacted
portions of the ITO and provided them to Mr. Zeeh prior to the hearing. After a
series of exchanges between Ms. Josic and me, which were held
in camera
or by email, additional versions of the judicial summaries were created. Mr. Zeeh
was invited to make submissions and his comments led to changes in the creation
of a final Judicial Summary. At the end of that procedure, Mr. Zeeh conceded
that the Summary was sufficient to make him aware of the nature of the excised
material and to enable him to challenge the warrant in submissions or by
evidence. He did not seek leave to cross-examine the affiant or call evidence.
III. The Issue
[
6
]
Mr. Zeeh did
not allege any material errors, omissions or misrepresentations. As he put it
in oral submissions, the real question here is whether police were in
possession of reasonable and probable grounds to believe that Mr. Scott was in
current possession of a firearm on his person or at the Scarborough address.
That question turns on whether the CS’s information was credible, compelling and
corroborated.
IV. Applicable Legal
Principles
[
7
]
I have reminded
myself of the guiding
principles set out in
R. v. Crevier
,
2015 ONCA 619
at paras.
62-90
.  They include:
•
A search
warrant is presumptively valid, and the challenging party bears the onus of
demonstrating, on a balance of probabilities, that it should not have issued.
•
A
Garofoli
hearing is a pre-trial, threshold evidentiary hearing challenging the validity
of an evidence-gathering tool. It is not a trial.
•
Where, as here,
the warrant depends on confidential informants, the reliability of those
informants must be assessed using the “three Cs” discussed in
R. v. Debot
:
the
tip must not only be compelling, it must come from a credible source and be
corroborated by police investigation. These three factors are assessed on a
totality of circumstances, keeping in mind that weaknesses in one factor may,
to some extent, be compensated by strengths in the other two factors.
•
As
the reviewing judge, I am to consider the totality of the circumstances and the
context in which the hearing took place, including the fact that the accused
has been unable to directly challenge the redacted portions of the ITO.
[
8
]
The
test on warrant review was explained by Justice Watt
in
R. v. Sadikov
,
2014 ONCA 72
, at para.
84
:
The scope of warrant review is narrow.  The review is
not a
de novo
hearing of the
ex parte
application. 
The reviewing judge does not substitute his or her view for that of the issuing
judge…The standard is whether there is sufficient credible and reliable
evidence to permit a justice to find reasonable and probable grounds to believe
that an offence has been committed and that evidence of that offence would be
found at the specified time and place of search…Said in another way, the test
is whether there was
reliable evidence that might
reasonably be believed on the basis of which the warrant could – not would –
have issued
.
[
9
]
I
must also consider the fact that authorizing justices, like triers of fact at
trial, are entitled to draw reasonable inferences from the contents of the ITO:
see
Sadikov
,
supra
, at paras.
81-82
,
citing
R. v. Vu
,
2013
SCC 60
at para.
16
, among others.  So, too, can officers rely on their training
and experience to arrive at their reasonable and probable grounds:
R. v. Wu
,
2013 SCC 60 at paras. 55-57 and 64.
V. The Arguments
[
10
]
Mr. Zeeh was
able to help me by pointing to potential concerns with the CS’s information. He
argued that the police surveillance corroborated Mr. Scott’s mundane daily
activities. With respect to credibility, he asked me to consider the CS’s track
record for accuracy. Did the affiant mention occasions when the CS’s
information did not lead to an arrest or seizure of contraband? The idea, here,
being analogous to an “error rate.” He also inquired about what was disclosed concerning
the CS’s motivation – considerations on sentence or outstanding charges being a
stronger concern.
[
11
]
With respect to
the degree to which the CS’s information was compelling, Mr. Zeeh reminded me
to consider how the information came to be known (First hand? On social
media?); whether it was generic or specific; and whether it was timely. The
point being to determine whether it was strong enough to support a reasonable
belief that Mr. Scott was in possession of a firearm at the time on his person,
in the motor vehicle or at the Scarborough address. He reminded me of the
concern for “roving grounds”
discussed in
R. v. Herta
2018 ONCA 927 (CanLII)
,
[2018] O.J. No.
6429 (C.A.)
and others. In passing, I note that the Mr. Zeeh’s arguments
concerning the Scarborough address were written when the security footage of
that building had yet to be disclosed to him. He fairly walked them back a
great deal in oral argument. The surveillance footage is said to show Mr. Scott
accessing the unit “a plethora of times, approximately 30” between September 17
and 19, 2023, at times using a key to lock and unlock the door. This, together
with his long-standing obligation to reside there by virtue of a bail and some bail
checks during that period, supports the inference that he resided there,
despite the fact that he had a connection to a different residence in North
York.
[
12
]
Ms. Josic
relied on her factum, in which she detailed the degree to which, in her view,
the CS’s information was credible, compelling and corroborated and supported
the issuance of the warrant. Her approach was a very cautious one, which
depended on my ability to review the unredacted ITO, for obvious reasons.
VI. Analysis
[
13
]
Justice Code
provided a useful explanation of the
Debot
criteria in
R. v.
Greaves-Bissesarsingh
[2014] O.J. No. 3892
at para. 35 (S.C.J.)
:
It
appears from Wilson J.’s reasons in Debot, and from the subsequent
jurisprudence, that the term “compelling” refers to considerations that relate
to the reliability of the informer’s tip such as the degree of detail provided
and the informer’s means of knowledge, that is, whether the informer made
first-hand observations or merely relied on second-hand hearsay, rumour, or
gossip.  The term “credibility” would appear to capture considerations such as
the informer’s motivation, criminal antecedents, and any past history of
providing reliable information to the police. The term “corroboration” refers
to supporting information uncovered by the police investigation.
[
14
]
I agree with
Mr. Zeeh that the police were not able to corroborate much of what the CS told
them and that what did constitute corroboration was largely mundane with few
exceptions, including information about Mr. Scott’s satchel. But in this case,
I found that the credible and compelling nature of the information compensated
for the relatively weak degree of corroboration. For this reason, I focus on the
CS’s credibility and the extent to which their information was compelling.
Also, given that the warrants in this case depended on only one CS and that the
redactions were so comprehensive, I have decided that, like Ms. Josic, I must also
be very cautious in my approach.
The Compelling nature of the CS’s
information
[
15
]
Much of the
information provided by the CS was based on first-hand knowledge. Because the
information provided takes up just over one page, there seems little point in
providing paragraph references. Instead, I have chosen to provide a brief
explanation of why it is compelling, which will be redacted in the version that
is accessible to the parties and the public. An unredacted version will be kept
under seal with the court file.
xxx xx xx xxxxxxx
xxxxx xx xx. xxxxx xxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx. xxxx xxxx xxxx xx.
xxxxx xx xxxxxx xxxxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxx. xx. xxxxx xxxx xxxx xx. xxxx xxxx xxxx
xx. xxxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxx xxxxxxx xx xxxxx xxxx xxx xxxx xxx xx xxx xxxxxxxxxx. 
xxxx, xxxx xxx xxx xxxxxxx xx xxxxx xx xxxxx, xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx: xx xxxxxxxxx xx
xxx xx xxxxxxxxx xx, xxxx xxxx xxx xxx xxxxxx xx xxx xxxxxxx xxxx xx. xxxxx
[
16
]
It was open to
the issuing justice to find that the CS’s information was compelling. It was
not conclusory or based on rumour or gossip, but detailed and based on first-hand
knowledge. The issuing justice also had before them what they needed to make a
judicious determination as to its currency.
Credibility of CS
[
17
]
The unredacted
ITO that was before the issuing justice contains information about the CS’s
involvement with the criminal justice system (including a criminal record or
outstanding charges, if any) and put them in a position to assess its impact on
the CS’s credibility. The ITO also discloses the CS’s motivation as an
informant, as well as the fact that they were cautioned about giving false
information. (Whether this included advising them that there would be no
consideration until the results of the investigation were substantiated, as
asserted in Ms. Josic’s factum at para. 135, is not entirely clear, but it does
not cause me concerns in the particular facts of this case.)
xxxx xxx xxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxx xxx xxxxxx. xxxx, xxxx xxx
“xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxxxx xx.
”
[
18
]
In some
circumstances, an affiant’s failure to indicate whether a CS had provided
information that proved fruitless in the past might raise concerns about their
reliability; however, in this case, the issuing justice was in a position to
make a judicious determination of the CS’s reliability as an informant on the
basis of the information provided in the ITO, seen in its totality.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.
It was open to the issuing justice to find that the CS’s information was
credible.
VII. Conclusion as to Validity
of the Warrants and Arrest
[
19
]
It is true that
the police surveillance and security footage in this matter do not corroborate the
very criminal activity at issue
per se
.  This, of course, is rarely
possible and is not required:
see
R. v. Herta
,
2018 ONCA 927
at para.
38
.  Nor do other aspects of the
investigation corroborate much that is not mundane or likely to be known more
broadly. However, the CS’s credibility and the compelling nature of their
information compensate for the limited corroboration provided by the police
investigation.
[
20
]
Viewed in its
totality and from a commonsense perspective, the ITO provided reliable and
credible evidence on the basis of which the warrants could have issued. For the
same reasons, Mr. Scott’s arrest was also justified.
Released: 
January 6, 2025
Justice P.F.
Band
[1]
These reasons have been
reissued to correct a mistake as to Ms. Josic’s office.
[2]
R. v. Garofoli
,
1990 CanLII 52 (SCC)
,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 1421
.