CITATION:
R. v. Ola
, 2025 ONCJ 17
DATE:  2025·01·14
COURT
FILE No.: Toronto Region 4815 998 23 48108024
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
OLUWATOFUNMI OLA
Before Justice Peter
Scrutton
Heard on September 25 and December 4, 2024
Reasons for Ruling released on January 14, 2025
C. Tsilingiris..........................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
N. Jackson............................................................................................................  
  for the Accused
Scrutton J.:
OVERVIEW
[
1
]
Mr. Oluwatofunmi Ola was arrested on June
14, 2023 and is charged with a number of firearms offences.  The allegations
are straight-forward: he was believed to have stolen an item from a grocery
store, was arrested by loss prevention officers, and found to be in possession
of a firearm during a search incident to arrest.  He seeks a stay of these
proceedings, alleging that his s. 11(b) right to be tried within a reasonable
time has been breached.
[
2
]
There is no real dispute between the parties
about the events contributing to the timeline in this case, only the proper
legal characterization of key periods and whether, if some of the delay here
can
be attributed to the defence, the matter should be stayed notwithstanding that
the net delay is under the 18-month
Jordan
ceiling.
[
3
]
On January 2, 2024, the defence and Crown
both accepted the first trial dates they were offered:  April 9-11, 2024, approximately
10 months after the defendant’s arrest. The parties agreed three days were
required notwithstanding the simple factual circumstances of the case because
of a blended
Charter
application.  Unfortunately, Mr. Ola’s trial did
not begin on April 9, 2024, but was adjourned because, the day before, the
Crown disclosed a substantial amount of video surveillance footage from the
grocery store that the defence had no opportunity to review before trial.  The
record is silent as to whether the Crown or the police bear responsibility for
this last-minute disclosure but the adjournment must be characterized as Crown
delay.  Mr. Ola’s trial was rescheduled to September 23-25, 2024, some 15½
months after his arrest.  No potential s. 11(b) issue was raised at this time.
[
4
]
Unfortunately, again, Mr. Ola’s trial did
not begin on September 23, 2024, again because of a Crown-caused adjournment.  When
Mr. Ola attended for trial that day, he learned that the Crown had mis-diarized
his trial as beginning two days later.  The defendant and the court were
available to begin as scheduled but no prosecutor or witness was available
until September 25.  The defendant’s trial began that day but, unsurprisingly,
did not conclude.  The parties obtained new dates – two days for further
evidence needed to complete the trial and one day for a s. 11(b) application
that Mr. Ola indicated he would bring.
[
5
]
The total delay from charge to February 3, 2025,
the anticipated date the matter will conclude, is 19 months and 20 days.  Ultimately,
whether this matter is over the presumptive ceiling turns on the attribution of
potential defence delay to three periods – before a trial date was scheduled in
this matter and after each trial date had to be rescheduled.
RELEVANT CHRONOLOGY
Jun. 15, 2023:      Information
is sworn; first appearance in bail court.
Jul. 24, 2023:       Initial
disclosure is provided.
Jul. 27, 2023:       Defence counsel emails
assigned Crown to schedule a Crown Pre-Trial (“CPT”).
Aug. 2, 2023:       CPT is conducted and a Judicial
Pre Trial (JPT) is scheduled for Sept 15, 2023.
Sep. 15, 2023:      JPT is conducted and the
parties obtain a 3-day trial time estimate.
Sep. 29, 2023:      No
one appeared for the defence and the matter is adjourned.
Oct. 27, 2023:      No
one appeared for the defence and the matter is adjourned.
Nov. 6, 2023:       Defence counsel requests trial
scheduling call; the Crown advises it will assist.
Nov. 29, 2023:      Defence counsel follows up with
the Crown about the trial scheduling call.
Dec. 18-19:          Defence counsel follows up
about the trial scheduling call, which is scheduled by the Crown for Jan 2,
2024.
Jan. 2, 2024:         The
parties accept the first trial dates offered: April 9-11, 2024
Apr. 8, 2024:        The
Crown makes substantial new disclosure.
Apr. 9, 2024:        The
trial is adjourned to allow time to review disclosure.
Sep. 23, 2024:      The defence appears for trial but
the Crown and witnesses are not available for the first two scheduled days.
Sep. 25, 2024:      Trial commences; the parties
obtain continuation dates of Dec. 4, 2024, Jan. 22, and Feb. 3, 2025.
Legal Principles
[
6
]
The key principles on this application are
well understood.
[
7
]
In
R. v. Jordan
,
2016 SCC 27
, [2016]
1 S.C.R. 631, the Supreme Court of Canada set out the framework for analyzing
whether a defendant's right to be tried within a reasonable time has been
violated and established an 18-month ceiling for matters prosecuted in this
court, above which any delay is presumptively unreasonable.  The burden then
shifts to the Crown to demonstrate exceptional circumstances that justify the
delay.  Understandably, the Crown does not rely on any such justification here.
[
8
]
On a s. 11(b) application, the court must:
(i) calculate the total delay from the charge to
the actual or anticipated end of trial;
(ii) subtract
defence delay from the total delay, which results in the “Net Delay”;
(iii) compare the
Net Delay to the presumptive ceiling;
(iv) if
the Net Delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, it is presumptively
unreasonable.  To rebut the presumption, the Crown must establish the presence
of exceptional circumstances.  If it cannot rebut the presumption, a stay will
follow;
(v) subtract
delay caused by discrete events from the Net Delay (leaving the "Remaining
Delay") for the purposes of determining whether the presumptive ceiling
has been reached;
(vi) if
the Remaining Delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling, the court must consider
whether the case was particularly complex such that the time the case has taken
is justified and the delay is reasonable;
(vii) if
the Remaining Delay falls below the presumptive ceiling, the onus is on the
defence to show that the delay is unreasonable.
[
9
]
“Defence delay” has two components: (i)
delay waived by the defence; and (ii) delay caused solely by the conduct of the
defence:
Jordan
at paras.
61-63
.  In
R. v. Cody,
2017 SCC 31
, the
Supreme Court clarified that the only defence delay that is deductible as
“delay caused solely by the defence” is delay that is: (i) solely or directly
caused by the accused person; and (ii) flows from defence action that is
illegitimate in that it is not taken to respond to the charges.  Inaction that
is not legitimate may also amount to delay:
Cody
at paras.
32 and 42
.  Where
the court and the Crown are ready to proceed but the defence is not, the
resulting delay should also be deducted:
Jordan
at para.
64
.
Attribution of Delay After the
Judicial Pre-trial
[
10
]
Within days of initial disclosure being
provided, defence counsel proactively reached out to schedule a Crown Pre-Trial.
 The Crown offered time on August 15 but defence counsel successfully prevailed
upon him to speak earlier, on August 2.  The parties jointly scheduled a JPT
for September 15.  After it, the parties received a trial time estimate that
authorized them to schedule a 3-day trial.  In this courthouse, the next step
is to obtain trial dates via a trial scheduling call with the trial
coordinator, something that the Crown arranges through a shared calendar.  Those
calls are normally available within a week.
[
11
]
For some reason, no steps were taken in this
regard by either party until November 6, 2023, when defence counsel contacted
the Crown and the trial coordinator attempting to arrange this call.  The
assigned Crown indicated that he would schedule it.  Nothing happened in this
regard.  Defence counsel followed up on November 29, 2023.  Again, nothing
happened.  Defence counsel followed up on December 18, 2024, asking to set the
first available trial call.  That day, the Crown scheduled the call on the
first available day, January 2, 2024 (six business days later).
[
12
]
The Crown argues that the two missed set
date court appearances on September 29 and October 27 reflected in the
chronology above should be deducted from the overall time period as defence
delay.  The problem with this submission is that the only party taking steps to
move this matter forward in the intake period before trial dates were set was
the defence.  There is nothing in the record to suggest that the Crown was
ready to set trial dates in the period it seeks to characterize as defence
delay.  The available inferences are either that no one was ready to set trial
dates or that both parties were ready but content not to set trial dates.  Even
after the defence reached out on November 6, 2023, the Crown did not take steps
to arrange for the trial scheduling call until December 19, 2023, six weeks
later.  In these circumstances, I do not see how any of the time between the
September 15
th
JPT and the January 2
nd
trial scheduling
call can be considered as delay “solely or directly” caused by the defence.
The Attribution of Delay from Rescheduling
[
13
]
Recently, in
R. v. A.(C.)
,
2024 ONSC
1603
(S.C.A.), Justice Harris, on appeal from summary conviction, considered
the issue of the appropriate legal characterization of defence counsel’s
unavailability in the context of a “bring forward” attempt to reschedule
existing trial dates in a proactive effort to mitigate a clear
Jordan
issue.
 Following
R. v. Hanan
,
2023 SCC 12
and
R. v. Boulanger
,
2022 SCC
2
, he concluded that this context is markedly different from that in which
trial dates are initially set; the difference requires that defence counsel’s
unavailability for the new dates be “reasonably apportioned” based on “all the
relevant circumstances.”
[
14
]
In this case, after the first trial was
adjourned, the court offered dates well before those that were ultimately
scheduled to begin on September 23, 2024:
Apr. 15-17:           the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Apr. 22-24:           neither
party was available.
Apr. 29-May 1:    neither
party was available.
May 6-8:               the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
May 13-15:           the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Jun. 3-5:                neither
party was available.
Jun. 10-12:            the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Jun. 17-28:            the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Jul. 2-5:                 the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Jul. 15-Aug. 31:   the
Crown was not available.
Sep. 3-5:               the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Sep. 9-11:             neither
party was available.
Sep. 16-18:           the
Crown was not available, the defence was.
[
15
]
In my view, having regard to
R. v. A.(C.)
and the authorities cited therein, I do not think it is reasonable to apportion
counsel’s understandable unavailability for the specific blocks of dates
offered in the immediate aftermath of the April 9 day-of-trial adjournment as
“defence delay.”  The determination of how much time is reasonable to afford to
the defence schedule after a Crown-caused adjournment is contextual.  In this
case, I draw June 12, 2024 as the line before which it would be unreasonable to
expect defence counsel to have three clear days.  It is commendable that the
court and Crown were able to accommodate this proceeding at different times within
two months of the first adjournment but unrealistic to expect defence counsel
to be available so soon.  To consider this period “defence delay” in these
circumstances would ultimately mean that the Crown bore no responsibility for the
delay flowing from the adjournment it caused.
[
16
]
If the defence had remained unavailable in
the face of the Crown’s and the court’s virtually unfettered availability
thereafter, I would expect it to bear responsibility for some or potentially
all of the delay flowing from its inability to accept earlier dates.  However,
as I read the April 9, 2024 transcript discussing the scheduling of new dates,
the Crown was reading from a list of available dates the trial coordinator had
offered the parties, which included the entire period from July 15 to August
31, 2024, for which the Crown was unavailable.  This accords with my understanding
of the local circumstances in this courthouse during the summer of 2024, as court
time was readily available.  I disagree with the Crown that the defence is
responsible for causing all of the delay in rescheduling this matter.  I attribute
only the period from June 20 to July 15 (25 days) and September 3-11 (8 days)
as defence delay during this time frame.
[
17
]
The same holds true for the delay associated
with rescheduling this matter after the trial did not conclude on September 25,
2024.  The court offered the parties the following dates:
Oct. 17, 2024:      Crown
was available, the defence was not.
Nov. 5, 2024:        neither
party was available.
Nov 15, 2024        Crown
was available, the defence was not.
Dec. 4, 2024:        both parties were available.
Jan. 14, 2025:       the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Jan. 22, 2025:       both
parties were available and scheduled this date.
Jan. 27, 2025:       the
Crown was available, the defence was not.
Feb. 3, 2025:        both parties were available.
[
18
]
A few weeks after these dates were offered, on
October 24, 2024, the trial coordinator notified the parties that the court was
available on an additional seven days in November, an additional nine days in
December, and an additional fourteen days in January.  Defence counsel was
unavailable for all of these dates except November 22, and provided the trial
coordinator with a calendar of his matters indicating that, with the exception
of five days in December when he would be out of the country, he was already
scheduled to be in court on substantive matters on each of the dates offered.  The
Crown asked to hold November 22 as a target date.
[
19
]
The following week, on October 30, defence
counsel reached out to advise that his schedule had opened up and he was now available
on November 12 and 13, some of the more recently released dates.  The Crown was
not available.  At this time, the Crown indicated that he had asked the Officer-in-Charge
of the investigation to canvass witness availability for November 22 and was
waiting to confirm this.  The Crown followed up on November 19 to ask whether
November 22 was still being held as target date and indicated (for the first
time since the matter was broached on October 24) that the Crown and witnesses
were available.  Defence counsel, in my view understandably, replied to say
that he had not held that date because of the lack of confirmation and was no
longer available.
[
20
]
I accept that both parties were making real
efforts to re-schedule the necessary dates.  Because of this, in the context of
the Crown-caused adjournment and the respective dates in question, I do not
think that any time during this period should be characterized as “defence
delay.”  The delay to be deducted in this matter as attributable to the defence,
then, is 33 days, making the net delay in bringing Mr. Ola’s matter to trial 18
months, 2 weeks and 2 days.  There being no complexity or exceptional
circumstances to justify this delay, the matter must be stayed.
[
21
]
Alternatively, in the event that I am wrong
about the delay that should be attributed to the defence after the respective
trial dates were rescheduled, I would not stay this matter for unreasonable delay
were the net delay properly found to be under the 18-month ceiling.  Defence
counsel submits that this matter ought to have concluded on April 11, 2024.  But
the defence did not identify a potential s. 11(b) issue when the second trial
dates were secured.  I expect, or at least would hope, that if delay had been
flagged at that juncture, Crown resources would have been redeployed so as make
a prosecutor available to take carriage of this straightforward yet serious prosecution
on any date that the court could accommodate it.
[
22
]
Clearly, this matter ought to have concluded
on September 25, 2024, just under 16 months from the date the information was
sworn.  But it is more than a theoretical
possibility
that this matter could have concluded much earlier had delay been flagged after
the first adjournment.  Further, I have largely rejected the Crown submission
that three discrete periods in this timeline ought to be characterized as
defence delay.  But that is very different from finding that the defence took
meaningful steps to expedite this trial.  The defence certainly took meaningful
steps to expedite this matter during the early and latter portion of the intake
period but both parties failed to secure trial dates in a timely manner after
the JPT and the defence was (reasonably) unavailable in the near aftermath of
both trial adjournments despite wide court availability.
[
23
]
Stays of proceedings for cases that are under
the
Jordan
ceiling “will occur only in rare cases where there is clearly
unreasonable delay”:
R. v. S.A
.,
2024 ONCA 737
at para.
24
.  Based on
the record before me, I would find that the defence has failed to rebut the
presumption that under-the-ceiling delay was unreasonable here.
Dated:     January 14, 2025                                                 ______________________
Justice
Peter Scrutton