Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj262/2025oncj262.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter
directs that the following notice be attached to the file:
A non-publication and non-broadcast order in this
proceeding has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4  Order restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2),
the presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)  any of the following offences:
(i)     an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160,
162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273,
279.01, 279.011, 279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)    any offence under this Act, as it read from time to time
before the day on which this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct
alleged would be an offence referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on
or after that day; or
(
b
)  two or more offences being dealt with in the same
proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in
respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
),
the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
)  at the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness
under the age of eighteen years and the victim of the right to make an
application for the order; and
(
b
)  on application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any
such witness, make the order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with
an order made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1)
or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v.
Oliha
, 2025 ONCJ 262
DATE: April 7, 2025
4810-998-23-48127400-00
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
v.
ERIC OLIHA
R E A S O N S   F O R   J U
D G M E N T
BEFORE THE HONOURABLE
JUSTICE M. BLOCK
on April 7, 2025 at TORONTO,
Ontario
APPEARANCES
:
L. Karademir        Counsel for the Crown
E. Oliha            In Person
I. Grant
Amicus
MONDAY,
APRIL 7, 2025
.
. .PORTION OF PROCEEDING NOT ORDERED TRANSCRIBED
R E A S O N S  
F O R   J U D G M E N T
BLOCK, J.
(Orally):
Mr.
Eric Oliha stands charged with robbery times two, forcible confinement, and
sexual assault, and breach of probation.
I.C.
was on vacation when she visited Toronto on September 31st, 2023. She and her
friends were walking in the area of Queen and Spadina. They attended the local
McDonald’s restaurant so that they could use the washroom. She testified that
she entered the women’s washroom on the second floor through an unlocked door.
As we will see, the washroom did not remain unlocked.
There
were two stalls in that washroom situated side by side with a partition between
them which had a gap at the bottom. Ms. C. thought that the washroom was
unoccupied and unused when she entered it. She did note a strong odor of
unwashed human but attributed it to the use of the facility by unhoused
persons.
Ms.
C. entered a stall, lowered her pants and sat down to urinate. Shortly
afterwards, a man slid under the partition separating the washroom stall
occupied by Ms. C. from the other washroom stall. That man proved to be Mr.
Oliha, apparently the source of the odor Ms. C. earlier detected. Ms. C.
screamed in surprise and fear as the defendant entered. She described being
“frozen” in response to the man’s presence.
Mr.
Oliha took control of her immediately and retained that control throughout
their interaction in that tiny washroom stall. He took out a small glass pipe
and smoked it. Ms. C. did not know what the substance was, but assumed from the
odor and the erratic behaviour of the smoker that it was a contraband
substance. He started off their interaction by asking her to partake in the
pipe smoking, but Ms. C. declined.
Mr.
Oliha spent approximately 15 to 20 minutes with the complainant in that
washroom stall. He faced Ms. C. as she sat on the toilet, her genitalia were
exposed for much of this time as she sat a few inches away from the defendant
in the stall.
Ms.
C. suggested to the intruder that her friends were worried about her and would
doubtless come to her aide. Mr. Oliha repeatedly shushed her to prevent her
from alerting persons outside the washroom. Ms. C. attempted to use her phone
to contact her friends; Mr. Oliha threw the phone in the toilet.  Mr. Oliha did
not just work at keeping Ms. C. under his control, he acted to complete her
isolation.
Mr.
Oliha used force to prevent Ms. C.’s attempts to exit but more often deflected
or ignored her request to be allowed to leave or purported to bargain with her
on the terms on which her exit would be permitted. Mr. Oliha repeatedly asked Ms.
C. for a hug. He indicated that in exchange she would be permitted to leave;
she declined. Several times the sharing of the defendant’s pipe was held out as
the price of departure. As before, Ms. C. declined. On multiple occasions, the
defendant said that her exit would be permitted if she simply spent five more
minutes in his company.
At
many points, Mr. Oliha asked Ms. C. to remove clothing as the price of
departure. In her examination in-chief, she stated that she was unsure whether
he asked her to remove her “clothes” or her “coat”.
It
was clear that Mr. Oliha was in complete control of Ms. C.’s movements
throughout this episode. At various points she attempted to rise from the
toilet seat and leave. On one occasion, she was able to unlock the cubicle
door, but Mr. Oliha maneuvered to maintain his position blocking the door and
relatched it. On another occasion, he pushed Ms. C. down on the toilet as she
attempted to leave. Another time Ms. C. attempted to knee the defendant in the
crotch; this attempt had no effect. Mr. Oliha pushed Ms. C. back down on the
toilet without difficulty. Ms. C. continued to call out to her friends while
confined in the toilet stall. When she did so she was repeatedly shushed by Mr.
Oliha. She told the Court that she was terrified by the experience. She
believed that she would be sexually assaulted.
Ms.
C. proved to be a remarkably fair, careful, and restrained witness. She was
moderate in expression and quick to alert the Court when she was unsure of
particular details. Her evidence was coherent, cogent, and detail rich. When
describing the defendant’s physical restraint of her, Ms. C. was careful not to
exaggerate the level of force used by Mr. Oliha. She made it clear that the
defendant uttered no explicit threats and nor did he use gratuitous violence.
She had a very minor injury to her finger that occurred during the encounter.
She testified that the injury was in essence an accident that occurred during
her confinement as opposed to something inflicted deliberately by the
defendant.
During
the encounter, Mr. Oliha asked Ms. C. if she had any cash. Understandably, she
felt that she had no option; she gave him a debit card linked to an American
bank and a retail gift card for a business associated with San Francisco.
Ms.
C.’s confinement ended when restaurant staff broke down the door to the
washroom; her repeated cries of distress had been heard by her friends and
restaurant staff. They became concerned when the door to the washroom proved to
have been locked. They called police and attempted to enter the washroom, and
were ultimately successful, as we know. The defendant and the complainant were
the only persons in that washroom when the door was forced by an employee.
The
manager, Ms. Smith, testified that she attempted to access the washroom with a
variety of keys in her possession. She was unsuccessful. She testified that the
washroom could be locked by turning a lever on the inside but required a key to
unlock it from the outside. As the washroom was locked when the complainant
entered, the only reasonable conclusion based on the evidence is that Mr. Oliha
locked the washroom door after she entered the stall.
After
the door was forced, Mr. Oliha fled down the fire escape and was arrested a
short distance away by the police. His image was recorded on the restaurant
security video in the public areas of the McDonald’s and entered as evidence. On
detention, he was in possession of Ms. C.’s debit and gift card.
Throughout
this judgment, I referred to the man who confronted and confined Ms. C. in the
McDonald’s washroom as the defendant, Mr. Oliha. As I’ve said, in his
possession were the debit and gift cards given up under duress by Ms. C.
shortly before.
During
the early portion of his appearance in court before me, including before his
arraignment, Mr. Oliha was disruptive; he shouted, interrupted, and resisted direction
from the Court. He’d made admissions against interests that proved to have no
basis in fact. I took these apparent admissions to be made in the spirit of
disruption and not to be considered as statements of fact.
In
unsworn comments made from the prisoner’s box, Mr. Oliha explained that the
police had planted Ms. C.’s debit and gift cards on him after they detained
him. As a result, I initially understood that the identity of the man in the
washroom stall with Ms. C. was controversial. The identification of the
perpetrator cannot reasonably be contested. Ms. Smith, the McDonald’s manager,
identified the defendant as the man in the contemporaneous video of the breach
of the washroom by the restaurant staff. As I’ve indicated, Mr. Oliha was
captured in the immediate area of the restaurant by the police within a few
minutes of the incident. His clothing and general appearance closely matched
the image of the man in the video.
Mr.
Oliha gave evidence, and it was bizarre in many respects. He originally claimed
that the police sought to frame him. That comment emerged in his
cross-examination of one of the police officers. He suggested during the
testimony of that arresting police officer that Ms. C.’s debit and gift cards
had been planted on him by the police. He told the Court that he went to the
women’s washroom as he needed to use the facilities and the men’s washroom was
unavailable. He claimed that he saw other men using that washroom, though that
claim was not substantiated by contemporaneous video.
After
entering the washroom, the defendant smelled smoke, in his testimony. He heard
a bottle being dropped or placed on the floor presumably in the neighbouring
stall. He there encountered a woman in the washroom stall whose pants were
down, but she immediately pulled them up. He testified that he didn’t smoke in
the washroom and never asked the woman for a hug or anything else including the
removal of clothing.
In
his testimony, the woman then went to the door of the washroom but could not
exit. In his testimony, the door was “jammed”. She then “freaked out for no
reason” though the defendant speculated that the woman felt threatened by the
danger of rape from a man in the washroom, the women’s washroom.
The
door was then broken down from the outside. Mr. Oliha testified that he picked Ms.
C.’s debit and gift cards off the floor as he departed. He saw them on the
floor and thought they might be his identification. The defendant said he was
struck on exit by a broom wielded by Ms. C.’s boyfriend as he fled the
restaurant.
Mr.
Oliha claimed that the police “shot up” the washroom shortly after his
departure. He speculated that this fusillade was based on police suspicion that
the suspect was still in the washroom. There was no evidence to support this
bizarre claim, and no witnesses were cross-examined on it.
After
a short time under cross-examination, Mr. Oliha refused to answer questions of
Crown counsel. His attitude towards the proceeding was then and frequently
combative and disruptive. I reject his evidence in its entirety.
It
is clear that Ms. C. was terrified by the encounter. She was particularly
concerned that she might be sexually assaulted; she was trapped in a small
cubicle. She is a very small woman, barely five feet tall, perhaps as much as
100 pounds in weight. Mr. Oliha’s a large, robust man; he appeared to me to be
approximately six feet tall and about 200 pounds in weight.
Of
course, the terror felt by Ms. C. does not constitute the
mens rea
that
the Crown must establish beyond reasonable doubt to prove the charges against
the defendant. But it must be clear that this was an inescapable conclusion
drawn from her prolonged confinement by the defendant in circumstances which,
short of complete nudity, her sexual integrity could not have been more
vulnerable. On this narrative, Ms. C. was most certainly forcibly confined.
Mr.
Oliha’s inquiry as to whether the complainant had any cash was, in these
circumstances, a demand backed up by total control of this young woman’s
movement by a vastly larger man. She clearly demonstrated she had felt she had
no choice but to comply. The situation created by the defendant created no
other rational choice. Her fear of sexual assault was based on that reality.
Mr.
Oliha chose to control Ms. C.’s movements from the moment he locked the
washroom door. He found her in a cubicle in a state you would expect to find a
woman using the toilet, in that her private parts were exposed. He deliberately
prolonged her position of acute vulnerability. The message that the defendant
was interested in exploiting Ms. C.’s confinement and compromised integrity,
physical and sexual, was reenforced by the repeated suggestion that the two
have a hug and that she remove her clothes or coat.
As
we know as the trial unfolded, the defendant conceded he was the man in the
women’s washroom when the woman “freaked out”. The focus of Mr. Oliha’s
submissions were that the facts alleged by Ms. C. did not amount to a sexual
assault as there was no explicit threat or sexual touching. This submission was
also the core of the succinct submissions made by Ms. Ingrid Grant,
amicus
appointed
prior to trial.
The
words of the Court of Appeal
in
R. v. Edgar
,
2016 ONCA 120
at paragraph
10
are apposite:
To commit a sexual assault,
it was not necessary for the defendant to touch or even verbally threaten the
complainant. The person’s act or gesture without words, force, or any physical
contact can constitute a threat to apply force of a sexual nature, if it
intentionally creates in another person an apprehension of imminent harm or
offensive contact that affronts a person’s sexual integrity. Coupled with a
present ability to carry out the threat, this can amount to a sexual assault.
Confining
a person in a small, enclosed space isn’t by itself a sexual assault, but
deliberately confining her under complete physical control for a prolonged
period when her sexual vulnerability is obvious, is another matter. The
defendant certainly intentionally acted to confine Ms. C. for a prolonged
period; she was confined in a position of degrading vulnerability. The
defendant repeatedly emphasized that her situation was completely under his
control. That control did not require an explicit threat to successfully
deprive Ms. C. of her financial instruments and exposed on a toilet under his
scrutiny and control her sexual integrity was most certainly affronted and his
ability to carry out the implied threat of sexual assault manifest. I find that
this charge has been made out.
The
robbery in count three is made out. I dismiss the robbery which is contemplated
in count four.
The
probation documents establishing Mr. Oliha’s status as under probation at the
time of this incident has been tendered and that count is made out.
The
forcible confinement is obvious, and the Crown has satisfied its burden in
relation to the four counts in which I make a finding a guilt.
.
. .PORTION OF PROCEEDING NOT ORDERED TRANSCRIBED
.
. .WHEREAS THIS MATTER WAS ADJOURNED