Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj188/2025oncj188.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the
following notice be attached to the file:
A non-publication and non-broadcast order in this
proceeding has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4  Order restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the
presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(i)    an offence
under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170, 171,
171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY ORDER ON APPLICATION
—
In proceedings in respect of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
)
or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the complainant of the right to make an application for the order;
and
(
b
)    on
application made by the complainant, the prosecutor or any such witness, make
the order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order
made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, (2) or (3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Eerhard
, 2025 ONCJ 188
DATE: 
2025 04 07
COURT
FILE No.:  Halton Info # 998 23 12101882
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
PETER EERHARD
Before
Justice Jennifer Campitelli
Heard
on February 19 and 20, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on April 7, 2025
E. O’Marra…………………………………………………………….counsel
for the Crown
R. Timol.................................................................. counsel
for the accused Peter Eerhard
CAMPITELLI J.:
[
1
]
Peter Eerhard faces three counts, as amended on
the information before me.  That he:
(1)
On or about the 10
th
day of June in
the year 2023 at the City of Burlington in the said Region, did commit a sexual
assault on J.E. contrary to
s. 271
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
;
and
(2)
On or about the 10
th
day of June in
the year 2023 at the City of Burlington in the said Region, did, for a sexual
purpose touch J.E., a person under the age of sixteen years directly with a
part of his body, to wit, his mouth, contrary to
s. 151
of the
Criminal Code
of Canada
;
and
(3)
Finally, on or about the 10
th
day of
June in the year 2023 at the City of Burlington in the said Region, did, while
bound by a probation order made by the Ontario Court of Justice in Burlington
on the 28
th
day of January in the year 2022, fail without lawful
excuse to comply with such order, to wit: keep the peace and be of good
behaviour, contrary to
s. 733.1(1)
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
.
Factual Background
[
2
]
Mr. Eerhard and the complainant met through an
online medium called “Sniffies”, designed to connect gay men for the purpose of
engaging in sexual acts.  At the time of the interaction between Mr. Eerhard
and the complainant, J.E. was fourteen years old and Mr. Eerhard was 55 years
old.  J.E. was able to gain access to “Sniffies”, despite being under the age
of eighteen at the time of the alleged offence, by entering a false birthdate when
prompted by the website.
[
3
]
Ultimately, J.E.’s father located the parties,
while they were engaging in a sexual act, by tracking the location on J.E.’s
cellphone.  J.E.’s father learned of Mr. Eerhard’s identity, and immediately notified
the police.
[
4
]
On this record, the parties have agreed that
there is an
air of reality
to the defence that Mr. Eerhard had an honest
but mistaken belief that J.E. was sixteen years of age or older.  In this case,
eighteen years old.  Therefore, the onus is on the crown to establish, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the defence is not available.
The Evidence of J.E.
[
5
]
Prior to reviewing J.E.’s evidence, I want to be
very clear that I have considered the evidence of this witness reminding myself
that he is a young person, who was just fourteen years old at the time of the
alleged offence.  J.E. was 16 years old when he provided his evidence to the
court.  I am mindful that the evidence of children is not considered to be
inherently unreliable, nor is it to be treated with any special caution:
R. v.
W.(R.) [R.W.]
1992 CanLII 56 (SCC)
, [1992] S.C.J. No. 56 at para.
23
(SCJ).  Moreover, I fully
appreciate that, in my assessment of J.E.’s evidence, I need to be sensitive to
the peculiar perspective of children, understanding that children experience
the world differently than adults:
R .v.
W.(R.) [R.W.]
supra at para.
24
.
[
6
]
J.E. testified that on June 10, 2023 he was approximately
6’0 tall, and had been shaving since the age of twelve.  He remembered he was in
his room experiencing “some dark thoughts” around his depression.  He recalled
that he decided to use a website called “Sniffies”, which he described as a
“hook-up app”.  J.E. acknowledged that “Sniffies” had an “age restriction of
18”, so he entered an erroneous date of birth in order to gain access to the
site.  It was J.E.’s evidence that he logged on as “anonymous” and the
application allowed him to see where other users were located on the map.  He
testified that a man in the Alton Village area, who had a profile picture depicting
only his penis, reached out to him directly.  J.E. denied that he was the one
who initiated contact with Mr. Eerhard by sending him a message saying, “I’m
18, do you want to suck my seven-inch cock?”.
[
7
]
However, J.E. couldn’t recall much of the
conversation between the pair, except that he suggested they meet at Pearson
High School.  When pressed while under cross examination, J.E. agreed it was
possible the pair first agreed to meet at Shoppers Drug Mart, and then plans
changed.  He recalled that once the meeting had been arranged, he told his Dad
that he was “going on a walk” and left his home.  J.E. was pressed a number of times
but did not remember Mr. Eerhard ever asking for his age, or confirming that he
was eighteen prior to the pair meeting.
[
8
]
It was J.E.’s evidence that he had his phone
with him on that evening, and that he was wearing Lululemon shorts and a
t-shirt.  J.E. remembered that he “first laid eyes” on what he thought was Mr.
Eerhard’s vehicle in the Pearson High School parking lot.  He then “went up to
the car”, and he recalled Mr. Eerhard driving him to a more secluded part of
the parking lot.  J.E. testified that he did not remember what was said in the
car, but because the parties were “going to hook up”, they exited the vehicle
and Mr. Eerhard then asked J.E. to “drop” his pants. I found this aspect of
J.E.’s evidence to be consistent with the suggestion he denied; specifically,
that the pair had connected for the purpose of Mr. Eerhard performing oral sex
on J.E.  J.E. complied and Mr. Eerhard began performing oral sex on him at
which point, J.E. received a phone call from his father. J.E. testified that he
told his father something like, “I’m like walking near where it was
happening”.  After Mr. Eerhard finished performing oral sex on J.E., J.E.
recalled he asked him, “have you ever had your ass eaten out before”.  When
J.E. indicated that he had not, it was his evidence that Mr. Eerhard responded,
“you’re in for a treat”.  While Mr. Eerhard was performing oral anal sex on J.E.,
J.E.’s father D.E. arrived.  J.E. recalled his father saying, “you’re done,
you’re done”, and telling him to get in his vehicle.
[
9
]
J.E. recalled the police arriving, travelling
back to his home to collect some of his electronics, and then attending
McMaster Children’s Hospital.  J.E. remembered that he provided a statement to
the police at McMaster Children’s Hospital, and acknowledged that he was not
honest about what had happened because he was “scared”.  It was J.E.’s evidence
that he was “scared of how my Dad would react to, like, the truth”, so he
didn’t tell the police the truth. However, J.E. testified that his father
highlighted how important it was to tell the truth, so it was J.E.’s evidence
that he told the police the truth the second time he spoke with them.
[
10
]
Overall, J.E. presented his evidence in a
sophisticated and clear manner.  He was candid and forthcoming about certain
aspects of his evidence.  However, I found J.E. was intentionally vague
surrounding some of the more contentious aspects of his evidence, which I
conclude was internally inconsistent.  In particular, with respect to any
conversation, which might have taken place between the parties.  I also find it
inherently implausible, on this record, and given J.E. maintained Mr. Eerhard
reached out to him directly, that Mr. Eerhard did not confirm he was eighteen
years old.  Especially, given the date he recalled entering, 2003, would have
resulted in J.E. being either twenty-two or twenty-three years of age in June
of 2023.  These problematic areas of J.E.’s evidence adversely impacted his
credibility, and the reliability of his evidence overall.
The Evidence of D.E.
[
11
]
D.E. is J.E.’s father.  He was an impressive
witness.  He provided evidence that was sincere, objective and logical.  He
testified that on June 10, 2023, J.E. was “just scraping six foot or just
approaching it”.  He recalled that J.E. had been a bit “squirrely” throughout
the day, and eventually asked him if he could go for a walk.  It was D.E.’s
evidence that he permitted him to go for a walk; however, ten minutes after
J.E. left their home, D.E. still had a “nagging concern”.  D.E. remembered that
he decided to call J.E. to see where he was, which is consistent with J.E.’s
evidence on this point.  D.E. testified that’s he still didn’t “feel quite
right”, so after he hung up, he checked the ‘Find My Phone’ application to
determine J.E.’s location.  Given it was inconsistent with where he told D.E.
he was going to be, D.E. decided to find him.
[
12
]
It was D.E.’s evidence that he located J.E. at
Pearson High School, while he was in the company of Mr. Eerhard.  D.E. recalled
that J.E.’s pants and underwear were down, and he said, “stop right now”, “step
away from the boy”.  D.E. testified that Mr. Eerhard immediately said, “he told
me he was eighteen”, at which point D.E. replied, “he’s fourteen”.  This aspect
of D.E.’s testimony is consistent with J.E. providing the age of eighteen to
Mr. Eerhard, which is inconsistent with J.E.’s evidence on this point.  D.E.
remembered Mr. Eerhard then stated something to the effect of, “oh, no, not
again”.  When pressed while under cross examination, D.E. agreed he may have
prompted Mr. Eerhard with respect to how old he thought J.E. was.
[
13
]
D.E. testified that he directed J.E. to “get his
clothes sorted and go wait in the car”.  D.E. had previously asked Mr. Eerhard
for his identification, which was provided to him, and he remembered calling
911 and providing that information to the operator.  The police attended the
scene a short time later.  D.E. recalled attending McMaster Children’s Hospital
with J.E. for a sexual assault kit.
The Evidence of Mr. Eerhard
[
14
]
Mr. Eerhard presented his evidence in a largely
unsophisticated manner.  He was candid and testified in a straightforward
fashion; however, he frequently experienced difficulty articulating himself. 
Mr. Eerhard’s evidence was corroborated by aspects of J.E. and D.E.’s evidence
and I found it to be internally consistent.  Overall, I find Mr. Eerhard was a
truthful witness who provided reliable evidence.
[
15
]
Mr. Eerhard testified that he is not currently
employed; however, provides care for his elderly parents.  He further recounted
pleading guilty to “luring” and “sexual interference”. It was his evidence that
he “didn’t question the other person enough to make his age appropriate”.
[
16
]
Mr. Eerhard testified that on June 10, 2023 he
was leaving his family’s home a little after 9:20 when he received a message
through the “Sniffies” medium that stated, “Hi, I’m 18. Do you want to suck my
seven-inch cock?”.  It was Mr. Eerhard’s evidence that he said “Hi” back and
asked, “You’re 18?”.  Once he received confirmation the person he was
communicating with was eighteen, Mr. Eerhard recalled they agreed to meet “at
the Shoppers”.  Mr. Eerhard remembered turning around at that point.  He
recalled some conversation about where the sexual activity would take place,
wherein he suggested his motor vehicle.  However, the individual then asked him
to meet at the school across from the ‘Shoppers’ parking lot.
[
17
]
The pair eventually connect when J.E. approaches
Mr. Eerhard’s passenger side window.  Mr. Eerhard testified that he asked J.E.,
“If he’s 18”, and then, “do you have your license”.  It was Mr. Eerhard’s
evidence that J.E. replied that he did have his license, but “not on him”.  He
again said, “I’m 18”.  It was at this point in their interaction that Mr.
Eerhard recalled opening his door.  Mr. Eerhard remembered noticing J.E. was
“black”, “he has some facial hair”, and “he was dressed appropriately”.
[
18
]
Mr. Eerhard testified that J.E. asked him to “go
to the back of the school”, and while they were driving, he asked him “if he’s
finished high school”.  Mr. Eerhard recalled J.E. replied that he “graduated”. 
He further inquired as to what he was doing currently, wherein he remembered
J.E. told him he was looking for a job. When pressed while under cross
examination, Mr. Eerhard agreed that each answer J.E. provided independently
was not determinative of his age, particularly given young people can be deceptive. 
Something that Mr. Eerhard experienced personally in the past.  However, he
maintained that he relied on his visual observations of J.E., in addition to
the information he received from him orally, prior to subjectively concluding
he was eighteen.
[
19
]
It was Mr. Eerhard’s evidence that while the
pair were walking to where J.E. wanted him to perform oral sex they stopped,
and J.E. stated, “not there, there’s a camera there”.  At this point in their
interaction, J.E. pulled down his shorts, and Mr. Eerhard began performing oral
sex on him.  Mr. Eerhard testified that J.E. asked him if he could “put his
penis in my butt”, but Mr. Eerhard said “no”. J.E. then asked Mr. Eerhard if he
could “suck my penis”; however, Mr. Eerhard recalled they were interrupted by J.E.’s
phone ringing.  Mr. Eerhard thought J.E. was speaking with “his friends”, and
when that conversation was complete, Mr. Eerhard remembered that he asked if he
could “lick his butt”.  J.E. agreed, and the pair also engaged in that sexual
activity.  Their interaction ended abruptly when D.E. arrived.
[
20
]
Mr. Eerhard testified that D.E. said, “that’s
enough”, and asked him if he knew how old J.E. was.  Mr. Eerhard recalled that
he said, “he told me he was 18”, and D.E. replied, “no, he’s 14”.  It was Mr.
Eerhard’s evidence that he “just froze” and went to the ground.  He remembered
D.E. asking him for his identification, which he provided.  The police then
attended and placed him under arrest.
Position of the Parties
The Crown:
[
21
]
The crown stresses the random nature of the
encounter between these parties, arguing it created certain obligations on Mr.
Eerhard with a view to ensuring the individual he was engaging with sexually
was legally able to provide his consent.  The crown asks me to reject Mr.
Eerhard’s evidence completely; however, the crown takes the position that even
if I accept Mr. Eerhard’s evidence, it has still proved beyond a reasonable
doubt that he did not take
all
reasonable steps in the circumstances to
ascertain the age of J.E. More was required on this factual record.
The Defence:
[
22
]
The defence reminds me that I must approach
my analysis contextually.  Mr. Eerhard must be considered as an individual who
was operating within the confines of an online application, which produces
random sexual encounters by its very design.  The defence takes the position
that, given his previous experience, and taking into consideration the nature
of “Sniffies”, Mr. Eerhard took
all
reasonable steps to ascertain J.E.’s
age.  Simply put, Mr. Eerhard recognized that there was an obligation on him to
be diligent, and the steps he took were consistent with what a reasonable
person would have taken in those circumstances.
The Applicable Legislation
[
23
]
At all material times, J.E. was fourteen years
old.  Accordingly, the absence of consent is not a relevant factor.  There is
no dispute between the parties that any sexual contact, which occurred between
Mr. Eerhard and J.E. was consensual.  The only live issue is whether Mr.
Eerhard had an honest but mistaken belief that J.E. was at least sixteen years
of age.  That being said,
s. 150.1(4)
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
applies.  It provides as follows:
150.1(4) It is not a defence to a charge under
section
151
or 152, subsection 160(3) or 173(2), or
section 271
, 272, or 273 that the
accused believed that the complainant was 16 years of age or more at the time
the offence is alleged to have been committed unless the accused took all
reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant.
Guiding Legal Principles:
[
24
]
Given that Mr. Eerhard, the defendant, has provided
evidence, the framework set out in
R .v. W(D.)
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] S.C.J. No. 26
applies. Specifically, the test outlined at paragraph 28:
(1)
If I believe the evidence of Mr. Eerhard,
obviously, I must find him not guilty;
(2)
Second, even if I do not believe the testimony
of Mr. Eerhard, but I am left in reasonable doubt by it, I must find him not
guilty;
(3)
Finally, even if I am not left in doubt by the
evidence of Mr. Eerhard, I must ask myself whether on the basis of the evidence
which I do accept, if I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence
of the guilt of Mr. Eerhard.
[
25
]
In turning my mind to the analysis I must engage
in, I have also reviewed the article written by Paciocco J.A. entitled,
“Doubt about Doubt: Coping with
W.(D.)
And Credibility Assessment” found
at 2017 22
Canadian Criminal Law Review
31. In that article, Justice
Paciocco helpfully breaks down the
W.(D.)
principles into five analytical
points:
(1)
Criminal trial cannot properly be resolved by
deciding which conflicting version of events is preferred;
(2)
A criminal fact-finder that believes evidence
that is inconsistent with the guilt of the accused cannot convict the accused;
(3)
Even if a criminal fact-finder does not entirely
believe evidence inconsistent with guilt, if the fact-finder is left unsure
whether that evidence is true there is a reasonable doubt and an acquittal must
follow;
(4)
Even where the fact-finder entirely disbelieves
evidence inconsistent with guilt, the mere rejection of that evidence does not
prove guilt; and
(5)
Even where the fact-finder entirely disbelieves
evidence inconsistent with guilt, the accused should not be convicted unless
the evidence that is given credit proves the accused guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt.
[
26
]
I have reminded myself that the complainant in this matter is a
child.  In my final analysis, I found Justice Hill’s review of the applicable
law in
R .v. B.B.
[2009] O.J. No. 2991
was both informative and
instructive.  In particular, paragraphs 60-63:
The testimony of a youthful witness cannot be said to
be inherently unreliable. Otherwise, a negative stereotype improperly supplants
abolition of the corroboration rule in the testimonial competence regime. The
testimony of a young witness is to be understood with an eye to common sense as
exactitude and detail may be missing from a child's recall as the world is
experienced differently from an adult:
B.(G.) v. The
Queen
(1990),
1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC)
,
56 C.C.C. (3d) 200
(S.C.C.)
at 219-220
per
Wilson J.;
Marquard v. The
Queen
(1993),
1993 CanLII 37 (SCC)
,
85 C.C.C. (3d) 193
(S.C.C.)
at 201
per
McLachlin J. (as she then was);
R. v. H.C.
(2009),
2009 ONCA 56 (CanLII)
,
241 C.C.C. (3d) 45
(Ont. C.A.)
at para.
42
.
The court's common sense approach may require caution
in accepting the youthful witness' testimony taking into account the strengths
and weaknesses of the particular witness' evidence in the context of a specific
case:
Marquard v. The Queen, supra
221-3
per
McLachlin J.;
The Queen v.
W.(R.)
(1992),
1992 CanLII 56 (SCC)
,
74 C.C.C. (3d) 134
(S.C.C.)
at 142-4
per
McLachlin J.;
R. v. Keeper
,
[2000] O.J. No. 1407
(C.A.)
at para. 4
per curiam; R. v. Reekers
,
[1999] O.J. No. 3415
(C.A.)
at para. 1
per curiam; R. v. Stephen (D.)
,
[1996] O.J. No. 441
(C.A.)
at para. 3
per curiam
.
As a general rule, children will have a better and
more accurate recollection of events shortly after they occurred than they will
some weeks, months or years later:
R. v. F.(C.C.)
(1997),
1997 CanLII 306 (SCC)
,
120 C.C.C. (3d) 225
(S.C.C.)
at 233-4
. Where a child witness at trial adopts an out-of-court statement
admissible pursuant to s. 715.1 of the
Code
,
but has no independent memory of the events, a special warning, like a
Vetrovec
caution, is admissible as to the
dangers of convicting on the videotape alone:
R. v. F.(C.C.)
,
at 241.
Whatever enlightened approach is taken respecting a
child's ability to perceive and recall, the standard of proof cannot be reduced
below that of cases involving adults:
B.(G.) v. The
Queen, supra
at 219;
The Queen v.
W.(R.), supra
at 143;
R. v. Markell,
[2001] O.J. No. 1813
(C.A.)
at para. 1-2
per curiam
;
R. v. Keeper,
supra
at para. 4.
[
27
]
Section
150.1(4) is not concerned with the accused’s belief as to a complainant’s age. 
Indeed, the section assumes that the accused believed the complainant was old
enough to give legal consent and requires an inquiry into the basis for that
belief.  Parliament, by enacting
s. 150.1(4)
has limited the “honest belief”
defence to cases where the accused has taken “all reasonable steps” to
ascertain the age of the complainant:
R. v. Saliba,
2013 ONCA 661 (CanLII)
, [2013] O.J. No.
5887 at paras.
26
, 27 (ONCA).
[
28
]
As
explained in
R. v. Dragos
(2012),
2012 ONCA 538 (CanLII)
, 291 C.C.C. (3d) 350, at paras
29-33
(ONCA),
s. 150.1(4)
mandates an inquiry akin to a due diligence inquiry. The
trier of fact must compare the steps, if any, taken by an accused to determine
the true age of the complainant with the steps that a reasonable person would
have taken in those circumstances.  Importantly, the 150.1(4) analysis does not
place any onus on the accused.  The onus is on the crown to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that all reasonable steps were not taken:
R. v. Saliba
at
para.
28
citing
R. v. Duran
at para. 54.
[
29
]
In
R. v. W.G.
[2018], O.J. No. 4827 at paragraph 58
, Justice Gray outlines
some common threads within the relevant caselaw, which I found provided helpful
guidance:
(1)
the legislative provisions seek to protect young people from sexual
crimes; they do so by placing the responsibility for preventing adults/youth
sexual activity where it belongs: with adults; Parliament's allocation of
responsibility to adults is crucial for protecting young people from sexual crimes: R.
v. George, supra;
(2)
it is well-understood that young people can pass for older people, and
it is reasonable to expect that an accused should be aware of the possibility
that a young person may be under 16 years of age: R. v. Hayes, supra;
(3)
there is a commonly recognized motivation for young people to
misrepresent their age: R. v. George, supra; and R. v. H.L., supra;
(4)
the greater the age difference, the higher the degree of diligence that
may be required in ascertaining the complainant's true age: R. v. R.A.K.,
supra;
(5)
specific concrete steps may not be required, depending on the
surrounding circumstances, including the complainant's degree of
sophistication, his or her apparent age and maturity, and his or her circle of
friends: R. v. L.T.P, supra.
Analysis:
[
30
]
The
analysis I must engage in is necessarily contextual and fact specific.  Mr.
Eerhard was operating within the confines of an online medium, “Sniffies”,
which connected parties for the purpose of random sexual encounters.  This was
a “hook-up app”, designed for individuals over the age of eighteen.  It was in
this context that Mr. Eerhard was connected with J.E.  This was not a party, their
interaction did not take place while in the company of mutual acquaintances,
and J.E. was not in the company of his friends.  My assessment with respect to whether
Mr. Eerhard took
all
reasonable steps to ascertain J.E.’s age must occur
against the appropriate fact specific backdrop.  It cannot take place in the
abstract, or with reference to an evidentiary record completely distinguishable
from the one before me.
[
31
]
I
agree with the crown that the discrepancy in age between these parties imposed
a higher degree of diligence on Mr. Eerhard, specifically with a view to the
inquiry he was required to engage in.  Moreover, as Mr. Eerhard was acutely
aware based on his previous experience, it is not uncommon for young people to
misrepresent their age.  As such, it would not have been sufficient for Mr.
Eerhard to simply rely on the age restriction imposed by the “Sniffies” application
to satisfy himself that J.E. was eighteen years old.
[
32
]
Prior
to carrying my analysis forward, I think it is helpful for me to review the
findings of fact I have made based on the evidence, which I have accepted on
this evidentiary record.  I have made the following factual findings:
(1)
I accept that Mr. Eerhard subjectively believed that J.E. was eighteen
years old when they engaged in sexual acts together;
(2)
I find that Mr. Eerhard verbally confirmed J.E. was eighteen years old prior
to allowing him to enter his motor vehicle.  Additionally, I find Mr. Eerhard confirmed
J.E. was eighteen years old through the “Sniffies” application prior to
agreeing to meet J.E. personally;
(3)
I find Mr. Eerhard responded to the following message, “I’m 18. Do you
want to suck my seven-inch cock?”;
(4)
I find Mr. Eerhard asked J.E. if he had a driver’s license, and J.E.
responded that he did, his driver’s license was just not on his person; and
(5)
Finally, I find Mr. Eerhard asked J.E. if he had graduated High School,
and that J.E. responded that he had.  I further find that Mr. Eerhard inquired
into what J.E. was doing for work at that point in time, and J.E. told him he
was looking for a job.
[
33
]
I
also accept Mr. Eerhard’s evidence that J.E. was dressed “appropriately” from
his perspective.  It was J.E.’s evidence that he was wearing Lululemon shorts
and a t-shirt, which I find to be corroborative of Mr. Eerhard’s evidence on
this point.  I also accept that Mr. Eerhard observed J.E. to have facial hair
on June 10, 2023, as the record reflects that he started shaving two years
prior to that date.  There is no dispute that J.E. was approximately six feet
tall on the date of the alleged incident, and I accept that at one point, he
told Mr. Eerhard they couldn’t engage in sexual activity in a particular
location because there was a surveillance camera.
[
34
]
I
carefully considered all of the inquires, which I accept Mr. Eerhard made to
inform his subjective belief that J.E. was eighteen years old, against the
appropriate factual background.  In the result, I find that on this particular
evidentiary record, Mr. Eerhard did take all reasonable steps to ensure that
J.E. was of an age where he could consent to the sexual activity they engaged
in together.  Certainly, there was an elevated level of diligence placed on Mr.
Eerhard given the age discrepancy between these parties.  Moreover, it would have
been insufficient for Mr. Eerhard to simply rely on the age restrictions
imposed by the online application “Sniffies”.  But he did not.  Mr. Eerhard
took a number of factors into consideration in order to inform his subjective
belief, and I must consider the totality of those factors in arriving in my
ultimate determination.
[
35
]
Mr.
Eerhard was operating in the context of an online forum, designed to connect
individuals over the age of eighteen for the purpose of engaging in random
sexual encounters, or “hook-ups”.  I accept that Mr. Eerhard responded to a
message, which stated, “I’m 18. Do you want to suck my seven-inch cock?”.  He
proceeded to confirm J.E.’s age by sending him a message through the “Sniffies”
application prior to agreeing to meet him.  When Mr. Eerhard first encountered
J.E., he observed him to be appropriately dressed, six feet tall, with
observable facial hair.  Mr. Eerhard personally confirmed J.E.’s age prior to
allowing him access to his motor vehicle, following which J.E. advised him that
he had a driver’s license.  J.E. further told Mr. Eerhard that he had graduated
from High School and was looking for a job.  J.E. also exercised a degree of
control over where the pair ultimately engaged in sexual activity together. 
When all of these factors are considered in their totality and contextually, I find
they are consistent with an inquiry a reasonable person would engage in given
similar circumstances.
[
36
]
The
crown very strongly argued that Mr. Eerhard ought not to have proceeded with
any sexual contact with J.E. absent being provided with a physical copy of his
identification.  Speaking frankly, I find that to be wholly unreasonable in
these particular circumstances.
Conclusion:
[
37
]
In the result, I find Mr. Eerhard took all reasonable steps to inform
his subjective belief that J.E. was eighteen years old prior to engaging in
sexual activity with him on June 10, 2023.  The crown has failed to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that all reasonable steps were not taken.  Mr.
Eerhard is not guilty with respect to all counts charged.
Released:  April 7, 2025
Justice
Jennifer Campitelli