Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj718/2025oncj718.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Murray
, 2025 ONCJ 718
DATE: 
July 15, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  19-4993
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
DAVID MURRAY
Before
Justice S. Murphy
Heard
on June 25, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on July 15, 2025
M. Flagg................................................................................................ counsel
for the Crown
A. O’Brodovich.........................................................  
counsel for the accused, D. Murray
Murphy J.:
[
1
]
This is a decision relating to the Crown’s
Application to admit similar fact evidence regarding the 35 counts of fraud
that Mr. Murray is facing.
[
2
]
At the commencement of the Trial, and throughout
the proceedings, the Defence has admitted the following elements of the Crown’s
case:
i)
Mr. Murray was the owner and operator of the
company, EcoLife Home Improvements Inc.;
ii)
Mr. Murray’s company, EcoLife Home Improvements
Inc. and each Complainant entered into a contractual relationship, and Mr.
Murray’s identity as a person and as an authorized representative of the
company is not in issue;
iii)
The timeframe as between 2017 and 2019 is not in
issue for any of the contracts, or the performance or non-performance of the
contract;
iv)
Mr. Murray received money from each complainant;
v)
Mr. Murray and/or the workers from the company EcoLife
either started work and did not finish regarding each contract, or did not
start work at all;
vi)
The money for each complainant was not refunded
(with one exception of the return of a deposit); and
vii)
Other admissions were made, which are not
relevant for the purpose of assessing the Crown’s application.
[
3
]
The Crown has filed an Application for the
Evidence as against Mr. Murray in the Crown’s case to apply across all counts,
or a Cross-Count Application.  The burden on the Crown is on a balance of
probabilities.  The Crown relies on
R. v. Handy
as the leading case
regarding these Applications, which sets out the legal test to be applied.
[
4
]
Mr. O’Brodovich, on behalf of Mr. Murray,
concedes the Crown’s Application on all of the elements of the
Handy
test, with the exception of the basis of collusion, or that there is an air of
reality to the risk of collusion.  If I find that there is an air of reality to
the risk of collusion or that there has been collusion, the obligation is on
the Crown to disprove collusion.
[
5
]
The Defence says that the Crown has not
discharged that obligation.  The Crown argues that there is no air of reality
to the risk of collusion and that there is no evidence of collusion in this
case.
[
6
]
When pressed regarding exactly where the
collusion as between Complainants, or as between the Complainants and the
police, the Defence focused on the area of the timing of the filing of the complaint
to the police.
[
7
]
The theory of the Defence is that none of the
Complainants believed that they had been deceived by Mr. Murray until they
learned of a Facebook Group called Victims of EcoLife, until they learned of a
protest against EcoLife held in March of 2019 in Tom Davies Square in Sudbury,
until they became aware of media coverage regarding disgruntled customers of
EcoLife Home Improvements Inc., or some combination of those things.
[
8
]
The Defence claims that deceit is part of the
mens
rea
that the Crown has to prove.  He argues that the subjective belief of
the Complainants was influenced by the Facebook group, the media and/or the
protest, and so their subjective belief that they were deceived forms part of
the analysis whether or not
mens rea
has been established.
[
9
]
The Crown argues that the subjective belief of
each Complainant is legally irrelevant to any issue and does not form part of
the
mens rea
of the offence of fraud.
[
10
]
I agree with the position of the Crown.  The subjective
belief of any Complainant that he or she has been deceived is irrelevant to the
legal analysis that I have to undertake.  As well, the timing of any change in
view of the Complainant about whether or not they had been deceived is also
irrelevant to any analysis that I must undertake.
[
11
]
Mens rea
was
defined by the Supreme Court of Canada in the seminal case of
R. v.
Théroux
,
1993 CanLII 134 (SCC)
, [1993] 2 SCR.  At page 15, Justice
McLachlan writing for the majority said:
“2
.
The Actus Reus of Fraud
Since the
mens rea
of an offence is related to
its
actus reus
, it is helpful to begin the analysis by considering
the
actus reus
of the offence of fraud.  Speaking of the
actus
reus
of this offence, Dickson J. (as he then was) set out the
following principles in
Olan
:
(i)   the offence
has two elements: dishonest act and deprivation;
(ii)  the dishonest
act is established by proof of deceit, falsehood or "other fraudulent
means";
(iii) the element of
deprivation is established by proof of detriment, prejudice, or risk of
prejudice to the economic interests of the victim, caused by the dishonest act.
Olan
marked a broadening
of the law of fraud in two respects.  First, it overruled previous
authority which suggested that deceit was an essential element of the
offence.  Instead, it posited the general concept of dishonesty, which
might manifest itself in deceit, falsehood or some other form of
dishonesty.  Just as what constitutes a lie or a deceitful act for the
purpose of the
actus reus
is judged on the objective facts, so
the "other fraudulent means" in the third category is determined
objectively, by reference to what a reasonable person would consider to be a
dishonest act.  Second,
Olan
made it clear that economic
loss was not essential to the offence; the imperilling of an economic interest
is sufficient even though no actual loss has been suffered.  By adopting
an expansive interpretation of the offence, the Court established fraud as
an offence of general scope capable of encompassing a wide range of dishonest
commercial dealings.”
[
12
]
Accordingly, the concept of deceit relates to
the
actus reus
of the offence, and it is to be determined on an
objective basis, rather than the subjective belief of the Complainant.
[
13
]
However, it also relates to the
mens rea
. 
Justice McLachlan went on to discuss
mens rea
in the following manner:
“3
.
The Mens Rea of Fraud
(i)
Doctrinal Considerations
This brings us to the
mens
rea of fraud.
What is the guilty mind of fraud?  At this point,
certain confusions inherent in the concept of
mens rea
itself become
apparent. It is useful initially to distinguish between the mental element or
elements of a crime and the
mens rea.
The term
mens rea,
properly
understood, does not encompass all of the mental elements of a crime. 
The
actus reus
has its own mental element; the act must be the
voluntary act of the accused for the
actus reus
to exist.
Mens
rea,
on the other hand, refers to the guilty mind, the wrongful intention,
of the accused.  Its function in criminal law is to prevent the conviction
of the morally innocent -- those who do not understand or intend the
consequences of their acts.  Typically,
mens rea
is concerned with
the consequences of the prohibited
actus reus
.  Thus in the
crimes of homicide, we speak of the consequences of the voluntary act ‑‑
intention to cause death, or reckless and wilfully blind persistence in conduct
which one knows is likely to cause death.  In other offences, such as
dangerous driving, the
mens rea
may relate to the failure to consider the
consequences of inadvertence.
This brings me to the question
of whether the test for
mens rea
is subjective or objective.  Most
scholars and jurists agree that, leaving aside offences where the
actus
reus
is negligence or inadvertence and offences of absolute liability,
the test for
mens rea
is subjective.  The test is not whether
a reasonable person would have foreseen the consequences of the prohibited act,
but whether the accused subjectively appreciated those consequences at least as
a possibility.  In applying the subjective test, the court looks to the
accused's intention and the facts as the accused believed them to be:  G.
Williams,
Textbook of Criminal Law
(2nd ed. 1983), at pp. 727‑28.
Two collateral points must be
made at this juncture.  First, as Williams underlines, this inquiry has
nothing to do with the accused's system of values.  A person is not saved
from conviction because he or she believes there is nothing wrong with what he
or she is doing.  The question is whether the accused subjectively
appreciated that certain consequences would follow from his or her acts, not
whether the accused believed the acts or their consequences to be moral.  Just
as the pathological killer would not be acquitted on the mere ground that he
failed to see his act as morally reprehensible, so the defrauder will not be
acquitted because he believed that what he was doing was honest.
The second collateral
point is the oft‑made observation that the Crown need not, in every case,
show precisely what thought was in the accused's mind at the time of the
criminal act.  In certain cases, subjective awareness of the consequences
can be inferred from the act itself, barring some explanation casting doubt on
such inference.  The fact that such an inference is made does not detract
from the subjectivity of the test.
Having ventured these general
comments on
mens rea,
I return to the offence of fraud.  The prohibited
act is deceit, falsehood, or some other dishonest act.  The prohibited
consequence is depriving another of what is or should be his, which may, as we
have seen, consist in merely placing another's property at risk.  The
mens
rea
would then consist in the subjective awareness that one was
undertaking a prohibited act (the deceit, falsehood or other dishonest act)
which could cause deprivation in the sense of depriving another of property or
putting that property at risk.  If this is shown, the crime is
complete.  The fact that the accused may have hoped the deprivation would
not take place, or may have felt there was nothing wrong with what he or she
was doing, provides no defence.  To put it another way, following the
traditional criminal law principle that the mental state necessary to the
offence must be determined by reference to the external acts which constitute
the
actus
of the offence (see Williams,
supra
, c.
3), the proper focus in determining the
mens rea
of fraud is to ask
whether the accused intentionally committed the prohibited acts (deceit,
falsehood, or other dishonest act) knowing or desiring the consequences
proscribed by the offence (deprivation, including the risk of
deprivation).  The personal feeling of the accused about the morality or
honesty of the act or its consequences is no more relevant to the analysis than
is the accused's awareness that the particular acts undertaken constitute a
criminal offence.
This applies as much to the
third head of fraud, "other fraudulent means", as to lies and acts of
deceit.  Although other fraudulent means have been broadly defined as
means which are "dishonest", it is not necessary that an accused
personally consider these means to be dishonest in order that he or she be
convicted of fraud for having undertaken them.  The
"dishonesty" of the means is relevant to the determination whether the
conduct falls within the type of conduct caught by the offence of fraud; what
reasonable people consider dishonest assists in the determination whether
the
actus reus
of the offence can be made out on particular
facts.  That established, it need only be determined that an accused
knowingly undertook the acts in question, aware that deprivation, or risk of
deprivation, could follow as a likely consequence.
I have spoken of knowledge of
the consequences of the fraudulent act.  There appears to be no reason,
however, why recklessness as to consequences might not also attract criminal
responsibility.  Recklessness presupposes knowledge of the likelihood of
the prohibited consequences.  It is established when it is shown that the
accused, with such knowledge, commits acts which may bring about these
prohibited consequences, while being reckless as to whether or not they ensue.
These doctrinal observations
suggest that the
actus reus
of the offence of fraud will
be established by proof of:
1.    the prohibited act,
be it an act of deceit, a falsehood or some other fraudulent means; and
2.    deprivation caused
by the prohibited act, which may consist in actual loss or the placing of the
victim's pecuniary interests at risk.
Correspondingly, the
mens
rea
of fraud is established by proof of:
1.    subjective knowledge
of the prohibited act; and
2.    subjective knowledge
that the prohibited act could have as a consequence the deprivation of another
(which deprivation may consist in knowledge that the victim's pecuniary
interests are put at risk).
Where the conduct and
knowledge required by these definitions are established, the accused is guilty
whether he actually intended the prohibited consequence or was reckless as to
whether it would occur.”
[
14
]
Justice McLachlan went on to say:
“The
concern is that any misrepresentation or practice which induces an incorrect
understanding or belief in the minds of customers, or which causes deprivation,
will become criminal.  As Marshall J.A. put it in
Mugford
,
supra
,
at pp. 175‑76:
. . . it
is not sufficient to base fraud merely upon a finding that the appellant
induced a state of mind in his customers which was not correct.  Any
misrepresentation may have that effect.  Criminal dishonesty extends
further. . . .
It would
be a startling extension of criminal liability if every statement urging the
public to purchase one's wares because only a limited supply remain were by
itself to be visited with criminal sanction.”
[
15
]
Therefore, it is clear that the element of
mens
rea
is from the perspective of Mr. Murray, not the perspective of any
of the Complainants involved in this case.  The fact that their views of the
consequence of Mr. Murray’s acts or failure to act may have been influenced by
other factors, such as media release, a Facebook group or a protest is
completely irrelevant to any issue that I have to determine.  These factors
simply explain how and why and when each Complainant chose to report their
concerns to the police.
[
16
]
I find in the circumstances, that I do not find
that there was collusion regarding any of the evidence given, on the part of
any of the Complainants and that there is no air of reality to the issue of
collusion.
[
17
]
The Crown’s Application is granted and the evidence
will apply across the counts.
Released:  July 15, 2025
Signed:
Justice S. Murphy