Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj71/2025oncj71.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Ay,
2025 ONCJ 71
DATE:  2025·02·10
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
CENGIZ
AY
SENTENCING
Heard and
Delivered: February 7, 2025.
Ms. Roxana Jahani-Geran for Mr.
Rzeszutek .....................................   counsel for the Crown
Mr. Abdullah Gur ..............................................................................   counsel
for the defendant
KENKEL J.:
[
1
]
After hearing persistent engine revving
coming from across the street, a witness looked out her bedroom window. She saw
Mr. Ay’s pickup truck in a driveway pointed towards her house. She said the truck
drove forward “full fledge” (meaning at full speed) on a diagonal path into her
neighbour’s garage. The crash shook her house which is attached. Constable Roberts
found the pickup truck inside the garage. The garage door was torn off and
laying on top of the truck. There was structural damage to the house including
the framing around the garage. The family who lived in the home said they
smelled gas. They were evacuated for their safety by the Vaughan Fire
Department.
[
2
]
Mr. Ay was convicted at trial of impaired
operation of a motor vehicle and refusing to provide a breath sample for
testing by an approved instrument.
[
3
]
Given the threat to public safety and the
need for general deterrence in this region with such a high rate of drinking
and driving offences, the Crown submits a 30-day jail sentence is required. The
defence concedes that a custodial sentence is required but submits that a 60-day
conditional sentence would sufficiently address the factors identified by the
Crown.
[
4
]
The aggravating factors include the very
dangerous nature of the driving – accelerating at high speed towards a
residential home. That posed a high degree of risk to Mr. Ay and everyone in
the vicinity. The damage caused and the removal of people from their home as a
consequence is a further aggravating factor. Mr. Ay’s high degree of
intoxication at the time also aggravates sentence.
[
5
]
The fact that this incident is an isolated
error mitigates sentence. Mr. Ay has no record and is otherwise employed and
supporting his family.
[
6
]
Mr. Ay is a permanent resident of Canada.
Mr. Gur mentioned that his conviction may have immigration consequences
regardless of the sentence. While I don’t agree that’s a mitigating factor,
collateral consequences can be relevant to sentence.
[
7
]
I agree that a custodial sentence is
required. In this case I find that a global conditional sentence of 90 days
best meets the purpose and principles of sentence. It provides for both
specific and general deterrence and the protection of the public through longer
supervision than a brief jail term.
[
8
]
On the impaired operation count Mr. Ay will
be sentenced to a conditional sentence of 60 days. On the refusal count Mr. Ay
will be sentenced to a conditional sentence of 30 days consecutive for a global
conditional sentence of 90 days.
[
9
]
In addition to the statutory terms, Mr. Ay
will obey a condition of house arrest for the entire period subject to the
following exceptions: for the purpose of employment including direct travel to
and from work, for medical emergencies involving Mr. Ay or any member of his
immediate family, for compliance with the terms of this order including
reporting to your supervisor or counselling, except for one period each week on
Saturdays from the hours of 12 noon to  4:00 p.m. for the purpose of shopping
for the necessities of life, and except with the permission of your supervisor.
[
10
]
In addition to the house arrest condition
Mr. Ay will not occupy the driver’s seat of any motor vehicle. He will not
operate a motor vehicle. He will take counselling for alcohol use as directed
by his supervisor and sign any releases necessary to monitor his compliance
with that condition.
[
11
]
The conditional sentence will be followed by
a term of probation of 24 months. In addition to the statutory terms, he will
report by phone within 48 hours of the expiry of his conditional sentence and
thereafter as required. He will not operate or occupy the driver’s seat of any
motor vehicle unless licensed to do so by the Province of Ontario in a vehicle
equipped with an approved ignition interlock device. He will continue
counselling for alcohol use as directed by probation and sign any releases
necessary for probation to monitor compliance with that condition.
[
12
]
As of today, Mr. Ay is prohibited from
operating a motor vehicle anywhere in Canada for a period of 27 months on both
counts concurrent, being two years plus the full term of his conditional sentence
for a total prohibition of 27 months. I find the 27-month period is the least
restrictive term that could sufficiently provide for public safety in the
circumstances of this case.
[
13
]
There will be a victim fine surcharge on
each count.
Delivered:  February 7, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel