Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj61/2025oncj61.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Warrington-Johnson
, 2025 ONCJ 61
DATE: 
2025 01 31
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 23-48103804
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
JOSHUA WARRINGTON-JOHNSON
Before
Justice David S. Rose
Heard
on September 3, 2024 January 8, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on January 31, 2025
Mr. C. Brannagan............................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Mr. C. Levien ………………… counsel for the
accused Joshua Warrington-Johnson
Rose J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson pleaded guilty to the
charge of Possession of a prohibited Taurus 45 caliber semi-automatic handgun
on April 17, 2023 contrary to
s. 95(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.  These are reasons
for sentence
Facts
[
2
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson’s case came out of a larger
investigation into a street gang operating in the area of Jane and Finch Avenue
in the north west part of the city.  It was called Project Wildcat.  Mark
Cummings was one of the main targets of Project Wildcat.  His private
communications were intercepted as part of the investigation.
Intercepts
[
3
]
The interceptions captured Mr.
Warrington-Johnson speaking with Mr. Cummings on March 18, 2023 at 1:32 pm.  In
that call Mr. Warrington-Johnson asked Mr. Cummings where his gun was, to which
Mr. Warrington-Johnson commented on the fact that Mr. Cummings had no gun.  Mr.
Cummings commented on the fact that Mr. Warrington-Johnson was looking for
“teeth”, meaning ammunition.
[
4
]
The next day Mr. Warrington-Johnson was heard on
another call with Mr. Cummings, telling him that he didn’t have a firearm
because his brother was using it right now.  On the basis of that intercept Mr.
Warrington-Johnson was sharing his gun with others.
[
5
]
On April 24 Mr. Warrington-Johnson was intercepted
speaking with Mr. Cummings about a shooting in the neighbourhood. Mr.
Warrington-Johnson talked about how he was stopped by the police in his tow
truck on the way home. The police told him there was a victim.  He told the
police that he knew nothing about gang members “mandem” getting shot. In that
call Mr. Warrington-Johnson explained to Mr. Cummings that when he was speaking
to the police he had a “blicky”, meaning firearm, in his waist and the police
did not know.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson joked to Mr. Cummings that the police
inadvertently gave him information that the shooting was at 18 Driftwood.  The
two men discussed possible motives for the shooting involving a street gang. 
Mr. Cummings told Mr. Warrington-Johnson that he needed an in person meeting
because of too much “chatter” on the phone.  Later in the call Mr.
Warrington-Johnson said to Mr. Cummings half-heartedly “let’s just slide to the
opp block right now [ie opposing gang territory]. You don’t even know you just
gave me a drop”.
[
6
]
The intercept on April 24 therefore has Mr.
Warrington-Johnson raising the idea of a retaliatory hit against a rival gang.
Seizure
[
7
]
The police used the intercepts, and other information,
to identify Mr. Warrington-Johnson’s phone number and address.  By that point
they knew him to be a tow truck driver who routinely monitored police
communications on a scanner.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson’s address was confirmed
from multiple sources to be Unit 103 – 2750 Jane Street, a unit he shared with
Valerie Johnson.  Further investigation confirmed that Mr. Warrington Johnson entered
that unit, and used a 2022 White Elantra, and a 2019 GMC Sierra tow truck.
[
8
]
A search warrant was  executed on April 27, 2023
at 9:41am.  That warrant yielded the following:
i)
A loaded Taurus 45 cal. Semi-automatic handgun
in his bedroom.  The gun had 7 rounds.
ii)
Several personal identifiers in that room
including a student id card, bank card and mail from Canada Revenue Agency;
iii)
A box of Blazer Brass .45 cal ammunition. That
box had 16 additional rounds of .45 cal ammunition
iv)
One round of .45 cal ammunition on the floor of
the passenger seat area of the 2019 GMC Sierra.
v)
Mr. Warrington-Johnson’s passport in the rear
seat of the Sierra.
Other evidence
[
9
]
The Taurus 9mm handgun was functional as a
semi-automatic weapon.  It uses conventional ammunition. It tested as a
prohibited firearm under s. 84 of the Code.  The ammunition found in the Sierra
was suitable for use the Taurus and successfully test fired.  Mr.
Warrington-Johnson has no registration certificate for the gun and he is not a
holder of a Firearms Acquisition certificate. A Photograph entered into
evidence captured the closet in which the gun was located in Mr. Warrington-Johnson’s
bedroom   It was at the bottom of a laundry hamper.
[
10
]
The Crown lead evidence at sentencing about the
shooting on April 24, 2023.  Toronto Police posted on social media at 8:24 pm
that night about a confirmed shooting at Jane St. and Yorkwoods Gate. A man was
located with a gunshot wound. He was taken to hospital with injuries.  A new
report from the same incident said that the victim was 22 years old.  He was
shot after a sedan with 3 people left the car and fired at him. The victim was
shot in the leg, and his injuries were serious but non life threatening.
[
11
]
The intercept from April 24 between Mr.
Warrington-Johnson and Mr. Cummings appears to be about that very shooting.
[
12
]
The Crown also lead evidence at sentencing about
the prevalence of shootings and firearm discharges in Toronto.  Toronto Police
Service data has the number of shootings in the city falling from 406 shootings
and firearm discharges in 2020 to 258 in 2023, but the number rises
dramatically in 2024 to 375.  The number of persons killed or injured by
shooting is between 5 and 10 per month in 2024 totalling 132 for the year 2024
until October 21, 2024.  There appears to be a correlation between the number
of shootings and firearm discharges and the number of persons killed or injured
by shooting. This is not surprising.  The total number of killed or injured by
gun was 191 in 2020, falling to 132 in 2023.  The number of victims therefore
appears to be increasing in 2024.
[
13
]
The TPS data confirm my experience as a trial
judge in Toronto that there is a serious plague of gun violence in the city. There
is a broad consensus in the city that we have a gun problem in Toronto.
Mr. Warrington-Johnson
[
14
]
A pre-sentence report (PSR) discloses Mr.
Warrington-Johnson to be 29 years old. He was raised by his mother, with whom
he is close.  His father left the family when Mr. Warrington-Johnson was born,
which left Mr. Warrington-Johnson estranged from his father for some time, but
now bonding over a mutual interest in the trucking industry.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson
Sr. is supportive of his son despite this case.
[
15
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson grew up in the Jane and
Finch area of Toronto, which he describes as a rough area.  The sound of guns
being fired was common, as was violence.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson has positive
roots in the community.  He was involved in a local boys and girls club.  He
has a positive role model in a local social worker Wayne Black.
[
16
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson disclosed that many of
his friends from growing up are either in jail or deceased.  Funerals are a
common occurrence.  Going to school was “scary at times”.  He was once run down
by a guy with a gun.  His community is not safe.  Despite knowing persons
involved in criminal activity Mr. Warrington Johnson is not himself involved in
criminal activity and does not belong to any street gang.
[
17
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson is single and has two
children, both sons.  One is 6, and one 5.  The eldest has autism and requires
significant assistance.  He pays $500 a month in child support.  His older brother
describes him as having a “father mindset” which confirms the PSR writer’s
opinion that the is a good father who cares for his children.
[
18
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson has support in the
community.  Wayne Black, a social worker in the Jane and Finch community wrote
a letter on behalf of Mr. Warrington-Johnson.  He describes Mr.
Warrington-Johnson as “…very progressive and always trying to make his life
better”. But Mr. Black’s letter advocates for something which I struggle with,
namely “Joshua is not committing crimes with a gun; I’ve known him for almost
20 years. Joshua like most in that community is trying to protect himself from
the element of surprise like a lot of youth in the community”.
[
19
]
I cannot accept that illegal possession of a
loaded gun is required to live out a peacefully in the community.  Having a gun
for protection from other contorts the term protection because it is the rest
of the community which requires protection.  I would not normalize illicit
possession of handguns.  They are designed to inflict grievous harm and all too
often do, as the data shows.  The protection is for those facing the muzzle,
not those pointing it, see
R. v. Jama
2018 ONSC 1252
.
[
20
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson worked as a truck driver recently,
and sees his future as a truck driver.  He has now completed a Truck training
course.
[
21
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson is a high school graduate
and attended college.
[
22
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson has been employed since
he was 16.  He has been a tow truck driver for the last 5 years but is now at
risk to lose his licence because of this conviction.
[
23
]
There are no reported substance abuse issues.
[
24
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson accepts responsibility
for this charge.  He told the PSR writher that having this gun was a “dumb
mistake” and that it has ruined his life, resulted in him losing his job and
jeopardising his ability to work in the future.  He said that he had the gun
for safety concerns in the community. He had the pistol because “people are
getting killed for no reason” and “he has children who need him”.
[
25
]
The PSR concludes that Mr. Warrington-Johnson
has much going for him.  He is a loving father, and is well situated in his
family.  He has no previous criminal record.  With that said, the PSR
highlights his risk of re-offending as: access to firearms; poor decision
making; he is a follower in a social
milieu
with many negative
influences.  He has children one of which is high needs. He is clearly a caring
father.  In his comments to me at the sentencing hearing he struck me as
intelligent, articulate and remorseful.  He spoke genuinely about his care for
his mother and children.
[
26
]
Mr. Warrington-Johnson has one day of
Pre-Sentence Custody.  I would credit this as 2 days.
Sentencing positions
[
27
]
The Crown seeks a sentence of 3 years in
penitentiary, and s. 109 1(b) and 1(c) for life, s. 491 weapons forfeiture, dna
on secondary.
[
28
]
The Defence seeks a sentence of Conditional
Sentence of 2 years less a day.  no objection to the ancillary orders.
Legal Framework
[
29
]
The range of sentence for gun cases under s.
95(1) of the
Code
must start with
R. v. Nur
2013 ONCA 677
, aff’d
2015 SCC 15
.  Nur involved the seizure of a loaded 22 caliber semi-automatic
handgun with an oversized magazine.  Mr. Nur had thrown the gun under a parked
car where it was seized after a brief foot chase.  When Nur was before the
Court s 95(1) carried a maximum 10 year sentence.  Since the Information was
laid against Mr. Warrington-Johnson Parliament increased the maximum sentence
for s. 95(1) sentences to 14 years as result of passage of Bill C-21 on
December 15, 2023.  While Mr. Warrington-Johnson is not exposed to the 14 year
maximum penalty currently in place for s. 95(1) I find that Parliament has
increased the penalty because of the increase in gun crime.
[
30
]
In
Nur
, the Court of Appeal found that s.
95(1) offences required a finding by the trial court on where  the offence lies
on a spectrum between true crime on one hand, and misconduct of a regulatory
nature on the other, see
Nur
(supra) at par. 51. In this case the facts
are easily at the true crime end of the spectrum.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson was
captured on intercepts talking about gang related activity, lending his gun out
to others, driving with the gun in a car while talking to the police about a
shooting and possible retaliation against another gang.  All the hallmarks of
true crime are present in this case.
[
31
]
The Court in
Nur
(supra) at par. 206 found
that sentencing possession of a firearm under s. 95(1) in circumstances of true
crime must emphasis denunciation and deterrence.  A 40 month sentence was
upheld in
Nur
, but in the context of the constitutional challenge to the
then 3 year mandatory minimum sentence under s. 95 of the
Code
,  Doherty
JA said:
Individuals who have loaded restricted or prohibited firearms
that they have no business possessing anywhere or at any time, and who are
engaged in criminal conduct or conduct that poses a danger to others should
continue to receive exemplary sentences that will emphasize deterrence and
denunciation. Thus, as outlined earlier, and regardless of the three-year
minimum penalty, this appellant, despite the mitigating factors, could well
have received a sentence of three years.
[
32
]
Authority for a range of sentence of 3 – 5 years
is plentiful, see
R. v. Mohiadin
2021 ONCA 122
,
R v. Morris
2021
ONCA 680
at par
177
,
R. v. Mahamet-Zene
2018 ONSC 1050
,
R. v. Serrano
2018 ONSC 6785
, and
R. v. Thavakularatnam
2018 ONSC 2380
.
[
33
]
There are some cases where a conditional
sentence is appropriate. Mr. Levien brought several to my attention:
R. v.
Hill
2023 ONCJ 357
where an indigenous offender received a conditional
sentence of 2 years less a day.  In that case Justice Burstein found (at par.
13) that the offence did not fall in the true crime end of the spectrum. A
similar finding was made by O’Donnell J. in
R. v. Carter
2021 ONCJ 561
at par.
23
.  There are other recent sentencing decisions by trial courts which
impose conditional sentences of imprisonment where the s. 95(1) case falls in
the true crime end of the spectrum, see
R. v. Stewart
2024 ONSC 281
,
R.
v. Edwards
2023 ONCJ 53
,
R. v. Beharry
2022 ONSC 4370
.  My review of
Stewart
,
Edwards
and
Beharry
leads me to find that those
offenders background and experience as victims of racism was a significant
mitigating factor in sentence.  I therefore recognize, while the range of
sentences is commonly understood to be 3 – 5 years see
Beharry
(
supra
)
at par. 31. Some trial courts have imposed conditional sentences in similar
circumstances.  Sentencing ranges are guidelines only, and do not detract from
the principal that imposing sentence is an individualized exercise.
[
34
]
I find the mitigating circumstances to be:
-The guilty
plea.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson accepted responsibility for the offences.  He
saved the Court the expense of a trial.  With that said this is not an early
plea. Mr. Warrington-Johnson pleaded guilty on the first day of this scheduled trial
before any evidence was called.  Based on the evidence at this proceeding the
Crown had a strong case;
-It is
mitigating that Mr. Warrington-Johnson has a supportive family.  His mother was
in Court during the proceedings;
-Mr. Warrington-Johnson
has support in the community;
-Mr.
Warrington-Johnsons has excellent prospects for rehabilitation.  He is hard
working, and has been working toward a career which is stable and pays well;
-He is a good
father who is supportive of his children, one of which is high needs;
-He has no
criminal record.
[
35
]
The aggravating circumstances are:
-There is a
serious gun plague in Toronto.  The evidence at sentencing is that the number
of shootings is on the rise, and with that a commensurate increase in the
number of dead or wounded shooting victims. I agree with Akhtar J.’s comments
in
R. v. McNichols
2020 ONSC 6499
at par.
38
,
…
the unauthorised possession of firearms
is a blight on this city that causes immeasurable pain and misery to all
sectors of society. Those who lose loved ones or see them seriously injured
suffer the traumatic effects for a lifetime.
-The gun was
loaded and easily available. It was a .45 caliber semi-automatic handgun which
delivers lethal force.  The gun seized was designed to inflict serious or
lethal harm on an individual.
-Ammunition
was located in Mr. Warrington-Johnson’s tow truck. The evidence in this case
establishes a street gang connection between Mr. Warrington-Johnson and Mr.
Cummings but his occupation as a tow truck driver puts him in an industry which
has been beset by extreme violence in Toronto.  Mr. Levien submits that Mr. Warrington-Johnson
has no connection with corrupt tow trucking. I accept this, and so reduce the
effect of this to some extent.
-Most
significantly the intercepts from March 18, 2023 have Mr.  Warrington-Johnson
talking  about seeking 45 cal ammunition. He was lending out his gun and
admitted on the intercepts  that he was driving with a gun in his waist belt as
he spoke with a  police officer on April 24.  This was at a location where
there had been a shooting that day.   He seemed to think there was some humour
to this.  Intercepts also record Mr. Warrington-Johnson raising the idea of
retaliation with Mr. Cummings for the April 24 shooting.  This case is about a
gun seizure against the backdrop of street gang activity and a shooting by a
rival gang.
-The moral
responsibility in this case is high.  Mr. Warrington-Johnson knew that he was
in possession of a loaded firearm and the he had no lawful business to do so.
- It is
aggravating that Warrington-Johnson had the gun for his own safety.  He told
the PSR writer that.  That kind of approach to firearms simply perpetuates the
cycle of violence and harm.
[
36
]
I disagree with the submission that the violence
in Mr. WJ’s neighbourhood furnishes some form of explanation for this offence
which mitigates the sentence. To the extent that violence in a community causes
people such as WJ to carry a handgun it reinforces the siege mentality which is
a significant part of the plague.  I disagree with Mr. Black’s comments.  Mr.
WJ was heard on the wires participating with Mr. Cummings as a gang insider if
not a member.  The wires amply support a finding that Mr. WJ was lending his
gun out to others, joking with a gang member about who had a gun and driving
around a crime scene with a concealed handgun, and most concerning raising the
spectre of a retaliatory action against the perceived perpetrators of the April
24 2023 shooting.  The cycle of gun violence must end and punishing illegal
possession of loaded handguns is one of he ways to do that.
[
37
]
Based on the foregoing I find that the predominant
principles of sentencing in this case are deterrence and denunciation.  Rehabilitation
plays a role but it must take lesser importance that deterrence and
denunciation. Having reflected on the defence submission for a conditional
sentence I would not accept that this sentence an appropriate sentence is less
than 2 years in jail.  Rather, the many aggravating factors bring this case
into the penitentiary range.  A sentence of less than two years would not be
proportionate in this case.
[
38
]
The challenge in this case is balancing all that
Mr. Warrington-Johnson has going for him with the severity of this offence.  On
reflection a sentence of less than 2 years would be disproportionate to what
happened here.  This calls for a penitentiary sentence.
[
39
]
The appropriate sentence is:
-2 years 8
months in jail (or 970 days less 2 days of presentence custody).  The net
sentence is 968 days in jail.
-lifetime
weapons prohibition under s. 109;
-because of
the duration of the jail sentence the victim fine surcharge is waived;
-the firearm
and ammunition are ordered seized;
-This is a
secondary designated offence under the DNA Identification Act. It is in the
best interests of the administration of justice that he supply a sample of his
DNA given the facts of the offence.
Released:  January 31, 2025
Signed:
Justice D. Rose