Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj398/2025oncj398.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Akbari
, 2025 ONCJ 398
DATE: 
2025 07 28
COURT
FILE No.:  Newmarket 998 24 91109660
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
WAISUDDIN AKBARI
Before
Justice E. Prutschi
Heard
on July 15, 2025
Reasons
for Sentence released on July 28, 2025
Amy Barkin.......................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Morgan Lipchitz and Ian Donnell....   counsel
for the defendant Waisuddin AKBARI
PRUTSCHI J.:
[
1
]
On March 4, 2024, Mr. Akbari engaged in a discussion
with Cameron Ahmad, a salesperson at a local car dealership. During that
conversation Mr. Akbari expressed dehumanizing and conspiratorial opinions
about the State of Israel, Israelis, and Jewish people more generally.
[
2
]
He spoke about his belief that Israel and the Jews
exercised control over world events and directly benefited from interest
payments on things like car loans. Mr. Akbari further discussed an Israeli plot
to exterminate anyone who was not Jewish. He stated that Israel sought to
enslave and poison the world and he equated Israelis and Jews to roaches who
should be exterminated or a cancer that needed to be eliminated.
[
3
]
He concluded the conversation by telling Mr. Ahmad,
“Before I go, I want you to remember my name and remember my face because the
next time you see it, I’ll be on the news.” Mr. Akbari further explained the
reason for his impending media notoriety saying, “I know when I’m going to die
because I’m going to plant a bomb in every synagogue in Toronto and blow them
up to kill as many Jews as possible.” The shocked salesperson asked if Mr.
Akbari was serious to which he responded, “Yes, I’m serious. I’ll make sure
those attacks are filmed and posted online so the world can see what I’ve
done.”
[
4
]
Mr. Akbari was found guilty after his trial of
threatening to blow up synagogues and threatening to kill Jews.
[1]
Kienapple issue
[
5
]
At the outset of sentencing Mr. Akbari requested that a
conditional stay be entered on one of the two counts he was found guilty of,
citing the principle enunciated in
R. v. KienappIe.
[2]
This legal
rule ensures that a person is not convicted more than once for the same criminal
act.
[
6
]
Mr. Akbari was found guilty both of uttering a threat
to damage synagogues contrary to section 264.1(1)(b) and of uttering threats to
kill Jews contrary to section 264.1(1)(a). Both acts arose from the same
conversation he had with Mr. Ahmad on March 4, 2024.
[
7
]
Though the words were uttered in the same conversation
and indeed within even the same sentence, the focus of the words were very
different. The threat against synagogues obviously has a very direct impact on
the Jewish community, but it is a distinct offence separate and apart from the
threats made against Jewish people.
[
8
]
Thus, while the imposition of two findings of guilt has
little, if any, impact on the appropriate global sentence, it is still
appropriate to register two findings of guilt which properly reflect the two
distinct offences and the targets of each crime. I therefore decline to enter a
conditional stay of either count.
Position of the parties
[
9
]
The Crown seeks a four-to-six-month jail sentence
followed by three years probation along with ancillary orders including DNA
registration and an extended weapons prohibition.
[
10
]
The defence seeks a conditional discharge but joins the Crown in
recommending a three-year period of probation with ancillary orders.
Principles of Sentencing
[
11
]
The aim of any criminal sentence is to protect the public while
contributing to respect for the law in a manner that helps to maintain a just,
peaceful, and safe society. This goal is at the core of the sentencing
principles outlined in
section 718
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
12
]
A sentencing judge attempts to achieve this goal by imposing just
sanctions which balance and address specific sentencing principles including
denunciation, both general and specific deterrence, and rehabilitation. A
well-crafted sentence will promote a sense of responsibility in the offender
and an acknowledgement of the harm they have caused to the community.
[
13
]
The overarching goal of a fit sentence is to impose a sanction that
is proportionate to the gravity of the offence committed, and the degree of
responsibility of the person who committed it.
[
14
]
Sentencing
is a highly individualized process. In determining the fit sentence for Mr.
Akbari, it is valuable to assess the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
at play in the unique circumstances of these offences and for this offender.
Aggravating Factors
[
15
]
It is important to be clear about what Mr. Akbari is – and is not –
being sentenced for. He is not
being sentenced for taking any material
steps to act on the threats he made. There is no evidence before me of the
collection of weapons, explosives, maps, planning or coordination. Indeed, following
his arrest, police conducted extensive checks and searches on Mr. Akbari to
ensure the safety of the community was not still at risk. Mr. Akbari’s guilt is
based on empty threats he communicated to a stranger, mistakenly assuming Mr.
Ahmad would be sympathetic to Akbari’s own warped and hateful worldview. There
was no effort to publicize his threats beyond the conversation he shared with
Mr. Ahmad.
[
16
]
That is not to say that the threats were harmless. Mr. Akbari’s
threats were clearly motivated by bias, prejudice and hate towards Israelis and
Jews. This is a serious statutorily aggravating factor pursuant to section
718.2(a)(i) which covers both national origin and religion. The hate-motivated
bias at the core of Mr. Akbari’s comments is the most serious aggravating factor
in this case. Hate-based threats are not just words, they are the
gasoline upon which even more serious offences burn. Where hate is normalized,
harm follows.
[
17
]
Statistics presented by the York Regional Police (YRP) and Toronto
Police Service (TPS) were filed as exhibits at the sentencing hearing and paint
a shocking portrait of a Jewish community under siege. In York Region, 71% of
all religiously motivated hate crimes target Jews.
[3]
In Toronto, 40% of all
reported hate crimes (religiously motivated or not) target Jews. Hate crimes in
general exploded in Toronto with an 80% increase being noted in 2023 “that
commenced immediately following the October 7 attack by Hamas on Israel.”
[4]
These disturbing statistics
are even more astonishing when one notes that Jews comprise roughly 1% of
Canada’s total population yet far outstrip any other identifiable group as the
target of hate crimes.
[5]
[
18
]
Against this backdrop, it becomes obvious why Mr. Akbari’s actions
triggered anxiety and concern not only in Mr. Ahmad who reported them to police,
but across the Jewish community more broadly. Mr. Akbari’s threats contributed
to a profound and pervasive sense of fear and despair amongst Canadian Jewry,
tragically but eloquently described in the five Community Impact Statements
filed in this case.
[
19
]
The authors of these statements provided passionate and courageous commentary
that greatly assisted in situating Mr. Akbari’s threats within the context of a
profound and palpable sense of fear that Canada’s Jews currently live under. Though
attacks against the Jewish state and the Jewish people are not new in Canada, the
problem has exploded exponentially since the October 7, 2023, terrorist attack
by Hamas and the subsequent war that continues to this day.
[
20
]
Richard Robertson, writing on behalf of B’nai Brith Canada,
described “a palpable dread hanging over the community…Jewish Canadians did not
and do not feel safe in their own communities…Mr. Akbari’s threats to destroy
synagogues were a shot through the metaphorical heart of the Jewish community.”
He concluded by saying that “Mr. Akbari’s actions have further traumatized a
cohort of society that is still grappling with and seeking to heal from the
suffering of its past. Threats of destruction targeting the Jewish community in
Canada re-open and deepen visceral wounds of our collective trauma.”
[
21
]
Jaime Kirzner-Roberts, from the Friends of Simon Wiesenthal Center
for Holocaust Studies, described Mr. Akbari’s threats as “not just an act of
hate against Jewish people – it is an attack on Canda’s values, laws, and way
of life.”
[
22
]
Rabbi Jennifer Gorman spoke for the Toronto Board of Rabbis. She described
congregants who now travel to Saturday services carrying phones for their own
safety despite the Orthodox Jewish prohibition against such technology’s use on
the Sabbath. When they arrive to their synagogues, members and guests are now
greeted by locked doors and security checkpoints.
[
23
]
James Stocker, writing for the Centre for Israel and Jewish Affairs,
noted that threats of violence against the Jewish community “may lead to real
violence by normalizing hate speech and emboldening individuals who may take
such threats seriously, leading to real-world attacks.”
[
24
]
In a starkly blunt statement, Michael Teper, of the Canadian Antisemitism
Education Foundation, reviewed a long list of recent hate crimes targeting the
Jewish community. In a depressing and deflating comment, he noted that:
In this context, some Jews are giving up on
life in Canda. As evidenced by media stories such as this, they are leaving the
country. Many Jews are afraid to drop off their children at the local daycare.
Our institutions are constantly on the watch for graffiti and vandalism and
break-ins. Our religious and community institutions are forced to divert their
financial resources away from programming, maintaining and building our
infrastructure, and direct these funds instead towards hiring security guards
and police officers. Based on bitter historical experience, we feel that Canada
is on a very dark trajectory that will not end well.
[
25
]
It is clear from reading these statements that it is impossible to
overstate the sense of fear, anger, and frustration Mr. Akbari’s words have
instilled in the broader Jewish community. While each statement is worthy of a reading
in its entirety, several common themes emerge.
[
26
]
First, the words Mr. Akbari used in his threats were taken both
literally and seriously by members of the Jewish community. Many Canadian Jews
live in a state of perpetual heightened anxiety, whether they are attending
synagogues, dropping their children off at Jewish day schools, or merely going
about their daily work and leisure activities. The statistics surrounding
anti-Jewish hate crimes, particularly since the start of the October 7 war in
Israel, demonstrate unequivocally that Jews in Canada have every reason to
react to Mr. Akbari’s comments in this way.
[
27
]
Second, a threat against Jewish communal infrastructure is taken no
less seriously than a threat against Jews themselves. Threats to synagogues are
threats to what should be safe community sanctuaries. Synagogues, for the very
reasons reflected in Mr. Akbari’s threat towards those institutions, have
necessarily become fortified security zones protected by cameras, bag searches
and guards. In direct contravention of their mission to be open and welcoming spaces,
Canadian synagogues exist behind locked doors, under constant video
surveillance, with paid security staff conducting searches of all who seek to
enter.
[
28
]
Many Canadians would be shocked to learn that attendance at prayer
services, schools, community centres or events require such extraordinary security
measures right in the heart of Canada’s purportedly safe democracy. Clearly the
sense of safety and comfort most Canadians take for granted does not exist in
the same measure for practicing members of Canada’s small but vibrant Jewish
community.
[
29
]
Another thread running through the Community Impact Statements is
how Mr. Akbari’s comments go beyond a strike to the hearts of Jews, but indeed
strike at the core of the promise of Canada’s national project. Many of the
authors noted that, by contributing to fear and hatred against Jews, Mr. Akbari
undermined social cohesion and integration within the broader community. Mr.
Akbari’s threats were directed at Jews and their institutions, but those words
served to weaken the foundations of freedom, security, and pluralism for all
Canadians.
[
30
]
This thread is reflected in some of the judicial commentary in other
hate-crime cases such as when Justice Ramsay described the “surge in
anti-Jewish acts” as a crime for which “every Canadian is a victim. Poison has
been injected into our public discourse and that poison pollutes the
environment in which all Canadians exchange their views.”
[6]
[
31
]
While it is important to situate Mr. Akbari’s conduct within its
appropriate context, it is also important for a sentencing court not to allow
itself to be overwhelmed by such troubling statistics and valid community
concerns. Mr. Akbari is not to be punished for the totality of the landslide of
hatred directed towards the Jewish community. He is however responsible for exacerbating
the problem, and his actions contributed to the further traumatization of an
already deeply traumatized community.
Mitigating Factors
[
32
]
Mr. Akbari is 41 years old and was born in Afghanistan to an Ismaili
Muslim family. Ismailis are a minority sect within the much larger branches of
the Muslim faith. Mr. Akbari’s father died from an illness when Mr. Akbari was
only four years old. By the time he was six, Mr. Akbari left his mother and fled
the war and turmoil of Afghanistan with his grandparents, making their way to
Pakistan. As a young man he moved to Moscow before settling in Canada at the
end of 2007 and eventually acquiring his Canadian citizenship.
[
33
]
Mr. Akbari is married with two teenaged children. He opened a
shawarma shop in York Region, working long hours at the restaurant to support
his family. During the trial he described losing large sums of money to a
gambling addiction that he says is now under control, though he expressed an
openness to attending counselling to assist him in managing this problem.
[
34
]
Mr. Akbari has a strong network of familial and community support
behind him. Though he described himself as non-religious during the trial, he has
been embraced by the Ismaili community who have offered him support since his
finding of guilt and the notoriety that surrounded his trial. Letters filed on
Mr. Akbari’s behalf make it clear that the community does not condone the hate-filled
threats Mr. Akbari has been found guilty of, though they offer personal support
to Mr. Akbari on his path to rehabilitation.
[
35
]
Numerous family members also offered letters of support. The shock
upon learning of Mr. Akbari’s threats was universal. He had never before been
heard to make antisemitic comments nor did he ever even engage in political
discussions about Israel. Mr. Akbari’s reputation prior to these offences was
one of a hard-working immigrant Canadian who supported various charitable
community causes with donations of food from his restaurant.
[
36
]
The charges and media coverage of the subsequent trial have had a
tremendous negative impact on Mr. Akbari and his family. He spent four days in
custody after being arrested before obtaining bail, as police conducted
extensive searches into his background. The franchisor of his restaurant pulled
the franchise upon learning of Mr. Akbari’s finding of guilt. This has left Mr.
Akbari financially dependent on dwindling savings and help from community
members and friends.
[
37
]
In meeting with the probation officer who prepared the Pre-Sentence
Report, Mr. Akbari expressed shame at his behaviour and has placed himself on a
waiting list for supportive services offered by the Canadian Mental Health
Association.
[
38
]
At the conclusion of the sentencing hearing, Mr. Akbari read a
lengthy prepared statement to the court. Though he continues to deny that he
made the threats he was found guilty of, he displayed important insight into
the harm those threats have caused and expressed his opposition to antisemitism
or violence in any form.
[
39
]
Mr. Akbari spoke very directly to members of the Jewish community
asserting their right to feel safe and secure, particularly in their places of
worship. He has taken it upon himself to become better educated about the
Jewish faith – something he had almost no knowledge of at the time of the
offences.
[
40
]
Mr. Akbari has taken preliminary steps to engage positively with the
Jewish community, reaching out, with the assistance of his counsel, to a Rabbi
in the hopes that he might have opportunities in the future to learn more about
Judaism. He expressed a desire to work together with the Jewish community to
combat antisemitism.
[
41
]
The attention his case has drawn has had a devastating impact on him
and his family. In a terrible twist of irony, Mr. Akbari’s comment during the
threats that he would “be on the news” has come true in a way he certainly did
not anticipate. He no longer feels safe to leave his home and described how and
he and his family have been the target of bullying and online harassment. This
situation too mirrors the lack of safety felt by the Jewish community caused,
in part, by Mr. Akbari’s own actions.
Analysis and Application to Mr. Akbari
[
42
]
I will begin by addressing the availability of a conditional
discharge. In order to impose such a sentence, I must be satisfied of two
things: first, that the discharge is in Mr. Akbari’s best interests, and
second, that the imposition of a discharge is not contrary to the public
interest. Mr. Akbari’s request for a discharge fails both prongs of this test.
[
43
]
Mr. Akbari already has a criminal record, albeit for a dated
unrelated offence – his 2013 conviction for impaired driving. He is a Canadian
citizen with no obvious collateral consequence flowing to him should he acquire
a new conviction on his record.
[
44
]
More importantly, while a discharge is not legally precluded even in
the face of a serious offence, it would clearly be contrary to the public
interest to grant such a sentence in the face of the highly aggravating
hate-motivated circumstances present here. There is a strong public interest in
denouncing and deterring this kind of odious conduct. A discharge would
manifestly fail to address those sentencing principles.
[
45
]
Only two months ago, in this very same jurisdiction, Justice
Townsend commented in detail on the threats specifically to Jewish institutions
and the increase in hate crimes more generally. This arose in the sentencing of
Kenneth Gobin who spat at Jews while glorifying Hitler. Mr. Gobin had a lengthy
prior criminal record, and his offences were markedly more serious, earning him
a substantial 12-month jail sentence. Nevertheless, Justice Townsend’s
rationale in emphasizing denunciation and deterrence is worth repeating at
length:
[33]  Frequently we hear news stories about
members of the Jewish community, and the community as a whole, suffering
victimization at the hands of hate-filled offenders. Threats made to bomb
schools, tombstones and places of worship vandalized, posters and material are
strewn about in the street. This has to stop. The hateful targeting of Jewish
people, and the targeting of any of the multicultural communities that make up
Canada has to stop.
[34]
One way to get this to stop is for
the court to impose sentences which accurately reflect the principles of
general deterrence and denunciation.
Members of the public need to know
that if you commit a hate motivated offence – whether toward the Jewish
community, the Black community, women, or the LGBTQ+ community to name a few –
you will be sentenced accordingly. Sentences imposed must reflect the reality that
hate motivated offences are on the rise. Communities must not be forced to be
revictimized over and over again by the actions of hate-filled offenders.
[35]  In the case before me, a significant
jail sentence is the only way for the principles of general deterrence and
denunciation to be met. A significant jail sentence is proportionate to the
seriousness of the offence, the degree of responsibility of the offender, and
the significant impact that this offence has had on the individual complainants
and the larger Jewish community.
[36]  Canadians deserve to feel safe. Safe
from violence, safe from harm, and safe from hate.
Words can be a weapon
,
and sometimes words like the ones used by Mr. Gobin can inflict serious lasting
injury.
[7]
[Emphasis added]
[
46
]
The threat to bomb Toronto synagogues killing “as many Jews as
possible” places this offence near the extreme end of the spectrum for such
offences. Denunciation and deterrence must be the primary sentencing principles
prioritized in such a case which suggests that a jail sentence may be the only
appropriate penalty in the circumstances.
[
47
]
Mr. Akbari’s threats were spoken to a single stranger previously
unknown to him. As a result of the publicity associated with his case, he has
suffered significant personal consequences flowing from his own criminal
actions. This includes the loss of his business and the four days he spent in
jail awaiting bail.
[8]
During that time, police satisfied themselves that Mr. Akbari had taken no
steps to actualize his threats.
[
48
]
He has been subject to bail conditions for nearly 1.5 years and has
remained compliant with those terms. He has developed some insight into the
far-reaching consequences of his words on the broader Jewish community, though
he continues to deny making the specific threats he was found guilty of. His
lengthy prepared comments at the conclusion of the sentencing hearing suggest
that he has come to recognize the extraordinary harm he caused and is already
on the path towards rehabilitation.
CONCLUSION
[
49
]
Balancing all these aggravating and mitigating factors, and taking
into account all the principles of sentencing, I find that probation alone is
insufficient to reflect the gravity of Mr. Akbari’s conduct. While a custodial
sentence is required, the safety of the community is not endangered if Mr.
Akbari were permitted to serve his sentence under strict conditions in the
community. This will send the appropriate message both to him, and to others, that
hateful threats against Jews and their institutions will be met by significant
sanction. At the same time, it will leave open a path to reconciliation and
rehabilitation without the crushing disruption of further jail time.
[
50
]
I therefore conclude that the appropriate sentence is one of 60 days
in custody to be served conditionally in the community. This will be in
addition to the four days Mr. Akbari already spent in jail awaiting bail which
will be credited as six days in accordance with the requirements of
pre-sentence custody. The entirety of the 60-day Conditional Sentence Order
will be subject to house arrest conditions with limited exceptions which will
be crafted with the input of counsel. The conditional sentence order will be
followed by the maximum probationary term permitted by law – three years.
[
51
]
Both the conditional sentence and the probation orders will
incorporate the following terms, among any others to be determined after the
submissions of counsel:
•
Report as directed;
•
Participate in counselling for gambling
addiction and antisemitism education as directed by his conditional sentence supervisor
or probation officer and sign the releases necessary to permit monitoring of
progress with that counselling;
•
Not be in possession of any weapons or
incendiary devices; and
•
Not attend or be within 200 metres of any
synagogue, place of Jewish worship, Jewish community centre, Jewish school or
daycare, or any gathering organized by or for the Jewish community, except for
the purposes of counselling as directed by your conditional sentence supervisor
or probation officer.
[
52
]
Uttering threats is a secondary designated DNA offence. There will
be an order compelling Mr. Akbari to provide a sample of his DNA. There will
also be a section 110 weapons prohibition for a period of 10 years.
Released:  July 28, 2025
Signed:
Justice E. Prutschi
[1]
R. v. Akbari
,
2024 ONCJ 709
.
[2]
1974 CanLII 14 (SCC)
, [1975] 1 SCR 729.
[3]
The YRP 2024 Annual Statistics Report can be downloaded at
Statistical Reports
- York Regional Police
, see p. 16.
[4]
The TPS 2024 Annual Hate Crime Statistical Report can be accessed through the
TPS online portal at
Hate Crimes | Toronto
Police Service Public Safety Data Portal
, see p. 1.
[5]
The
Daily — Police-reported crime statistics in Canada, 2023
[6]
R. v. Leslie Bory, unreported decision of J.A. Ramsay, Ontario SCJ, March 10,
2025 at p. 55.
[7]
R. v. Gobin
,
2025 ONCJ 266
at para.
33-36
.
[8]
In accordance with the rules regarding
Summers
credit, these four days
will be credited as six days concurrently on both counts.