Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj293/2025oncj293.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Galati
, 2025 ONCJ 293
DATE:  2025·05·28
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
GIUSEPPE
GALATI
JUDGMENT
Evidence and
Submissions Heard: May 28, 2025.
Delivered: May 28,
2025
Mr. Charles Lamy....................................................................................  
counsel for the Crown
Mr. Jeffrey Goldglass.......................................................................  
counsel for the defendant
KENKEL J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
Constable Steinman clocked a van travelling
at 139km/hr in a 70 km/hr zone. He turned around and tried to catch up. At the
next intersection the van drove into the left turn lane, but when the light
went green it drove back into the through lane cutting off another vehicle. The
van continued at extreme speed until it slowed as it passed a second police
car. Mr. Galati was eventually stopped and arrested for Dangerous Operation.
[
2
]
Mr. Galati admitted he may have been
speeding that day, but not to the extreme described by the officer. He used the
left turn lane to get around a vehicle stopped at the red light with its 4-way
flashing lights on. He did not drive in a dangerous manner and the officer
could have caught up to him at any time. He said the officer’s evidence was
absurd and ridiculous.
[
3
]
The evidence and the submissions of both
counsel identify two issues for decision:
•
First, what was the manner of driving? That
determination turns primarily on the assessment of the credibility of the
witnesses.
•
Second, Has the Crown proved that the accused’s
operation was dangerous within the meaning of s 320.13(1)?
Operation
[
4
]
PC Steinman noticed a white Chevrolet van
travelling a lot faster than the rest of the traffic southbound on Bathurst
Street. As it came closer and passed him, his onboard radar clocked the vehicle
travelling at 139 km/hr. The officer stated that the maximum speed on Bathurst
is 70 km/hr. It was February, and the road was slushy and wet. He made a U-turn
and activated his lights and siren to try to catch up to the van to cause it to
stop. It didn’t.
[
5
]
At the next intersection at Wellington
Street the van moved into the left turn lane. It appeared to stop for the red
light. When the light turned green the van did not turn left, but instead turned
back into the through lane cutting off a car in that lane as it started
forward. The van then accelerated to a very high speed.
[
6
]
The officer followed the van at speeds up to
120 km/hr, but he wasn’t closing the gap with the white van. On the contrary,
it appeared to be gaining speed and increasing the distance between them. The
officer estimates the van’s speed after Wellington was 140 km/hr, still in a 70
km zone. The driver was “flying past” other cars on the roadway.
[
7
]
At the next major intersection at Henderson
the light was red. The officer said the van appeared to drive through the red
light. The officer was careful to explain that he wasn’t close enough to see
that, but the officer could see the light was red even at that distance. He did
not see Mr. Galati stop. The light was still red when the officer arrived
seconds later, and Mr. Galati’s van was no longer there.
[
8
]
After Henderson there happened to be another
York Regional Police car travelling southbound closer to the intersection at McLellan
Way. The white van slowed as it passed that car and PC Steinman, still with
full lights and siren, was able to catch up and effect the stop.
[
9
]
The officer’s evidence including his
responses in cross-examination on this point showed that the radar device was internally
calibrated at 4 different speed levels prior to use. The device produces
signals as described by the officer that simulate doppler shifts caused by
moving vehicles. This device was confirmed to be in working order at the start
of the shift. PC Steinman then confirmed that the device was measuring his own
speed properly as he drove. Finally, he ensured that the device measurement of
the apparent speed of traffic passing him was consistent with the speed as
measured by the device. The Crown has proved that the radar device was in
working order and provided a reliable and accurate measurement of speed in this
case.
[
10
]
Constable Steinman followed at distances of
up to 200m at one point, and for a few seconds he lost view of the van as it
went over certain hills on the way, but the officer’s direct pursuit and the
distinctive feature of this van – a large ladder on top – confirm that the van
that passed the officer was the one that was stopped further down Bathurst.
[
11
]
Constable Steinman was a credible witness.
His recollection was aided by reference to detailed contemporaneous notes made
at the time of the events. He was acting in a professional capacity at the
time. His evidence as to vehicle speed was based not only on his observations
and his pacing of the vehicle, but also by measurement by a radar device that
was calibrated and confirmed in working order at the beginning of his shift.
He’s been a qualified radar operator since 2021. His evidence was not
diminished in cross-examination.
[
12
]
Mr. Galati testified that his van is a work
van for his roofing business. It carries 4000lbs of tools and 6 ladders on the
roof. He went out to respond to a call that day despite the bad weather. Mr.
Galati said the roads were icy not slushy as described by the officer.
[
13
]
Mr. Galati testified that he saw PC
Steinman’s marked police car as he passed travelling in the other direction. He
said the officer could have caught up to him at any time. Mr. Galati said he
was the only vehicle on Bathurst. He saw the police officer as he passed the
cruiser. The officer “wasn’t coming after me” and so he didn’t stop.
[
14
]
At the intersection with Wellington Street
the car in front put his 4-way flashing lights on so Mr. Galati said he went
into the left turn lane. He drove back into the through lane simply to go
around the stopped car as he thought it was broken down.
[
15
]
As for his continued driving southbound on
Bathurst, Mr. Galati said that he couldn’t see the officer and there was no way
the officer could see him. The officer’s evidence that he was travelling at
high speed and may have gone through the red at Henderson was absurd and
ridiculous. Mr. Galati testified that he’d say he was going 100 km/hr “not that
I remember though”.
[
16
]
When he was south of Henderson Mr. Galati said
he was driving by a second police car that was also travelling southbound. Shortly
afterwards he stopped in response to Constable Steinman, the officer who wasn’t
following him.
[
17
]
Mr. Galati testified that he was born and
raised in Canada, and he doesn’t break the law. He also testified that he’s not
a bad driver, he’s a great driver. In cross-examination he admitted that he has
a criminal record. He explained that when he said he doesn’t break the law he
meant recently. When the Crown pointed out he had recent convictions his
evidence changed again to mean within the past year.
[
18
]
Mr. Galati said he’s an aggressive driver,
but also a “great driver”. He owned a racing company for 30 years and has been
driving for 44 years. In cross-examination the Crown showed him an 18-page
driving abstract from the Ministry of Transportation showing convictions for
various offences. Without reviewing the particulars, Mr. Galati agreed that he
had an extensive record of driving convictions, but he still considers himself
a good driver. He explained that most of the convictions were dated and he’s 59
years old now. The Crown pointed out that one of the convictions was 10 weeks
prior to this incident which Mr. Galati described as crystal clear in his
memory, but Mr. Galati didn’t recall that matter.
[
19
]
Mr. Galati’s repeated assertions of general
good character and specific good conduct in relation to driving were proven to
be false in cross-examination. The criminal record and the provincial driving
abstract were not reviewed in any detail and were not otherwise produced to the
court. Reference to both was simply to respond to assertions by the defendant.
The Crown properly did not refer to those documents for any other purpose and
they otherwise add nothing to the Crown’s case.
[
20
]
Mr. Galati admitted he was speeding on
Bathurst. He doesn’t know what his speed was as he didn’t look at his
speedometer. He was also distracted as he said he was talking to his
80-year-old customer “the whole way” down Bathurst. He failed to respond to the
lights and siren of PC Steinman’s vehicle even though he said he saw the police
cruiser as he passed so was alert to the fact that he just passed an officer
while travelling at high speed. His statement that the officer didn’t follow
him is contradicted by the credible evidence of PC Steinman and the fact that
it was that officer who caused him to stop after direct pursuit. The only
reason that Mr. Galati wasn’t stopped earlier was that his extreme speed
created a distance between himself and the officer. He maintained that speed
and therefore maintained the gap, at times increasing that distance down Bathurst
until he realized there was a second police car after the third major
intersection. That second car caused him to slow and then stop for the two
cars.
[
21
]
I find Mr. Galati’s evidence as to his
driving including his speed to be unreliable and incredible. His speed
travelling past the officer was reliably measured at 139 km/hr. The credible
evidence of PC Steinman and Mr. Galati’s agreement that there was a long gap
between his car and the officer’s car with lights and siren shows that Mr.
Galati continued his speed towards Wellington, slowed and stopped there and
then increased his speed afterwards. The fact that PC Steinman was travelling
120 km/hr and Mr. Galati’s van continued to gain ground shows that up to the
point of the second cruiser, Mr. Galati was travelling again at a similar
speed.
[
22
]
Constable Steinman maintained observation on
the distinctive white van throughout and there is no issue that the van he
first measured at 139 km/hr was the one that he eventually was able to stop
further south on Bathurst.
[
23
]
Mr. Galati’s evidence that the car he cut in
front of at Wellington was stopped with 4-way flashers on is contradicted by
the credible evidence of PC Steinman who did not mention any flashing lights on
that vehicle. It’s also contradicted by the fact that the vehicle was not
disabled and moved forward into the intersection when Mr. Galati moved in front
and cut him off.
Dangerous Operation
[
24
]
Mr. Galati was driving a commercial van with
4000lbs of tools on board and 6 ladders affixed to the roof. He was driving in
wet and slushy winter conditions. He says it was icy. He was distracted the
entire way down Bathurst by a conversation with his customer on his cellphone
via a Bluetooth connection. He was travelling at an extreme speed that was double
the legal limit and would have been a dangerous speed even on a 400 series
highway..
[
25
]
The dangerous driving was not momentary but
sustained. While the central danger was the extreme speed, the failure to stop
for the officer or perhaps even to notice the police car following with lights
and siren shows Mr. Galati was driving aggressively while distracted. Even when
stopped, he then managed to cut off another driver when he resumed his travel. The
Crown has proved that Mr. Galati drove in a manner that was objectively
dangerous.
[
26
]
The Crown must also prove the mental
component – that the dangerous manner of driving was the result of a marked
departure from the standard of care a reasonable person would have exercised in
the same circumstances –
R v Roy
,
2012 SCC 26
at para
36
.
[
27
]
In these circumstances, with the heavy
loaded vehicle with 6 ladders on top, in those slushy and wet winter
conditions, a very experienced driver like Mr. Galati would be well aware of
the need for caution. He would have foreseen the risk in travelling at extreme
speed, the risk in his aggressive driving and the risk posed when he combined
the two with the distraction of a phone conversation. The decision to drive in
that manner despite the serious risk it posed to the safety of others was a
marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in
those circumstances.
Conclusion
[
28
]
I can find no credible evidence that leaves
a reasonable doubt. I find the Crown has proved the charge beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Delivered:  May 28, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel