Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj411/2025oncj411.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R.
v. Sampson
, 2025 ONCJ 411
DATE:  July 28,
2025
COURT
FILE No. Toronto Region
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
LEE SAMPSON
Before
  Justice Michael Waby
Reasons
  for Judgment released on 28
th
July, 2025
Ms. Sengupta-Murray................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
Ms Gensey...............................................................................................................  
  for the Accused
Waby M.:
[1]
Lee Sampson is charged with a single count
  of sexual Assault as against Y.S.  The sexual assault is alleged to have
  happened on 2
nd
June, 2024.  It is alleged that Ms S. met the
  Accused while she was on a night out with friends in Toronto.  That she and
  Mr Sampson, who was previously unknown to her, encountered each other outside
  a night club, chatted and subsequently went together to Mr Sampson’s parked
  car where it is alleged non-consensual sexual intercourse subsequently
  occurred.
[2]
Mr. Sampson pleaded not guilty.
Overview
[3]
The case for the Crown is advanced through
the testimony of the complainant Ms. S. and an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF).
 Mr. Sampson testified in his defence and defence counsel Ms Gensey, also
entered various video footage and a photograph as exhibit.
[4]
It is common ground between the parties that
the Crown’s case stands or falls on my findings of credibility and reliability
on the whole of the evidence tendered at this trial.
[5]
The test that governs the analysis of
credibility in this context is proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  It was
explained by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. W.(D.)
(1991),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, 63
C.C.C. (3d) 397 (S.C.C.) and other case law as follows.
[6]
If I believe Mr. Sampson’s evidence, I must
acquit him.
[7]
Even if I do not believe his evidence but I
am left in reasonable doubt by it, or any of the other evidence, I must acquit
him.
[8]
Finally, even if I am not left in doubt by
his evidence, I still must consider it and all of the evidence and ask myself,
on the basis of the evidence that I do accept, whether the Crown has proven
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
[9]
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt goes hand-in-hand
with the presumption of innocence which is a fundamental principal of our
system of justice.
[10]
The burden of proof in a criminal trial
always rests with the Crown.  The burden of proof is a heavy one.  It is proof
beyond a reasonable doubt in relation to each of the offence’s essential
elements.  A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched, or frivolous
doubt.  It is not a doubt based on sympathy for or prejudice against anyone
involved in this trial.  It is a doubt based on reason and common sense and is
logically derived from the evidence or the absence of evidence.
R v Lifchus
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC)
, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, 118 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at para
39
[11]
I may accept some, all, or none of a
witness’ evidence.
[12]
To be clear, it is not sufficient that on
the whole of the evidence that I am satisfied that Mr. Sampson is
probably
guilty and a criminal trial is not a credibility contest.  Even if I believe the Accused is probably guilty or likely guilty,
that is not sufficient.  In those circumstances, a judge must give the benefit
of the doubt to the Accused and acquit because the Crown has failed to satisfy
the court of the guilt of the Accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
[13]
In
R. v.
J.H.S.
,
2008 SCC 30
, the Supreme Court
qualified the
W(D)
instruction
with an additional prong, partly in recognition that a trier of fact “may
believe some, none, or all of the testimony of any witness, including that of
an Accused” (para 10).  This prong is that where the trier of fact is unable to
decide whom to believe, the Accused is entitled to an acquittal (paras
11-12).
[14]
Put another way, it reflects that the trier
of fact must not treat “conflicting testimonial accounts” as a credibility
contest, in the sense of deciding whether they accept one or the other. “The
main point is that lack of credibility on the part of the Accused does not
equate to proof of his or her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt”:
J.H.S.
,
ibid
at
para
13
.
[15]
The burden
never
shifts
to the Accused to establish their own innocence, and the onus always lies with
the Crown to prove every essential element (
R. v.
J.H.S.
,
2008 SCC 30
, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 152, at para.
13
).
Issues
[16]
The central issues in this case before me
are those of reliability and credibility and the related issue of consent
Summary of Relevant Evidence
Viva voce
Evidence
Evidence of Y.S.
[17]
Ms. S.’s evidence can be summarised as
follows.  She and several friends rented an Air B n B in Toronto for a night
out to celebrate her cousin’s birthday.   Having consumed 10 shots of alcohol
she and her friends left their rented apartment at approximately 10.30 p.m. and
went to a club downtown on King Street by car.  While at the Club Ms S.
consumed further alcohol and spent time with her friends.  She left the club at
around 2 a.m. when it closed.
[18]
Ms S. testified  in
Chief that while standing on the sidewalk outside the club on King Street she
encountered the Accused who she says “grabbed her” and began chatting. He talked
to her for several minutes. She described herself as being very intoxicated. She
testified that she could not recall exactly how they started interacting and
were getting to know each other and exchanging  personal details.
[19]
She gave evidence Mr.
Sampson gave her his phone number she texted him her cell number from her phone.
Her evidence was that the Accused offered to give her a ride home when her
friends said that they were leaving and she decided to go with the Accused
r
ather
than her friends following his offer of a ride.
[20]
When asked about her
impressions of the Accused she sent he seemed fine and they were having a nice
conversation but she described herself as being in a vulnerable state and being
very intoxicated.
[21]
She testified that she
and the Accused walked together to the parking garage where his car was located. 
She estimated the walk to take about 5 minutes and that when they arrived at
the parking garage they went through a door and she walked up some stairs to
where the car was parked. She and the Accused got into his car and very shortly
afterwards began making out by what she described as “lips to lips kissing”.  She
testified that this was consensual and she wanted to do this with the Accused. 
She also testified that very shortly after she got into the car with the Accused
she received a phone call from her cousin who was checking up on her and she
advised her cousin that she was fine.
[22]
She described that she
was sitting in the front passenger seat of the vehicle and the Accused was in
the driver's seat.  They kissed for some 2 to 3 minutes and she gave evidence
that the Accused said he wanted to reposition his car to give them more privacy.
[23]
Ms S. could not remember
what her response was when the Accused suggested this and the Accused moved his
car and parked it such that the windscreen was facing a wall in the car park. 
Ms S. testified that having done this they continued making out and although the
Accused told her he wanted to go further she said no.   She gave evidence that
there  wasn't a specific conversation about consent and that subsequently the Accused
began to start kissing and sucking on her breasts and showed her a piercing on
his penis.  Ms S. testified that once the Accused had done his pants back up
she climbed on top of him in the driver’s seat of the vehicle and straddled him.  
She gave evidence he was stimulating her with his penis and ‘teasing’ her.   At
some point she testified that  she became uncomfortable and moved back to the
front passenger seat.
[24]
When asked by Crown
counsel if she told the Accused what she did not want to do she testified that
she told him she did not want to have intercourse, however, she agreed that she
consented to him kissing her breasts and testified” if that's what it took to
get me home for a drive I was fine with that as long as we didn't have sex. When
asked how she communicated her consent to this she replied by not stopping it. 
She testified that she did not want to get on top of the Accused and sit on him
whilst his penis was out of his pants but was willing to do so once he had
pulled his pants up.
[25]
She described the
clothing that she was wearing as that night as a one-piece dress with no bra but
underwear and testified that when she moved back to the front passenger seat she
and the Accused continued to kiss consensually.   After that the Accused
reclined her seat and it was her evidence that the Accused asked to have
intercourse and she said no.
[26]
Ms S. gave evidence a conversation
then took place about whether he had a condom she testified that occurred when
the  Accused was physically on top of her.   She gave evidence that she kept gently
pushing him on his chest a number of times and the Accused said to her  “I'm
not going to put it in” and “why are you pushing me”.   She gave evidence but
they continued with what she described as foreplay with the Accused face to
face on top of her in the front passenger seat with her seat partially reclined
and that the Accused the “humped her three times”  and on the third time he put
his penis inside her.  She subsequently agreed that this was after the
conversation they had had regarding use of a condom.
[27]
Ms S. testified in Chief
that she did not want to have intercourse but the Accused said he had a condom
and he “kind of persuaded me to let him use it”  and “in my head I thought it
would be fine”  She gave evidence that she had said no to intercourse several
times and although they discussed the use of a condom she described feeling
anxious and vulnerable at this time and so intoxicated that she was seeing
double.  However, she testified that that she could not remember her specific
response to the Accused using a condom for intercourse.
[28]
Her evidence was that at
this point all she wanted to do was to go home as the Accused had promised to
give her a ride.  When asked by Crown counsel if she wanted to have sex with
the Accused even if he was wearing a condom Ms S. testified that she did not.
[29]
She gave evidence that
she had pushed the Accused multiple times when he was on top of her but once
his penis was inside her she “kind of froze”.  It was her evidence that the
intercourse lasted for approximately 3 to 5 minutes.  She testified in Chief that
she could not remember whether the Accused had used a condom but she knows she
saw the packaging for a condom in the car.  It was her evidence that she did
not know how to react at the moment the intercourse was happening and that she
was afraid of the Accused and what else he might do after intercourse had
happened.
[30]
After intercourse was
over she testified that she was scared and wanted to change the subject so she
asked the Accused about his cologne and shortly after this the Accused cousin
called him on his cell phone asking where he was and when he was coming back.
[31]
Ms S. testified that
after this phone call she realized the Accused was never going to take her home
but he had “just got what he wanted”.   She and the Accused got out of the
vehicle and walked back together to where they had first met on King Street.  She
testified that they walked back in silence and it took about 5 minutes to get
back outside Ruby Soho.
[32]
It was her evidence
that her phone had totally died at some point whilst she was in the Accused’s
car and that when she go back to King Street with the Accused she asked him to
put the location of her Airbnb in his phone so she could see the directions and
walk back there.  It was her evidence she had no way of communicating with any
of her friends as her phone was dead.  She testified that she did not remain with
the Accused on King Street outside Ruby Soho for more than two minutes as she
was scared of him.   She hugged him goodbye and went on her way to walk home
and still felt very intoxicated.
[33]
When asked how police
became involved, Ms S. gave evidence that she became lost on her way back to
her Airbnb and asked for help from two random strangers she met and that after
she spoke to the second stranger about directions she saw two police cars and
approached them and asked them to take her home.
[34]
It was her evidence that
when she was asked questions about her night by the officers she became
emotional broke down in tears and couldn't talk for about 5 minutes she
testified that she couldn't remember exactly what had happened as she had
blacked out in her interaction with the officers but that the officers had “made
me” tell them what had happened.
[35]
After she disclosed the
alleged sexual assault, she and the officers drove around King Street to see if
they could locate Mr. Sampson.  At some point she suggested that she get out of
the police car to walk around to see if it would trigger her memory. She
testified that while she was in the police car, officers charged her phone and
she then texted her friends to tell them everything was fine because she
planned to tell them what had happened later..   It was her evidence that when
she got to King Street and was outside of the scout car she heard someone say words
to the effect of  “Yo, are you good”  and when she turned she saw and
recognized the Accused and his cousin who were with a third male she did not
recognize.
[36]
Ms S. described feeling
scared when she saw the Accused and typed on her phone the message “That's him”
 and showed this to one of the officers.   She gave evidence that she was also extremely
tired at this point having been up for some 30 to 40 hours without sleep and she
was also trying to sober up.   She subsequently provided a statement to police
at 14 division after the completion of a medical examination.
[37]
In cross examination Ms S.
agreed that it was possible that she had initiated the first contact with the Accused
but she could not remember.    When asked if she told the police that when she
first saw the Accused they were both attracted to each other she testified that
this was not the case.   Ms S. also testified that she could not remember
whether she had initiated physical contact with the Accused on first seeing
him.   Defence counsel showed a photograph in which the Accused was standing
behind her with his arms wrapped around her and in which they were both
smiling.   Ms S. agreed photo showed her and the Accused but couldn't remember
how the photo came about but it  was her evidence she would never ask for such
a photo to be taken.
[38]
In cross examination she
agreed that that their initial conversation was light -hearted and she and the Accused
were friendly but she denied the suggestion that she had asked the Accused and
his cousin to come back to her Airbnb and party with her.  She testified that
the Accused stopped her when she was going to leave with her friends and said
he would drive her home it was her evidence that “I trusted his words.”
[39]
In cross examination
she denied asking the Accused whether he had any weed on him and testified that
she did not ask to go back to his car with him to smoke some weed.  She gave
evidence did not does not smoke weed.   However, when asked again by defence
counsel whether it is possible that this did in fact happen, Ms S. testified “
it may have but I can't recall.”
[40]
When asked if she had
any difficulty walking to the Accused car from King Street Ms S. gave evidence
“ I can't remember because I was intoxicated.”   She agreed that she and the Accused
were talking and the mood was friendly on their walk
to
the garage.  She
accepted the relevant video footage recorded by the Accused on his phone and
entered as an exhibit accurately captured her and the Accused walking together
on the way to the garage.
[41]
When defence counsel put
a section of her police statement to her that she had given she agreed that she
had told the police that “they were each giving a look, the kind of look you
give when you're both into each other.”  Miss S. also agreed that she had told
the police she was physically attracted to the Accused she also agreed that she
had told the police that she had spaced out the ten shots of alcohol she had
drunk at the Airbnb over the course of two to three hours rather than drinking
them in quick succession before she left the Airbnb that night as she had
earlier testified.  Ms S. denied the defence suggestion that she was attempting
to exaggerate her level of intoxication on the night of the alleged incident.
[42]
Her evidence that she
was confident that she and the Accused had to walk upstairs to get to his car
but agreed but a section of video footage recorded by the Accused appeared to
show her walking downstairs in the underground car park with the Accused
filming it. When it was put to her that she appeared to have no obvious
difficulty maintaining her balance or walking she testified that while that may
appear to be the case she was holding a handrail of the staircase.  She testified
she could not remember if it was the staircase she used to get to the Accused’s
car.
[43]
Ms S. accepted in cross
examination that the Accused may have pulled out a small bag of weed when they
got into the car but she can't remember.  She did however deny taking any weed
from the Accused and placing it in her cleavage for later consumption.  She
accepted she may have spoken to the Accused about his cologne and it's pleasant
smell
before
any sexual activity occurred although she could not
remember.
[44]
Ms S. agreed in cross
examination that she had previously told the police in her statement that she “at
least” wanted to make out with the Accused but rejected the defence suggestion
that “at least” meant that she was open to further activity occurring because she
“had boundaries like everyone else.  She accepted however that further
consensual activity had occurred beyond kissing that included the Accused
kissing and sucking on her breasts and her straddling him.
[45]
In cross examination Ms S.
testified that although she consented to the foreplay and the kissing and
sucking on her breasts this was at the point just before the Accused crossed
her boundaries.  She gave evidence she told him “I'm celibate” and did not want
sex.   In cross examination Ms S. agreed that intercourse was a very firm line
she would not cross.  She testified that she could not now remember who whose
idea it was to move the car when they were making out.
[46]
When asked in cross
examination whether she moved her positioning at one point because the steering
wheel was in her back and that was making her uncomfortable she gave evidence
she did not think it was for that reason but because the Accused was trying to
touch her.   Ms S. testified that she couldn't remember if the Accused reclined
her seat or not and when defence counsel asked whether she had performed oral
sex on the Accused Ms S. testified “ that's false, I don't have a recollection
of that.”  She also rejected the defence suggestion that when she was engaged
in foreplay with the Accused she had asked him if he had a condom.
[47]
When defence counsel put
it to Ms S. that full intercourse with  Mr Sampson was something she would not consider
Ms S. testified agreed.   However she agreed with defence counsel's suggestion
that she had told the police that if the Accused wore a condom she might be
willing to have sex with him.  Her evidence was  “yes I told that to the police,
 what else was I going to do?”   When it was suggested to her by defence
counsel but this was inconsistent with her repeatedly saying that she would not
consent to sex under any circumstances Ms S. testified that that she agreed but
that she only did so because the Accused kept pressuring her.   When asked if
she had told the Accused that she would consider having sex if he had a condom Ms
S.  testified “ I can't remember saying that.”
[48]
In cross examination Ms S.
agreed that she had seen a condom wrapper and agreed with defence counsel that
she the Accused may have put the condom but she was lying down and could not
see.   However, she subsequently testified that she accepted it was possible
the Accused had worn a condom when they had intercourse although she did not
know what about the Accused ejaculated or not.
[49]
Ms S. described herself
as still being very tipsy.  It was her evidence that she had her underwear on
throughout the entirety of the intercourse.  She could not recall whether the Accused
had given her any Kleenex to clean up with after intercourse but Ms S. repeated
that the Mr Sampson had put his penis inside her against her wishes.
[50]
Ms S. agreed in cross
examination that a piece of video footage showed her and the Accused both
walking back from the garage where they opposed both appeared to be smiling, she
was making a peace sign to the camera and apparently dancing to some music that
was playing on the street.  She testified that although she appeared to be
using her cell phone while walking back from the parking garage she did not
have any recollection of that happening because she was so drunk.
[51]
When a further section
of her video statement to the police was put to her by defence counsel she
accepted that she had told the police “if he wore a condom I might let him do
it.”   She testified that that meant she only said she
might
have let
him do it not that she
would
although Ms S. disagreed that this
conversation with the Accused occurred before he was on top of her.  It was her
evidence that this only occurred when the Accused was on top of her attempting
to put his penis inside and that he pressured her into allowing it to happen.
[52]
When defence counsel put
to her that the video segments of her and the Accused did not appear to show
any mobility issues or obvious signs of intoxication on her part she replied “one
video doesn't prove what my walking was like and that's only what you see.”  She
accepted in further cross examination that she could not remember whether she
had provided the Accused with her number and details when they first met or
after they had returned from the car park and she agreed that the Accused had
offered to walk her back to her Airbnb after they left his car.
[53]
When it was suggested to
her that her phone was not dead upon their return to King Street but it was
simply a lack of data on her phone she testified “that's false, I mean it was
both , I didn't have data but my phone was also dead.”   Ms S. agreed that she
hugged the Accused goodbye and that they went their separate ways and she
accepted there was a gap of some 90 minutes to 2 hours before she met the Accused
again with the police.
[54]
When it was put to her
that the video footage of her and the Accused returning from the car showed her
smiling and laughing Ms S. testified that this was only  a result of the
alcohol she'd consumed at the Airbnb, as well as whisky she said she had also
consumed in the club.   When defence counsel asked whether she was able to
interact with her friends at the bar Ms S. testified “I didn't say I could
carry on a conversation, I was all over the place” and she again denied
exaggerating her levels of intoxication.
Ms S. denied
the suggestion put to her by defence counsel that all the active all the sexual
activity she engaged in with Mr. Samson was consensual.
Evidence of Lee Sampson
[55]
Mr. Sampsons evidence can be summarized
thus.  While it contains a number of similarities with the evidence of Ms S. it
also contains some very  fundamental differences.
[56]
Mr. Sampson testified that he and his
cousin had arranged to go out for the night on the date in question the Accused
drove them in his car and parked underground  at a garage located at King Street
and Portland street in Toronto.  By this time they had planned to go to a club
on King Street but the lineup was so long  they changed their minds and tried
to get into an establishment called Ruby soho.
[57]
He testified that whilst
he was standing on King Street waiting to gain entry to Ruby soho he felt
someone pulling on his dreadlocks from behind him and heard a female voice say
words to the effect of  “Oh my God your hair is so long” and when he turned around
he saw it was Ms S. .  He gave evidence that they chatted for a few minutes
about their plans, she talked about his hair and was hugging and caressing him
and taking pictures of them both.  Mr Sampson testified that at her request he
gave his phone number  to her and his cousin took a picture of them outside
Ruby Soho at Ms S.’s request  and identified this as Exhibit 1.
[58]
It was Mr Sampson’s evidence
that up to this point in the evening he had not been drinking or taken any
drugs and  for him and his cousin the night had just started and they had only
just arrived at King Street.   He testified that whilst he was talking with Ms S.,
 she asked him for any weed.   He told her he didn't walk around with cannabis but
he had some in his car and he offered to give her some.
[59]
After this conversation
they left to walk to his car to get the weed.  When asked how Ms S. seemed Mr. Sampson
replied she seemed fine and normal and that she did not seem obviously
intoxicated.  He testified that whilst they were walking to his car they were “doing
videos” and when they arrived at the garage they walked downstairs to his car.  
He estimated the walk to be about approximately 2 minutes and whilst they were
walking there Ms S. invited him and his cousin to come over to his Airbnb to
party with them but he declined.
[60]
It was his evidence that
when they got to his car he opened the door for her and she got into the front
passenger seat he got into the driver's seat. He located a bag of weed and gave
Ms S. a few buds which he wrapped in a Kleenex and which she put in her
cleavage.   When shown the video of Ms S. wearing the same clothes as shown in
the other video footage walking down a set of concrete stairs Mr. Sampson
identified this as the staircase they took on the walk to his car in the
parking garage on the night of the alleged incident.
[61]
It was his evidence that
although he looked for some rolling papers in his car he was unable to locate
any and so he and Ms S. were unable to smoke any weed.  After he had given her
the cannabis buds Mr Sampson gave evidence she commented on his cologne and
sprayed some of it on herself when he showed her the bottle.
[62]
He testified that they
were talking normally and then began to make out passionately kissing in their
seats and touching each other intimately.  He testified that she then unbuckled
his pants and performed oral sex on him from her seat as she leant over the
console. He estimated they were in the car for some 4-5 minutes before things
turned physical.  It was his evidence that after she had performed oral sex she
“hopped over” the console then began riding on his private area and kissing him
while telling him how good he smelled.
[63]
Mr Sampson testified
that he kissed her breasts and body and the while doing this she looked out of
the car window and saw another vehicle and became paranoid and said  “what if
someone sees us,  you have to move the car.”  Mr. Sampson repositioned the car
so that the windscreen faced a wall of the garage and that while he did this Ms
S. returned to the passenger seat.   After this, they resumed kissing and he
testified that she asked him if he had a condom.   It was his evidence he told
her he did not know if he had one but subsequently located  one.  He gave
evidence  Ms S. appeared to have difficulty reclining her seat so he helped her
and as he did so she removed her underwear and placed it on the dashboard.
[64]
Mr Sampson gave
evidence  that during the course of Ms S. straddling him she had moved back to
her side of the car because she said the steering wheel was uncomfortable in
her back.  He testified that when she removed her underwear Ms S. told him she
hadn't had sex for some time and had been celibate after a rocky breakup. This
is when he said she asked him if he had a condom.  Mr Sampson gave evidence  Ms
S. said to him  “the only way you get to put it in is with a condom.”
[65]
He testified that she
watched him put the condom on and she put her hand on his penis to make sure
the condom was on.   He testified that his pants were only partially down and
his penis was exposed following oral sex and Ms S. remained clothed apart from her
white underwear she had placed on his dash.
[66]
Mr. Sampson testified
he climbed on top of Ms S. had consensual intercourse that lasted 2 or 3
minutes and it ended when he ejaculated.  It was his evidence he offered her
some napkins to clean up and she did so and testified that they walked upstairs
from his car where he disposed of the napkins in a bin
[67]
When asked by defence
counsel how Ms S. seemed after intercourse, he testified that she was good, that
they chatted in the car for a short while afterwards and then walked back to
Ruby Soho.   He identified him and Ms S. form the video exhibit in which she is
dancing and smiling and making a peace sign to the camera.   When asked weather
Ms S.  had indicated at any point that she did not want sex Mr. Sampson denied
that this was the case and testified “no I would have stopped if she had.  I'm
not a forceful guy.  I have a daughter and a sister.  No means no stop means
stop.”
[68]
He denied at any point
that Ms S. had tried to push him off her or that at any point she had indicated
she was uncomfortable with any of the sexual activity that was occurring.   When
asked whether Ms S. appeared intoxicated to him at any point Mr. Sampson
testified that was not the case and that to him her words and speech were clear
she was not stumbling she was not being physically sick and said that had she
appeared to be like that there is no way he would have let her into his car.
[69]
He also testified that  that
she did not appear intoxicated on their way back from car park.  Mr. Sampson
testified that on the way back he believes Ms S.  tried to call her cousin using
her phone as he saw her phone light up although he accepted he did not know who
she was calling.   He testified that whilst they were walking back to Ruby Soho
she asked him for his number and messaged him her details from her phone.
[70]
He also testified when
they got back to Ruby Soho she asked Mr. Sampson's cousin if he knew where her
friends were  and complained about not having any data on her phone and Mr.
Sampson offered to let her use his phone and she put her address in and
accessed his Google Maps for directions
[71]
Mr. Sampson testified
that they did not have any conversation about him ever offering a lift back to
her address.   He testified that once again Ms S. asked him to return to the
Airbnb with her  but he did not want to.  It was his evidence that after she
had the directions from his phone she hugged him and kissed him and said “text
me” and he told her to “walk home safe”.
[72]
The next relevant
encounter happened some time later when Mr. Sampson saw two police scout cars
and Ms S. on King Street.  He gave evidence that he was worried about what was
going on and whether something had happened to her and he crossed the road and
asked her if she was all right and if she was lost.  It was his uncontradicted
evidence that whilst he was speaking with Ms S. in the company of the officers
she was giggling and laughing with him he testified that he offered to call her
an Uber.  Shortly after this one of the officers ask him if he knew Ms S. and
Mr. Sampson told the officer he did and that she was with him a few hours ago.  Subsequent
to this Mr. Sampson was arrested shortly afterwards for sexual assault.
[73]
In cross examination Mr
Sampson testified that he could not recall whether Ms S. was wearing a bra and
testified and that  that she had no difficulty reaching over from her seat once
they were in the car too for oral sex.   He rejected the crowns suggestion that
Ms S. had only gone with him because he had offered to give her a ride.  It was
his evidence they never discussed him providing a ride for her.
[74]
Mr. Sampson testified
that he and Ms S. never had a conversation in which she said she was not
interested in intercourse but she had told him she'd been celibate for a while. 
He repeated his evidence that after oral sex she had said to them “the only way
we have sex is if you have a condom. I usually don't do stuff like this
[75]
Mr. Sampson rejected the
Crown's suggestion that Ms S. kept trying to push his hands away from her and
rejected the Crown's suggestion that she did not perform oral sex on him and he
rejected the suggestion that the only time the use of a condom was raised was
when he was already on top of her.   He similarly rejected the suggestion but
the only reason the condom was discussed was because he was pressuring with Ms S.
into sex.
[76]
It was his evidence he
put the condom on did not force her in any way to have intercourse and Mr.
Sampson also denied the Crowns suggestion that Ms S. had seemed tense at any
point during or after intercourse.
[77]
Mr Sampson testified
that it was about two hours since he had last seen Ms S. when he next saw her
with the police officers on King Street
[78]
Law and Analysis
[79]
There is not an issue in
this case that sexual intercourse took place between Ms S. and Mr. Sampson on
the date of the alleged incident. Forensic testing as well as the evidence
before me supports this fact.
[80]
As previously indicated the central issues
in this case are those all credibility and reliability particularly as they
relate to issues of consent with respect to the sexual intercourse that
occurred.
[81]
While the central allegation is keenly
contested there is inevitably some overlap in the versions of events provided. 
Ms Sengupta-Murray for the Crown fairly acknowledges that the Accused was not
meaningfully undermined during the course of his cross examination and was
consistent in the evidence that he provided.
[82]
Both Crown and Defence counsel rightly
acknowledge that there are also no standard responses on the part of the victim’s
of sexual assault to their experience and that the behaviour of sexual assault
victims can vary considerably dependent upon a wide variety of factors relevant
to both the individual and the circumstances of the particular incident.   The
court has rightly long since rejected any of the discredited tropes that
surround such outmoded thinking.
[83]
Ms Gensey submits that there are significant
issues of credibility and reliability with the evidence of Ms S. and
inconsistencies in the evidence she has provided.  It is  the submission of
defence counsel that  while the evidence of Mr Sampson should be believed , at
the very least his should raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of the court.
[84]
I accept that Mr Sampson presented as a
credible and reliable witness and was not undermined in his core version of
events.  He was forthright and candid and consistent.  His evidence is
bolstered by the 3 separate pieces of video footage that were entered as
exhibits in which he is seen walking with Ms S. to and from his car and in
which she is filmed walking down the stairs at what I am satisfied is the
parking garage where the alleged incident occurred.
[85]
It is to Ms S.’s credit that she allowed for
a considerable number of alternate possibilities in the course of her evidence
and also conceded that there were issues of significance that she accepted she
was unable to recall.  Although at times in cross examination Ms S. appeared to
be less forthcoming and occasionally combative.  It is perhaps fair to describe
her evidence at times , in the words of Ms Sengupta-Murray as “cautious”
although at other  times this may be a rather charitable description. 
Nevertheless, the Court must acknowledge that complainant’s in cases of sexual
assault often, unsurprisingly, do not find it an easy experience.
[86]
It is also trite to state that consent by
any person to one form of sexual activity does not equate in to consent to
other forms of sexual activity.  Simply because Ms S. accepts that she
consented to a range of other sexual activity does not lead to the conclusion
that she willingly engaged in sexual intercourse with Mr Sampson.
[87]
Nevertheless, the evidence given Ms S.
presents a number of significant inconsistencies as well as raising issues that
I find, inevitably, impact upon my overall assessment of her credibility.
[88]
It is clear that Ms S. consistently
portrayed herself as significantly intoxicated throughout the entirety of the
evening and events leading up to and beyond the alleged sexual assault.  He
evidence o the quantity of what she drank and over what time frame differed
significantly in her evidence as well as in what she reported to the police.  I
accept that alcohol may impact people, or the same person, in different ways
subject to a number of variables.  Nevertheless, Ms S. describes drinking a
prodigious amount of hard alcohol over a short period of time and supplementing
this in the club she was in with friends.  She describes herself as severely
intoxicated and seeing double.
[89]
The video footage of her going to and from
the car park is unarguably at variance with this evidence.  The footage of her
and Mr Sampson walking to and from the garage shows Ms S. walking briskly and
without any apparent difficulty while simultaneously smiling and laughing at
the camera, navigating kerbs and street furniture, making controlled motions
with her hands and dancing along with music laying on the street.  There is no
discernable impact on her motor skills and demeanour that is consistent with
the level of intoxication she describes,
[90]
I also do not find that she relied to any
meaningful or observable extent on the handrail I the garage for support as she
descended that staircase.   I do find that this creates the spectre of Ms S.
significantly exaggerated the extent of her intoxication and this inevitably
impacts  her credibility.
[91]
I also find the footage undermines Ms S.’s
evidence that she was afraid of the Accused on their way back from his car. 
The footage belies her evidence that they returned in silence and without
engaging.  That is plainly not the case.  It is also apparent that Ms S.
presents in the relevant video footage afterwards as smiling and relaxed and in
the same manner as the is shown when travelling to the Accused’ car.   The lack
of credibility around her being fearful is reinforced by the uncontradicted
evidence that she was smiling and friendly with the Accused when she later
encounters him in the presence of the Accused.
[92]
In all observable
regards Ms S.’s demeanour is at variance with the level of intoxication and
fear that she described.
This aligns with the evidence of Mr Sampson.
I reject her evidence that at any observable point in
the evening she was afraid of or intimidated by Mr Sampson and this inevitably
impacts her credibility with respect to her evidence of feeling this way in the
car with Mr Sampson.
[93]
I allow for reasonable and inconsequential
inconsistences in a witnesses evidence.  However, it is also apparent that Ms S.
was inconsistent on her evidence of whether there was any credible boundary
communicated to Mr Sampson with respect to intercourse.  Her evidence in chief
and cross examination was inconsistent on this point and also contrasted with
the evidence she gave to police in her statement.  Clearly discussions about
the possibility of intercourse had taken place between Ms S. and Mr Sampson
with Ms S. stipulating that the must wear a condom if this was to occur.  I
find Mr Sampson did wear a condom as he testified and Ms S. herself
subsequently allowed this may have happened. I cannot accept the portions of
her evidence where she testified this was not the case.
[94]
The video footage as
well as Ms S.’s own evidence also demonstrates inconsistencies as to whether ,
when and how her phone ceased to function as well as who  first initiated
contact between her and the Accused and how, whether she had discussed
marijuana with Mr Sampson and her equivocal answer with respect to whether she
had given him oral sex, in which she testified “ I have no recollection of
that.”
[95]
I also find that Mr
Sampson’s evidence is further bolstered by his behaviour upon seeing Ms S.
return to the scene in the company of police officers.  While it is seldom
appropriate to generalise any pattern of behaviour from a given set of facts,
on the facts of this particular case I find Mr Sampson’s actions as described
and not contradicted support his evidence that he acted in a manner consistent
with someone who believed all the sexual activity that occurred between him and
Ms S. was consensual and that he had no reason to believe otherwise and that he
approached Ms S. out of concern for her and not in a contrived act of
self-preservation.
[96]
The burden of proof in a
criminal case is necessarily a high one.  As I have previously indicated I am
mindful that a criminal trial is not a credibility contest.  Nevertheless,
following my consideration of the totality of the evidence and absence of
evidence in this case, for the foregoing reasons I find that the evidence of Mr
Sampson raises a reasonable doubt as to his guilt.   As a consequence of this
the Crown has not established his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt and I find Mr
Sampson not guilty of sexual assault.
Released:  28
th
July, 2025                           ____________________________
Justice
Michael Waby