Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj663/2025oncj663.html

CITATION:
R. v. Wallace
, 2025 ONCJ 663
DATE: 
December 13, 2025
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
JASON
  WALLACE
Before Justice Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for Sentence Delivered Orally On
8 November, 2025
Heather Donkers...........................................................................  
for the Crown
Mabel Pastrana...............................................  
for the defendant, Jason Wallace
Fergus ODonnell J.:
Overview
1
.
Jason
Wallace
has
pleaded guilty to a charge of disobeying a court order contrary to
s. 127
of
the
Criminal Code
.  The Crown has proceeded by indictment. 
The maximum available sentence for this offence is two years'
imprisonment.  The Crown seeks a sentence of one year in jail less
pre-sentence custody.  Mr.
Wallace
seeks a
"time-served" sentence.  As of today, applying the typical ratio
of credit for pre-sentence custody, which reflects the fact that such custody
does not earn remission as a forward-reaching sentence would, Mr.
Wallace
has the equivalent of four months in custody to
his credit.
2
.
The order here was made under
provincial legislation, namely
Ontario's
Prevention
of and Remedies for Human Trafficking Act, 2017,
S.O. 2017, c. 12
,
which allows for restraining
orders and other remedies to issue relating to people who are reasonably
believed to have been victims of human trafficking at the hands of the person
who is the object of the order or for whom there are reasonable grounds to
believe may be future victims at the hands of the person who is the object of
the order.  That order was issued by Justice Calderwood of this court on
21 June, 2024 and served on Mr.
Wallace
six days later.  I have heard nothing to suggest that
any steps were ever taken to overturn or vary that order as the provincial
legislation allows for.  The order prohibits Mr.
Wallace
from contacting or
communicating with Ms.
M.
, directly or indirectly and from being within five hundred
metres of her or any place she is or may reasonably be known to be.
3
.
As the
provincial law here does not provide its own mechanism for enforcement, any
alleged breaches justifiably are addressed through
s. 127
of the
Criminal Code
.
4
.
The facts underlying the plea
are very simple.  Ms. M. was at the casino with her mother. 
Mr.
Wallace
was there, saw her at a
table, tapped her on the shoulder and asked if she was winning.  She did
not respond.  Mr.
Wallace
smirked at her and then stood behind her for ten minutes
before walking away.
5
.
Ms. M. filed a
victim impact statement by way of a written form and also a recording of a song
she had written.  The contents of those inputs are trenchant.
6
.
The Crown
seeks a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment less pre-sentence custody
followed by twelve months of probation including reporting, victim safeguards
to match the restraint order and counselling.  Ms. Donkers points to
Mr.
Wallace
's criminal record as the most
aggravating circumstance here.  I shall detail that later, but she points
out that Mr.
Wallace
has 2019 convictions for advertising sexual services and
deriving a material benefit therefrom, for which he received the equivalent of
a nine-month sentence (the Crown had sought eighteen months'
imprisonment).  Those convictions did not relate to Ms. M., but rather to a
nineteen-year-old victim.  Coincidentally, that sentencing was before
me.  Ms. Donkers argues that throughout his long record Mr.
Wallace
has multiple convictions
for disobeying court orders for which he has received various sentences up to
about ninety days' imprisonment (some were fines or suspended sentences) and
she says that he clearly does not care about court orders and has not been
deterred by past dispositions.
7
.
Ms. Pastrana seeks a sentence
of time-served for Mr.
Wallace
.  She notes an early guilty plea, which is definitely a
mitigating circumstance, both from a practical perspective for the court system
but also very much in terms of saving the victim from the stress of the court
process.  Ms. Pastrana argues that Ms. M. has never been found to have
been the victim of human-trafficking, which may be true but is not the question
before me.  The reality before me is that a judge of this court was
satisfied there were reasonable grounds for issuance of the order that was
specific to Ms. M. and Mr.
Wallace
and he disobeyed it.  I give more weight to the fact
that this was not a stalking type of violation of the restraining order in the
sense that there is no evidence to suggest that this was anything other than a
coincidental co-location at that time and place, although I would say that the
absence of stalking type behaviour is more the absence of what would have been
a huge aggravating factor rather than being a mitigating factor.  Ms.
Pastrana also says that it was not clear that Mr.
Wallace
knew it was Ms. M. on
approach, but his plea includes an admission of knowledge that what he did
violated the order.  She says there was no intimidation, but the fact
remains that he admittedly smirked and then loitered behind her for ten
minutes; intimidation may lie in the eye of the victim, reasonably
so.
8
.
Ms. Pastrana
also argued that the fact that Ms. M. stayed minimizes the offence, which I
must strongly reject.  Her staying may have been a fear response for all I
know, knowing that she would be relatively physically safe in a heavily secured
area like a casino, or it may even have been a non-verbal statement on her part
that despite the violation of the order she would not let Mr.
Wallace
control her life. 
It matters not:  she was entitled to be where she was and while Mr.
Wallace
is also entitled to go to
the casino, he has an obligation not to make contact and, once he knows she is
there, to establish at least a five hundred metre distance-immediately.
9
.
Ms. Pastrana
also referred to Mr.
Wallace
's conditions in custody, as did he, including over-bunking,
poor conditions, etc.  No records were filed in this regard, although
there is some room for judicial notice to be taken of that, up to a certain
point and obviously with lesser weight than if specific details were documented
and accepted.
10
.
Ms. Pastrana also referred to
Mr.
Wallace
having had an awful upbringing
generating significant trauma, beginning with a father who was violent to
Mr.
Wallace
's mother, his mother being violent to
the children--especially Mr.
Wallace
's sisters--and
Mr.
Wallace
's sisters being physically and sexually
abusive towards him.  She also referred to him having been the victim of a
sexual assault by another inmate in his early years.  She explained
Mr.
Wallace
's very challenging experience with the
near death of his daughter at birth and her very difficult circumstances to the
present day, as well as his own serious cardiac issues.
11
.
Mr.
Wallace
spoke
at some length, including recounting his view that a police officer had lied
about Ms. M.’s lack of desire to be with Mr.
Wallace
and
Ms. M.’s pursuit of him, as well as saying that she had been found incredible
in a child abuse trial before another judge.
12
.
Mr.
Wallace
's record runs from 1996 to
2024.  There is only one substantial gap, for about five-and-a-half years
from 2005-2011 (by substantial gap, I mean anything longer than about two or
three years).  As noted earlier, Ms. M. was not the victim in Mr.
Wallace
's 2019 pleas before me, but
she was his victim in a 2021 conviction for failure to comply with probation in
St. Catharines and a failure to comply with a recognizance conviction and failure
to comply with an undertaking conviction in Barrie in 2023.  The record
includes pre-2000 convictions for sexual interference and criminal harassment
and includes various property and assaultive convictions.
13
.
Mr.
Wallace
has taken some steps to
address his underlying issues.  He provided a letter that showed he had
done four anger-management sessions while in custody.  A psychologist he
saw during his probation wrote about Mr.
Wallace
having attended sixteen
sessions with him (and missing six), with missed sessions and slow response
times limiting his ability to assist Mr.
Wallace
.  Mr.
Wallace
had independently reached out three times while in
crisis.  The letter is a mixed reflection, addressing Mr.
Wallace
's openness to discussion, his
forthrightness and willingness to discuss his feelings, but it ends with the
disturbing observation:  "Although he exhibited insight into his
attitudes, values, and behaviours, he rigidly defended his actions and beliefs
even when he was able to concede that they were not always in his best interests. 
Overall, he appeared to enjoy challenging social policies and laws and living a
lifestyle that may often straddle the law."
14
.
It is my job
to impose a sentence that responds to the objectives of sentencing including
specific deterrence (a clear need here)
[1]
and general deterrence,
wherein the importance of obeying court orders actually resonates.  I must
consider the protection of the public and also the need for
rehabilitation.  In a big picture sense I must balance the seriousness of
the crime with the moral responsibility of the offender.
15
.
Taking at face
value Ms. Pastrana's description of Mr.
Wallace
's upbringing, I accept that Mr.
Wallace
's life and offending does
reflect the wisdom of W.H. Auden's poem
1 September, 1939
, albeit
written in a different context, that "those to whom evil is done, do evil
in return."  The challenges that arise from that sort of background
can be enormous and not easily addressed.  They do deserve measure in the
moral responsibility analysis, but they are not a get-out-of-jail-free
card, particularly so where there have been multiple state interventions by way
of probation and the like and limited progress.  I accept that there is
some insight on Mr. Wallace’s part here and some willingness to engage, but the
psychologist's letter does very much seem to teeter on the balance between hope
for improvement and signs of disinterest on Mr.
Wallace
's part in changing anything.
16
.
As far as his
version of his and Ms. M.’s relationship, I do not know the chapter and
verse.  There may be some merit to what he says or there may not.  It
is certainly not an element that I would treat as a demonstrated mitigating
factor.  Even if that history were true, however, and whatever Mr.
Wallace
's mental health challenges
are, what Justice Calderwood's order required of Mr.
Wallace
was as simple as it was
easy to adhere to:  in non-judicial language it said: leave Ms. M. alone
and stay away from her.  He made a conscious choice to ignore that very
simple demand from the court order.
17
.
The offence is
a serious one.  There is a tendency, sometimes for pragmatic reasons,
sometimes for principled reasons relating to the seriousness of the breach, its
being rooted in survival or homelessness or addiction challenges or whatever,
for the courts to impose again and again and again, sentences for breaches at
or below the low-reformatory sentences seen with Mr.
Wallace
, perhaps a month or two or
three.
[2]
That is not the issue
here.  This is a case in which Mr.
Wallace
has a long and established history of disobeying court
orders and there is quite simply nothing to be said in mitigation of what he
did that day.  He saw, he breached, he lingered.  He may have behaved
in haste, but he must now regret at leisure.
18
.
Mr.
Wallace
's history shows he has no
respect whatsoever for court orders.  I accept that, but for his guilty
plea, the Crown could have sought a longer sentence.  I accept that this
is not a case for a mere incremental increase.
[3]
The simple fact is that
after a long series of breach after breach after breach, an offender will have
earned a leap and not a step and that public safety will require it.  That
applies both for
Criminal Code
breaches generally and also for breaches
of this provincial law in light of the enormous toll human trafficking has on
its victims and those who care for them.  Again, whether or not Ms. M. has
been proved to have been Mr. Wallace’s human-trafficking victim to a criminal
standard in court before, that is not the issue:  a court issued an order
under the legislation, applying the applicable standard, Mr. Wallace did not
challenge the order and he breached it blatantly.  It might even be argued
that the very public nature of his breach in a place known to be full of CCTV
bespeaks a wantonness on his part.
19
.
Mr.
Wallace
has four months of
Summers
credit; I would enhance that to five months to make a limited allowance for
Duncan
credit on the very finite record before me.  I otherwise accept the
Crown's submission that a twelve-month sentence would be appropriate after
balancing the mitigating and aggravating circumstances.  Accordingly, five
months credit for pre-sentence custody shall be noted towards sentence. 
Mr.
Wallace
will spend a further
seven months in custody.
20
.
Thereafter he
shall be on probation for two years.  Counsel may address the appropriate
conditions.
Released:       13
December, 2025
[1]
Quite
apart from Mr Wallace’s general disinclination to obey court orders, he has
multiple convictions for disobeying orders (and an undertaking) relating to the
same victim.
[2]
While
this does not serve in any way as an
ex post facto
explanation
for the sentence imposed, Mr. Wallace’s very long and strident outburst in
court after the imposition of sentence would appear to be consistent with an
expectation on his part that any breaches of court orders would forever be met
with a sentence of a month here or a couple of months there and that the
duration of his sentences would not increase as his numbers of convictions
increased.
[3]
Generally
speaking a sentencing court will impose moderate increases for subsequent
offences for which an offender has previous convictions, avoiding large leaps
in order to avoid undermining the objective of rehabilitation.  However, the
“step” principle is not iron-clad.  At a certain point, an offender with
multiple breach convictions ought not to be surprised if a subsequent sentencing
leads to a leap rather than a step.  Such a leap represents a realization that
for some offenders incremental increases (or even sentences matching previous
sentences for similar offences) are incapable of bringing out any awareness on
the offender’s part of the seriousness of his or her pattern of disregard for
court orders.  This is such a case.