Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj273/2025oncj273.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Z.K.,
2025 ONCJ 273
DATE: 
2025 05 16
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 4810 998 23 48127186-00
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
Z.K.
— AND —
A.A.
Before
Justice D. Moore
Heard
on April 23 and May 15, 2025
Ruling
re: Application for Order Appointing Counsel released on May 16, 2025
A. Gibbons........................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
D. Costa.................................................................................... counsel
for the Accused Z.K.
J. Khou.................................................................................... counsel
for the Applicant A.A.
MOORE J.:
[
1
]
A.A. is the Complainant/Respondent in an application
by Z.K. pursuant to
s. 278
of the
Criminal Code
to introduce text/whatsapp
messages in Z.K.’s possession at his trial on the charges of sexual assault (2
counts) and assault.
[
2
]
On January 21, 2025 I signed an order on consent
of both the Crown and Z.K. appointing Ms. Khou as counsel for A.A. to represent
her at a Stage 2 hearing purportedly pursuant to
s. 278.94
of the
Criminal
Code
.
[
3
]
On February 18, 2025 I granted, with the consent
of the Crown, Z.K.’s application for a hearing pursuant to s. 278.93 and
ordered that the matter would move on to a stage 2 s. 278.94 hearing.
[
4
]
The stage 2 hearing is currently scheduled to be
heard May 27, 2025.
[
5
]
On February 23, 2025 Ms. Khou emailed written
submissions on the Stage 2 application as well as a request for a further order
appointing her as counsel to supplement or clarify my January 21 2025 “order”. 
While the Crown was copied on this email counsel for the defence was not.  My judicial
assistant advised the parties that as I am the seized trial judge it would not
be appropriate for me to make an
ex parte
order and copied Mr. Costa on
that communication.
[
6
]
Mr. Gibbons for the Crown responded that now Mr.
Costa had been provided with a copy of the draft order the Crown joined in Ms.
Khou’s request and asked that I sign the order or request that the matter be
brought before me for submissions.  I directed the latter and requested that
submissions be made on 2 areas: (1) what was my jurisdiction to make the order
sought and (2) if I had jurisdiction why was a second order required.  I initially
heard submissions on those issues on April 23.  I expressed that the submissions
had not satisfied me that I had jurisdiction to make the order sought and I
invited the parties to adjourn the matter to make inquiries as to (a) other
possible avenues for A.A. to get funded counsel without an order of the court
(b) whether other interested parties wished to make submissions (in particular
the Crown Law Office – Civil or Legal Aid Ontario) and also to do further
research to make additional submissions.
[
7
]
On April 25 I received additional submissions
from Ms. Khou and was provided with Justice Latimer’s decision in
R. v.
B.C.S.
(2019) ONCJ 467 in support of those submissions.
[
8
]
On May 15 I heard further submissions and
dismissed the application with brief oral reasons and indicated I would
supplement those reasons with written more fulsome reasons.  These are those
reasons.
[
9
]
I preface my ruling by stating unequivocally
that I am completely in favour of Complainant/Respondents on 276 and 278
applications being represented by counsel.  They clearly have the statutory
right to standing and to be represented by counsel, but in addition to that I
have generally found such representation to be of the highest quality and of
great assistance in deciding such applications.
[
10
]
My concern is whether or not I have jurisdiction
to make the order sought.  I, and I am sure many if not most of my colleagues,
have been signing similar orders for several years now.  While I am uncertain
of the entire history of such orders it appears that these appointments were
simply added to the procedures in place for s. 486.3 and
amicus curiae
appointments made by the Court whereby pursuant to an agreement between the
Attorney General and Legal Aid Ontario the Attorney General funds the cost of
these appointments but Legal Aid Ontario administers them.  It is possible that
the procedure originated with Justice Latimer’s decision in
R. v. B.C.S.
but I am not certain that this is the case.
[
11
]
The source of jurisdiction is clear in s. 486.3
and
amicus
appointments.  The
Criminal Code
in the case of the
former and the centuries-long recognized inherent jurisdiction of the Court in
the latter.  The opposite is the case in respect to the order sought here.  The
order I signed on January 21 purported to be made pursuant to s. 278.4, but s.
278.4 DOES NOT provide that the court may appoint state funded counsel for the
Complainant/Respondent.  It only provides in s. 278.4(3) that the trial judge
must make sure the Complainant/Respondent is provided notice of their right to
be represented by counsel.
[
12
]
The right to be represented by counsel at a
proceeding does not require the provision of state-funded counsel.  An accused
person has a well-established right to counsel at their trial both at common
law and pursuant to the
Charter
, but that does not mean that I have
jurisdiction to appoint state funded counsel for an accused person.  Where an
accused person wishes state funded counsel to be appointed by the court they
must bring an application pursuant to s. 7 and 24(1) of the
Charter
under the procedure outlined in
R. v. Rowbotham
(1988),
1988 CanLII 147 (ON CA)
, 41 C.C.C. (3d)
1 (Ont.C.A.) and somewhat clarified by caselaw in the decades since.  On such
an application an accused must show (1) that they have exhausted all avenues
available to them to obtain legal aid (2) that they lack sufficient funds to
obtain counsel privately and (3) representation by counsel is essential to a
fair trial (see for example
R. v. Tang
,
2015 ONCA 470 (CanLII)
, [2015] O.J. No. 3366, at para.
9
, leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused [2015] S.C.C.A. No. 486).
[
13
]
In
R. v. B.C.S.
Justice Latimer was presiding
as a youth court judge and dealing with a 17 year old Complainant/Respondent and
a defendant who was also a young person.  He found that he had jurisdiction to
make the order based on his “inherent procedural jurisdiction to make orders
that are practically necessary to ensure that the proceedings they are
statutorily mandated to conduct are administered justly and fairly.”  In
support of this jurisdiction he relied on the decision of the Supreme Court of
Canada in
Ontario v. Criminal Lawyers’ Association
(2013),
2013 SCC 43 (CanLII)
, 300 CCC (3d)
137.  But it is important to note that in finding statutory courts had the
jurisdiction to appoint
amicus
, it placed important constraints on the
exercise of that jurisdiction:
Thus,
orders for the appointment of
amici
do not cross the prohibited line
into the province's responsibility for the administration of justice, provided
certain conditions are met. First, the assistance of
amici
must be
essential to the judge discharging her judicial functions in the case at hand.
Second, as my colleague Fish J. observes, much as is the case for other
elements of inherent jurisdiction, the authority to appoint
amici
should
be used
sparingly and with caution, in response to
specific and exceptional circumstances
(para. 115).
Routine appointment of
amici
because the
defendant is without a lawyer would risk crossing the line between meeting the
judge's need for assistance and the province's role in the administration of
justice.
[1]
[
14
]
I do not believe that Justice Latimer meant for
his decision to be relied on as authority that such orders should be made in
every case where the Complainant/Respondent has standing.  Rather he had a 17
year old Complain­ant/Respondent who did not yet have counsel and a motion date
approximately a month away.  Special protections and orders for minors,
including the provision of state-funded counsel have a long history, including the
Office of the Children’s Lawyer in family proceedings, litigation guardians in
civil proceedings, and perhaps most relevant to the issue before Justice
Latimer, s. 25 of the
Youth Criminal Justice Act
.
[
15
]
In any event A.A. is not a minor and I do not
find that
R. v. B.C.S.
provides me with authority for jurisdiction to appoint
state funded counsel for Complainant/Respondents as part of my inherent
procedural jurisdiction in this case.  In an appropriate case I might have
jurisdiction under the
Charter
to do so analogous to the
Rowbotham
procedure or to use my inherent jurisdiction to appoint
amicus
to assist
me with respect to the Complainant/Respondent’s interests but I do not have a
Charter
application before me and no one has suggested that an
amicus
appointment is necessary in this case.
[
16
]
The submissions of the Crown and A.A. in this
case are essentially that these orders should be made automatically upon the
Complainant/Respondent being granted standing.  Indeed past practice has simply
been to provide a draft order without a supporting application or affidavit.  While
that has certainly been past practice (including my own) having looked into the
matter more thoroughly it is not a practice I can continue to engage in.
[
17
]
It was certainly open to Parliament when they
enacted s. 278.4 to give courts the jurisdiction to order state funded counsel in
all cases as they did in s. 486.3.  Parliament did not do so.  The Attorney
General is certainly capable of providing state funded counsel on whatever terms
it wishes.  While these orders have become common in the past few years, for
many years state funded counsel was provided to Complainant/Respondents on
O’Connor
applications without court orders.  There is no need for a court order to compel
the Attorney General to do something they are apparently willing to do.  The
Attorney General could simply direct that funded counsel be provided whenever a
Complainant/Respondent is provided notice of a proceeding pursuant to s. 486.4
and let Legal Aid Ontario administer it.  The Legislature could enact
legislation expressly giving courts this authority, it has not done so.  The
Executive branch could also expressly give courts this authority, it has not
done so.
[
18
]
Having Complainant/Respondents represented by
counsel is extremely beneficial to everyone involved in the proceeding.  Thankfully
it appears Ms. Khou is going to continue representing A.A.  I note that this
ruling only applies to the application to grant an additional order and does
not apply to my January 21, 2025 order since no one has applied to set that
order aside.
[
19
]
Although not strictly necessary given my ruling,
even if I had been convinced that I had jurisdiction to make the order sought I
would not have as it is unnecessary.  Essentially it was argued that the
wording of the order was insufficient as it did not explicitly refer to s. 276
issues.  I was provided with previous instances in which Legal Aid Ontario
restricted payment in the past.  In my view my previous order was for funding
counsel for representation on the application before me.  The description was
simply to identify the application.  There is only one application before me. 
It is possible (although not likely) that dozens of different legal issues
could arise.  There is absolutely no reason for a new order each time a new
issue arises.  It might be different if there was a new application with a new
stage 1 ruling, but that is not the case here.
Released:  May
16, 2025
Signed:
Justice D. Moore
[1]
[emphasis added] At para. 47