Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj26/2025oncj26.html

The court
hearing this matter directs that the following notice should be attached to the
file:
A non-publication and
non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued under
subsection
486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the consequence of failure
to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4   Order restricting publication —
sexual offences.
—(1)   Subject to subsection (2), the
presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the complainant or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any of the following
offences:
(i)    an offence under section
151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160, 162, 163.1, 170, 171, 172, 172.1, 173,
210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.02, 279.03, 346 or 347,
(ii)    an offence under section
144 (rape), 145 (attempt to commit rape), 149 (indecent assault on female), 156
(indecent assault on male) or 245 (common assault) or subsection 246(1)
(assault with intent) of the
Criminal Code
,
chapter C-34
of the Revised
Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983, or
(iii)    an offence under
subsection 146(1) (sexual intercourse with a female under 14) or (2) (sexual
intercourse with a female between 14 and 16) or section 151 (seduction of a
female between 16 and 18), 153 (sexual intercourse with step-daughter), 155
(buggery or bestiality), 157 (gross indecency), 166 (parent or guardian
procuring defilement) or 167 (householder permitting defilement) of the
Criminal
Code
,
chapter C-34
of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read
immediately before January 1, 1988; or
(
b
)    two or more offences being
dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which is an offence referred
to in any of subparagraphs (
a
)(i) to (iii).
(2)
Mandatory
order on application.
—   In proceedings in respect of the
offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding
judge or justice shall
(
a
)    at the first reasonable opportunity,
inform any witness under the age of eighteen years and the complainant of the
right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on application made by the
complainant, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the order.
.   .   .
486.6   Offence.
—(1)   Every
person who fails to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, (2) or
(3) or 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary
conviction.
CITATION:
R. v.
Trindade Pereira
, 2025 ONCJ 26
DATE:  2025-01-16
Toronto
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE
   KING
—  AND  —
LUIS TRINDADE PEREIRA
Before Justice Mara Greene
Reasons for Judgment
released January 16, 2025
K. Kirec and A.
Dimiskovski …………………………….……………………..For the Crown
J. Dos Santos……………………………………………………………. Mr. Trindade Pereira
[
1
] Mr. Trindade Pereira is charged with three different sets of
offences.  The first set alleges a host of offences from October 15, 2022 until
November 22, 2022.  They include an assault with a weapon, two sexual assaults,
uttering threats and breaching an undertaking.
[
2
] The second set of charges allege that in March 2023, Mr.
Trindade Pereira  breached his release order by contacting M.G. both on March
13 and 19, 2023. It is further alleged that on March 13 and Feb 10, 2023, Mr.
Trindade Pereira attempted to obstruct justice and attempted to intimate M.G.
to drop the charges against him.
[
3
] The final set of charges allege that on Nov 19, 2022 Mr.
Trindade Pereira assaulted M.G., uttered a threat to her and uttered a threat
to her son, S.G.
[
4
] It is agreed by all parties that M.G. and Mr. Trindade Pereira
were involved in a romantic relationship in 2022 for a short period of time. 
M.G. alleged that during this time, Mr. Trindade Pereira assaulted and sexually
assaulted her culminating in the relationship ending on November 19, 2022 when
M.G. went to police.  At that time, M.G. reported the allegations of assault
and uttering threats from November 19, 2022.  M.G. alleged that after this date,
despite being charged and ordered to have no contact with her, Mr. Trindade Pereira
continued to contact her and threaten her and her family.  M.G. went to police
again and reported the contact and threats.  She also reported the alleged
sexual assaults from November 12 and 19, 2022. M.G. alleged that after his
arrest on these new charges, Mr. Trindade Pereira continued to contact her and
tried to coerce her to drop the criminal charges.   Mr. Trindade Pereira
testified at trial and denied all of the offences.   At the end of the trial,
Crown counsel invited me to find Mr. Trindade-Pereira not guilty of the sexual
assault from November 19, 2022 and the breach of a release order from March 19,
2023.  I will nonetheless review the evidence as it relates to these two
allegations because it, in my view, it is relevant to my overall assessment of
the issues in this case.
[
5
] On December 2, 2024, I advised Mr. Trindade Pereira that he was
not guilty of all charges.  I indicated that my reasons would follow.  These
are my reasons.
Summary of the Evidence
[
6
] Mr. Trindade Pereira and M.G. met through an online site.   In
October 2022 the relationship turned romantic. It ended one month later.
[
7
] According to M.G., after their first week together, Mr. Trindade
Pereira started to become aggressive with her.  M.G. described Mr. Trindade Pereira
as someone who was always drunk and on drugs.  She further testified that he liked
to have sex in a rough manner and that he derived pleasure from burning
cigarettes onto her breasts and having sex without her consent.
(i) The allegations from Nov 12, 2022
[
8
] M.G. testified that by November 12, 2022, she had already
advised Mr. Trindade Pereira that she did not want to continue their
relationship.  Nonetheless, Mr. Trindade Pereira called her and stated that he needed
to speak to her.  M.G. only agreed to meet him because he threatened to hurt
her children if she did not meet him.
[
9
] M.G. went to Mr. Trindade Pereira’s residence.  He confronted
her about the breakup.  He then removed both his and M.G.’s clothing and
proceeded to sexually assault M.G.  She told him no, but he ignored this and
forced vaginal sexual intercourse without a condom.  During this sexual assault
he also burned her breast with a lit cigarette. M.G. testified that she still
has scars from the burns.  According to M.G., after the sexual assault, Mr.
Trindade-Pereira told her not to tell anyone what took place or he would hurt
her children.
[
10
] Mr. Trindade Pereira denied sexually assaulting M.G. on this
date.  According to Mr. Trindade Pereira they were still dating at this point
in time and in fact, M.G. sent him a text that morning stating, “good morning
love”.  This text was made an exhibit at trial.
[
11
] Mr. Trindade Pereira testified that he and M.G. had consensual
sexual relations on November 12. At the end of the night, he paid for a taxi
for M.G. to return home.  Later that night/early morning, they sent loving text
messages to each other.  These text messages were also made exhibits at trial.
[
12
] M.G. admitted to sending some of the text messages but
testified that she was forced to send them and that they did not accurately
reflect her feelings towards Mr. Trindade Pereira.    M.G. denied sending all
the texts, she testified that Mr. Trindade Pereira used her Facebook to text
message himself pretending to be her.
(ii)  The allegations from November 19, 2022
[
13
] M.G. testified that on Nov 19, Mr. Trindade Pereira sent her a
text message asking her to buy food and to attend his place for dinner.   M.G.
followed his instructions out of fear for her son’s safety.
[
14
] Upon arriving at the residence, M.G. testified that Mr.
Trindade Pereira forced her to have dinner with him and his roommate.  After
dinner, M.G.’s daughter and son-in-law came over for a short visit.  According
M.G., once her daughter left, Mr. Trindade Pereira ripped off her stockings and
forced her into his bedroom. Once in the bedroom, she tried to call her daughter
on her cell phone, but Mr. Trindade Pereira took it away and hit M.G. in the
face with the cell phone.  He then locked the door, threatened to kill her and
sexually assaulted her.  The sexual assault included forced anal and vaginal
intercourse.
[
15
] After the sexual assault, M.G. wanted to leave but Mr. Trindade
Pereira would not let her.  She finally called a friend and asked that friend
to call police.  According to M.G.,  Mr. Trindade Pereira then threatened to
kill her.  He then went to grab a knife, while doing so, M.G. telephoned her
daughter and asked her to pick M.G. up because she thought Mr. Trindade Pereira
was going to kill her. M.G.’s daughter picked her up and took her home.
[
16
] Upon arriving home, M.G. telephoned the police.  She told them
that Mr. Trindade Pereira assaulted her.  She made no mention of a sexual
assault.  M.G. testified that she did not mention the sexual assault because
she was fearful of Mr. Trindade Pereira.
[
17
] Mr. Trindade Pereira testified that no sexual assault occurred
on November 19, 2023.  According to Mr. Trindade Pereira, on this date, M.G.
came over and they had dinner with his roommate.  After dinner, M.G.’s daughter
and son-in-law came over.   When they arrived, Mr. Trindade-Pereira offered
them a drink and they socialized for approximately an hour.  When M.G.’s
daughter wanted to leave, Mr. Trindade Pereira walked them to their vehicle and
then returned to his residence.  Mr. Trindade Pereira found M.G. in his
bedroom.  She was angry about text messages she had read on Mr.
Trindade-Pereira’s cellular telephone.    Mr. Trindade Pereira told her to
leave and suggested she call her daughter to come and pick her up.  According
to Mr. Trindade Pereira,  M.G. threatened to call police on Mr. Trindade Pereira
and then left.   An hour later, Mr. Trindade Pereira received a message from
M.G.’s daughter advising that her mother was calling the police.  He was later
arrested for assaulting M.G.
[
18
] An agreed statement of fact was filed at trial. According to
this document, Gilberto Reis, Mr. Trindade Pereira’s roommate, confirmed that M.G.,
her daughter and son-in-law came over on November 19, 2022. He further
confirmed that after her daughter left, M.G. went to Mr. Trindade Pereira’s
room, but only remained there for five minutes.  He heard Mr. Trindade Pereira
state “Who said you could be looking at my phone”.  M.G. responded “What are
you doing with these women on here”.  Mr. Trindade Pereira then told M.G. to
call her daughter to pick her up as he did not want M.G. in his apartment.    It
was agreed by both parties that this evidence confirmed that that a sexual
assault could not have occurred on November 19, 2022.
(ii) Contact after Nov 19
[
19
] After his arrest, MG learned that Mr. Trindade Pereira was
released with conditions to have no contact with her.  According to MG, Mr.
Trindade Pereira nonetheless contacted her by calling her on the telephone.  He
was angry that she went to police and threatened that there would be consequences
for this to her and her children. Police were called and Mr. Trindade Pereira
was arrested again.
[
20
] M.G. alleges that throughout 2023, Mr. Trindade Pereira
continued to contact her.  He even communicated with her on Facebook while he
was in custody.
[
21
] Mr. Trindade Pereira denied any contact with M.G. after his
arrest on November 19, 2022.
General Legal Principles
[
22
] The starting point in understanding any decision in a criminal
court is understanding the burden of proof.  The burden lies on the Crown to
prove each essential element of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt.  This is
a high standard.   Reasonable doubt is based upon reason and common sense.  It
is logically connected to the evidence or the lack of evidence. It is not
enough for me to believe that Mr. Trindade Pereira is possibly or even probably
guilty.  Reasonable doubt requires more.  As a standard, reasonable doubt lies
far closer to absolute certainty than it does to a balance of probabilities.  
In order to convict, a trial judge must be sure that every essential element of
the offence has been made out.
[
23
] The
issues in the case at bar are directly linked to the credibility and
reliability of the witnesses at trial.
[
24
] Before I
engage in assessing the evidence, a few comments must be made about the
fact-finding process.  In Canadian criminal law, there is a clear process for
addressing evidence where the defendant testifies.  The court must consider
whether she believes the defendant’s evidence.  If the court does not believe
the defendant, she must go on to consider whether the defendant’s evidence
leaves her with a reasonable doubt about the commission of the offence.  Where
there are competing versions of events the court is not permitted to merely
decide which version of events the court likes better.  In assessing whether or
not to accept the defendant’s evidence the court must consider all the
evidence, including the evidence of the complainant. A considered and reasoned
acceptance of the complainant’s evidence beyond a reasonable doubt is a
sufficient basis to reject the testimony of the defendant. As was stated in
R.
v. J.J.R.D.,
2006 CanLII 40088 (ON CA)
, [2006] O.J. No. 4749 (C.A.) at paragraph
53
:
53
The
trial judge's analysis of the evidence demonstrates the route he took to his
verdict and permits effective appellate review. The trial judge rejected
totally the appellant's denial because stacked beside A.D.'s evidence and the
evidence concerning the diary, the appellant's evidence, despite the absence of
any obvious flaws in it, did not leave the trial judge with a reasonable doubt.
An outright rejection of an accused's evidence based on a considered and reasoned
acceptance beyond a reasonable doubt of the truth of conflicting credible
evidence is as much an explanation for the rejection of an accused's evidence
as is a rejection based on a problem identified with the way the accused
testified or the substance of the accused's evidence.
[
25
] While it
is open to the court to reject the evidence of the defendant because she
believes the complainant, there may be occasions where the court believes both
the defendant and the complainant. In such a case, the court will be left in a
reasonable doubt.
Analysis
[
26
] This case really revolves around the credibility and/or
reliability of the witnesses.  The only witnesses at trial were Mr. Trindade Pereira
and M.G.  I also have the text messages between Mr. Trindade Pereira and M.G.
and an agreed statement of fact about Mr. Reis’ evidence.  Both counsel advised
that I can accept Mr. Reis’ evidence as credible and reliable.
[
27
] In the case at bar, I fully accept Mr. Trindade Pereira’s
evidence.  He was an honest, credible and reliable witness.  There were no
meaningful inconsistencies in his evidence, and I have no basis to reject his
testimony.  I completely believe him.  Moreover, his evidence as it relates to
November 19, 2023 is corroborated by Mr. Reis.    This alone, is sufficient to
raise a reasonable doubt on all charges.   I will nonetheless address M.G.’s
evidence.
[
28
] In my view, M.G. was not a credible witness and I reject her
evidence in its entirety.  I reach this conclusion for a number of reasons. 
Firstly, her evidence is contradicted by independent evidence that even the
Crown agrees I should accept.  Secondly, the text messages sent by M.G. to Mr.
Trindade Pereira are inconsistent with her evidence about her feelings towards
Mr. Trindade Pereira. In my view, M.G.’s explanations for this inconsistency
were inconsistent and non-sensical.  Thirdly, M.G.’s evidence was inconsistent
in other key evidence that in my view goes to the heart of her allegations.
[
29
] In relation to my first reason for rejecting M.G.’s evidence –
the presence of evidence that directly contradicts M.G.’s evidence – this
relates to the evidence of Mr. Reis. According to Mr. Reis, on November 19,
2022 M.G. left shortly after her daughter left, making it impossible for the
protracted sexual assault as described by M.G. to have occurred.  Crown counsel
agreed that Mr. Reis’ evidence, filed as an agreed statement of fact, should be
believed and therefore invited me to find Mr. Trindade Pereira not guilty of
this offence.  Crown counsel argued, however, that this should not lead me to
conclude that M.G. was untruthful about the event.  Instead, she argued that
M.G. could have been mistaken about the date.  She argued this was a reliability
issue as opposed to a credibility issue.   Respectfully, I disagree.
[
30
] November 19, 2022 was not some insignificant date in the midst
of a lengthy relationship.  November 19, 2022 was the first time M.G.
telephoned the police. It was the day that Mr. Trindade Pereira was arrested
and the last time that M.G. was actually at Mr. Trindade Pereira’s residence. 
Moreover, during the course of their short relationship, M.G. had only been at
Mr. Trindade Pereira’s residence on three occasions and it was the only time
that her daughter and son-in-law came over to his residence. It is
inconceivable given these factors that M.G. could have been mistaken about the
date and that this sexual assault did occur, but on a different date.  The only
reasonable inference is that M.G. was not truthful about this allegation.  In
my view, having found M.G. was not truthful about this allegation, it clouds
the entirety of her evidence.  If M.G. could lie about this, I am unable to be
satisfied that the rest of her evidence is truthful.
[
31
] Furthermore, M.G. denied that she was jealous about Mr.
Trindade Pereira being with other women and denied making any statement to that
effect.  Yet, according to Mr. Reis’ evidence, on November 19, M.G. made
specific comments about Mr. Trindade Pereira and other women that can only be
viewed as an expression of jealousy.  Crown counsel conceded that Mr. Reis’
evidence on this point should be believed.
[
32
] The next frailty relates to the text messages M.G. sent to Mr.
Trindade Pereira from November 12 until November 19, 2022.  In my view, the
text messages and M.G.’s evidence about the text messages further establish
that M.G. was not truthful with this court.
[
33
] The text messages filed at court start on November 12, 2022 and
go until November 19.  In these text messages, M.G. expressed her love for Mr.
Trindade Pereira at times and at other times expresses jealousy and anger due
to his inattentiveness to her and attention to other women.   M.G. was cross-examined
extensively about these text messages as they directly contradict her evidence
that from very early on she wanted to end the relationship, but Mr. Trindade
Pereira would not let her.   M.G.’s initial explanation for these text messages
was that Mr. Trindade Pereira forced her to write them.  When it was pointed
out that he was not with her when she wrote the messages, M.G. testified that
he telephoned and threatened her to write these messages.  This included not
just the love messages, but also her jealous text messages.   M.G. went on to
testify that some of the text messages were actually written by Mr. Trindade Pereira.
He commandeered her Facebook and sent the messages himself, sometimes while in
the same room with M.G.  At other points in her evidence, M.G. testified that
she would be in the same room with Mr. Trindade Pereira, and he would dictate
to her what text messages to send to him.  In my view, these explanations are inconsistent
with each other and defy common sense.  I will point out a few particularly
problematic posts and explanations.
[
34
] The first issue relates to the evolution of M.G.’s evidence
during the course of cross-examination explaining the text messages.  M.G. originally
testified that she had no contact with Mr. Trindade Pereira between the 12
th
and 19
th
of November.  This is directly contradicted by the text
messages filed at trial.  When first confronted about the text messages, M.G.
was evasive in her responses and presented as not wanting to explain the
texts.  When pressed further, M.G. testified that she was forced to write the
text messages.  When she was reminded that Mr. Trindade Pereira could not
possibly have been in her presence when some of the texts were written (for
example the “ Good morning love” text from November at 7:17 am and the “I love
you text” from November 13, a short time after the alleged sexual assault),
M.G. testified that Mr. Trindade Pereira telephoned her first and told her she
had to send the text messages.
[
35
] Many of the text messages M.G. sent to Mr. Trindade Pereira
expressed her jealousy and anger at Mr. Trindade-Pereira for either being with
other women or ignoring M.G. Again, M.G. testified that Mr. Trindade Pereira
forced her to write these messages and at times even took over her Facebook
account and sent the messages himself.  This makes no sense at all.  These texts
were not protestations of love.  These messages are expressions of M.G.’s jealousy
and her anger at Mr. Trindade Pereira for being with other women.  It makes no
sense at all that he would force M.G. to write out these texts. In my view, the
texts accurately reflect M.G.’s state of mind at the time - that she was
jealous.
[
36
] Another series of text messages that are inconsistent with M.G.’s
overall evidence relates to a series of texts from November 13, 2022.  The
relevant series starts with Mr. Trindade Pereira writing that this is his last
message for the night. M.G. responded questioning whether Mr. Trindade Pereira
was breaking up with her.  At trial M.G. testified that she was happy they were
breaking up. Yet, when Mr. Trindade Pereira did not respond to this text, M.G.
wrote “answer me”.  If she wanted them to break up, why was she demanding  a
response?  Mr. Trindade Pereira finally responded stating that  he was not
breaking up with her, he just meant that it was his last text for the night. 
M.G. responded with “I love you”.  In my view, these text messages contradict
M.G.’s assertion that she was happy they were breaking up.  The only reasonable
inference to be drawn from these messages is that M.G. misunderstood Mr.
Trindade Pereira’s original text and thought he was breaking up with her. This
upset her and when she realized the error and that he was not ending the
relationship, M.G. was relieved.
[
37
] The final issue with M.G.’s testimony relates to the
inconsistencies in her evidence.  I am mindful that witnesses are often
inconsistent.  Not because they are being untruthful, but because memories fade
with time. There was one inconsistency, in my view that cannot reasonably be
attributed to memory issues and is another example of M.G. not being truthful
with the court.
[
38
] M.G. originally testified that her daughter came over to Mr.
Trindade Pereira’s residence on November 19, 2022 because she knew that Mr.
Trindade Pereira was aggressive.  The essence of this was that her daughter was
there for a protective purpose which if true bolstered M.G.’s evidence.
However, later in her evidence, M.G. testified that her daughter came over on
November 19, 2022 because she wanted to meet Mr. Trindade Pereira.  M.G. also
testified, however, that her daughter and son-in-law had already met Mr.
Trindade Pereira, liked him and came over to visit with him.  When pressed on
this at one point during her evidence, M.G. denied that her daughter had met
Mr. Trindade Pereira before.  When the inconsistency was pointed out, M.G.
testified they had met in “photos”.
[
39
] At trial, when asked about why she did not leave with her
daughter and son-in-law on November 19, 2022 given her fear of Mr. Trindade Pereira,
M.G. testified that she could not because Mr. Trindade Pereira had a weapon in
his backyard.  Despite the numerous statements M.G. made to police, she had
never mentioned this weapon before.
[
40
] In my view, M.G. was not a credible witness and I do not accept
her evidence.  Moreover, I do accept Mr. Trindade Pereira’s evidence in its
entirety.  As such, the Crown has not proven any of the offences before the
court beyond a reasonable doubt and I find Mr. Trindade Pereira not guilty of
all counts.
Released January 16, 2025                                   ______________________
Justice
Mara Greene