Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj111/2025oncj111.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that
the following notice be attached to the file:
A non-publication and non-broadcast order in this
proceeding has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v. Morelli
,
2025 ONCJ 111
DATE:  2025-02-27
Toronto
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE
   KING
—  AND  —
ROBERT MORELLI
Before Justice Mara Greene
Reasons for Judgment released February 27,
2025
A. Speiser…………………………..……………………………………… for the Crown
R. Posner ….…………………………..………………………...……...for Robert Morelli
[
1
] Mr. Morelli is charged with sexual assault in relation to an
osteopathic treatment he conducted on his patient, A.M., on March 15, 2013.    Many
facts are not in dispute.  Both parties agree that Mr. Morelli conducted an
internal pelvic osteopathic treatment of A.M. on this date.  It is also agreed
that the type of treatment conducted on March 15, 2013 is a “controlled act” that
 pursuant to the
Regulated Health Professions Act
only regulated health
professions may perform.  Osteopathy is not a regulated health profession and
pursuant to this regulation, Osteopaths are not permitted to perform
“controlled acts”.  Despite this fact, Osteopaths had historically conducted internal
pelvic treatment and in 2013 this type of treatment was still being taught at
the Canadian College of Osteopathy.   At the present time, the Osteopathic
community no longer recommends conducting this kind of treatment.
[
2
] The issues at trial were as follows:
(a)
Was the touching involved in the osteopathic internal pelvic
treatment a sexual act so as to make any non-consensual touching a sexual
assault?
(b)
If yes, did the complainant consent to the treatment?
(c)
If the complainant did consent, was her consent vitiated by virtue
of the relationship between the parties?
(d)
If the touching was not sexual in nature, is Mr. Morelli nonetheless
guilty of a common assault?
Summary of the Evidence
(i)
Background evidence about the clinical
relationship
[
3
] In 2013, A.M. was in her 5
th
year as a student at the
Canadian School of Osteopathy.  A.M. met Mr. Morelli a few years earlier while
walking to school one day.  Mr. Morelli was a supervisor at the school clinic
and also assisted in teaching some classes.  He was not A.M.’s professor and
did not grade her.  He may have indirectly supervised A.M. when she was in her
second year of school, but he did not otherwise have any role in her formal
education.    Mr. Morelli was, however, a well-respected osteopath who A.M.
held in high regard and wanted him to think well of her.  A.M. saw Mr. Morelli
as a mentor and wanted his assistance with her thesis.
[
4
] A.M. testified that as part of the educational program, students
at the Canadian College of Osteopathy would often practice the techniques in
class on other students.  Moreover, the college recommended that students
receive osteopathic treatment in the community.   In light of this
recommendation, A.M. asked Mr. Morelli if he would treat her.  When A.M. first
spoke to the police she stated that she started seeing Mr. Morelli as a patient
in her 5
th
year at school.  Later, when A.M. received her medical
file from Mr. Morelli, she realized that she was actually in her second year at
the college when she became Mr. Morelli’s patient.   The first treatment took
place in November of 2011.  In deciding to become Mr. Morelli’s patient, A.M.
liked the fact that he would accommodate her difficult schedule and would even
see her after hours.  Moreover, Mr. Morelli had a strong reputation in the
community and was well respected.
[
5
] Mr. Morelli testified at trial.  According to Mr. Morelli, at
the time of the allegations, he was an Osteopath working in the city of
Toronto. He also did some supervising and teaching at the Canadian College of
Osteopathy.
[
6
] Mr. Morelli considered himself to be like a tutor to A.M..  He
did not grade her, but she was a student, and he did advise her on her thesis
in an informal capacity.  Mr. Morelli testified that he mentored and treated
about eight students at the time.  It was common in the osteopathy community
for  practitioners to treat students.
(ii)
Symptoms and course of treatment
[
7
] A.M. did not have a strong recollection of all her appointments
with Mr. Morelli but prior to attending court she looked at Mr. Morelli’s
medical notes and agreed that the dates included in his file were accurate.  A.M.
saw Mr. Morelli as a patient five times between November  2011 and March 15,
2013, the date of the allegation before the court.   A.M. sought treatment from
Mr. Morelli three times after the alleged sexual assault.
[
8
] When A.M. first started seeing Mr. Morelli as a patient, she signed
a consent form.  The form was signed on November 18, 2011.  On this form, there
was a place to identify treatment area or symptoms.  A.M. wrote “thorax?”.  
The form then asked about specific complaints and A.M. wrote “open to
assessment”.  The consent form included confirmation that A.M. was told about
the possible risks and side effects of osteopathic treatment and that she may
stop treatment at any time.
[
9
] A.M. testified at trial that she had no specific ailment when
she started to see Mr. Morelli.  She had some general issues but nothing that
was particularly pressing or concerning.
[
10
] A.M. testified that when Mr. Morelli recommended the internal
treatment she was surprised because she had no gynecological or pelvic related
complaints that warranted this kind of work.    A.M. maintained at trial that
in her opinion the treatment was not necessary.
[
11
] Despite A.M.’s denial at trial about having any pelvic related complaints
when she was being treated by Mr. Morelli, when asked about the contents of Mr.
Morelli’s notes which included reference to a host of symptoms that could be linked
to pelvic issues, A.M. testified that she could not recall the specifics of
some of her complaints but agreed that the general nature of the notes was
accurate.
[
12
] A.M. did recall that on November 18, 2011 she complained of
having no energy and a hormone shift related to the birth control pill.  In
September 2012, A.M. complained again about hormonal issues related to her
period.  A.M. also agreed that she could have complained of “genitofemoral
symptoms” but could not recall at trial what the specific symptoms were.
Moreover,  A.M. testified that she did have digestive symptoms. A.M. agreed
that pelvic floor work can help with the above symptoms but did not believe
that her symptoms were sufficiently severe to justify the internal pelvic
treatment she received. At the March 15, 2013 appointment when the internal pelvic
treatment was performed, A.M. complained of breast density issues, advised that
she had an ultrasound of her breast that came back negative, linked the breast
lump to her periods and also complained of stomach discomfort and an irritation
in her right hamstring.
[
13
] Mr. Morelli at the time of trial could no longer remember specific
complaints A.M. made, he could only rely on his notes to identify the specific
symptoms complained of and the treatment provided.   Mr. Morelli testified that
his notes reflect that A.M. had specific issues with her hormones, digestion,
genitofemoral symptoms and a lump in her breast that came and went her period. 
She had an ultrasound conducted but it came back negative.  Mr. Morelli
testified that in his mind A.M. had acute concerns such that internal pelvic
treatment was recommended.  It was his opinion that the treatment needed to be
done and was a reasonable and appropriate course of action.
(iii)
The Treatment on March 15, 2013
[
14
] A.M. testified that she attended at Mr. Morelli’s office on March
15, 2013 for a regular treatment.  Upon attending, Mr. Morelli conducted a
visual assessment and then advised A.M. that an internal treatment was
required. As  a fifth-year student, A.M. knew what this involved.  A.M.
testified that internal work includes palpating the inside of the vagina.   A.M.
testified that she was aware that there was a course offered at the college
specifically on conducting these types of internal exams.  She further
testified that at the time, internal treatments of this nature were discussed
at the college as being a very important way to treat gynecological issues,
pelvic pain and incontinence.
[
15
] A.M. testified that when Mr. Morelli suggested the internal
treatment, she attempted to avoid it by asking if an external exam could be
conducted instead.  Mr. Morelli replied that in his opinion they needed to go
to the next step, which was an internal pelvic treatment.  He stated they had
tried external work and it was “not holding”  A.M.  testified that she then
told Mr. Morelli that she was on her period.  She hoped that this would provide
her an excuse to not have the treatment, but Mr. Morelli replied that it was
actually a good time to conduct an internal treatment.  He said it was the best
time to do it because A.M.’s hormones would be neutral.   Mr. Morelli explained
to A.M. that internal work could be helpful and there was no other way to reach
the muscles in issue.  He further explained that he had performed this
treatment many times in the past with great results.
[
16
] Before A.M. could even ask anything further, Mr. Morelli started
to prepare the room for the treatment.  He handed A.M. a sheet and instructed
A.M. to remove her bottoms, lay down on the treatment table and to cover
herself with the sheet.  Mr. Morelli then left the room while A.M. undressed. 
Upon his return to the room, Mr. Morelli put on gloves and advised A.M. that he
was going to use a lubricant.  He then touched her thigh and said, “here we
go”.
[
17
] Mr. Morelli conducted the treatment by placing his fingers
inside A.M.’s vagina and palpating differing muscles.  During the treatment,
Mr. Morelli’s eyes were closed and he narrated to A.M. what he was doing by
identifying the structures he was working with using the proper anatomical and
muscle names.  During the treatment, which lasted a few minutes, Mr. Morelli
told A.M. that her ovary was twisted, and he was treating this.  According to
A.M., at no point did Mr. Morelli make eye contact with her, nor did he ask
A.M. how she felt.  A.M. testified that she felt that she was “a body for him
to perform this artistic treatment”.
[
18
] At one point in the treatment, A.M. felt a lot of pressure in a
particular area – like Mr. Morelli was pressing on it too hard.  It was
somewhat painful.  A.M. did not want to complain, so she attempted to show her
discomfort by labouring her breath.  A.M. testified that Mr. Morelli responded
by telling her to calm her breathing and try to relax.  A.M. testified that he
sounded abrasive when he said this.
[
19
] At the end of the treatment, Mr. Morelli left the room so A.M.
could get dressed.  She laid back down on the table and Mr. Morelli returned to
the room and finished the treatment through external treatment measures.   A.M.
testified that she was extremely uncomfortable during this latter part of the
treatment because she was on her period and was not able to put her menstrual
cup back in.
[
20
] Mr. Morelli testified that he could not recall what took place
on March 15.  He confirmed from his notes that he did conduct an internal
pelvic treatment. His notes reflected that the treatment was necessary and
appropriate in the circumstances as A.M. was suffering acute symptoms. Mr. Morelli
testified that his general process was to explain the problem he identified
from his assessment and propose a treatment course.  He denied that he would
push or try to sell a particular treatment and would not proceed with this kind
of exam without the patient’s consent.  In his mind A.M. and any other patient
could refuse treatment at anytime.   If a patient was in pain, he would have
stopped and made sure it was alright to continue.  He would have had no problem
proceeding if a patient was on her period as this was a good time to conduct
this type of treatment.
(iv)
Evidence on the issue of consent
[
21
] A.M. testified that when Mr. Morelli recommended the internal treatment,
she did not want to have the treatment.   She did not, however, tell Mr. Morelli
this.  Instead, she asked if an external treatment could be conducted instead. 
A.M. testified that Mr. Morelli dismissed this request and started to try to
sell her on the idea of the internal treatment telling her that the prior
external treatments had not worked, that many women feel a lot better after the
internal treatment and that he is well trained to conduct this kind of treatment. 
A.M. then attempted to avoid the treatment by indicating that she was on her period. 
Mr. Morelli told her that this did not matter and in fact stated that it was a
good time to conduct the treatment.
[
22
] A.M. ultimately acquiesced to the treatment and did not tell
Mr. Morelli that she did not want to have the treatment.  She testified, however,
that despite her acquiescence she did not want the treatment and was
uncomfortable with it.
[
23
] A.M. testified that she felt that she could not refuse the
treatment for a number of reasons.  Mr. Morelli sounded so authoritative and confident
that she was felt she could not say no.  Mr. Morelli was a well-known
practitioner who had offered to mentor A.M. and as such did not want to look
like a bad student by refusing the treatment.  She was worried about losing Mr.
Morelli’s support and respect.  Mr. Morelli was a well-known practitioner and
she had no reason to doubt his expertise or his recommendation.  She tried to
make excuses to avoid the treatment, but her excuses did not deter Mr. Morelli.
[
24
] A.M. further noted that Mr. Morelli was standing between her
and the doorway when they discussed the procedure.
[
25
] When questioned further about her consent to the treatment, A.M.
testified that she felt coerced and pressured into the treatment.  This is in
contrast to her original statement to the police  where A.M. stated that she
agreed to the treatment because it helped so many women. She further told the police
that she has regretted her decision to consent to the treatment because it has
been so traumatic to think about.  A.M. also told police in her original
statement that she agreed to the treatment in 2013 because she felt that she
needed to try it.  At trial, when it was suggested to her that this was why she
agreed to the treatment, A.M. denied it.
[
26
] A.M. testified that at the time of the treatment, she felt
helpless and that she did not really have the opportunity to choose. She now
regrets not saying “no” to Mr. Morelli.
[
27
] A.M. also testified about how she felt during the treatment. A.M.
described her feelings as a dual narrative, on the one hand A.M. did not want
to do this and on the other hand, she should relax, and it is O.K. because he
knows what he is doing.  On the one hand she was just taking her doctor’s
advice and he felt certain about it , like he knew better than her. On the
other hand, she did not want the treatment.  At one point in her evidence, A.M.
stated that she leaned into the narrative that the treatment was medically necessary
as a way of normalizing the event which made it easier to tolerate the
treatment.
[
28
] In relation to this dual narrative, A.M. testified that on one
hand she knew internal treatments like this were a protected act that osteopaths
were not permitted to perform under provincial legislation, but on the other
hand Mr, Morelli advised that he did it all the time and that it was a good treatment. 
She also knew that it was taught at the college and that other practitioners
used this method of treatment.   A.M. testified that she assumed that Mr. Morelli
would not jeopardize his practice by doing something improper so she assumed it
must be ok.
(v) Subsequent treatments
[
29
] A.M. sought treatment from Mr Morelli on three occasions after March
15, 2013.   She saw him on April 15, 2013, September 19, 2013 and October 17,
2014.  A.M. testified at trial that she only continued to see Mr. Morelli as a
patient because she did not want to seem weird and wanted Mr. Morelli’s support
with her thesis.
[
30
] Some of A.M.’s email communications with Mr. Morelli leading up
to her post March 15, 2013 appointments were filed with the court.  On November 
21, 2013, A.M. wrote to Mr. Morelli asking for an appointment.  She wrote that
she wanted to see him before taking the “heart course” because she heard “it
was a good idea to get treated before and after”.  Mr. Morelli offered her a
number of appointment dates and A.M. responded “I will take the Sunday please.
I think it will be best to be treated at the end of the course.  Thank you so
much!!”.  This appointment was subsequently cancelled by A.M.
[
31
] On October 14, 2014, A.M. wrote to Mr. Morelli seeking an
appointment sometime between October 15 and October 20.  A.M. wrote that there
was no particular issue, she just wanted a check up.  She was in town for data
collection in relation to her thesis for only a few days and wanted to see Mr.
Morelli for a treatment.  Mr. Morelli treated her on October 17.  This was the
last appointment.
(vi) Evidence about the use of internal pelvic treatments.
[
32
] A.M. testified that she was well aware that the Osteopath
community conducted internal pelvic and internal anal treatments.  There was an
optional course students could take in their fifth year at the college
specifically on internal treatments.  When A.M. was in her fifth year, the
course had been cancelled.  A.M. was not sure of the reason why.
[
33
] A.M. further testified that she knew that internal exams were 
a “controlled act” and that Osteopaths were not authorized to engage in this
kind of treatment.  It was her personal opinion that osteopaths should not conduct
internal pelvic treatments.
[
34
] At the time of the allegations, Mr. Morelli was a well
respected and qualified osteopath in Toronto.  He had competed two years of
premed, five years of education at the Canadian College of Osteopathy and then
completed a thesis.  In total, he had nine years of training.   Included in his
training was a class called “gynecology” where he learned to conduct internal
treatments of the pelvic and related areas.   As part of the training, students
performed the treatment in class on each other.
[
35
] Mr. Morelli testified that he was aware at the time that
Osteopaths were not a regulated health care profession and as such were not
permitted to conduct this kind of treatment.  Nonetheless, it was taught in
school and the osteopath community believed that they were entitled to do this
treatment as they had been engaging in this technique for well over 100 years. 
Mr. Morelli testified that it was his belief that Osteopaths would be  grandfathered
in to do this kind of treatment.  At one point In time the osteopath community was
lobbying to be permitted to do it.  He believed that once they were formally
regulated it would be permitted.   It was his view that his medical opinion
about the treatment superseded the prohibition.   In 2015, the osteopathy
community decided to stop seeking regulation and encouraged practitioners at
that point to stop doing internal treatments.
General Legal Principles
[
36
] The starting point in understanding any decision in a criminal
court is understanding the burden of proof.  The burden lies on the Crown to
prove each essential element of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt.  This is
a high standard.   Reasonable doubt is based upon reason and common sense.  It
is logically connected to the evidence or the lack of evidence. It is not
enough for me to believe that Mr. Morelli is possibly or even probably guilty. 
Reasonable doubt requires more.  As a standard, reasonable doubt lies far
closer to absolute certainty than it does to a balance of probabilities.   In
order to convict, a trial judge must be sure that every essential element of
the offence has been made out.
[
37
] In many criminal trials, judges are called upon to make
assessments of both credibility and reliability.  Credibility relates to the
veracity of the witness while reliability focuses on the ability of the witness
to accurately recall events.   In assessing a witness’s credibility and/or reliability,
judges may consider the presence or absence of inconsistencies in a witnesses’
evidence, whether the witness was evasive as well as other factors that may
arise in any given trial. What weight a trial judge will place on an inconsistency
will depend on the nature of the inconsistency.   Moreover, when considering evidence
at trial, it Is not an all or none proposition.  Trial judges may accept some,
none or all of a witnesses’ evidence.
Legal Principles – The Offence of Sexual Assault
[
38
] The offence of sexual assault must be considered in the context
in which the offence was created.   McLachlin C.J. wrote in
R. v. J.A.
2011 SCC 28 (CanLII)
, [2011]
S.C.J. No. 28 “It is a fundamental principle of Canadian law that a person is
entitled to refuse sexual contact.”  Major J., speaking for the majority of the
court in
R. v. Ewanchuck
1999 CanLII 711 (SCC)
, [1999] S.C.J. No. 10 stated at paragraph
28
,
…Society is committed to protecting the personal integrity, both
physical and psychological, of every individual.  Having control over who
touches one’s body, and how, lies at the core of human dignity and autonomy. 
The inclusion of assault and sexual assault in the Code expresses society’s
determination to protect the security of the person from any non-consensual
contact or threats of force.  The common law has recognized for centuries that
the individual’s right to physical integrity is a fundamental principle, “every
mans’ person being sacred, and no other having a right to meddle with it in any
the slightest manner”: See Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of England (4
th
ed. 1770). Book III, at p. 120.  It follows that any intentional but unwanted
touching is criminal.
[
39
]  With this backdrop in mind, the
actus reus
of a sexual
assault is made out where the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that:
the defendant touched someone; where the contact was sexual in nature; and, the
person did not consent.   The presence of absence of consent is subjective to
the complainant.  The defendant’s state of mind or intention is irrelevant at
this stage.
[
40
] The
mens rea
for sexual assault is made out where the
Crown proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant intended to touch the
complainant in a sexual manner and knew, or was reckless or willfully blind to
the complainant’s lack of consent.   Once the
actus reus
is established,
the defendant can only rely on his lack of knowledge about the absence of
consent if the defendant took reasonable steps to confirm that the victim was
consenting.   Moreover, the defence of mistaken belief in communicated consent
cannot be raised where any consent obtained has been vitiated by
section
273.1(2)
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
41
] Applying this standard to the case at bar, the Crown must prove
the following:
a)
That A.M. was touched by Mr. Morelli;
b)
The touching was of a sexual nature;
c)
That A.M. did not consent to the touching;
d)
That Mr. Morelli intended to touch A.M.
e)
That Mr. Morelli knew that A.M. did not consent or
was reckless or willfully blind to her lack of consent and that he took
reasonable steps to confirm that A.M. was consenting and that consent was not
vitiated pursuant to
section 273.1(2)
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
42
] In the case at bar, everyone agrees that Mr. Morelli touched
A.M. during the course of an osteopathic treatment that involved touching A.M.’s
vaginal area and inserting his fingers inside her vagina.  The main issues at trial
relate to whether the touching was of a sexual nature and the whether A.M.
consented to the touching.
Was the touching of a sexual nature?
[
43
] On the issue of whether the treatment at issue amounts to
conduct of a sexual nature, Crown counsel argued that the body part touched is
determinative.  As Mr. Morelli inserted his fingers into A.M.’s vagina to work
on the internal muscles, any objective person would conclude that this
implicated A.M.’s sexual integrity.
[
44
] Counsel for Mr. Morelli argued that given the therapeutic
context, the absence of expert evidence that the treatment was not reasonable
and the fact that Mr. Morelli acted clinically throughout the treatment raises
a reasonable doubt about the sexual nature of the touching.  The context was
clinical and not sexual and as such I should be left in a reasonable doubt
about whether the conduct in issue was sexual in nature.
Relevant Legal Principles
[
45
]
The leading case on whether the alleged conduct was sexual in nature is
R.
v. Chase
(1987)
,
1987 CanLII 23 (SCC)
, 37 C.C.C. (3d) 97 (S.C.C.)
.
In that case,
the court held a sexual assault is committed where  assaultive conduct is sexual
nature such that the sexual integrity of the victim is violated.  In assessing
whether or not the touching was of a sexual nature, McIntyre J. in
R. v. Chase
, supra,
held that the “test
to be applied in determining whether the impugned conduct has the requisite
sexual nature is an objective one”.  In determining this issue, the court may
consider “the part of the body touched, the nature of the contact, the
situation in which it occurred, the words and gestures accompanying the act,
and all other circumstances surrounding the conduct”. McIntyre J. further held
that the actor need not have committed the offence for a sexual gratification
for the offence to be made out.
[
46
]
When looking at the test articulated in
R. v. Chase
, it is important to
be mindful of the context in which this decision was made.  It involved an
appeal from a finding by the Court of Appeal that the modifier “sexual”
referred only to the body part touched, particularly the genitalia.   In that
case, since the body part touched was not the genitalia, the appellate court overturned
the conviction and entered an acquittal.  It is in this context that the Supreme
Court of Canada rejected the notion that the modifier “sexual” referred only to
the body part touched and elected to have a broader interpretation of the word 
so as to recognize that a touching not involving one’s genitalia can still be sexual
in nature.  In my view, the decision in
R. v. Chase
does not preclude a
court  from finding that in some circumstances the body part touched will be
the most important factor and may very well be determinative.  In my view, it
is open for a trial judge to infer that the touching is of a sexual nature that
impacted the sexual integrity of the victim solely because the body part
touched was the genitalia of the victim particularly where the context of the
touching does not provide an alternative explanation.  In other words, absent
other evidence, in many cases where the body part touched is a person’s genitalia,
the only reasonable inference will be that the touching was sexual in nature.
[
47
]
The case law consistently states that context is important in assessing whether
the conduct was of a sexual nature where the alleged touching takes place in
the medical or therapeutic context.  In
R. v. Clottey,
2018 ONCJ 536
, a
medical doctor was charged with sexually assaulting his patient.  Citing many
authorities, the Court held that doctor-patient sexual assault cases require a
strong consideration of the context in which the touching takes place as
opposed to a focus largely on the location where the victim was touched.  The
court held that this is because “there can be legitimate medical reasons for a
practitioner to examine a patient’s sexual organ”  (
R. v. Clottey
, supra, at
para
489
).  The court went on to note that where there is a valid medical purpose
for examining the breast or genital area, in order to find that the act is
“sexual in nature”, the touching must have been sexual as opposed to medical in
nature or as the trial judge stated, “the touching must have been used to
sexualize the interaction” (
R. v. Clottey
at para
490
).  In assessing
this issue, a question that must be considered is whether the physician
honestly believed that the examination in question as  performed by the
physician was clinically justified. The court stated at paragraphs 494 and 495
[494]
As
Justice Epstein stated recently for the Ontario Court of Appeal in a successful
appeal from conviction of Dr. Daniel Marshall for sexual assault based on a
single historic genital examination of an adolescent boy, it is relevant to
consider whether the accused physician
honestly believed
that the
examination in question was
clinically justified
.  In that case, not
only did the accused physician hold an honest, subjective belief as to the
medical purpose for the genital exam, but also, that belief was medically
objectively supportable.
[495]
If the
practitioner’s honest belief as to whether the examination would or could be
clinically useful was
not
relevant, physicians could be held
criminally liable simply for honest errors in judgment as to whether an
examination was actually necessary, irrespective of their
bona fide
intentions.
 This would subject physicians to an impossibly high standard. Even in
civil negligence law, physicians are not liable for such errors.
[
48
] Ultimately in
R. v. Clottey
, the court held that where
“there was a legitimate medical rationale for the examination, and the examination
was not performed in a sexual fashion, there can be no finding of a sexual
assault” (
R. v. Clottey
, supra,
at para
501
).
[
49
]
Similar applications of the law have been made in cases where the practitioner
was not a medical doctor, but where the therapy involved was still considered
to be a legitimate form of treatment.  For example, in
R. v. S.L
.
2020
ONSC 4036
the accused was a practitioner of Traditional Chinese Medicine.  It
was alleged that he sexually assaulted one of his patients when he performed a
treatment that involved placing his fingers in her vagina.  While the act
involved was a controlled act that those practicing Chinese Traditional Medicine
are not approved to do, the court still found S.L. not guilty on the basis that
the Crown had not established that the treatment was not legitimate and because
S.L. did not know of the statutory prohibition.
[
50
] In
R. v. Findlay,
2021 ONSC 5661
, a registered massage therapist
was charged with sexually assaulting a client during a massage . While not  a
medical practitioner, the court held that the touching occurred in a clinical/therapeutic
context which was relevant to whether the touching was sexual in nature.  The
Court in
Findlay
summarized the relevant legal
principles as follows:
344
In a recent Court of Appeal
decision,
R. v. Trachy
,
2019 ONCA 622
, Benotto, J.A. wrote the following about the offence of
sexual assault principles which are relevant to this case:
73 The objective test requires the
court to look to all the circumstances surrounding the conduct to determine on
an objective basis whether it was of a sexual nature and violated the sexual
integrity of the complainant:
R. v. Litchfield
. While
the intent or motive of the accused may be a factor in considering whether the
conduct was sexual in nature,
the Supreme Court
in
Chase
went
on to state, at p. 302:
It must be emphasized, however, that
the existence of such a motive is simply one of many factors to be considered,
the importance of which will vary depending on the circumstances.
74 The mental element in sexual
assault and indecent assault is the intention to touch. Proof of sexual purpose
is not required because the "factors which could motivate sexual assault
are said to be many and varied . . . To put upon the Crown the burden of
proving a specific intent would go a long way toward defeating the obvious
purpose of the enactment", which is to protect the sexual integrity of all
persons:
Chase
, at
pp. 302-303. As the Supreme Court
stated in
R. v.
Ewanchuk
,
at para.
28
:
Society
is committed to protecting the personal integrity, both physical and
psychological, of every individual. Having control over who touches one's body,
and how, lies at the core of human dignity and autonomy . . . It follows that
any intentional but unwanted touching is criminal.
...
81 ... There was no analysis with
respect to the sexual integrity of the complainants and whether that integrity
was violated by the respondent's touching of their breasts. The trial judge did
not address the position of trust between the child-students and their teacher.
He did not address the sexual nature of the touching.
...
84 As
Lutoslawski
makes
clear, the sexual nature of the touching is determined by an objective standard.
The question is whether a reasonable observer would perceive a sexual or carnal
context to the touching in light of all the circumstances. [Citations omitted].
345
In considering all of the
circumstances to decide if the touching was of a sexual nature in a medical or
clinical setting, the court must consider the difference between conduct that
might suggest professional incompetence or conduct that does not meet
professional standards and conduct that must meet a criminal standard to be a
crime.
[
51
] It is important to be mindful that even where the touching is
for a clinical purpose a patient may still feel violated where in their mind
the procedure involved is unnecessary.  As De Sa J. stated in
R. v.
R.K.
2018 ONSC 2590
, “I have no doubt
that the complainants perceived the touching as “sexual”, and that they did not
consent to “sexual” touching. However, their perception of the nature of the
touching may have been largely influenced by their expectations at that time….The
unexpected touching was disturbing to both of the complainants.  However, this
perception is not sufficient to satisfy me that the “touching” was of a sexual
nature”. (
R. v. R.K.
, supra,
at para
102
).
[
52
] In assessing whether the touching was part of a reasonable
medical or therapeutic examination or treatment, many of the cases I have
reviewed included expert evidence on the appropriateness of the procedure.  To
that end, in
R. v.  R.K.
,
supra,
where a dermatologist touched his
patient’s breasts during an examination, De Sa J. wrote that medical evidence
will often be required.  He stated,  “ Whether the examination is a reasonable medical
approach to the issue will factor into the analysis of whether the touching can
be characterized as sexual at all.  Medical evidence may be critical to this
assessment” (
R. v. R.K.
, supra,
at para
91
).
Application to the facts in this case
[
53
] In the case at bar, I accept Mr. Morelli’s evidence that when
he treated A.M. on March 15, 2013, he was engaging in what he believed to a legitimate
clinical treatment.  I found Mr. Morelli to be an honest and reliable witness. 
He was consistent about his practice, policies and memories of events.  He was
not moved at all in cross-examination and answered all questions posed in a
very straightforward manner.   I accept his evidence in its entirety.  I accept
that Mr. Morelli did not try to sell his patients on particular treatments or
pressure them into a treatment. I accept that he listened to the symptoms
identified by his patients, conducted an assessment and recommended a course of
action.   I am mindful that at times Mr. Morelli’s evidence differs from A.M.’s
evidence.  For example, A.M. testified that she never actually consented to the
treatment, but instead she silently acquiesced to it.  Mr. Morelli testified,
however, that in relation to this kind of treatment it was his practice to ask
the patient if they were comfortable with going ahead and only proceed with
their consent.  I accept that while Mr. Morelli could not recall this
particular patient that as per his testimony, he would not have deviated from
his general practice and did confirm that she was consenting to the treatment.
[
54
] With this in mind, I find that Mr. Morelli approached the
treatment of A.M. in a purely clinical and therapeutic  fashion and that nothing
occurred during the treatment to sexualize the interaction.  I note that Mr.
Morelli explained the procedure to A.M., he left the room while she undressed, he
told A.M. at the time why he thought it was necessary to conduct the treatment,
he described what he was doing as he was doing it in a clinical fashion and explained
at trial why he thought the treatment was necessary.  I am mindful that A.M. testified
that in her mind Mr. Morelli seemed to treat the process as a “work of art”.  When
I consider A.M.’s evidence about why she formed this opinion, I am unable to
find that it accurately portrays Mr. Morelli’s state  of mind at the time of
the treatment.  The only behaviour A.M. identified to explain this opinion was that
at times Mr. Morelli’s eyes were closed and he did not look at her face at all
during the treatment.  Mr. Morelli testified that he did close his eyes while
doing internal work.  This is because he was focused on what he was feeling as
he administered the treatment. Since the treatment was touch based, I find that
Mr. Morelli choosing to close his eyes as he treated A.M. and his failure to
look at A.M. in the face is completely reasonable. Mr. Morelli testified that
while his eyes were closed, he did talk to his patients advising them what he
was feeling and doing.  A.M.’s evidence is consistent with this.
[
55
] I am also mindful that A.M. testified that in her opinion the
treatment was not necessary; but this is not test.  The issue is whether it was
a legitimate treatment that was reasonable in the circumstances.  I am satisfied
that the evidence establishes that A.M. had expressed the types of symptoms
where internal pelvic treatment was recognized at the time as being a helpful
treatment. While A.M. could not recall the details of all her symptoms and was
of the view that her symptoms were not acute, she did admit to having some of
the symptoms that support Mr. Morelli’s conclusion that an internal pelvic
treatment was appropriate.  I accept Mr. Morelli’s evidence that he made a
clinical decision based on the information received, his training and his
experience. Moreover, I note that I have no expert evidence indicating that the
treatment was not consistent with osteopathic treatments at the time.   Given
the evidence before me, had Mr. Morelli been identified as a registered health
professional, I would have no difficulty finding that the Crown has failed to
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the conduct involved when Mr. Morelli
treated A.M. on March 15, 2013 was sexual in nature.
[
56
] This case, however, presents an additional complication.  This
is because at the time of the offence, osteopaths were not permitted to conduct
the kind of examination performed by Mr. Morelli.  The
Regulated Health Professions
Act
states that no person “shall perform a ‘controlled act’ in the course
of providing health care services to an individual unless the person is a
member authorized by the
Health Profession Act
to perform the controlled
act’”.  A controlled act is defined as “putting an instrument, hand or finger
beyond the labia majora”.  Crown counsel argued that because osteopaths are not
authorized by the
Regulated Health Professions Act
to perform controlled
acts, I must find that Mr. Morelli acted outside what is a reasonable treatment
and as such, the treatment must be viewed as being sexual in nature. Respectfully,
I disagree.
[
57
] In
R. v. S.L
.,
supra,
the accused practiced Traditional
Chinese Medicine and admitted to conducting a vaginal exam of his client.  In
finding that even though persons practicing Traditional Chinese Medicine are
not authorized to perform controlled acts, the court held that “the breach of
regulatory provision does not amount to a criminal act” (
R. v. S.L.
, supra,
at
para
131
).  Lemon J., in
R. v. S.L.
, supra,
noted that there was no
evidence that S.L. knew that he was not authorized to conduct this type of
treatment.  As such, at its highest, he inadvertently engaged in a treatment
that was contrary to provincial regulation.
[
58
] In the case at bar, Mr. Morelli testified that it was common
practice in 2013 for osteopaths to perform internal pelvic and anal
treatments.  While he knew it was a ‘controlled act’ and that osteopaths were
not identified as a regulated profession, in his mind he thought they would be
grandfathered in to conduct these procedures  once they became regulated.  This
is because  osteopaths have performed this kind of treatment for years and at
the time the osteopathic community was lobbying to become a regulated health
profession.  Moreover, there was even a course at the Canadian College of
Osteopaths that taught students how to perform internal pelvic treatments and
Mr. Morelli had been trained at the college to perform this kind of treatment.  
While A.M. personally believed that osteopaths should not perform this type of
treatment, this was a personal belief as opposed to the profession’s standard.
[
59
] I appreciate that this case differs from
R. v. S.L
.,
supra,
in that Mr. Morelli, unlike S.L., knew osteopaths were not a regulated profession
and as such not authorized to perform controlled acts.  In my view, Mr.
Morelli’s non-compliance of a provincial statute, while a relevant factor in
assessing if the treatment was reasonable in the circumstances, it is not
determinative.   In the case at bar, there was uncontradicted evidence before
me that in 2013 osteopaths were conducting internal pelvic treatments.  Mr.
Morelli testified that it was a recognized treatment within his profession and 
A.M. confirmed that there had been a course at her college specifically on
internal pelvic exams.  Mr. Morelli was a trained osteopath and was trained in
the area of internal pelvic treatments.  Mr. Morelli testified that he believed
that osteopaths would become a registered health profession and that they would
be grandfathered into the provision since the practice had existed long before
the enactment of the
Regulated Health Professions Act
.  In my view, when
I look at the case in its totality, while the fact that he was not permitted by
statute to perform this treatment is one factor to consider, the remainder of
the evidence presented at trial all supports a finding that Mr. Morelli was
engaging in a treatment that was recognized by the profession, that was reasonable
in the circumstances and one that Mr. Morelli honestly and legitimately
believed was the appropriate treatment.  Moreover, in my view, Mr. Morelli
conducted the treatment in a purely clinical fashion.  I am therefore left in a
reasonable  doubt that the conduct that makes up the
actus reus
of the
offence was sexual in nature. Mr. Morelli is therefore not guilty of the
offence of sexual assault.
[
60
] Crown counsel made extensive arguments about the application of
consent pursuant to
section 273(2)
of the
Criminal Code
.
Given my
finding that the conduct in question is not sexual in nature I need not address
these issues.
Assault
[
61
] Having found Mr. Morelli not guilty of sexual assault, I must
still determine if the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Morelli
committed the lesser included offence of common assault.    An assault is
committed where the accused touches a victim without her consent.  Crown
counsel argued that since A.M. did not consent an assault is still made out in
law.
[
62
] In assessing whether A.M. consented, I must remind myself that
a patient is in a position of vulnerability when in the care of a health
professional.  This vulnerable position is important when assessing if the
consent involved in this case was voluntary.
[
63
] At trial, A.M. testified about her mental state at the time of
the treatment in March 2013.  During the trial,  A.M. testified that on the one
hand, she trusted Mr. Morelli as a well-respected osteopath, he strongly
encouraged the treatment, he sounded authoritative about it and she accepted
that the treatment was necessary.  A.M. also wanted Mr. Morelli’s approval and
was afraid that he would think poorly of her as a student if she did not agree
to the treatment and she wanted his assistance with her studies.  On the flip
side, A.M. believed that osteopaths should not perform internal pelvic
treatments, she did not personally think her symptoms warranted such an invasive
treatment, she was not comfortable with this kind of treatment and felt
pressured into it.   At trial, it was clear to me that A.M. truly believes
today that she did not consent. Years later, A.M. now looks back at this event and
feels that in the moment she was pressured into having the treatment and had
Mr. Morelli been less authoritative, or given her more time to consider her
options she would  have said no.    Crown counsel urged me to find that this
dual narrative was how A.M. managed to get through a distressing event. She
attempted to normalize the assault by convicting herself that the treatment was
proper.  In light of this, Crown counsel argued that I should not view the dual
narrative as evidence of consent.
[
64
] I generally found A.M. to be an honest witness doing her best
to describe her state of mind back in 2013 about an event that has clearly been
distressing to her for some time.  There is one area of her evidence, however,
that I do not accept and do not find credible.  At one point, A.M. testified
that she agreed to the treatment because Mr. Morelli was standing between her
and the door. The implication being that she could not physically leave.  I
reject that Mr. Morelli did anything to physically force A.M. into the
treatment.  Firstly, A.M. had ample opportunity to leave. Mr. Morelli left her
alone in the room to change prior to the treatment starting. Secondly, A.M.’s
evidence about her dual narrative at no point included concerns about being
forcibly confined and thirdly, Mr. Morelli  denied blocking the doorway  and I
accept his evidence on this point.  Mr. Morelli described the set up of his
treatment room and was not challenged on his description.
[
65
] While I accept that A.M. was doing her best to be truthful when
she testified, there were a number of inconsistencies between A.M.’s evidence
at trial, her statement to police and other evidence that I do accept that causes
me to have some doubt about the reliability of her present recollection about
why she acquiesced to the treatment. Firstly, A.M. originally testified that
she was not suffering from any meaningful symptoms and definitely was not
suffering from symptoms that were pelvic related.  At trial, when questioned
about the symptoms Mr. Morelli recorded in her patient file, A.M. agreed that
she did have hormone complaints, an issue with a lump in her breast and
digestive issues, all of which can be linked to pelvic issues. Secondly, A.M.
told police that she agreed to the treatment in part because she knew it had
helped other women.  She also told police that she agreed to the treatment in
part because she felt that she needed to try it.  At trial, A.M. denied this.
Thirdly, when questioned about why she continued to seek treatment from Mr. Morelli
after March 15, 2013, A.M. testified that she only did this because she was
worried it would look weird if she abruptly stopped treatment.  A.M.’s
communications with Mr. Morelli’s office contradict this.  Reading the emails I
find that A.M. actively sought out Mr. Morelli for treatment.  Moreover, she
cancelled a treatment in late 2013 without any issue.  This was a clear
opportunity for a clean break from Mr. Morelli, yet in 2014, A.M. actively
sought out Mr. Morelli for a treatment even though she was only in town for a
few days.  In my view, A.M.’s memory as it relates to her treatment and engagement
with Mr. Morelli is not completely reliable.
[
66
] I accept that A.M. was significantly impacted by this treatment
and that she truly believes that she was pressured into a treatment she did not
want.  The emotional toll this has taken on A.M. is obvious.  Having said that,
when I consider all the evidence, I am left in a doubt about what was really
going through A.M.’s mind at the time the treatment took place.
[
67
] Regardless of whether or not A.M. truly consented to the
treatment, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Morelli had an
honestly held belief that A.M. consented to the treatment and that his belief
is objectively reasonable.
[
68
] First of all,
as previously stated, I found
Mr. Morelli to be an honest and reliable witness and I accept his evidence. I
accept Mr. Morelli’s evidence that he would not have proceeded without A.M.’s
actual consent to the treatment and that at the time A.M. verbally agreed to
the treatment.  Mr. Morelli testified that in relation to this kind of
treatment it was his practice to ask the patient if they were comfortable with
going ahead.  I accept that while Mr. Morelli could not recall this particular
patient that as per his testimony, he would not have deviated from his general
practice.
[
69
] I am mindful that A.M. asked some questions about the necessity
of the procedure. A.M. testified that this was her way of showing hesitancy in
relation to the treatment.  When I consider all the evidence, I am not
satisfied that Mr. Morelli would have or should have understood that the
questions posed suggested hesitancy.  In my view, the questions A.M. posed were
the kind of questions any patient might pose to better understand the course of
treatment being proposed.  I accept Mr. Morelli’s evidence that he did not
pressure A.M. into the treatment and that he did not try to “sell it” to her.  I
am satisfied that Mr. Morelli had an honestly held belief that A.M. was consenting,
and his belief is objectively reasonable.  I therefore find that the Crown has
not proven beyond a reasonable doubt the lesser included offence of assault.
Released February 27, 2025                                             _____________________
Justice
Mara Greene