Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj658/2025oncj658.html

ONTARIO
COURT
OF
JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Bello Reyes
, 2025 ONCJ 658
DATE:
2025
12
4
COURT
FILE
No.:
998-25-
12100626
B
E
T
W
E
E
N
:
HIS MAJESTY
THE
KING
—
AND
—
LUIS
BELLO REYES
&
AMIR
HABIBZAI
Before
Justice
Pardeep
Bhachu
Heard
on November 26, 2025
Reasons
for
Judgment
released
on
December
4,
2025
N.
Lamphier
.......................................................................................... counsel
for
the
Crown
S.
Stauffer
.......................................................... counsel
for
the
accused
Luis
Bello
Reys
H.
Bassi
.................................................................. counsel
for
the
accused
Amir
Habibzai
BHACHU J.:
OVERVIEW:
[
1
]
One of the most vital assets
anyone living in Canada owns in current times is their vehicle. We use our
vehicles to accomplish daily tasks such as groceries, going to the bank or
going to appointments. The fact is, owning a vehicle is necessary and relied upon
by almost everyone. After a house, a vehicle is the next biggest purchase one
can make. Many purchase vehicles for every day use, others purchase vehicles as
a hobby, many purchase vehicles only after they are able to save enough money
to make such a purchase.
[
2
]
Imagine going to your car to start
your day and your vehicle is gone from your driveway sometime overnight,
imagine having to attend a doctor’s appointment made well in advance but you
have no means to get there now because your vehicle was taken by a thief.
Imagine going on vacation or attending a child’s tournament and parking your
vehicle at a hotel only to find out sometime in the night hours, your vehicle
is taken leaving you stranded and then trying to deal with the authorities and
insurance in the aftermath. Unfortunately, these are not imaginary scenarios
but ones that many Canadians are facing on a daily basis. One only needs to
turn to the repeated headlines in the news of vehicles being stolen and
offloaded to various ports in Canada and shipped overseas for profit. Closer to
our local community, sadly one doesn’t have to travel far to hear about vehicles
being stolen from neighbourhoods, retail outlets and hotel parking lots from
neighbours, family and friends.
[
3
]
My colleagues not only locally,
and across the province, but also across the country have written extensively
about the prevalence of auto-thefts and called the problem an epidemic. I agree
with this characterization. The statistics related to auto- thefts demonstrates
a crisis in Ontario. The Insurance Bureau of Canada outlines that auto theft
claims costs increased by 524% between 2018 and 2023. The Insurance Bureau of
Canada also indicates that auto theft losses amounted to over $1.5 billion in
2023. Statistics also point to cities within Halton region being targeted for
auto-thefts specifically Oakville where auto theft claim costs have risen by
513% from 2018 to 2023. Milton is listed in the top 10 Ontario cities that have
seen an increase in auto theft claim costs in the same period of 1010%. These
numbers are astronomical and hard to comprehend.
[
4
]
In Ontario, law enforcement and
prosecution agencies have responded to the call to stop the upward trend of
these offences. It is encouraging that the Insurance bureau of Canada has released
new data indicating that the theft frequency dropped slightly in the first 6
months of 2024 however the frequency still remains above historical trends.
[
5
]
The Courts dealing with these
offences have also responded in turn. The message is clear as one looks to the
cases and sentences that judges are imposing across the province and the
country. Higher penalties are being imposed to send the message to those
engaged in this activity currently or to like-minded individuals that may want
to become involved in an auto-theft ring, this conduct will not be tolerated
and that the theft of automobiles is taken seriously.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND:
[
6
]
Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai
entered pleas of guilt to ten counts including offences of possession of stolen
property, theft of motor vehicles, and breach of release orders. Upon entering
a plea, a Pre-Sentence Report (hereafter “PSR”) was ordered for both
individuals.
[
7
]
I will briefly outline the facts
for the plea. There was an Agreed Statement of Fact filed consisting of 80
pages. This was marked as an exhibit on the plea.
[
8
]
In October 2024, Halton Regional
Police Service commenced an investigation in response to a large number of
motor vehicle thefts from hotels in Burlington and Oakville, ON. The involved
suspect vehicle was consistently described as a dark jeep Grand Cherokee.
[
9
]
On January 6, 2025 the Jeep was
located in the rear parking lot at 580 The East Mall in Etobicoke. It was
determined that the VIN number on the Jeep was on file as stolen on October 11,
2024 from Peel Region. The plate attached to the Jeep was a fictitious plate. A
tracking device was subsequently installed on the Jeep.
[
10
]
Surveillance was conducted by the
police and it was determined that Mr. Bello Reyes was the primary driver of the
Jeep. Police were able to confirm that Mr. Bello Reyes had been working with
Mr. Habibzai and a third individual named Mr. Ari in connection with 13 vehicle
thefts from hotels in Halton, Peel and Toronto. All vehicles that were stolen
were valued at over $5,000.00.
[
11
]
The Modis operandi of the group involved the 3
individuals meeting at the Shoppers Drug Mart located at 600 the East Mall,
Etobicoke where Mr. Habibzai would park his 2023 Black BMW 730i or his 2021
Black Audi and Mr. Ari would park his father’s 2007 Red Mazda 3. All three
parties would enter into the Jeep and then proceed to canvass hotels for
vehicles to steal. When a prospective vehicle was located, the Jeep, according
to the tracking data, would become stationary for approximately 25-35 minutes
while the theft was occurring. The rear passenger window of the target vehicle
would be smashed to gain entry and the accused persons would start to reprogram
the targeted vehicle.
[
12
]
Once reprogrammed, the stolen
vehicle would be taken to a location to discard property and disable the GPS of
the stolen vehicle. In the case at bar the two locations vehicles would be
taken to included the Mississauga Golf & Country Club at 1725 Mississauga
Road and the parking lot of 165 Galaxy Boulevard in Etobicoke. From that point
the vehicles would be taken to a different location to “cool off”.
[
13
]
On February 20, 2025 investigators
executed search warrants for Mr. Bello Reyes’, Mr. Habibzai’s and Mr. Ari’s
residences and vehicles. In relation to Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai items
such as cell phones, re-programming kits, clothing, key/remote programmers,
glass breakers, break and enter tools, portable jump starters and cash were
located.
[
14
]
At the time of the commission of
these offences, Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai were bound by a release order
with a condition to not communicate with each other directly or indirectly. It
became clear through surveillance and phone downloads that Mr. Bello Reyes and
Mr. Habibzai had repeated contact with each other therefore breaching the
release orders. As a result of the investigation, Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr.
Habibzai were arrested and remain in custody since the date of their arrests.
POSITIONS ON SENTENCE:
[
15
]
Counsel presented a joint position
on sentence for Mr. Bello Reyes. With respect to Mr. Habibzai, although the
quantum of custody was joint, counsel for Mr. Habibzai argued that I should
attribute custody past the statutory 1.5 enhancement for every day served for
the days that Mr. Habibzai spent on lockdown and while being triple-bunked.
Pre-sentence custody at the date of the submissions on sentencing was 280 days.
As of the date of my sentence ruling, I calculate pre-sentence custody to be
288 real days. Applying the statutory
Summers
credit, both individuals
will have served 432 days enhanced as pre-sentence custody.
Mr. Bello Reyes:
[
16
]
Crown and counsel for Mr. Bello
Reyes jointly suggest a sentence of just over 3 years in the penitentiary with
a sentence going forward of 2 years plus 1 day. Taking into account the PSC and
enhancement to be credited, the specific sentence will be a sentence of 3 years
and 5.3 months or 1,291 days less PSC for Mr. Bello Reyes. Counsel provided
lockdown records from Maplehurst Correctional Complex. Counsel jointly indicate
that an additional .5 day should be granted as credit for the 256 days that Mr.
Bello Reyes was triple bunked. By my calculation that would attribute 128
further days of PSC credit for Mr. Bello Reyes. Total PSC for Mr. Bello Reyes
would then be 560 days PSC with enhanced credit. This would then mean from the
date of sentence being imposed Mr. Bello Reyes would serve a further 731 days
(or 2 years plus 1 day) going forward from today’s date.
Mr. Habibzai:
[
17
]
Crown and counsel for Mr. Habibzai proposed a joint
position of 2.5 years custody. Mr. Habibzai also has 432 days enhanced at the
Summers
statutory allowance of 1:1.5 which he will be credited. Records from
Maplehurst Correctional Complex were provided in support of counsels’ request
to attribute 2.5 days for each real day spent in custody. The Crown suggests .5
day should be granted for the 262 days that were spent triple bunked and to
account for the conditions of the institution including days on lockdown.
VICTIM IMPACT
[
18
]
Victim impact statements were
prepared by three of the victims of the auto thefts in this case: William
Sparks, Rita Smith and Cheryl Healey. All three victims describe not only what
their vehicles meant to them on a practical level but also the effect they felt
to their sense of safety and security as a result of the crimes committed. In
my view, Mr. Sparks accurately states the impact on victims of auto theft in
his VIS. I reproduce the following from his statement:
This experience has left us feeling violated, unsafe,
and deeply unsettled. It is something we continue to carry with us every day.
The individuals responsible did not just steal a vehicle – they took from us
our sense of peace, security, and the treasured memories tied to the personal
items that were inside
.
[
19
]
Rita Smith outlined that the
vehicle stolen from her was purchased with her inheritance she received from her
parents. She wrote:
My parents immigrated to this country, worked hard all
their lives to provide a better life for their children. They never asked or
received handouts. This has tarnished the joy from the fruits of their labour
and that is unforgiveable. There is no excuse for the damage that has been
done.
[
20
]
Cheryl Healey was leaving on a vacation and parked her
vehicle at a hotel overnight. She detailed the steps she had to take not only
in trying to track her vehicle until the air tag was disabled in the vehicle,
but the aftermath including finding her vehicle completely demolished and the
stress of dealing with her insurance company afterwards. Cheryl Healey
described that she and her husband saved up for their vehicle. In her VIS she
writes
This car was our prize possession. My husband had
dreamed about owning a Hellcat for the past ten years….To purchase this car, we
curtailed frivolous purchases…eating out…and worked many hours overtime to save
enough money. This was our only way to justify this vehicle purchase. It was
our pride and joy.
[
21
]
Suffice to say, the impact of
these crimes will be felt by the victims much beyond the dates of the offences
and I wish to thank these individuals for providing us their stories and
talking about how these offences have real victims that suffer real
consequences. Auto-thefts are not victimless crimes.
PERSONAL CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENDERS
[
22
]
PSRs were ordered for both Mr.
Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai. In addition, Mr. Bello Reyes filed an affidavit
while Mr. Habibzai testified at the sentencing hearing
viva voce
.
Mr. Bello Reyes:
[
23
]
The PSR provides a more fulsome
background of Mr. Bello Reyes. Mr. Bello Reyes is 30 years old and has no
criminal record. Mr. Bello Reyes’ upbringing was tumultuous growing up
witnessing a toxic relationship between his biological parents. He has a
5-year-old son. The mother of his child with whom he’s had an on again off
again relationship dealt with her own issues related to drug use that impacted
their relationship. Sadly, Mr Bello Reyes also had to deal with his son being
diagnosed with cancer in February of 2024. Mr. Bello Reyes rationalized his
criminal behaviour because of the personal circumstances he was dealing with
including his son’s health and financial pressures to support his family. Mr.
Bello Reyes took responsibility for his actions and acknowledged his actions
were horrible. He also expressed remorse for the crimes he committed and
acknowledge the impact of his actions on the victims. I note in court Mr. Bello
Reyes echoed his remorse and emphasized that his actions hurt innocent victims.
[
24
]
Mr. Bello Reyes also submitted an
affidavit in which he outlined the conditions he was subjected to while in
custody. These conditions included being triple bunked, subject to frequent
lockdowns, and the violence around him. Notwithstanding the negative aspects of
custody, Mr. Bello Reyes completed a number of programs for which certificates
of completion were provided and made exhibits. This demonstrates that Mr. Bello
Reyes has some insight into his behaviour and realizes there are areas that he
needs to address and changes that need to be made to his lifestyle. Mr. Bello
Reyes also enjoys the strong support of his family and friends.
Mr. Habibzai:
[
25
]
Mr. Habibzai is 21 years old. He
does not have a criminal record. The PSR provided background information that I
have considered. Mr. Habibzai was physically abused by his father and watched
his mother being abused at the hands of his father while growing up. At an
early age he lived in a war zone in Afghanistan and recalls hearing bombs,
sirens and witnessing human carnage on the streets. When he was 5 years old his
parents left Afghanistan and moved to Canada in 2017.
[
26
]
Mr. Habibzai completed his GED and
worked for 2 years to save money so that he could attend college to study in an
electrician program. While he did work when he was at school, he was laid off
and was not gainfully employed since then.
[
27
]
In the PSR, when asked about the offences, Mr.
Habibzai minimized his involvement in the crimes he committed. He justified his
actions as a response to being pressured to help his mother financially coupled
with being unable to secure employment. By his own admission his involvement in
the offences was a poor decision.
[
28
]
Mr. Habibzai took the stand to testify at the
sentencing hearing. He described being in custody as the worst experience of
his life. He said he was treated like an animal. He testified to being triple
bunked and not having access to showers routinely.
[
29
]
Both Mr. Habibzai and Mr. Bello Reyes’ experience in
custody is not surprising as inmates frequently will echo the same comments
about their experiences in jail. While being in jail is not meant to be an
experience that is comfortable or without some level of hardship, I accept that
due to over-crowding, staff shortages, facility management, access defence
calls not being held when scheduled and the constant strain on custodial
institutions to answer to the over 200 courthouses across the province,
conditions in the jails can become particularly harsh.
PRINCIPLES OF SENTENCING AND ANALYSIS
[
30
]
In my view the paramount
sentencing principles are deterrence (both general and specific) and
denunciation as outlined in
section 718
of the
Criminal Code
. It is
clear that with any sentence being imposed a strong message has to be sent to
Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai specifically but also any other like-minded
individuals that choose to engage in this type of criminal activity. The Courts
and the public will not tolerate the ongoing occurrence of these type of
offences no more.
[
31
]
I am also mindful of the fact that
a sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree
of responsibility of the offender. In accordance with section 718.2 of the
Code
I keep in mind the principles of totality and proportionality. I also
remind myself that as Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai are first time offenders
I must exercise the sentencing principle of restraint in determining a fit
sentence.
[
32
]
In
R. v. Casseus
,
[2024]
O.J. No. 5812 (O.C.J.)
, at para 32
Justice Latimer speaks about this type of
offence stating the following:
I take judicial notice of the
following notorious fact – auto theft is a matter of pressing local and
provincial concern. When proven, it is the obligation of the prosecution and
the courts to deal with the matter appropriately, cognizant of all relevant
considerations, including the public’s need to have this conduct denounced and
deterred.
[
33
]
Crown counsel provided several
cases outlining the ranges of sentences for auto- thefts. Several cases involve
a similar number of thefts as the case at bar. They are helpful in determining
whether I will accede to the largely joint positions put before me.
[
34
]
In
R. v. Draoui
, in an
unreported decision of the Ontario Court of Justice from Halton Region, Justice
Crawford, on a plea of guilt, accepted a sentence of 2 years less a day plus 2
years probation. In that case Mr. Draoui was involved with several individuals
from Quebec in targeting vehicles on private driveways in Ontario. The theft of
approximately 4 vehicles was involved.
[
35
]
In
R. v. Chambers
, in an
unreported decision of the Ontario Court of Justice, Justice Hanna, on a plea
of guilt, sentenced Mr. Hanna to a penitentiary sentence of 3 years for being
involved in the theft of 14 vehicles.
[
36
]
In
R. v Risley
,
1986 ABCA
20
, Justice McClung writing for the appellate court of Alberta, increased the
sentence to one of 4.5 years in the penitentiary. Mr. Risley had plead guilty
to 12 counts related to theft and possession of stolen vehicles. The Appellate
court emphasized at paragraph 6 that “[o]rganized car theft is national
scourge. Profits are substantial and more vehicles disappear each year.” The
original sentence was increased from 3 years custody to reflect the Court’s
concern with the ongoing nature of auto thefts.
[
37
]
In
R. v. Al-Hmidawi
, in an
unreported decision of the Ontario Court of Justice, Justice Fraser, after
trial, sentenced Mr. Al-Hmidawi to 3 years custody for being involved in the
theft and trafficking of multiple vehicles.
[
38
]
Although the cases referenced are
helpful, ultimately as with any sentencing exercise, each individual must be
sentenced based on the specific factors present in the case before the court
and tailored to their individual circumstances. It is helpful to examine the
aggravating and mitigating factors to determine a fit and appropriate sentence.
[
39
]
The aggravating factors are many
in this case. The sophistication of the plan Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai
engaged in in executing each of the thefts was elaborate. It required thought,
time and pre-planning. These were not spur of the moment offences that were
committed. This was a well executed plan between three individuals that
included targeting vehicles in hotels, reprogramming the vehicles, taking the
vehicles to a cooling location and then to shipping containers. All parties
used aliases on their telecommunications to shield their true identities from
being determined easily. There were multiple thefts with multiple vehicles that
occurred during the offending period. When operating the stolen vehicles, they
were operated in a dangerous manner on regularly used highways at speeds of
150km/h and higher. The investigation itself involved a significant commitment
of police resources employing many investigative tools such as tracking
warrants and physical surveillance, in addition to obtaining and viewing CCTV
footage from businesses in order to determine who the accused persons were.
Both Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai were found with tools to commit the thefts
including programmers and glass breakers showing a significant attention to
detail to ensure they had all the correct tools to commit the crimes. In
addition, both individuals were bound by release orders and by communicating
frequently by text or in person on multiple occasions, there was a blatant
disregard for court orders demonstrated.
[
40
]
In terms of mitigating factors,
both individuals are young and without any prior criminal antecedents. They
both entered a plea of guilt and demonstrated remorse for their actions not
only through the PSR but in court as well. Both individuals show insight into
their criminal behaviour and acknowledge the harm their actions caused the many
victims of these offences. They both struggled with many factors in their past but
also their current situations that led to the offences being committed. It
appears financial motivation was a large part of the reason they turned to
crime. Each indicate a plan in place once they have completed their custodial
sentences which gives me hope for the rehabilitation of both Mr. Bello Reyes
and Mr. Habibzai. Both individuals are also well supported by family and
friends who attended each court appearance before me.
[
41
]
As counsel propose joint positions
for both Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai, I consider the well-established
principle of accepting joint positions and the importance they play in our
justice system. This principle is demonstrated in
R. v. Anthony Cook
,
2016
SCC 43
at para
25
. Experienced counsel before me have outlined a carefully
crafted sentencing position for Mr. Bello Reyes and Mr. Habibzai and provided
extensive sentencing materials in support of the same.
[
42
]
By taking into account the
totality of the factors in this case as they relate to both Mr. Bello Reyes and
Mr. Habibzai, I find the joint positions advanced by Crown and counsel fairly
take into account both the aggravating and mitigating factors specific to this
case. In addition, the positions advanced by counsel appropriately addresses
the principles of sentencing paramount to auto thefts.
[
43
]
In sentencing both Mr. Bello Reyes
and Mr. Habibzai to penitentiary sentences, I acknowledge the upward trend in
sentencing for auto thefts and believe it is only with lengthy custodial
sentences can the appropriate deterrence to commit such offences be achieved.
THE SENTENCES:
Mr. Bello Reyes
[
44
]
Mr. Bello Reyes will be sentenced
to a global 3 years and just over 5 months custodial sentence. Calculated in
days Mr. Habibzai’s sentence will be 1,291 days less Pre-Sentence custody of
560 days. Commencing today he will serve a sentence going forward of 731 days
or 2 years plus 1 day.
Mr. Habibzai
[
45
]
Mr. Habibzai will be sentenced to
2.5 years custody less PSC. Calculated in days, Mr. Habibzai will serve a total
sentence of 910 days less PSC of 288 real days enhanced at
Summers
credit
to reflect 432 days PSC plus an additional credit of .5 days for the 262 days
he was triple bunked. In my view, this additional credit acknowledges the harsh
conditions of being institutionalized as experienced by both Mr. Bello Reyes
and Mr. Habibzai. Although crediting .5 a day for each day Mr. Habibzai was
triple bunked is less than what counsel requested, considering the principle of
parity with Mr. Bello Reyes’ sentence and taking into account the sentence
being one that is fit in the circumstances, in my view .5 credit is fair and
reasonable. In total Mr. Habibzai will be given an additional credit of 131
days with total PSC to be marked as 563 days enhanced of pre-sentence custody.
Going forward Mr. Habibzai will be serving 347 days from today’s date.
[
46
]
In addition there will be a
forfeiture order made for all items seized during the investigation as
indicated in the Agreed Statement of Fact. Further Mr. Habibzai will be
forfeiting a 2022 BMW vehicle as proceeds of crime on consent.
Released: December 4, 2025
Signed:
Justice
P. Bhachu