Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj446/2025oncj446.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Stewart
, 2025 ONCJ 446
DATE: 
2025 08 28
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 4811 998 23 10002160
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
HOLLY
STEWART
Before
Justice Paul F. Monahan
Heard
on July 7 and 8, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment on a Directed Verdict Application and a
Charter
Application
Released on August 28, 2025
Ms. Maya Sengupta Murray............................................................ Counsel
for the Crown
Mr. Adam Little............................................................................ Counsel
for the defendant
MONAHAN J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
The defendant Ms. Holly Stewart is charged with refusing
to comply with a breath demand made by a peace officer under
section 320.27
or
320.28
of the
Criminal Code
contrary to
section 320.15 (1)
of the
Criminal
Code
. The alleged offence date is February 1, 2023.
[
2
]
The trial was held before me on July 7 and 8,
2025. The defence brought a
Charter
application alleging
Charter
violations under section 7, 8, 9, 10(a) and 10(b). The trial and the
Charter
application were held on a blended basis on consent.
[
3
]
The Crown called two witnesses: Ontario
Provincial Police (“OPP”) Officer John Vallinga and OPP Officer Brittni Lewis. The
defence called Ms. Stewart on the
Charter
application.
Timing of Submissions and Rulings
[
4
]
At the end of the Crown’s case, the defence
brought an application for a directed verdict. I deferred my ruling on the
directed verdict. The defence proceeded to call Ms. Stewart on the
Charter
application and reserving the right to call her on the trial proper if the
defence was unsuccessful on the directed verdict application and the
Charter
application.
[
5
]
Some of the
Charter
issues raised by the
defence relate to issues at the roadside and other
Charter
issues relate
to right to counsel issues at the police station. On July 8, 2025, the defence
and the Crown argued the directed verdict application and the section 10(b)
Charter
application as concerns the issues arising at the police station namely the
lack of access by Ms. Stewart to her cell phone and/or the internet for the
purposes of obtaining counsel of choice.
[
6
]
I indicated that I would endeavour to provide my
decision on August 28, 2025 related to the directed verdict application and, if
necessary, my decision on the section 10 (b) issues relating to the issues at
the police station namely the cell phone and internet access issues. It was understood
that if the defence was unsuccessful on the directed verdict application and
the section 10(b) cell phone/internet police station issues, the Court would
then hear arguments on the
Charter
issues arising at the roadside.
Ruling on the Directed Verdict application
[
7
]
These are my reasons on the directed verdict
application.
[
8
]
As concerns the directed verdict application, the
defence submitted that there was no evidence that there was a breath technician
available or an approved instrument ready to go and that no steps were taken to
bring Ms. Stewart before any breath technician to provide a breath sample in
response to the approved instrument demand. The defence relied, by analogy,
upon the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in
R. v. Breault
2023 SCC 9
.
In
Breault
, the Supreme Court indicated that as concerns an approved
screening device (“ASD”) demand, if the police make an ASD demand they must be
in a position to receive the sample right away and therefore need an ASD must
be on hand. The defence submitted that the same must be true with respect to an
approved instrument demand.
[
9
]
The test on a directed verdict application is
whether or not there is some evidence upon which a reasonably instructed jury
could convict beyond reasonable doubt. In my view, the directed verdict must be
dismissed. Officer Vallinga called for a Breath technician from the roadside
and there were multiple references to the breathroom at the station. Ms.
Stewart was asked to provide a sample more than once and she clearly said she
would not do so without speaking to counsel.
[
10
]
The law is clear that there is no requirement
that the approved instrument be warmed up and tested as operational. Further,
where there is an outright refusal the Crown does not even need to demonstrate
that the device in question was an approved screening device or that it was
immediately available to the police: see
R. v. Danychuk
(2004)
2004 CanLII 12975 (ON CA)
, 183
C.C.C. (3d) 337 (Ont. C.A.) at paras
19-20
.
Breault
has not changed this
law for approved instrument demands. Even if it has, in my view there is some
evidence from which it can be inferred that an approved instrument was on-site
in the breathroom and if Ms. Stewart had been willing, a breath sample could
have been received into it in a timely manner.
[
11
]
The directed verdict standard is met by the Crown
and, as a result, the directed verdict application is dismissed.
Overview of the Facts
[
12
]
I am not going to summarize all of the evidence.
I will give a brief overview and I will expand upon aspects of the evidence in
my discussion and consideration of the issues below. In some cases in this
section I will make findings of disputed facts.
[
13
]
On February 1, 2023, at 9:39 PM the OPP were
dispatched to a disabled vehicle on Highway 404 near Steeles Avenue. The call
was later revised from a disabled vehicle to a single motor vehicle accident. A
vehicle, driven by the defendant Ms. Stewart, had ended up in the ditch. There
was conflicting information as to how the accident had occurred.
[
14
]
Officer Vallinga arrived on scene at 10:19 PM. Ms.
Stewart was being attended to by paramedics. Officer Vallinga spoke to Ms.
Stewart but it was not until 10:35 PM that he detected alcohol on her breath
which resulted in an approved screening device demand and a failure.
[
15
]
Ms. Stewart was placed under arrest at about
10:42 PM and read her rights to counsel. She initially indicated that she did
not wish to speak to a lawyer at that time. Ms. Stewart was transported to the
Toronto OPP detachment at 2682 Keele Street in Toronto. When she arrived at the
police station, Ms. Stewart indicated that she had not been provided her right
to counsel but my view is that she is mistaken and she was read her right to
counsel at the roadside. At 11:06 PM she was read rights to counsel again this
time at the police station and this time she requested to speak to counsel
Catherine Shoniker and she provided a phone number for Ms. Shoniker. The police
confirmed this phone number using a Google search on the internet. The police
determined that Ms. Shoniker’s legal office was permanently closed and Ms.
Stewart was so advised.
[
16
]
After learning that Ms. Shoniker’s office was permanently
closed Ms. Stewart made  at least two clear requests to have access to her
phone in order to assist her in finding a lawyer on the internet. On my view of
the facts, the police understood that Ms. Stewart wanted her phone to access
the internet or to otherwise be given access to the internet in order to find a
lawyer. The police were not prepared to give her access to the internet,
whether on her phone or not, and whether supervised or not. I also infer that
Ms. Stewart would have been fully satisfied with supervised access to the internet
in any form. It did not have to be on her phone.
[
17
]
By and large the interactions with Ms. Stewart and
the police were not recorded. However, one part of the conversation was
recorded on one occasion when the breathroom recording system picked up the
discussion in the cells which was as follows:
Ms. Stewart: “give me my cell phone, let me get my own legal advice
and I’ll figure it out from there.
Officer Lewis: that is not how it works.
Ms. Stewart: okay, so you guys have all the cards. I wanted my
lawyer. You telling me that my lawyer is no good, so what are my options?
Officer Lewis: (muffled)
Ms. Stewart: I am not doing duty counsel.
Officer Lewis: okay, that’s fine, do you want, like is there another
lawyer that you know of, or somebody…
Ms. Stewart: give me my cell phone and I’ll find one at 11 o’clock
at night (next word sounds like “or” but it is muffled) it’s not going to
happen until tomorrow morning.”
[
18
]
The police asked Ms. Stewart repeatedly if she
had the names of any other lawyers and she did not. Ms. Stewart testified on
the
Charter
application that she had never been charged with a criminal offence
in the past and did not know any criminal lawyers other than Ms. Shoniker who
had assisted her ex-husband in the past.
[
19
]
As I will explain below, the police offered her
an outdated lawyers directory which she declined to use on the basis that she
assumed it would have nothing more than names and phone numbers but no lawyer biographical
information. The actual content of the lawyers’ directory was never established
before me beyond an indication that it contained the names and phone numbers of
many lawyers. There is no evidence that it contained any biographical information
concerning the lawyers in the book.
[
20
]
Throughout her dealings with police, Ms. Stewart
made it clear that she did not wish to consult duty counsel. She wanted private
counsel and she wanted to use the internet to find one. She wanted to use the
Google search engine to find information about lawyers having experience in
drinking and driving cases. She also wanted to see biographical information
outlining the experience of the lawyers and reviews by other members of the
public who had used the lawyers identified on the Google search.
[
21
]
Officer Vallinga suggested in cross-examination
that he would have been prepared to conduct internet searches for “top DUI
lawyers” for example but this would only be if the detained person asked for
it. It was never suggested to Ms. Stewart when she was in police custody that
the police could do Google searches on her behalf to try to find a top impaired
driving lawyer. Moreover, on my view of the facts, it could not be practically
done by having the officer conduct a search and then relay the content of the
search back to Ms. Stewart and then have her digest the content and direct
further searches and view further links. In any event, on my view of the facts
the police including Officer Vallinga were not about to do this. I note that Officer
Vallinga had never assisted a detained person in this way in the past and I’m
certain that he was not prepared to do so with Ms. Stewart, whether she asked
for it or not. It is clear to me that Ms. Stewart was given only three
options:(i) give police the name of a lawyer and they would look up their
contact information and help try to reach that person; (ii) look at a lawyers’
book containing thousands of lawyers’ phone numbers and tell police who she
would like to call and the police would facilitate that call; or (iii) speak to
duty counsel.
[
22
]
Officer Lewis did say that she and Ms. Stewart
could have “formulated a plan” to allow Ms. Stewart to conduct Google searches
on her phone while being supervised by Officer Lewis. While I don’t question
Officer Lewis’ honesty, I don’t believe she was prepared to supervise access by
Ms. Stewart to the internet. Her statement above to the effect that “that is
not how it works” indicates otherwise. Officer Lewis never offered to give Ms.
Stewart supervised access to the internet.
[
23
]
As indicated above, I find as a fact that on at
least two occasions Ms. Stewart asked for access to her phone to use the internet
to try to find a lawyer. Further, on my view of the facts, both Officer
Vallinga  and Officer Lewis knew that Ms. Stewart wanted access to her phone
for this purpose. Officer Vallinga testified that he never gave access to
anyone’s cell phone not because this was his training but because some other
officer had told him on some previous occasion that the police were not allowed
to do that. As indicated above, Officer Lewis testified that she would have
facilitated allowing Ms. Stewart to use her cell phone to search the internet
if she and Ms. Stewart had “formulated a plan” and the use of the phone was supervised.
As I have already said above, while I do not question Officer Lewis’ honesty I
don’t believe she was actually prepared to give Ms. Stewart supervised access
to her phone and she never offered to do so. I do accept Officer Lewis’s
testimony that looking back on it now she realizes that it was a “mistake” for
her not to have offered Ms. Stewart supervised access to the internet via Ms.
Stewart’s phone or otherwise.
[
24
]
Ultimately, Ms. Stewart was never given access
to her cell phone or other internet access and as a result she never spoke to
counsel. She was not prepared to provide a breath sample without consulting
with counsel and as a result she was charged with a refusal to provide a breath
sample contrary to
section 320.15(1)
.
The 10(b) application concerning access to her
cell phone or the Internet
(i)
Introduction on this Issue
[
25
]
As mentioned briefly above, I find that Ms.
Stewart at least twice sought access from the police to her cell phone in order
to try to find a lawyer on the internet. Ms. Stewart wanted to use Google to do
this. As I have already said, while Ms. Stewart requested access to her phone, what
she was really asking for was internet access in any manner whether by use of
her phone or otherwise. The police understood that she was seeking access to
the internet to find a lawyer and they were not prepared to allow such access.
Ms. Stewart testified that the day she was released at the station after she
was charged with the refusal offence under section 320.15, she went home and
performed a Google search for a “24 hour top DUI lawyer”. This led to multiple
responses resulting from the Google search engine. It took Ms. Stewart about 20
minutes to review and consider the results of the Google search and for her to determine
that she would like to contact Mr. Adam Little and to speak to Mr. Little. As
the reported cases disclose, Mr. Little is a well known and well respected
lawyer who has a particular expertise in the impaired, over 80 and refusal area
of the law. As I say, Ms. Stewart indicated that she was able to speak to Mr. Little
within 20 minutes of doing her Google search and I accept her evidence in this
regard. He became her lawyer in this case and was her lawyer at trial.
(ii)
The
Actus
Reus
for a Refusal
[
26
]
It is the defence’s submission that where a
detained person seeks access to counsel prior to or shortly after “refusing” to
provide a breath sample and that access is denied, the
actus reus
of a
refusal is not made out. I agree with the defence on this point and I will
explain why.
[
27
]
In
R. v. Mandryk
2012 ONSC 3984
Justice
Code held that the
actus
reus for a refusal must be interpreted in a
“flexible and fair manner”. Where an accused seeks access to counsel shortly
before or shortly after a “refusal”, the “refusal” is only provisional. It is
only after the consultation with counsel occurs or there is waiver with respect
to access to counsel, that the provisional refusal becomes final or definitive;
see
Mandryk
at paras 65-68;
R. v. Wannamaker
2019 ONSC 6459
at paras
51-52
; and
R. v. Doobay
2019 ONSC 7272
at paras
58-59
.
[
28
]
Accordingly, in my view, if a detainee makes a
request for access to counsel in order to obtain advice as concerns a demand
for a breath sample into an approved instrument, and that request for counsel
is a reasonable one and public safety is not an issue and the accused person has
acted diligently, then if access to counsel is not provided in response to the
detainee’s request, the
actus reus
for a refusal is not made out.
(iii) Positions of the Parties
[
29
]
In the case at bar, the Crown submits that Ms.
Stewart was entitled to resources to help her find counsel but that Ms. Stewart
was not entitled to dictate the precise form of those resources. The Crown
submits that Ms. Stewart was offered a “lawyers’ book” and that she refused
access to that book because she assumed it would just be a book of lawyer’s
names and phone numbers with no further information concerning the particular
expertise of the lawyers. The Crown submits that the accused was not diligent
in refusing access to the lawyers’ book and that she was not entitled to insist
on access to her cell phone or to search the internet. The Crown therefore
submits that the accused was not duly diligent and that there was no section
10(b) breach thereby making the refusal a final one and requiring a conviction
in this case.
[
30
]
The defence submits that while there may be no
obligation to advise an accused person when rights to counsel are first given
as to the availability of resources such as a lawyers’ phone book or access to
the internet, once a request for access to resources to find counsel is made by
the detainee to the police and the request is a reasonable one in the
circumstances, the defence submits that the failure to provide access in these
circumstances is a breach of section 10(b). In this case, the defence submits
that the request by Ms. Stewart to access the internet via her phone or
otherwise in order to find a lawyer was entirely reasonable and that the police
were obliged to comply with that request for access to the internet via her
cell phone or other means. The failure to do so, the defence submits, was a
breach of Ms. Stewart’s right to counsel and that the refusal is not made out
as the refusal was provisional only, pending access to counsel.
(iv) The Law Regarding Access to the
Internet to Obtain Counsel
[
31
]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Bartle
,
[1993] 173 at pages 191-92 held that section 10(b) of the
Charter
requires that the police, on arrest or detention of a person,
(i)
“inform the detainee of his or her right to
retain and instruct counsel without delay and as to the existence and
availability of legal aid and duty counsel;
(ii)
if a detainee has indicated a desire to exercise
this right, to provide the detainee with a reasonable opportunity to exercise
the right (except in urgent and dangerous circumstances); and
(iii)
to refrain from eliciting evidence from the
detainee until he or she has had that reasonable opportunity.”
[
32
]
The first duty set out above is informational
and the second and third obligations are implementational duties that are
triggered only if the detainee indicates an intention to exercise the right to
counsel (see
Bartle
at page 192).
[
33
]
When rights to counsel are initially given to a
detainee, there is no obligation to advise of the resources available to find
counsel: see
R. v. Dickson
2021 ONSC 6374
at paras
95-96
(per Durno J.).
See also
R. v. Zoghaib
,
[2005] O.J. No. 5947 (per Fragomeni J.)
affirmed
at
[2006] O.J. No. 1023 (C.A.)
; and
R. v. Henry
2019 ONCJ 437
at para
63
(per Silverstein J.).
[
34
]
However, where a detained person indicates a
desire to obtain private counsel, even if they do not have the name of counsel,
then there is a duty to tell the detainee of the resources available to contact
a lawyer: see
Dickson
at para
99
. I note that Justice Akhtar in
R. v.
Persaud
2020 ONSC 3413
at para108 stated that “if the detainee does not
have a lawyer but requests an opportunity to find one, they should be given the
chance and means to do so either through a phone directory or Internet access”.
[
35
]
In
R. v. Edwards
2024 ONCA 135
the
Ontario Court of Appeal clarified the law as concerns the obligation on police
when the detainee seeks access to private counsel. The Court of Appeal in
Edwards
rejected the case law which had suggested that the police have an obligation to
pursue access to counsel, “as the detainee would personally have done so”. The
Court of Appeal held that if this was the proper approach it could lead to a
breach of the right to counsel even if the police acted reasonably because they
failed to do something the detainee would have done: see
Edwards
at para
37
. The Court of Appeal in
Edwards
held that the test for police conduct
in assisting a detainee to obtain counsel remains one of  “reasonable
diligence” and not a determination of what a detainee would have done if it was
left up to them (see para 38).
[
36
]
The Court of Appeal in
Edwards
stated at
para
36
that “[t]he obligation on the police to facilitate contact with counsel
and the responsibility on the detainee to take reasonable steps to contact
counsel work in tandem.”
[
37
]
The Court of Appeal in
Edwards
observed further
that the content of the “reasonable diligence” standard applicable to the
police is be informed by the particular circumstances including the extent to
which police have assumed control of the detainee’s ability to contact counsel.
“If the police assume that control, it is reasonable to expect that the police
will take a more active role in contacting counsel” (
Edwards
at para
42
).
[
38
]
Finally, on my review of the law, while the onus
of proving a section 10(b) breach is on the accused, where a detainee asserts
the right to counsel and acts properly, the onus of establishing a change of
mind indicating that the detainee no longer wanted to consult counsel is on the
Crown to prove unequivocal waiver: see
Wannamaker
at para
34
.
(v) Application of the Law to the Case at Bar
[
39
]
Although Ms. Stewart initially said at the
roadside that she did not wish to speak to counsel, by the time she reached the
police station she clearly indicated that she wished to consult with private
counsel. She never waived her right to counsel. She made it clear that she did
not wish to speak to duty counsel. She explained in her testimony on the
Charter
application that she had had a bad experience with duty counsel when she was
dealing with a family law matter years earlier. She did not explain this past
issue to the police but as I have said she made it plain to the police that she
would not be consulting duty counsel. She made it equally clear that she wanted
private counsel. As I have indicated above, when she was told her choice of
counsel, Catherine Shoniker, was no longer practicing, she requested access to
her phone at least twice for the purpose of trying to find a lawyer on the
internet. She was simply asking for access to the internet On my view of the
evidence, the police knew this was why she wanted her phone.
[
40
]
There was considerable testimony regarding a
“lawyers’ list” and a “lawyers’ book” which were said to be available at the OPP
Police detachment on Keele Street in Toronto. Officer Vallinga testified that
there was a “lawyers list of criminal lawyers” available at the station and
that this was offered to Ms. Stewart. He referred to it as a list of “local
lawyers”. On the other hand, Officer Lewis made no such reference to a “lawyers
list” being available at the station on Keele Street. She said there was an
outdated “lawyers’ directory” with lawyers’ names and phone numbers. Ms.
Stewart confirmed that she was offered and declined a “lawyers’ book”. It is
apparent to me that Officer Vallinga is mistaken when he said there was a
“local list” of criminal lawyers at the police station. It is obvious that when
you are dealing with the entire City of Toronto it makes no sense to talk about
a list of “local lawyers”. Publicly available information indicates that there
are currently approximately 57,000 lawyers in Ontario including at least 25,000
lawyers in Toronto. This would not be much different in 2023 at the time of the
alleged offence. Officer Vallinga was unable to tell the Court anything of
substance regarding the content of the so-called local list of lawyers
available at this Toronto police station. Officer Vallinga is now working in
Essex where he said they do have such a list of local lawyers. This makes sense
as Essex is an area where there is a smaller number of lawyers dealing with
criminal cases. I am satisfied that Officer Vallinga is mistaken when he says
there was a local list of criminal lawyers at the OPP Toronto police detachment
on Keele Street in Toronto. Officer Lewis is correct namely that there was an
outdated “lawyers’ book” at the detachment. The Crown had an opportunity to
produce this directory but never did so. It is difficult to know what the
precise content of it was. Officer Lewis said the directory was outdated and
had names and addresses and phone numbers for lawyers but she could not say if
there was biographical information about the lawyers in the directory.
[
41
]
In my view, Ms. Stewart’s request on at least
two occasions for access to her phone in order to use the internet to try to
find a lawyer was an entirely reasonable request. After learning that her first
counsel of choice was no longer practising law, the police repeatedly asked Ms.
Stewart if she had another lawyer who she knew who could advise her and she
repeatedly told him that she did not. This makes sense as Ms. Stewart had never
been in trouble with the law before. The police repeatedly asking Ms. Stewart who
had never needed a criminal lawyer in the past if she knew the name of another
criminal lawyer was a meaningless exercise because she made it clear that she
knew no one and needed access to the internet to find a lawyer.
[
42
]
Both Officer Vallinga and Officer Lewis
testified that there were no officer or public safety concerns with allowing
Ms. Stewart access to her phone to use the internet. Officer Lewis suggested
that she did not know Ms. Stewart’s purpose for requesting access to her phone
namely to use the internet. As I have already said, I reject his testimony. Officer
Lewis is mistaken in this regard. I believe that Officer Lewis did understand
that Ms. Stewart was asking for access to the internet via her phone. Officer
Lewis also said it was a “mistake” for her not to have given Ms. Stewart her
phone for this purpose. While it is for the Court, not the police, to determine
the content of the reasonable diligence standard applicable to police, Officer
Lewis’s acknowledgement that it was a mistake not to give Ms. Stewart access to
the internet by her phone supports my view that the police were not reasonably
diligent in this case as concerns the implementation of Ms. Stewart’s right to
counsel.
[
43
]
I am aware of Justice Richetti’s decision in
R.
v. Wijesuriya
2020 ONSC 253
where he states at para 58, among other things,
that a detained person “has no right to use their own phone”. However, he was
addressing a different issue namely the argument that is sometimes made that
police generally insist that when a traditional telephone call is being placed,
it is to be done on the police phone rather than the detained person’s phone.
He was observing that this is appropriate. Justice Richetti was not dealing
with the situation where a detained person did not have a lawyer and they wished
to use the internet in order to find one. In any event, as I’ve already said,
Ms. Stewart was asking for access to the internet via her phone or otherwise.
She wasn’t insisting that she be able to place a call using her personal phone
which was the point that was being addressed by Justice Richetti in
Wijesuriya
.
[
44
]
The police had an obligation to implement Ms.
Stewart’s desire to exercise her right to counsel. Ms. Stewart wanted to do
something which in the modern world makes perfect sense: she wanted to search
the internet to find a lawyer. This was an entirely reasonable request in the
circumstances. As I have said, there were no officer safety or public safety issues
with giving Ms. Stewart access to the internet. The evidence is uncontradicted
that after she was charged she was released and she was able to search the internet
the next day at her home on her computer and it took all of 20 minutes for her
to find and speak to a well respected experienced lawyer familiar with this
area of the law. This could have and should have happened at the police station
before Ms. Stewart was charged with the refuse charge.
[
45
]
Ms. Stewart’s desire to consult private counsel couldn’t
be satisfied by simply repeatedly asking her if she knew the name of another
lawyer or by offering her to look at an outdated lawyers’ phone book. The Crown
says that Ms. Stewart did not act with reasonable diligence because she didn’t
take the police up on the police offer to look at the outdated phone book.
However, the Crown is not even in a position to prove the content of the
lawyers’ phonebook beyond saying that it contained the name and contact
information of lawyers. In my view, any lawyers’ phonebook, outdated or
otherwise, must have had the names and phone numbers of thousands of lawyers in
it.  There is no evidence that any such book contained biographical information
such that a detainee could realistically use the book to obtain private counsel
with the confidence that such private counsel had expertise in this area. If
the Crown wanted to have any success with the argument that Ms. Stewart was not
diligent because she did not seek to review the lawyers’ directory, the Crown
should have established the content of the directory. If it had contained
detailed biographical information about the lawyers then perhaps it might have
allowed Ms. Stewart to contact a properly qualified lawyer of choice and this might
have satisfied the obligation on the police to implement Ms. Stewart’s right to
counsel with reasonable diligence. The Crown had ample opportunity to produce
the lawyers’ phonebook and were even invited to do so as late as during the
course of the trial but they didn’t do so. In my view, they can not now fairly
make the argument that if Ms. Stewart had only accessed the lawyers’ directory,
she could have retained private counsel and her failure to do so is evidence of
a lack of diligence on her part.
[
46
]
The police had a duty to assist Ms. Stewart in
implementing her desire to speak to counsel. The police had taken control of all
of Ms. Stewart’s communications with the outside world. Ms. Stewart wanted to
use the internet to access counsel and she specifically made this request known
to the police on at least two occasions. Ms. Stewart was acting diligently in
this regard and the police’s failure to provide her with access to the internet
via her phone or otherwise failed to meet the reasonable diligence standard imposed
on the police. This does not mean that access to the internet needs to be
provided in all cases. It will depend upon what amounts to reasonable diligence
for the police in the circumstances of a given case and whether the detained
person is acting with reasonable diligence. I note that the police officers themselves
who had custody of Ms. Stewart were using the internet to determine that Ms.
Stewart’s first choice of counsel was not available. This is not surprising as the
internet is the way most people access information in the modern world. In the
face of Ms. Stewart’s express request to use the internet in order to exercise
her right to counsel, the failure to allow Ms. Stewart to access to the internet
on the facts of this case was a breach of her rights to counsel. The police
should have let Ms. Stewart have supervised use of the internet on her phone or
provided her with other internet access.
Conclusion
[
47
]
The Crown has failed to prove the
actus reus
for the refusal offence under section 320.15(1) of the
Code
. Ms.
Stewart’s refusal to provide a breath sample was a provisional refusal only
which would only be finalized or definitive after she had had the opportunity
to consult counsel. She testified that if she had been able to obtain private
counsel and they had advised her to provide a breath sample, she would have
done so. I accept her evidence in this regard. Ms. Stewart was only provisionally
refusing to provide a breath sample because she wanted legal counsel before
deciding how to respond to the breath demand.  She was entitled to legal
counsel. She acted with reasonable diligence in exercising her right to counsel
and she never waived her right to counsel. The police failed to meet the
standard of reasonable diligence applicable to them as concerns their
obligation to facilitate Ms. Stewart’s expressed right to access counsel.
[
48
]
There is no section 24(2)
Charter
analysis
required in this case (see
Doobay
at para
60
). If I am wrong and a
section 24(2) analysis is required, I would nevertheless exclude the evidence
of the refusal pursuant to section 24(2). In this case, while the police acted
in good faith the
Charter
breach was a serious one as Ms. Stewart was
denied her access to counsel which she had repeatedly requested. The police understood
and could have easily facilitated Ms. Stewart’s request for access to the internet
in order to find counsel and they should have done so. The impact on Ms.
Stewart’s
Charter
rights was significant as she was left without counsel.
She was “at sea” not understanding what her legal obligations were. The third
Grant
factor does favour admission of the evidence. However, balancing all of the
factors together the long-term integrity of the justice system will be better
served by the exclusion of the evidence of the refusal.
[
49
]
The Crown has failed to prove the
actus reus
of the refusal offence. If I am wrong on this point, I rely on my section 24
(2) analysis above to exclude the evidence of the refusal. In the circumstances,
there will be a not guilty finding on the refusal charge.
Released:
August 28, 2025
Signed:
Justice Paul F. Monahan