Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj695/2025oncj695.html

CITATION:
R. v. Hon,
2025 ONCJ 695
DATE: March 17, 2025
Court File No. 4911-999-00-2137401X-00
4911 999 00 0302339Z-00
4911 999 00 2148561X-00
4911 999 00 0296685X-00
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
YOON T. HON, KA-WAI A. CHEUNG,
JIELAN WANG and WAN Y. OU
Appellants
v.
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
Respondent
RULING
BY THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE J.
SICKINGER
on March 17, 2025, at NEWMARKET,
Ontario
APPEARANCES
:
M. Mahadeo     Paralegal on behalf of the defendants
C. Gabriel     Provincial Prosecutor on behalf of the Respondent
Reasons
for Judgment
SICKINGER,
J:
(Orally)
Yoon Hon,
Ka-Wai Cheung, Won Ou, and Jielan Wang were each convicted of one count of
speeding pursuant to section 128 of the
Highway Traffic Act
. All four
have appealed those convictions.
In each
case the agent at trial brought an application pursuant to ss. 7, ll(d) and
24(1) of the
Charter
. Those applications were unsuccessful in each case,
each appeals the denial of the
Charter
application. There are also other
discrete grounds of appeal in each case.
I propose
to deal with the issue of the
Charter
jointly first, and then deal with
each appellant separately. The following are the basic points of law which
apply to all four matters before the court.
These
appeals are conducted pursuant to ss. 136 and 138 of the
Provincial Offences
Act
.
The
standard of review on these proceedings was set out by the Supreme Court of
Canada in
Housen v. Nikolaisen
. The standard of review for a question of
law is one of correctness.
The Court
stated that in the case of an error in law, the appellate judge is free to
replace the opinion of the trial judge with its own. The Court further sets out
the standard of review for findings of fact, holding that findings of fact are
not to be reversed unless it can be established that there is a palpable and
overriding error (
see:
Housen v. Nikolaisen
2002 SCC 33 (CanLII)
,
[2002] 2 SCR 235
, at
paragraphs
8 - 10
).
Section 138
of the
Provincial Offences Act
holds that; "upon an appeal, the
court may affirm, reverse or vary the decision appealed from or where, in the
opinion of the court, it is necessary to do so to satisfy the ends of justice,
direct a new trial".
Any jurist
who makes a ruling is required to provide reasons sufficient to allow the
parties to understand the ruling and to allow for meaningful appellate review. 
The sufficiency of reasons should be analyzed functionally and contextually.  A
trial court should not be held to a standard of perfection.  The failure to
provide adequate reasons is an error in law (
see:
R. v. Sheppard,
2002
SCC 26
).
The test
for an unreasonable verdict has been established by the Supreme Court.  The
test asks whether or not “the verdict is one that a properly instructed jury,
acting judicially, could reasonably have rendered”.  The test is equally
applicable to a judge sitting at trial without a jury.
Justice
Arbour, speaking for the Court in
Biniaris
held as follows,
"The
review for unreasonableness on appeal is different, however, and somewhat
easier when the judgment under attack is that of a single judge at least when
reasons for judgment of some substance are provided. In those cases, the
reviewing appellate court may be able to identify a flaw in the evaluation of
the evidence, or in the analysis that will serve to explain the unreasonable
conclusion reached and justify the reversal ... [T]he Court of Appeal often can
and should identify the defects in the analysis that led the trier of fact to
an unreasonable conclusion. The Court of Appeal will therefore be justified to
intervene and set aside a verdict as unreasonable when the reasons of the trial
judge revealed that he or she was not alive to an applicable legal principle or
entered a verdict inconsistent with the factual conclusions reached."
(
see:
R.
v. Biniaris
(2000),
2000 SCC 15 (CanLII)
,
143 CCC (3d) 1
, at paragraph
37
).
Dealing now
with ss. 7 and ll(d) as argued in Hon.
As set out
above, there is one joint issue for all four parties.  In each case, the
prosecutor proceeded by way of certificate evidence under s. 48.1(2) of the
Provincial
Offences Act.
An
application was brought pursuant to ss. 7 and ll(d) of the
Charter
asking the Court to find that the section creates a
Charter
breach by
not permitting the Defendant to make full answer and defence.
The
appellants argued that by not requiring the officer to be present, the use of
certified evidence denies the right to a fair trial in cross-examination. The
appellants sought either a stay of proceedings or a summons from the court to
have the officer present for cross­examination.
The
Respondent argued both at trial and on appeal that s. 7 does not apply to
regulatory proceedings and that there is no infringement of the right to a fair
trial as the
Provincial Offences Act
permits cross-examination of the
officer once certain criteria are met.
In Hon,
Justice of the Peace Levita denied the application giving reasons on May 19th,
2023. In Wang, Justice of the Peace Kulmatycki denied the application on June
5th, 2023. He relied on the decision in Hon.
In Ou,
Justice of the Peace Rotondi summarily dismissed the application without
hearing submissions relying on Hon and Wang, on June 13th, 2023.
In Cheung,
Justice of the Peace Martin dismissed the application, relying on Hon and Wang
on September 20th, 2023.
Section 48
permits the reception of certificate evidence in speeding cases. The evidence
is proof of the fact certified to in the absence of evidence to the contrary. 
It does not remove the onus on the prosecution to prove the case beyond a
reasonable doubt.
The officer
who provides certificate evidence is not required to attend except as provided
for under s. 49(4) of the
Provincial Offences Act
.
Under s.
49, the court can compel the officer to attend to give evidence where it is in
the interest of justice and necessary to ensure a fair trial. Section 46(2) of
the
Provincial Offences Act
entitles the defendant to make full answer
and defence.
Justice of
the Peace Levita found in Hon that s. 7 did not apply to absolute liability
offences,
relying on
R. v. Polewsky
,
2005 CanLII 38742 (ON CA)
,
2005 202 CCC (3d) 257
from the
Ontario Court of Appeal, and
R. v. Pontes
,
1995 CanLII 61 (SCC)
,
1995 3 SCR 44
from the
Supreme Court of Canada.
He also
held that there was no violation of the right to a fair trial, relying on a
number of appellate level decisions which dealt with similar legislative
schemes that permitted for the introduction of certificate evidence (see:
Waterloo
Regional Municipality v. Yan
2004 CanLII 73252 (ON CA)
,
[2004] OJ No 4012
; and
Cochrane v. Ontario
(Attorney General)
2008 ONCA 718 (CanLII)
,
92 OR (3d) 321
).
His Worship
provided clear and cogent reasons for denying the
Charter
application.
The introduction of certificate evidence has been upheld by the Court of Appeal
in the two cases set out above.
While those
cases do not deal with speeding, they are nonetheless analogous, and
instructive. The Legislative schemes are similar to that which is the subject
of this application, and I see no reason to depart from the instruction given
by those Courts.
There is no
error present in His Worship's decision which would permit this Court to
overturn his ruling, and I find that he was correct in law in dismissing the
Charter
application.
Having
established the general proposition that the
Charter
application in Hon
was correctly decided, I will now deal with each individual case.
Firstly,
dealing with the remainder of Mr. Hon’s appeal.
In addition
to submitting that His Worship ruled incorrectly on the
Charter
application, the appellant submits that His Worship should have adjourned the
matter to permit the officer to be cross-examined on the certificate evidence.
He argues
that the Justice of the Peace permitted the prosecution to ask irrelevant
questions during cross-examination of the appellant and further that the
verdict was unreasonable. The first ground of appeal is dismissed given my
above finding that the
Charter
application was properly decided.
During
submissions on the
Charter
application, the Appellant asked to have the
officer present to cross-examine them as to the testing of the radar device
used.
The
Appellant submits that the officer's notes only indicate "radar test at
09:23 hours" but do not indicate if the device passed, or what testing
procedure was used.
Further,
the Applicant argues that the officer’s notes do not set out how he was aware
of the 60 kilometre an hour speed limit, which is set out in the certificate of
evidence.
The
Appellant wished to cross-examine the officer on these points to raise a
reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the certificate.
Regardless
of the ruling on the
Charter
application, the
Provincial Offences Act
would permit the court to have the officer present for cross-examination if the
conditions set out in
s. 49 are
met.
The Justice
of the Peace refers to
Yan
when giving his ruling as to whether or not
the officers should attend for cross-examination. The Court of Appeal
in
Yan
dealt with a very similar legislative scheme for certificate evidence in the
case of red light cameras. His Worship found that the test set out in
Yan
is applicable
here, and I agree.
In that
case, the Court of Appeal held that the defence must set out:
"Some
reasonable and legitimate basis for examining the officer, some valid reason
why cross-examination of the officer would be necessary to ensure a full fair
trial and a full defence."
The Court
goes on to state that the defence must show some material irregularity in the
certificate evidence, or: "There is some proposed defence evidence that
could raise a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the certified
statements." (see:
R. v. Yan
at paragraph 20).
The test in
Yan
is not overly onerous on the defence. It simply means to weed out
requests based on nothing more than an assertion that cross-examination is
necessary for a fair trial without some evidentiary basis (
see:
Yan
, at
paragraphs
16 and 17
).
His Worship
goes on to hold that the prosecution is not required to prove that the speed
measuring device was properly tested, and that this is not an essential element
of the offence. I agree with His Worship on this point.
That being
said, the fact that the prosecution is not required to prove a fact does not
preclude cross-examination on it or mean that evidence on that fact could not
cause a reasonable doubt.
His Worship
then goes on to state that the defence must show some evidence that there is a
material irregularity with the certificate in order to have the officer attend.
He omits
the alternative set out in
the test in
Yan
, that there is some proposed
defence evidence that could raise a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the
certified statements.
His Worship
finds that the omissions in the officer's notes, i.e. that he did not record
whether or not the device passed the testing procedure or what testing
procedure was used could not constitute a material irregularity in the
certificate. His Worship does not turn his mind to whether or not that evidence
could raise a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the certified statements.
His Worship
rules that the officer will not be summonsed to attend. I find that the Justice
of the Peace erred in law when applying
the test set out in
Yan
. It is
not a two-part test. It sets out two alternatives, either of which can require
the officer to attend for cross-examination.
The Court
failed to consider that errors in the testing procedure could raise a
reasonable doubt as to the reliability of the information contained in the
certificate even if the certificate is valid on its face.
This is
evidence which could constitute evidence to the contrary. Evidence to the
contrary need not come from the defendant but can come through the
cross-examination of prosecution witnesses.
The
officer's notes do not detail the testing procedure which was undertaken, or
the results of that test. The request is based on information contained in the
disclosure and not a bold assertion that the officer should attend. This
omission in the officer's notes is sufficient, in this Court's opinion, to meet
the test set out in
Yan
for the officer to attend.
As a
result, Mr. Hon was not permitted the opportunity to make full answer and
defence as required by s. 46(2) of the
Provincial Offences Act.
There are
other grounds of appeal before this Court, but given this finding, it is
unnecessary to address them. I grant the appeal and find that it is necessary
to order a new trial in order to satisfy the ends of justice. So that concludes
my judgment then with respect to Mr. Hon.
Moving on
now to Ms. Wang.  The Appellant, Wang, argues two main grounds of appeal. 
Firstly, that the
Charter
application was incorrectly decided and,
secondly that the verdict is unreasonable.
As set out
above, the Justice of the Peace relied on His Worship’s decision in Hon to deny
the
Charter
application. The same Agent argued the applications and the
argument was very similar to that in Hon. Fulsome submissions were made on both
sides.
I have
found above that Hon was rightly decided in terms of denying the
Charter
application. His Worship, in this case, was not bound by the Hon decision but
was entitled to rely on it after finding that it was correctly decided.
Therefore, the first ground of appeal is dismissed with respect to Ms. Wang.
The Agent
in Wang did not set out any particular reason to have the officer attend for
cross­examination as was set out in Mr. Hon's case.
His
Worship's ruling on the
Charter
application was delivered in writing on
June 5, 2023. The trial commenced the following day on June 6th, 2023.  The
defence did not seek an adjournment to have the officer or any other witness
attend.
The
prosecution proceeded by way of certified evidence.  The certificate indicated
that the appellant, Wang, was operating a motor vehicle at 80 kilometres an
hour in a 60 kilometre an hour zone at Stouffville Road and Bridgewater Avenue
in Richmond Hill on February 1st, 2022 at 10:41 a.m.  No further evidence was
called.
Ms. Wang
testified with the assistance of a Cantonese interpreter.  She testified that
she was not driving on Stouffville Road.  She stated that she was driving on
Bayview Avenue and on 19th Avenue.
She stated
that she was on 19th Avenue when she noticed a police cruiser behind her with
its sirens on. She agreed that she was given the ticket that brought her to
court when she pulled over for the officer at that time.
Ms. Wang
testified that the stretch of road was a 70 kilometre per hour zone and that
she was driving "that rate of speed". She stated that she was
bringing lunch to her son and that typically she drives on 19th Avenue instead
of Stouffville Road because there was heavy traffic, and she was aware of a bad
accident in the past which took place in the area. She says that she tries to
avoid that stretch of Stouffville Road.
Ms. Wang
was then asked in-chief if her son was in school when she was bringing him
lunch. In response, she stated that she was on her way to work that day. Ms.
Wang was asked in cross­examination to describe the route she takes to work. 
She replied that she takes 19th Avenue to Woodbine and makes a right turn on
Woodbine and then continues to work.
At times,
the interpreter does not interpret what Ms. Wang is saying, and at one point
tells the court that she is not responsive to the prosecutor's question. It is
a bit difficult to determine what is being directly interpreted. No one raised
issues with the interpretation during the trial, or on appeal.
Ms. Wang
testified that she drove the stretch of road almost daily for the 12 years that
she lived in the area. She said she is very familiar with the speed limit and
would not drive over 70 as there are often police.
She stated
that she constantly checks the speedometer while driving. Ms. Wang could not
give the exact address for the restaurant where she worked but described its
location on Woodbine Avenue.
The Court
referred to three inconsistencies in Ms. Wang's evidence outlined by the
prosecution in submissions. One, that the route she took varied. Two, that she
said she was going 70, then changed it to "different rates of speed",
and that the times and locations where she checked her speedometer were not
consistent with the motor vehicle stop.
The Court
refers to the test in
W. (D).
and correctly identifies the three parts.
The Court states that it is satisfied that the elements of the offence exist
and that it does not believe Ms. Wang's evidence. The Court states that it
rejects her evidence based on the inconsistencies. The Court does not outline
those inconsistencies or how they caused the Court to reject her evidence.
There is
one very significant inconsistency in the evidence between Ms. Wang and the
certificate. The certificate says that she was on Stouffville Road, Ms. Wang
says that she was on 19th Avenue.  The Court does not address that
inconsistency at all in its reasons.
This Court
does not see all of the inconsistencies outlined by the prosecution in its
submissions. Ms. Wang does not vary the route that she was driving that day.
She does testify to different rates of speed, but it is somewhat difficult to
determine what portions of the drive she is referring to. The questions asked
of her are not always as clear as they could be.
I agree
that Ms. Wang is inconsistent in that she says first she is taking lunch to her
son, and then that she was going to work at another time. She confirms further
on in her evidence that she was in fact on her way to work.
The
evidence of an accused person must not be treated or weighed differently from
that of any other witness (
see:
R. v. Laboucan
,
2010 SCC 12 (CanLII)
,
[2010] 1 SCR 397
).
The trial
court is required to set out cogent reasons as to why it rejected Ms. Wang’s
evidence.  I appreciate that the traffic courts are extremely busy, and that
jurists must rule on matters quickly from the bench as a matter of necessity,
otherwise the process would grind to a halt.
When
considering the evidence as a whole, I am not satisfied that the reasons
provided address the nature of the inconsistencies such that it would cause the
Court to outright reject Ms. Wang's evidence. It is not clear from reading her
evidence that it is unreliable or incredible to the degree that the Court finds
.
The failure to provide sufficient reasons is an
error in law. The reasons provided do not properly permit this Court to assess
the reasonableness of the verdict or the path taken to conviction by the Court.
I would
give effect to the second ground of appeal.  The appeal is granted and a new
trial ordered.
Moving on
now to the Ou matter.
The
Appellant, Ou, argues that the Justice of the Peace erred in summarily
dismissing the
Charter
applications without allowing the defence to make
submissions, that the Justice of the Peace errored by not compelling the
officer to attend for cross-examination, and by not permitting the accused to
establish reasonable doubt by calling evidence.
In Ou, the
officer was present on the day of trial on Zoom. That information is not
contained in the transcript, but I understand from the representatives, and
submissions that the Justice of the Peace was not going to permit the officer
to testify on Zoom.
The
Prosecution then indicated that it would proceed by certificate evidence, and
therefore the
Charter
application would need to be argued. It is the
Prosecution who was making the request to argue the
Charter
application
jointly with the Defendant.
The Justice
of the Peace - sorry. Can we mute whoever is talking, Madam Clerk. Thanks.
CLERK
REGISTRAR: I'm not really ....
THE COURT: 
I think it’s Mr. Genova (ph)
CLERK
REGISTRAR:  Okay.
THE COURT: 
Because he’s not muted.
The Justice
of the Peace asked the defence if there was any material irregularity in the
certificate evidence which was not outlined in their written materials. The
defence asks what the Court would deem to be an irregularity.  Then, before the
defence is given the opportunity to respond, or make any further submissions
the Justice of the Peace summarily dismissed the application without hearing
any submissions from either side as to the summary dismissal.
The Court
relies on Hon and Wang to support the dismissal of the application.  I note
that these decisions are from the trial level and not binding on the Court. 
The Court then goes on to summarily dismiss the Defence request for the officer
to attend, again, without hearing any submissions.
The agent
for the Appellate seems confused at this point by what has occurred and asks
the Court if they are then going to argue the motion. The Court indicates no.
Defence
then goes on to make arguments that evidence to the contrary can come in
through cross-examination of a Crown witness, or through a defence witness. The
Defence then asks for an adjournment to have the Appellant attend the trial.
Without
hearing any submissions as to the reason for having the Appellant present or
hearing any submissions from the Prosecutor, the Court refuses the adjournment
on the basis that,
“It’s a
trial date.  The Defendant knew that this was a trial date.  The Defendant
should have been here.  You make a motion, and you expect the motion to pass
and so you’re not ready for your trial.  It’s a trial.  It’s not a motion
date.  It’s a trial.”
The Court
acknowledges that the Defence is not ready to proceed with trial but then
forces them to proceed in any event.
A not
guilty plea was entered on behalf of Ms. Ou and the certificate evidence was
entered setting out that she was travelling 75 kilometres per hour in a 40
kilometre per hour zone in addition to other particulars. No other evidence was
called.
The Court
found that the certificate was proper on its face and that there was no
evidence to the contrary and then finds Ms. Ou guilty.
The Court
of Appeal in
Greer
sets out when the Court may summarily dismiss a
Charter
application. The decision to summarily dismiss a
Charter
application is
usually entitled to deference from an appellate court (see:
R. v. Blom
,
(2002)
167 CCC (3d) 32 (OCA)
at paragraph 28
; and
R. v. Kazman
,
2020
ONCA 22
at paragraph
16
, leave to appeal refused, [2020] SCCA No. 58).
Deference
will not be due if the trial judge conducted the hearing in such a way that it
was so unfair as to result in a miscarriage of justice (
see:
R. v. Greer
,
2020 ONCA 795
, at paragraph
109
).
The Accused
must be permitted to make submissions before the summary dismissal occurs.  The
right to make submissions is essential to the right to make full answer and
defence.  The trial management authority to dismiss
Charter
motions
summarily will not be exercised fairly if this authority is used without first
permitting submissions from the applicant (again,
see:
R. v. Greer
, at
paragraph
110
).
Where the
trial judge is considering summarily dismissing an application because the
Charter
claim appears to be meritless, they must ensure that the Defence is aware of
this and is able to summarize the anticipated evidentiary basis for the claim
prior to the dismissal (
see:
R. v. Greer
,
at paragraph
111
).
Further,
the party asking for the summary dismissal has the burden of convincing the
trial judge that the motion is manifestly frivolous. Here, no party asks that
the motion be summarily dismissed (
see:
R. v. Haevischer
,
2023 SCC 11
,
at paragraph
91
).
The trial
judge is also required to explain why a
Charter
motion is being
summarily dismissed.
This is
relevant in determining whether or not procedural fairness has been achieved
(
see:
R. v. Greer
,
at paragraph
114
).
While Greer
speaks specifically to dismissing
Charter
applications, the guidance
with respect to procedural fairness should apply to the dismissal of other
applications as a matter of common sense.
It is clear
here that the Justice of the Peace does not give the appellant the opportunity
to make submissions prior to summarily dismissing both the
Charter
application, the application to have the officer present for cross-examination
and the application for an adjournment to have the Appellant attend.
The Justice
of the Peace does not inquire as to what evidence to the contrary may be called
from the officer or the defendant prior to making their decision.
When
considering the summary dismissal of all three applications without seeking
submissions from the Appellant, I am satisfied that these actions deprive the
Appellant of the opportunity to make full answer and defence, or to put
evidence to the contrary before the Court. The conduct is so unfair as to
result in a miscarriage of justice.
Were it
merely the dismissal of the
Charter
application at issue, I may have
ruled differently.
The denial
of the adjournment applications without any consideration of the merits or the
effect on the Defence ability to make full answer and defence tips the balance
in favour of a miscarriage of justice, particularly as the Court acknowledges
that the Defence is not ready to proceed.
It does not
matter whether or not the applications would ultimately have been successful,
it is the lack of procedural fairness which leads to the miscarriage of justice
here. I grant the appeal and order a new trial in that case with respect to the
second and third grounds of appeal.
Finally,
with respect to the Cheung matter.
The
appellant argues that the Court erred in dismissing the
Charter
application and that the verdict was unreasonable. The application was fully
argued in Cheung. The Defence gave no specific reason to have the officer
attend for cross-examination, nor did they highlight any anticipated evidence
that would constitute evidence to the contrary.
The Justice
of the Peace relied on Hon and adopted the reasoning of Justice of the Peace
Levita in dismissing the application.  I find no error in this given my above
decision that Hon was correctly decided.
Following
this ruling, the Defence indicated that it was ready to proceed to trial. No
request was made for an adjournment for any purpose. The certificate of
evidence was read into the record, indicating that the appellant drove 78
kilometres per hour in a 50 kilometre per hour zone on May 5th, 2020, at 9:49
a.m. No further evidence was called by either party.
The Justice
of the Peace found Mr. Cheung guilty on the basis of the certificate as no
evidence to the contrary was called. I find no error was committed by the
Justice of the Peace in Cheung and that the appeal is dismissed in its
entirety.
... END OF
EXCERPT OF PROCEEDINGS