Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj434/2025oncj434.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that
the following notice be attached to the file:
A non-publication and non-broadcast order in this
proceeding has been issued under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is
concerned with the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
, read as follows:
486.4  Order restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the
presiding judge or justice may make an order directing that any information
that could identify the victim or a witness shall not be published in any
document or broadcast or transmitted in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect
of the offences referred to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the
presiding judge or justice shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order
made under any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Otell
, 2025 ONCJ 434
DATE:  2025 08 22
COURT FILE No.:  Ottawa 23-11400110-00
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
FADI
J. OTELL
Before
Justice Richard Blouin
Trial
Heard on October 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7, 2024.
January
30, 31 and February 6, 2025.
Trial
Submissions on April 11, 2025.
Reasons
for Judgment released on May 2, 2025.
Submissions
on 11(b) #2 July 4, 2025.
Ruling
on 11 (b) #2 August 22, 2025.
K. Rad ………………………………………………………. counsel
for the Crown
R. Wellington ……………………….……….………… counsel
for the Defendant
BLOUIN J.:
Overview
[
1
]
The defendant brought an initial
Charter application to stay proceedings as a result of a purported violation of
his right to a trial within a reasonable time on July 9, 2024, approximately
three months before his seven-day trial was to commence.  The application was
heard on August 26, 2024.  My ruling was delivered on September 27, 2024,
denying the application and confirming that the trial was to commence October
1, 2024, as scheduled.  It did commence that day.
[
2
]
After the
complainant and her cousin had finished testifying, the Crown developed an
unforeseen medical issue.  She informed the court on October 4th that she would
attempt to continue on October 7th, but it turned out that she was not.  The
trial eventually resumed on January 30, 2025 and continued the next day, and
February 6, 2025 until the evidence was completed.  Submissions were made on
April 11, 2025 and I reserved judgment.  On May 2, 2025, I convicted the
defendant on two counts involving the same transaction – a sexual assault and
an invitation to sexual touching (the latter was stayed pursuant to
R. v.
Kienapple
).  The matter was remanded to July 4th for sentencing.
[
3
]
Before
sentencing, the defendant filed a second 11(b) application to stay proceedings
based on the additional time since October 2024 that added to the delay
occasioned before the first application.
[
4
]
The defendant
filed the application on June 2, 2025 and I heard 11(b) submissions from both
parties before hearing sentencing submissions the same day – July 4th.
[
5
]
The defendant
submitted that the total delay I ought to scrutinize is the period from January
7, 2023 – when the information was sworn, until the day he was found guilty –
May 2, 2025.  However, I agree with the Crown’s position that the total delay
ought to be calculated up and until a date when the evidence and submissions
were concluded (April 11) and should not include deliberation time.  The
18-month ceiling outlined in
Jordan
, beyond which delay is presumed
unreasonable under s. 11(b), ends at the conclusion of evidence and argument,
and does not extend to time required for verdict deliberation (
R. v. K.G.K.
2020 1 S.C.R. at paragraph 3
).
The Law
[
6
]
As a result,
the delay I must analyze is 27 months and 11 days of total delay.  Justice
Coroza
in
R. v. Musclow,
2024 ONCA 565
borrows from an earlier Court of
Appeal summary, at paragraph 22, and outlines the fundamental principles of the
analysis.
[22]
The
framework for assessing unreasonable delay post-
Jordan
is well-established. It was first
summarized by this court in
R.
v. Coulter
,
2016 ONCA 704
,
133 O.R. (3d) 433
, at paras.
34-40
:
A.  
   The New Framework Summarized
[34] Calculate the
total delay
, which is the
period from the charge to the actual or anticipated end of trial (
Jordan
, at para.
47
).
[35] Subtract
defence delay
from the
total delay, which results in the “
Net Delay
” (
Jordan
, at para.
66
).
[36] Compare the Net Delay to the presumptive
ceiling (
Jordan
,
at para.
66
).
[37] If the Net Delay exceeds the presumptive
ceiling, it is presumptively unreasonable. To rebut the presumption, the Crown
must establish the presence of
exceptional circumstances
(
Jordan
, para.
47
). If it cannot rebut the
presumption, a stay will follow (
Jordan
,
para.
47
). In general,
exceptional circumstances fall under two categories:
discrete events
and
particularly
complex cases
(
Jordan
,
para.
71
).
[38] Subtract delay caused by discrete events
from the Net Delay (leaving the “
Remaining Delay
”) for the
purpose of determining whether the presumptive ceiling has been reached (
Jordan
, para.
75
).
[39] If the Remaining Delay exceeds the
presumptive ceiling, the court must consider whether the case was particularly
complex such that the time the case has taken is justified and the delay is
reasonable (
Jordan
,
at para.
80
).
[40] If the
Remaining Delay
falls below the presumptive ceiling
, the onus is on the defence
to show that the delay is unreasonable (
Jordan
,
para.
48
). [Emphasis in
original.]
Analysis
[
7
]
After
calculating the total delay at just over 27 months, I must subtract the defence
delay.  This includes tactical choices that delay the trial, and the period of
time where the Court and Crown are ready to proceed but the defendant is not (
R.
v. Jordan,
2016 SCC 27
at paragraph
64
).  That period of delay has already
been ruled on by me in 11(b) application # 1.  The Crown and Court were ready
to schedule the trial March 10, 2023, but the defendant switched counsel who
was not able to schedule trial dates until June 20, 2023.  In addition, on June
20, 2023, the Court and Crown were ready to set a trial date with available
weeks starting each week from August 13, 2024.  The defendant was not available
until October 1 – 11, 2024.  It is important to point out that the Crown was
not available either during the week of September 9, 2024.
[
8
]
While the defendant
does not have to keep him or herself in a state of perpetual availability, I
attribute four weeks over that seven-week period (August 13 – October 1, 2024)
to defence delay.  As a result, when I consider both the periods where the
Court and Crown were ready, and the defence was not, I come to slightly over a
four-month period of delay attributed to the defendant.  Accordingly, the net
delay in this case is 23 months.  Since it exceeds the
Jordan
ceiling of
18 months, it is presumptively unreasonable.  To rebut the presumption the
Crown must establish the presence of exceptional circumstances.  If it cannot
rebut the presumption, a stay of proceedings will follow.
Exceptional
Circumstances
[
9
]
On the same
date (October 7th) that the last three days of the trial were adjourned because
Ms. Rad was unable to continue, the Crown contacted the trial coordinator’s
office indicating that three additional days were required to complete this
trial.  Mr. Wellington responded on October 11th indicating that the defence
was agreeable to non-consecutive dates, if necessary, and to advise before the
matter returns on October 15th.  After an October 11th request from the trial coordinator,
on October 14th, the Crown counsel provided possible dates in November,
December and January with exceptions for some periods when she was not
available:  November 4 – 15; November 25 – 29; December 2 – 13 and December 23
– January 1.  She indicated this case was a priority and that she may be able
to move “some things around”.  Mr. Wellington provided dates:  October 24, 25,
28-30; December 10-12 and January 29-31.
[
10
]
Ms.
Rad was asked by Mr. Wellington if she was free in October, and to consider
January. Ms. Rad replied that she thought January worked best for her. She did
not respond to the December 10 – 12 suggestion even though she had indicated
that she might be able to move another assignment. Of course, at that point,
there was no indication that any of the dates suggested could be accommodated
by the trial coordinator.
[
11
]
When the
trial coordinator responded later, on October 15th, he indicated that setting
an agreeable date with a per diem non-local judge had increased complexity, and
that the trial judge “would really like this trial to continue in November or
December”.  However, no dates were made available during those two months. The
trial coordinator rightly believed, at that time, that January, February and
March were not available to me because, pursuant to the Courts of Justice Act,
I had completed my allotment of days, and I could not sit again until April
2025.
[
12
]
To make
things more complicated, around the end of October, the government amended the
Act to allow per diem judges to sit an increased number of days. On October 22,
Mr. Wellington wrote that his client was eager to continue this matter and was
considering another 11(b) application.
[
13
]
When
the trial coordinator became aware that my restricted schedule was no longer an
impediment, he provided, on October 28 the trial dates of January 29 – 31.  Ms.
Rad was available.  Mr. Wellington suggested January 30th, 31st and February
6th.  Those three days of trial evidence were then agreed to be the final three
days.
Adjournment for Submissions and Judgment
[
14
]
On February
6, 2025, the defendant completed his testimony shortly before lunch, and the
defence closed its case.  The Court then indicated that, dependent on counsel’s
views, we would proceed to submissions.  Before the break the Crown conceded
that she would not make submissions regarding proof of two specific instances
of alleged misconduct, and that she would also like to address the Court
regarding Browne v. Dunn issues.  I asked that the Crown submit in writing the
three alleged violations of that rule for consideration over lunch.  The Court
returned at 2:00 p.m.
[
15
]
After
argument regarding Browne v. Dunn, I made a ruling on that issue and then
invited submissions on the trial.  Mr. Wellington then indicated that the Crown
had just delivered a case book containing 12 decisions that she would be
relying on in submissions.  He indicated that he was not able to digest most of
them during the lunch break.  I then suggested that I would prefer to receive
written submissions given the volume of evidence. I also expressed a desire to
get transcripts of the last three days (I had already received transcripts for
the first four days in October).  In my view, it was not realistic to have
counsel make submissions that afternoon given the volume of evidence – some
given recently – and the filing that day of cases the Crown would rely on in
her submissions.  Both lawyers appeared to accept that approach.
[
16
]
Since I was
scheduled to be out of the country from February 15th to March 15th, I
suggested March 18, 20, and 21 as potential dates to return for submissions. 
The Crown indicated that she was engaged in a three-week jury trial March 17 –
April 4 but said that she would make herself available in April.  Mr.
Wellington indicated March was difficult, but he had dates in early April,
specifically April 2nd.  April 11th was the date given for submissions.  After
hearing submissions on April 11th, I was able to quite quickly provide a
judgment which was delivered on May 2nd.  I might add that to be able to order
transcripts and receive written submissions before April 11th, resulted in a
much shorter turn around to provide judgment.
Findings
[
17
]
The Crown
submits that the defendant failed to raise the 11(b) issue in a timely manner. 
Because the second 11(b) application was filed after the conviction, the Crown
submits they are prevented from taking steps to mitigate the delay, since the
delay already had occurred.  In my view, this submission has no merit.  The
defendant filed an 11(b) motion before the start of the trial and, while it did
not succeed, the net delay at that time was close to the 18-month ceiling.  The
Crown had to have known that delay continued to be a live issue.  But, in case
that was not apparent, the defence made it clear in October 2024 that 11(b) was
still in play:
October 21 -
appearance in set date court: “counsel indicates that 11(b) may become an issue
… as trial coordinator is currently offering April 2025, and counsel is hoping
that we can resume this trial sooner than that”.
October 22 - E-mail
Mr. Wellington to Ms. Rad and trial coordinator: “My client is eager to
continue this matter, if we are looking at dates in April 2025, he is
considering renewing his 11(b) application”.
October 28 –
appearance in set date court: “counsel does indicate 11(b) may be an issue” and
“counsel is not agreeable … to go into the New Year”.
Discrete
Events
[
18
]
The Defence concedes that the Crown’s
illness was a discrete exceptional event.  It was unavoidable and
unforeseeable.  He does not have issue with subtracting some time from the net
delay to account for it, only that six month is excessive.  I agree.  Here, in
my view, the Crown and the justice system generally, did not sufficiently
respond to obvious delay concerns.  Paragraph 75 of
R. v. Jordan
, [2106]
1 SCR 631
is illustrative:
[75] The period of
delay caused by any discrete exceptional events must be subtracted from the
total period of delay for the purpose of determining whether the ceiling has
been exceeded. Of course, the Crown must always be prepared to mitigate the
delay resulting from a discrete exceptional circumstance. So too must the
justice system. Within reason, the Crown and the justice system should be
capable of prioritizing cases that have faltered due to unforeseen events
(
see
R. v. Vassell
,
2016 SCC 26
,
[2016] 1 S.C.R. 625
). Thus, any portion of the delay that the Crown and
the system could reasonably have mitigated may not be subtracted (i.e. it may
not be appropriate to subtract the entire period of delay occasioned by
discrete exceptional events).
[
19
]
In my view,
although both the Court (the trial coordinator, the per diem scheduler, the
trial judge) and the Crown made significant efforts to arrange dates for
continuation, no dates were offered to the defendant that were rejected by him.
Periods of time which the Court and the Crown are unavailable will not constitute
defence delay, even if the defence is not available (
Jordan
para.
64
). I
realize that Mr. Wellington had limited dates available, but the five days in
late October, and the three days in December (December 10 – 12) were not
offered by the Court.  For reasons Ms. Rad articulated in submissions (she had
developed a rapport with the child witness and her family) no other Crown was
sought to continue the trial, even though the two most significant child
witnesses had testified. I understand the obvious desire and logic to stick
with the case, but that must be weighed against the defendant’s 11(b) right –
which by this time – was clearly in jeopardy.
[
20
]
The Crown
relied on the recent Ontario Court of Appeal
decision of
R. v. Dunnett
2025
ONCA 392
regarding family emergencies as an exceptional circumstance
applying to a case that was outside the presumptive ceiling.
Dunnett
also featured a second 11(b) application. In that case the Crown had a family
crisis during the two days of a Garofoli hearing.  The hearing was adjourned
for one month.  Unfortunately, on that date, the affiant was unable to attend
because of a serious medical family situation.  Both situations resulted in a
delay of approximately two months later than the original return date upon
which the trial judge based his first 11(b) ruling.
In
Dunnett
there
were two adjournments, not one.  The court responded and re-scheduled within a
month of the first adjournment.  The second adjournment only extended the trial
time by a total of two months.  In my view, this is an example of the system
responding to, and prioritizing, a case that was in obvious 11(b) jeopardy.
[
21
]
A recent
Ontario Court of Appeal decision (
R. v. v. J.S.
2024 ONCA 794
)
illustrates this point at paragraphs 78 and 79:
[78] Accordingly, when
the need for continuation dates arises, it is incumbent on all justice
participants to make best efforts to accommodate the earliest possible dates so
that trials can finish close to on-schedule. This will sometimes require the
parties to assess and re-assess their priorities and, where possible, adjust
their schedules to accommodate the dates offered so as to avoid lengthy
adjournments.
[79] In this case, the
Defence was offered numerous reasonable continuation dates in November and December
2019. This was not a circumstance where only one or two dates were offered well
into the future, or where the trial could not finish close to the date that had
been anticipated. Rather, nine dates were put forward as options and, had just
one or two more had been taken, the trial would have ended well under the
ceiling.
[
22
]
Unlike
J.S.,
where
nine dates were offered, no dates were offered to the defence that were
rejected.
Effect of
COVID-19
[
23
]
Although I
expressed in application 11(b) #1 the view that backlogs have existed in the
OCJ post COVID, I conclude that, in this case, the net delay of 23 months
resulted from the inability of the Court to offer continuation dates in a
timely manner. And, as
discussed in
R. v. Kirkopoulos
2024 ONCA 596
at para.
53
, there was no evidence proffered to establish any COVID backlog
in the trial coordinator’s office or to show if any steps were taken to
mitigate the effect of the backlog if one existed.
[
24
]
The Crown
made submissions that
R. v. Agpoon
2023 ONCA 449
was an example
of the Court recognizing backlogs resulting from COVID. However, that case
dealt with jury blackout periods not being accounted for by the trial judge,
but in any event, paragraph 20 outlines an important proviso:
Jordan
imposed certain conditions on the Crown. For example,
the burden is put on the Crown to show that it took reasonable available steps
to avoid and address the problem before the delay exceeded the ceiling [at para
70]. But this was clearly impossible in the case of the pandemic. Further, the
Court referred to the Crown’s obligation to make efforts to mitigate the delay
resulting from a discrete exceptional circumstance. Noting [at para.75] that
within reason, the Crown and the justice system should be capable of
prioritizing cases that have faltered due to unforeseen events. This principle
applies to dealing with the backlog of cases in the emergence of the justice
system from the pandemic.
[
25
]
As a result,
I would only accord two months to exceptional circumstances because of the
Crown’s illness.
Complexity
[
26
]
R. v.
Jordan
also deals
with the second category of exceptional circumstances:
[77]   As indicated, exceptional circumstances also
cover a second category, namely, cases that are particularly complex. This too
requires elaboration. Particularly complex cases are cases that, because of the
nature of the evidence or the nature of the issues, require an inordinate
amount of trial or preparation time such that the delay is justified. As for
the nature of the evidence, hallmarks of particularly complex cases include
voluminous disclosure, a large number of witnesses, significant requirements
for expert evidence, and charges covering a long period of time. Particularly
complex cases arising from the nature of the issues may be characterized by,
among other things, a large number of charges and pre-trial applications, novel
or complicated legal issues, and a large number of significant issues in
dispute. Proceeding jointly against multiple co-accused, so long as it is in
the interest of justice to do so, may also impact the complexity of the case.
[78]   A typical murder trial will not usually be
sufficiently complex to comprise an exceptional circumstance. However, if an
inordinate amount of trial or preparation time is needed as a result of the
nature of the evidence or the issues such that the time the case has taken is
justified, the complexity of the case will qualify as presenting an exceptional
circumstance.
[
27
]
When I ruled
in September 2024, just before trial, that 11(b) had not been violated, I
offered the view that this case was not a simple one-day matter that one would
expect to be scheduled to trial much sooner than a seven-day case with
motions.  That remains the case.  However, the issue that takes this case from
below the presumptive ceiling to substantially above it, is the delay from
October 7th to April 11th, not the complexity of the case.  In my view, as with
“a typical murder trial”, this case was not sufficiently complex to comprise
exceptional circumstances.
Conclusion
[
28
]
Despite the
best efforts of all participants, the Court did not provide any trial
continuation dates that could conclude the viva voce evidence before four
months had expired (October 7, 2024 – February 6, 2025). In addition, the Court
was not able to offer a date to hear submissions for another two months
(February 6, 2025 – April 11, 2025).
[
29
]
Accordingly,
as decided above, I have reduced the net delay of 23 months by the two months
accorded to exceptional circumstances. The remaining delay at 21 months exceeds
the
Jordan
ceiling and the defendant’s right to a trial within a
reasonable time has been violated. The only remedy available in law is a stay
of proceedings.
[
30
]
And, although
this result is exceedingly unsatisfactory in the circumstances of this case, I
am duty bound to follow the law. There will be a stay of proceedings.
Signed: Justice Richard Blouin