Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj622/2025oncj622.html

ONTARIO COURT OF
JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Miller
, 2025 ONCJ 622
DATE: 
September 9, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 24-48114328
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
TYRIAL MILLER
Before
Justice P.F. Band
Heard
August 11-14, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on September 9, 2025
Mr.
M.
Boissoneault........................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Ms. A. Shakeel.....................................................................................  
counsel for Mr. Miller
BAND J.:
I.
INTRODUCTION
AND ISSUES
[
1
]
After a domestic dispute that happened on May 1,
2024, Mr. Tyrial Miller was charged with assaulting, choking and pointing a
loaded handgun at his then girlfriend, Ms. Dejauna Lindo. The incidents took
place at Mr. Miller’s mother’s apartment. When police investigated later that
night, they found a loaded handgun under a pile of wet laundry on the balcony.
Mr. Miller was also charged with a series of firearms offences and breaches of
court orders.
[
2
]
Mr. Miller pleaded not guilty, and a three-witness
trial proceeded before me.
[
3
]
At the outset, the Crown applied to have text
messages and other evidence admitted as an exception to the rule against prior
discreditable conduct. I admitted a series of text messages in which Mr. Miller
apologized for assaulting Ms. Lindo in April to provide context for their rocky
relationship and because it could help explain the growing animosity in that
relationship. I also admitted evidence that Ms. Lindo had seen the handgun
prior to the events in question. I did so with conditions aimed at keeping the
trial focused on the subject matter of the charges before the Court.
[
4
]
While not strictly a prior discreditable conduct
issue, it was agreed that testimony about Mr. Miller’s history of infidelity
would be admissible at trial, as it further explained the issues in the
relationship and was relevant to the incidents before the Court.
[
5
]
Later, with Ms. Shakeel’s consent, I allowed the
Crown to cross-examine Mr. Miller on his Youth Court record.
[
6
]
The central issue in this trial is whether the
Crown has proved the offences beyond a reasonable doubt. That question turns on
the credibility of Ms. Lindo and Mr. Miller. (While I also heard from the
officer who found the handgun pursuant to a judicial authorization, her
evidence was not challenged.)
II.
BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE EVENTS AT ISSUE
[
7
]
A summary of the events will place the issues in
context.
[
8
]
Mr. Miller and Ms. Lindo are 20 and 23 years
old, respectively. They met in 2023 and started dating in the spring or summer.
They have a son who was born in March 2024. That pregnancy was unplanned. Ms.
Lindo had a strained relationship with her mother and spent most of her
pregnancy with Mr. Miller at his mother’s apartment. After the birth of their
son in March 2024, she returned to her mother’s house for a short period. Mr.
Miller would visit and help with the baby. Then, Ms. Lindo moved back to Mr.
Miller’s mother’s apartment with the baby. Ms. Lindo had a very good
relationship with Mr. Miller’s mother.
[
9
]
At the time, Mr. Miller’s mother, his sister Sarah,
his younger brother Kamreese and his older brothers Chris and Kevin also lived
in the apartment. His mother’s boyfriend visited frequently but did not spend
the night. At times, young cousins also came over. The apartment had three
pre-existing bedrooms that were occupied by Mr. Miller’s mother and brothers.
Mr. Miller occupied a part of the living room that had been walled off for his
privacy. His sister slept in the bunkbed in the remaining part of the living
room. Mr. Miller’s space was closest to the balcony door.
[
10
]
Mr. Miller and Ms. Lindo agree that their relationship had been
tumultuous. They were on and off and they argued a lot. Mr. Miller had cheated
on her repeatedly. This led to conflict in which she would confront him, he
would admit it, she would leave, he would promise never to do it again and she
would return. They give different descriptions of the level of physicality that
their arguments would involve, but both agree that nothing as serious as what
is alleged to have happened on May 1 had ever happened before.
[
11
]
On April 24, they got into a physical altercation. They present
different versions as to what happened and who was the aggressor. According to
her, it took place when she was in the back seat of the car and Mr. Miller was
in the driver’s seat. Her version describes a violent series of incidents in
which Mr. Miller was the aggressor in the car, where he slammed her head into
the rear passenger window, and then upstairs, where he punched her. The
incident also left her with scratches on her chest. According to Mr. Miller,
the incident began outside the car, when she was pulling on his shirt as he
tried to buckle up the baby. He turned around and slapped her. Both ended up in
the car, where Ms. Lindo slapped him from the back seat several times and
pulled his hair. He pushed her into the back seat to get her to release his
hair. Both got out of the car and then he returned to it and left. He saw no
injuries on her at the time.
[
12
]
For a short time, Mr. Miller and Ms. Lindo had a dog. They had to
give it up in mid-March because it had attacked his little sister and a
neighbour. Mr. Miller heard from his sister that it had also scratched Ms.
Lindo. Ms. Lindo denied ever having been harmed by the dog.
[
13
]
Mr. Miller and Ms. Lindo also agree that on May 1, on the way home from
spending time with friends, he realized that he had lost his cell phone. They
retraced his steps but were unable to find it. In the elevator up to the
apartment, Ms. Lindo offered him her second phone. He set up his iCloud account
on the phone, and then began to clear it of Ms. Lindo’s messages. It was then
that he discovered a message from Ms. Lindo telling a man that she missed him. Sarah,
Chris, Kevin and the baby were at home. Mr. Miller’s mother was not.
[
14
]
Beyond that, their accounts are very different.
[
15
]
According to Ms. Lindo, Mr. Miller became upset and confronted her
about the message.  He Facetimed the other male and then “went off” as she put
it. He went to the other room. She went to tell him that it was not what he was
thinking. Then, she went to the balcony to make a call. When she re-entered the
apartment, Mr. Miller hit her on the right side of her face and called her a
whore while he was holding the baby. It was hard enough to leave a mark. She
fought back by slapping him in the face. The two yelled back and forth. He was
upset that she had hit him while he was holding their son. He handed the baby
to his sister. He hit Ms. Lindo several times. Then, he pushed her onto his bed
and got on top of her. They were at the extremity of the bed near the dresser. He
strangled her with both hands. It did not last long, and she did not lose
consciousness, but her vision “went a little dark” and “starry.” He then
reached behind him with his right hand and retrieved a black handgun from the
dresser drawer while keeping his left hand on her neck. He pointed the gun to
her head. He said he’d kill her, asked “why would you do that to me?” and told
her that she was not to be with anybody else. During the incident, Mr. Miller
pulled off her wig.
[
16
]
Chris came in, pulled Mr. Miller off Ms. Lindo and told her to go to
his room. She did so. At this point, she did not know if Chris saw the gun or
where it was. About five minutes later, Chris came to see her. Mr. Miller
followed him and yelled at her. He reached over Chris’s shoulder and hit her.
She made her way to Mr. Miller’s mother’s room, locked it and called 911. She
stayed there until police arrived. She told them about the gun and that her
prints may be on it because she had handled it earlier.
[
17
]
In her 911 call, Ms. Lindo is extremely upset and raw. Mr. Miller
can be heard in the background implying that she was lying about the gun and
that he had made gun gestures with his hands. He also told her to tell the
police to come search the house.
[
18
]
When police arrived, Ms. Lindo was still very upset and agitated.
She was not wearing her wig. In the SOCO photos, she remains teary.
[
19
]
Ms. Lindo described the firearm as a black handgun like those that
police officers carry. She had seen it earlier that day when Mr. Miller passed
it to her and asked her to put it away in the dresser. She saw the “clip” with
gold-coloured bullets in it. He also showed her one that she described as
purple tipped. He told her that it is the kind that explodes in the body. He
told her he had the gun for protection.
[
20
]
The handgun that was found on the balcony is indeed a black
semi-automatic pistol that looks like those carried by police. The bullets in
the magazine are gold coloured, except for the one on the top which, based on
the photographs, counsel agree is blue tipped.
[
21
]
For his part, Mr. Miller, denied assaulting Ms. Lindo as described,
or using a firearm or knowing of its existence in the apartment. Rather, he got
upset about the text message and the fact that Ms. Lindo was lying to him about
it. For the first time in their relationship, he felt like she had cheated on
him. But he went to his room because she was lying to him. He spent time with
the baby. Ms. Lindo came to keep arguing, which he did not want to do. So, he
got up to give the baby to his sister. In doing so, he brushed past Ms. Lindo
and made contact with her shoulder as the space was tight. She slapped him on
the side of the face. After handing off the baby, he turned around and Ms.
Lindo slapped him again. So, he took both of her hands with his and pulled them
downward, telling her to stop putting her hands on him. It was then that he
made the hand gestures that resembled guns. He demonstrated these gestures –
both hands in front of his body in a relaxed position, with the index and
middle fingers pointing roughly forward and the ring and pinky finger curled
inward at approximately a right angle. He also testified that this is what he
does when he talks. She pushed him and he fell into a clothing rack. He got up
and shoved her. She held his hair they fell onto the bed. She was screaming and
Chris came in and tried to pull him off her. Ms. Lindo was holding his hair,
and Chris had to disentangle it from her hand. He and Chris argued because he
and the rest of the family always took Ms. Lindo’s side.
[
22
]
When police arrived just after 11PM, Mr. Miller was sitting in the
hallway outside his mother’s unit, holding the baby. He was calm and
cooperative.
[
23
]
Mr. Miller’s Youth Court record spans March 2021 to March 2023. It
includes two robberies, one count each of uttering threats, assault, assault
with a weapon and assault by choking, and several breaches of court orders.
[
24
]
At the time of the incident, Mr. Miller was on a bail with a 10 p.m.
curfew. He was also supposed to live at his aunt’s apartment, which was in the
same building.
III.
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
[
25
]
On behalf of the Crown, Mr. Boissoneault submits that I ought to
accept Ms. Lindo’s evidence and reject Mr. Miller’s. He argues that I should do
so because Ms. Lindo’s testimony is buttressed by a number of pieces of
evidence that lend credit to it: (1) the 911 call, which is powerful circumstantial
evidence of her state of mind minutes after the incident; (2) real
corroborative evidence, including the handgun and the fact that she was not
wearing her wig when police arrived; and (3) the escalating animus between the
two, which fits her account of the events of May 1 and speaks to motive.
[
26
]
While he does not argue that Mr. Miller’s account, standing alone,
is fatally flawed, he maintains that it ought to be rejected because it does
not add up when considered along with the totality of the evidence. Likewise,
it should not raise a reasonable doubt in my mind. While he accepts that Mr.
Miller’s Youth Court record ought to be treated with caution, he submits that
it is nonetheless evidence of dishonesty and disregard for court orders. He
also argues that his account of his PTSD and how he manages it was not credible
when considered against his Youth Court record.
[
27
]
On behalf of Mr. Miller, Ms. Shakeel submits that Mr. Miller’s
evidence ought to be believed or, in the alternative, that it should raise a reasonable
doubt in my mind. In the further alternative, she argues that Ms. Lindo’s
evidence lacks credibility, reliability and plausibility. It also reflects a
motive to fabricate. As such, it cannot be the foundation for a finding of
guilt.
[
28
]
Moreover, she argues that there are other reasonable inferences with
respect to the existence of the firearm in the apartment that are inconsistent
with Mr. Miller’s guilt: it could have been left there by one of the multiple
residents or guests, including Ms. Lindo.
IV.
APPLICABLE LEGAL PRINCIPLES
[
29
]
The Crown bears the entire burden of
proving Mr. Miller’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. That burden never shifts
to Mr. Miller.
In
R. v. Lifchus
,
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC)
,
[1997] 3 SCR 320
at
para.
36
, the Supreme Court of Canada explained that reasonable doubt is not
based on sympathy or prejudice; rather, it is based upon reason and common
sense; it is logically connected to the evidence or absence of evidence; it
does not involve proof to an absolute certainty; it is not proof beyond any
doubt nor is it an imaginary or frivolous doubt.
[
30
]
I also remind myself
that criminal trials are not credibility contests. The question is always
whether the Crown has proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
31
]
In cases such as this
one, it is important to follow the analytical framework that the Supreme Court
of Canada provided in
R. v. W.D.
(1991),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
,
63 CCC (3d) 397
(S.C.C.)
to ensure that the burden of proof does not
shift. It is broken down into three prongs:
(i)
If I believe Mr.
Miller’s
evidence and it is exculpatory, I must acquit him.
(ii)
If I do not believe Mr. Miller’s testimony but am left
in reasonable doubt by it, I must acquit him.
(iii)
Even if I am not left in doubt by
Mr. Miller’s evidence, I must ask whether, based on the evidence which I do
accept, I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of his guilt.
V.
CREDIBILITY, RELIABILITY AND MOTIVE TO FABRICATE
[
32
]
Ms. Shakeel argues that a number of inconsistencies in Ms. Lindo’s
testimony should give me pause:
(a)
Whether Mr. Miller hit her with an open or
closed fist when she returned from the balcony;
(b)
Whether Mr. Miller punched her several times
while holding the baby, or after handing the baby off to his sister and whether
the striking started before or after she went to the balcony;
(c)
In-chief, she did not mention injuries to her
face when shown a photograph; in cross-examination, she said she saw swelling
and explained that she was not wearing her glasses, yet she was able to read
text messages on the courtroom screen;
(d)
She called 911 because she wanted police to
attend and told them about the firearm but did not tell them about being
choked, which is also a serious offence; she also told them about his release;
(e)
Whether she locked Mr. Miller’s mother’s door or
not; and
(f)
She testified that the coloured bullet was
purple tipped while the photo depicts it as blue tipped.
[
33
]
She also argued that in failing to volunteer certain things that she
had done during examination-in-chief, Ms. Lindo minimized her own misconduct.
[
34
]
Ms. Shakeel further submitted that certain aspects of Ms. Lindo’s
evidence were implausible: the absence of bruising on her neck; the fact that
she did not fight back when being choked; her account of how Mr. Miller
retrieved the handgun; and the fact that Chris did not react to the firearm
itself.
[
35
]
Lastly, Ms. Shakeel argued that Ms. Lindo’s strong relationship with
Mr. Miller’s mother and family could have given her a motive to fabricate the
allegations for fear that she would lose face because of the text message that
she had sent to the other man.
[
36
]
In contrast, Ms. Shakeel argued that Mr. Miller’s testimony was
detailed, consistent and plausible. Moreover, he admitted past instances of
wrongdoing or dishonesty.
[
37
]
Mr. Boissoneault accepts that Ms. Lindo’s testimony is not perfect.
However, she was careful when she could not remember something with certainty,
and easily admitted certain facts put to her in cross-examination. The core of
her account – what happened in Mr. Miller’s room – was not shaken. Also, her
account is supported by the factors I have listed above.
[
38
]
He also argued that nothing could be made of Ms. Lindo’s failure to
fight back when being choked, or of the lack of evidence of Chris’s reaction,
if any.
VI.
ANALYSIS
[
39
]
I have carefully considered the evidence in its totality. I do not
accept Mr. Miller’s evidence as truthful, and it does not raise a reasonable
doubt in my mind. This is because it conflicts with the evidence that I do believe
to have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt: this includes Ms. Lindo’s account
of what happened to her on May 1, which was supported or corroborated by other
evidence, including the firearm that was found on the balcony. I also had some
concerns with Mr. Miller’s credibility. I will explain why.
[
40
]
Despite some inconsistencies in Ms. Lindo’s testimony, I found her
to be a credible and reliable witness who appeared to me to be doing her best
to tell the truth. Her account made sense in the context of the increasing
animosity that existed between the two of them. For the first time in a short relationship
that involved physical and verbal altercations, Mr. Miller came to believe that
Ms. Lindo had been unfaithful to him.
[
41
]
I do not agree that the inconsistencies in Ms. Lindo’s testimony are
as numerous or important as Ms. Shakeel suggests. On either account, what
happened between the two of them on May 1 was a situation of high stress and conflict
that began before they ended up in Mr. Miller’s room. All of it happened in
very cramped spaces. In that context, Ms. Lindo’s inability to recall exactly when,
where and how she was struck at the outset is of little moment. I saw no
inconsistency in Ms. Lindo’s testimony about her ability to read the text
messages in court – one screen was right in front of her and a very large one was
nearby. Her testimony in cross-examination that her face showed some swelling
was a minor point in the context of the allegations and she did not dwell on
it. I take the same view of Ms. Lindo’s inconsistent testimony as to whether she
had locked Mr. Miller’s mother’s door behind her after minutes after the
incident.
[
42
]
With respect to what she told the dispatcher in the 911 call, again context
matters. This was a short and tumultuous relationship, most of which overlapped
with Ms. Lindo’s unplanned pregnancy. Both accepted a certain amount of verbal
or physical violence from each other. She knew that Mr. Miller had a firearm
but was not concerned because he told her it was for protection. However, he
crossed a line when he pointed it at her. Also, Ms. Lindo struck me as a person
with a certain amount of “street smarts.” She wanted the police to come as soon
as possible. In the circumstances, focusing on the firearm and telling the
dispatcher that Mr. Miller was still there and was required to remain there
because of a curfew makes sense. It did not undermine her allegation that she
had also been choked.
[
43
]
I did not find Ms. Lindo’s description of the coloured bullet to be
problematic. Colour perception is to some extent subjective. It depends on a
number of factors, including lighting. She testified to having seen it in the
apartment and it was photographed by police at another location and under
different conditions. Also, blue and purple are proximate on the colour
spectrum. What is more, there was only one coloured bullet in the firearm, and
it stood in stark contrast with the others, which were all gold in colour.
[
44
]
I also found that Ms. Lindo easily admitted things that did not
reflect well on her, including her role in the April 24 incident. In the
context of the evidence as a whole, I did not find that she attempted to
minimize her behaviour.
[
45
]
Ms. Lindo’s account was not implausible. She explained that when she
was being choked, Mr. Miller had his full weight on her and her arms were at
her sides. He is bigger than her and he is also much stronger. Also, there is
no one way to react when being choked. I did not find her failure to fight back
in those brief moments to be implausible. The absence of bruising after the
brief incident of choking that she described did not cause me concern either.
[
46
]
Given the layout of the room, Mr. Miller’s size and their position
on the bed, it would have been easy for Mr. Miller to reach back and retrieve
the firearm.
[
47
]
I also agree with the Crown that the lack of evidence about Chris’s
reaction to the gun, if indeed he saw it, should not affect the credibility or
plausibility of Ms. Lindo’s account. There is not enough evidence about him,
his lifestyle or his temperament.
[
48
]
With respect to a motive to
fabricate, I remind myself that (1) there is no onus on Mr. Miller to prove
that Ms. Lindo had a motive to fabricate, and (2) the absence of an apparent
motive does not bolster Ms. Lindo’s credibility:
R. v. Bartholomew
2019
ONCA 377
at paras.
21-22
.
[
49
]
I see no apparent motive to fabricate here. Such a motive on these
facts would be very thin. The text message is ambiguous, and the family had consistently
sided with Ms. Lindo in the past. Moreover, this was a short and turbulent relationship
and despite it all, Ms. Lindo explained that she had been open to co-parenting
with Mr. Miller after May 1.
[
50
]
Ms. Lindo’s description of the events was detailed and compelling.
Her description of the firearm and ammunition that were on the balcony was detailed
and substantially accurate. Her emotional state during the 911 call provided
compelling support for the serious allegations she has made. That heightened emotional
state made sense in the context of the trajectory of her relationship with Mr. Miller.
I also note that Mr. Miller confirmed Ms. Lindo’s testimony that Chris
intervened and pulled him off her. I believed it to be truthful and accurate.
[
51
]
It is true that when Mr. Miller’s account is considered on its own, no
clear flaws emerge. But that is not the right way to approach it. It must be
viewed in the context of the evidence as a whole. His credibility must also be considered.
[
52
]
As I indicated, I reject Mr. Miller’s version of events because it conflicts
with the evidence that I do accept as truthful and accurate. Stacked beside Ms.
Lindo’s testimony, the 911 recording and the real evidence, including the
firearm, Mr. Miller’s account is not capable of belief.
[
53
]
With respect to credibility, I found that Mr. Miller’s explanation
about his hand gestures was contrived. First, they could in no way be confused
with a firearm in these circumstances. Second, as he testified, making those
gestures with both hands is how he talks.
[
54
]
Mr. Miller’s Youth Record should not be given undue weight for the
reasons set out by Justice Nakatsuru in
R. v. I.T
.
2024 ONSC 6176
beginning at para.
37
. That said, it does have some impact on his credibility
and respect for court orders. This is because of the nature of the relevant
entries on it, and the fact that they are quite recent.
[
55
]
For
these reasons, Mr. Miller’s evidence does not raise a reasonable doubt in my
mind either.
[
56
]
Having
said that, I must consider whether other plausible theories or reasonable possibilities
that are inconsistent with Mr. Miller’s guilt arise from the evidence or lack
of evidence in this case: see
R. v. Villaroman
2016 SCC 33
. Ms. Shakeel
argues that the firearm could have been left in the apartment without Mr.
Miller’s knowledge by one of the other occupants or frequent visitors, including
Ms. Lindo.
[
57
]
Even
Mr. Miller does not believe that the firearm was Ms. Lindo’s. I also reject
that suggestion as implausible. I believed her that it was not hers, and that
what she knew about it was what Mr. Miller showed and told her. I also find
that there is no reasonable possibility that Mr. Miller did not have knowledge
or control of the firearm because I am convinced that he showed it to Ms. Lindo
earlier in the day and asked her to put it in the dresser.
VII.
CONCLUSION
[
58
]
For these reasons, I find that the Crown has proved beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Miller is guilty of all the offences charged. I will
invite the parties to provide their views with respect to the application of
the
Kienapple
principle.
Released:  September 9, 2025
Justice P.F. Band