Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj715/2025oncj715.html

ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Daley
, 2025 ONCJ 715
DATE:  October 10, 2025
COURT FILE No.:  2311402470
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
—  AND  —
CHRISTOPHER DALEY
Before Justice T. Lipson
Reasons for
Judgment released on October 10, 2025
Mr. B. Estwick  .......................................................................................   counsel
for the Crown
Mr. M. Ertel  .........................................................   counsel
for the accused Christopher Daley
Lipson J.:
REASONS
FOR JUDGMENT
[
1
]
Christopher Daley entered pleas of not guilty
to charges of criminal harassment and mischief.
Overview of the evidence
[
2
]
The complainant, Sandra Lofaro, testified
that following the breakdown of her relationship with the defendant in August
2022, Mr. Daley engaged in a sustained pattern of harassing conduct that caused
her to fear for her safety. Ms. Lofaro said that she was subject to repeated
and unwanted communications, including some with sexually explicit and
degrading text messages. The relevant texts are found in exhibit 3. Ms. Lofaro
also testified that Mr. Daley entered her home without permission, drove past
her home late at night and installed a GPS tracker in her vehicle and conducted
surveillance on her movements. There was evidence in the trial that Mr. Daley
confronted her new partner, Ken Evraire, at his workplace, accusing him of
ruining the life of his two daughters. Mr. Daley also punctured three of Mr.
Evraire’s tires which Mr. Daley later admitted to and paid for the damage.
[
3
]
Ms. Lofaro testified to experiencing fear,
anxiety and sleep loss. She implemented safety plans at work and home. She said
that her romantic relationship with Mr. Evraire ended due to the stress caused
by Mr. Daley’s actions. Ms. Lofaro expressed ongoing fear of the defendant
knowing her whereabout and described the impact on her daily life and
well-being.
[
4
]
The Crown argues that Mr. Daley’s conduct
amounts to criminal harassment and that he knew or was reckless as to whether
Ms. Lofaro was harassed.
[
5
]
The defence does not dispute that the texts
to Ms. Lofaro were sent by Mr. Daley. The defence did not dispute the impact
these texts had on Ms. Lofaro’s emotional well-being. However, the defence
submits that the Crown did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Daley
put a GPS tracking device in the complainant’s car or that Mr. Daley was
otherwise conducting surveillance on Ms. Lofaro’s whereabouts. The defence contends
that while there is credible evidence that Ms. Lofaro felt harassed by the
actions of Mr. Daley, there is insufficient evidence that Mr. Daley knew that
she was harassed or that he was reckless or wilfully blind as to whether Ms.
Lofaro was harassed.
Analysis
The charge of criminal
harassment
[
6
]
I turn first to the issue of whether the
Crown proved the
actus reus
of criminal harassment. As I indicated
earlier, the defence concedes that Ms. Lofaro did not want some of his
communications, that she was fearful and that she had concerns for her safety.
[
7
]
Under s. 264 of the
Criminal Code
,
the
actus reus
(or guilty act) of criminal harassment requires proof
beyond a reasonable doubt of the following elements:
1. The accused engaged
in one of more of the prohibited forms of conduct listed in s. 264(2) including
repeatedly following the complainant or someone known to them; repeatedly
communicating with the complainant, directly or indirectly; watching or
besetting the complainant’s residence, workplace or other location; or engaging
in threatening conduct directed to the complainant or their family.
2. The complainant was
harassed- meaning they were tormented, troubled, worried continually or
chronically, plagued, or badgered.
3. The complainant
feared for their safety or the safety of someone known to them.
4. The complainant’s
fear was objectively reasonable in all the circumstances.
[
8
]
For the following reasons, I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the Crown has established the above requisite
elements of the offence.
[
9
]
Ms. Lofaro and the defendant were in an
intimate relationship from September 2015 to August 2022. They have a daughter
together named Marissa who was born in January 2019.  In October 2022, Ms.
Lofaro began a relationship with Ken Evraire.  It is evident from the text
message evidence that Mr. Daley was angry and upset with Ms. Lofaro over their
breakup as well and her new relationship. Ms. Lofaro described the defendant as
“volatile and unpredictable”. Mr. Daley’s bitterness over the break-up and his
upset over Ms. Lofaro’s new relationship is evident in the texts he sent her
set out in exhibit 3.
[
10
]
Over the time frame alleged in the
information, Mr. Daley sent Ms. Lofaro numerous text messages, including ones
with vulgar and sexually explicit content. The complainant explicitly asked him
to “stop texting me” and to limit communications to issues regarding their parenting
Marissa. Despite Ms. Lofaro’s pleas for him to limit his texts to parenting issues
with Marissa, the evidence is clear from the defendant’s texts to the
complainant found in exhibit 3 that Mr. Daley nevertheless continued to send
her unwanted texts concerning her dating life and casting aspersions on her
character in texts which had nothing to do with parenting issues but, instead,
reflected his anger and hostility over their breakup.
[
11
]
In addition to the unwanted and
inappropriate text messages sent to Ms. Lofaro, Mr. Daley engaged in other
forms of prohibited harassing conduct proscribed by s. 264(2) which made the
complainant fearful for her safety.
[
12
]
On December 13, 2022, while Ms. Lofaro was
at work, Mr. Daley entered her home without permission. Security footage showed
him placing an item near a chair in the corner of her home. He still had access
via keys and alarm code which had not been changed. Later that night, his truck
was seen driving past her home on two occasions. These incidents caused Ms.
Lofaro significant fear.
[
13
]
On December 31, 2022, Sandra Lofaro met her
sister and friend Connie for breakfast at the restaurant 'Changes Are'. After
breakfast, Sandra left her van parked near the restaurant and traveled to
Kanata in Connie’s vehicle to visit the Structube furniture store. While Sandra
was at Structube, she received unsolicited and emotionally charged messages
from Daley. These included: “I feel bad for people responding for you.” “Why
are you ignoring me?” “You’re not where you said you’d be.” These messages were
sent while Sandra was in Kanata, despite her not using her own vehicle and not
informing Daley of her plans. The timing and tone of the messages suggested
Daley had real-time awareness of her location. His emotionally charged comments
implied he knew she was not at home or using her usual vehicle.
[
14
]
Ms. Lofaro testified that she was disturbed
by Daley’s awareness of her movements, especially since she had taken precautions
by leaving her van behind. She suspected she was being tracked and later
confirmed this when a GPS tracker registered to Daley was discovered under the
passenger seat of her van on February 10, 2023.
[
15
]
On January 2, 2023, Ms. Lofaro saw the
defendant parked and then drive away from a location near her parents’ home
when she was there for a brunch.
[
16
]
On January 23, 2023, Ms. Lofaro went out for
coffee with Mr. Evraire at a Second Cup. Mr. Daley sent Ms. Lofaro a message
stating that his friend Alex had seen her and Mr. Evraire at the coffee shop
and had taken a photo of them together. He cancelled a planned dinner he had
with Ms. Lofaro and their daughter. He sent a series of vulgar and accusatory
text messages, including derogatory remarks about Mr. Evraire and claimed that
Ms. Lofaro had “ruined the day”.
[
17
]
On January 31, 2023, his truck was parked
near a vaccine clinic where Ms. Lofaro took her daughter, despite not informing
him of the appointment. She believed that her movements were being tracked. He
also intimated in other emails that she was lying about her whereabouts because
her car was parked in another location than she happened to be.
[
18
]
On February 10, 2023, a mechanic found a GPS
tracker hidden under her front seat. The tracker was registered to a person
named “Chris”. The telephone number associated with the contract was the same
number used By Mr. Daley to text Ms. Lofaro. There is compelling circumstantial
evidence that the defendant is the Chris and that he is responsible for the GPS
device found in Ms. Lofaro’s vehicle. The discovery of the GPS tracker made her
feel “enraged and afraid and in shock”.
[
19
]
Ms. Lofaro described the above-described
conduct caused her to feel anxious, unsafe and fearful. She implemented safety
plans, lost sleep and ended her romantic relationship with Mr. Evraire due to
the defendant’s actions. His conduct caused her ongoing distress.
[
20
]
In her testimony, Ms. Lofaro provided a
detailed and consistent account of events spanning several months which I have
described above. I found Ms. Lofaro to be an entirely credible witness. Her
testimony was corroborated by multiple forms of evidence including security
footage showing Mr. Daley entering her home, text messages in exhibit 3
demonstrating repeated unwanted and sometimes vulgar communications and the
discovery of the GPS tracker supporting her claims of surveillance and
harassment. I found the fear she experienced as a result of the defendant’s
conduct to be objectively reasonable and her testimony to be credible and
compelling.
[
21
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that Mr. Daley engaged in the prohibited conduct set out in s. 264(2), that Ms.
Lofaro was harassed, that she genuinely feared for her safety because of his
conduct, and that her fear was objectively reasonable in all the circumstances.
The
mens rea
analysis
[
22
]
Counsel for the Crown and defence agree that
the central issue to be determined is whether the Crown has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant had the requisite
mens rea
for
criminal harassment.
[
23
]
To establish the
mens rea
for
criminal harassment, the Crown must prove that the defendant knew the
complainant was harassed or was reckless or wilfully blind as to whether the
complainant was harassed. The standard is subjective, meaning it focuses on the
defendant’s actual state of mind, not what a reasonable person ought to have
known or foreseen. In
R
.
v Eltom
,
2010 ONSC 4001
, the trial
judge’s finding that the accused was “completely insensitive” to the
complainant’s fear was insufficient to establish
mens rea
. The correct
standard is knowledge or recklessness, not negligence or insensitivity.
[
24
]
The defence submits that the Crown has not
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Daley knew or was reckless or
wilfully blind as to whether Ms. Lofaro was harassed.
The text messaging
[
25
]
Exhibit 3 contains 173 pages of text
messaging between Mr. Daley and Ms. Lofaro, all of which the court has reviewed
with care.
[
26
]
I agree with the defence submission that it
is important to understand the relationship between the two which existed at
the time the texts were being sent. Mr. Daley and the complainant were separated
and were co-parenting their young daughter Marissa. Mr. Daley moved out in
September 2021, however the following year was spent trying to see if the
relationship could keep going. In September 2022, Ms. Lofaro officially ended
the relationship. Some of Mr. Daley’s belongings remained at the complainant’s
home. There was no custody arrangement in place for their daughter.
[
27
]
The defence says that Mr. Daley was unaware
the complainant was harassed because their communications continued, and they
both engaged in discussion. Sometimes the complainant initiated the
conversation. The defence argues that this is not the typical scenario in a
criminal harassment charge where there is usually one-sided communication from
the accused toward the complainant. It is submitted that there are several
examples of messages between Ms. Lofaro and Mr. Daley where they amicably
discuss various topics such as Mr. Daley’s knee injury, soccer, a family trip
to Portugal and sharing photos of Marissa.
[
28
]
I agree with defence counsel that some of
the text messaging between the two were pleasant and/or for the purpose of
arranging time for Marissa to spend with Mr. Daley. Yet, unfortunately, it is
also the case that Mr. Daley deliberately sent unwelcome and harassing messages
to Ms. Lofaro. The texts demonstrate that Ms. Lofaro repeatedly attempted to
set boundaries and focus their communications on parenting. Nevertheless, Mr.
Daley would on several occasions, divert the conversation from the subject of
parenting their daughter, to maligning Ms. Lofaro or her new partner at the
time, Mr. Evraire. Importantly, Ms. Lofaro did inform the defendant that these harassing
communications were unwanted and that she was fearful of him. On occasion, Mr.
Daley acknowledged that the communications were unwelcome, yet he continued nonetheless.
Proof of all of this are found in the actual texts highlighted in the Crown’s
written submissions as follows:
December 5,
2022
Page 8:
LOFARO’s 4th text
- “Ok. Then go
do that and stop texting me about us, please. And for heaven’s sake, stop
sending pics of women - how awful for them that you are doing this.”
December 14,
2022
Page 37:
DALEY’s first text message, demonstrating he understood his actions to be mean
- “I was being
mean because I was drunk and not being honest with my true feelings.”
December 14,
2022
Page 38:
LOFARO’s first text on the page
- “Stop with
your abusive and vulgar texts. It’s harassment. Stop driving past my house at
night. Stop picking up Marissa randomly”
December 15,
2022
Page 40:
DALEY’s 2nd message
- “I know I’ve
said some terrible things lately. I wonder if this is anything like how I made
you feel inside. I understand how you feel about walls now. I’m trying hard to
severe the bonds.”
December 17,
2022
Page 61:
LOFARO’s last message
- “I am done
with your garbage. You will hear from my lawyer as this can never happen
again.”
December 20,
2022
Page 88:
LOFARO’s 3rd-5th, 6th
- “You slashed
Ken’s tires. And texted me his address several times the same day. Come on.”
- “I am done
playing your games. You could have endangered his whole family. It’s not a
coincidence.”
- “Stop. Stop
this craziness. You can deny all you want but you did. All the text messages
this week and your responses about his address.”
- “You searched
up his address? Texted his exs to gather info on us. And his tires get slashed.
All in the same week.”
- “Your actions
have not been ok.”
December 20,
2022
Page 89: All of
LOFARO’s text on page 89
- “Your anger
is out of control”
- “You posting
on Ken’s wall was not ok. You slashing his tires out of anger is not ok. You
driving past my house at night is not ok. You coming into my house without
letting me know is not ok. Your mental health is not ok and I am worried”
- “I am fearful
of your next move”
- “You are
unpredictable. I need to protect myself and my kids.”
- “No. We have
been done, Chris. I’m trying to move on. I want a drama-free life.”
- “You have
brought so much drama to me in the past few months - you are out of control.
You crossed the line with me already with your texts but now crossed the line
with Ken when you posted on his wall and slashed his tires.”
- “Me walking
away from you and the behaviour that has not been ok for so long is not me out
of control. It’s finally me being in control of my thoughts and doing what is
best for me and my kids”.
- “Even when
you sent me the text about our intimate pics/videos and selling them, I said
nothing. You have crossed the line with me and Ken. I will not tolerate your
out of control behaviour any longer towards me or any man I choose to date in
the future.”
December 20,
2022
Page 90:
LOFARO’s 1st and 8th message.
- “Your mental
health is my worry”
- “You scared
the shit out of me. I don’t think you are mentally stable and I worry you will
hurt yourself and Marissa.”
December 20,
2022
Page 91: DALEY’S
2nd message
- “I said
things that triggered your anger because I know you so well.”
December 20,
2022
Page 92:
LOFARO’s 2nd message:
- “I don’t care
if you hope I heal. I don’t think we are safe with you in our lives to be
honest. Not after this weekend.”
December 20,
2022
Page 94:
LOFARO’s 2nd message:
- “Your
salvation talk doesn’t make me any less afraid of your mental health.”
December 20,
2022
Page 95: DALEY’S
message apologizing (this is after the tire slashing event)
- “I’m sorry,
Forgive me, Thank-you, I love you, Good bye”
December 22,
2022
Page 98:
LOFARO’s last two text messages
- “I have
multiple cameras facing my house for protection. I would like my garage opener
please. You do not make me feel safe.”
- “You and your
brother do not have the right to enter my home.”
December 22,
2022
Page 99: DALEY’S
MESSAGE
- “I want you
to be happy…you are free from me.”
- “You are safe
and free to do as you please.”
December 22,
2022
Page 99:
LOFARO’s 5th message
- “I do not
have a relationship with him nor will it grow. Your fear tactics worked and he
does not want to pursue anything with me further because of you.”
January 11,
2023
Page 123:
LOFARO’s 4th-6th message
- “Personal
items are not for us to discuss. So, please stop.”
- “Don’t send
me pics, Chris. Or elude to what you do in your bed with her.”
January 12,
2023
Page 124:
LOFARO’s 2nd message
- ‘“You did a
criminal act towards Ken and you are still acting out - just through your 3
year old daughter- which is sickening.”
January 23,
2023
Page 135:
LOFARO’s 11th text
- “And because
I am choosing to not have a life with you, you are angry and pull this garbage
on me with Marissa. It’s so unfair and wrong.”
January 23,
2023
Page 136:
LOFARO’s 3rd text
- “By going out
with another guy? We are not together. Me wanting to have a life outside of
being a mother has nothing to do with wanting to hurt you. It has nothing to do
with you. YOU deliberately hurt others, especially me. Your actions today show
this 1000%. Keep your fake kindness to yourself.”
January 23,
2023
Page 138 -
LOFARO’s 5th message
- “Stop
pretending to care. Stop offering help. Just stop. Your kindness is
ridiculously conditional - it makes me sick. You have ruined this day for me
once again.
January 25,
2023
Page 145 -
LOFARO’s 4th and 5th message
- “I am not
feeling sorry for you. You don’t control your emotions and your anger comes out
and leaves consequences.”
- “I do not
want to discuss this anymore. It sucks all of my energy out and I’m not going
to allow for that moving forward.”
January 26,
2023
Page 153 -
LOFARO’s 7th and 8th message:
- “Remember
after you slashed Ken’s tires you said I was free from you? What happened to
that?”
- “I do not
want to be with you. So please, please leave me alone and stop the following,
manipulation, driving past my house etc. please stop
[
29
]
I also note that on December 17, 2022 , Ms.
Lofaro received 31 unanswered messages from Mr. Daley. Mr. Daley frequently
used discussions regarding parenting arrangements as a pretext to initiate
personal and harassing conversations.
[
30
]
It is also clear from the above texts that Mr.
Daley sent Ms. Lofaro messages demonstrating actual knowledge or recklessness
regarding her emotional state and the harassing nature of his conduct:
[
31
]
Mr. Daley also wrote messages with
sexualized and degrading content. He also told her “I still have the videos we
made and some of the pics of your ass, pussy and you sucking my dick. I have no
use for them now but thought you might be able to sell them?”
[
32
]
I am satisfied that these remarks were
intentionally made to harass and distress Ms. Lofaro and demonstrates an
obvious recklessness as to whether Ms. Lofaro was or would be harassed.
Other s. 264(2) prohibited conduct
[
33
]
Of course, the unwanted messaging is only
one of the prohibited forms of conduct engaged in by Mr. Daley. I am satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that he repeatedly tracked the movements of Ms.
Lofaro in her vehicle by using a GPS device. Mr. Daley engaged in confrontation
with Mr. Evraire at their workplace and slashed his tires while Ms. Lofaro and
Mr. Evraire were on a date which was, in my view, meant as a sinister message
designed to intimidate Mr. Evraire but also to instill fear in Ms. Lofaro. He
succeeded with respect to Ms. Lofaro. Mr. Daley also entered her house without
permission. I find that the defendant engaged in repeated and unwanted
surveillance of the complainant as well as stalking behaviour. I accept the
testimony of Ms. Lofaro that she was harassed and fearful because of Mr. Daley’s
offending conduct.
[
34
]
I find that the evidence establishes beyond
any reasonable doubt the guilt of the accused on the charge of criminal
harassment. He is found guilty and convicted of the offence.
Charge of Mischief
[
35
]
The second charge alleges that the accused
between December 13, 2022 and February 10 2023 did wilfully obstruct interrupt
or interfered with the lawful use, enjoyment or operation of property contrary
to
s. 430(1)
(c) of the
Criminal Code
. It is alleged that Mr. Daley installed
or had installed a GPS device in Ms. Lofaro’s vehicle which interfered with the
complainant’s lawful enjoyment of her vehicle. His presence at multiple
undisclosed locations supported her claim that he was tracking her causing her
emotional distress and interfering with he lawful use and enjoyment of her
vehicle.
[
36
]
On February 10, 2023, Ms. Lofaro brought her
van to Kanata Collision in Stittsville for cleaning and detailing. Mechanic
Manny Guella, who specializes in electrical systems, discovered a GPS tracking
device hidden under the front passenger seat. The device was attached using
rare earth magnets, placed upside down, and was active and powered. Guella
photographed the device and informed Lofaro, who immediately contacted police.
Guella confirmed the GPS tracker was hidden in a non-obvious location and would
not be easily detected without training. He verified the device was active and
documented its placement with photographs.
[
37
]
Constable Laurie Kudsi, from the Intimate
Partner Violence Section, led the investigation. A production order revealed
the GPS device was activated on November 29, 2022, with a one-year service
term. The device was registered to a person named Chris with a phone number
(613-862-6788), and email (chris.nearest@gmail.com). The device was purchased
via Amazon for $150. It is admitted that this was the same telephone number
used by Mr. Daley to text Ms. Lofaro
[
38
]
Ms. Lofaro testified that she made sightings
of Daley’s truck at locations where she had not informed him of her presence
raised suspicions that Mr. Daley was tracking her. On January 31, 2023, Sandra
took her daughter for vaccines at a clinic and saw Daley’s truck parked nearby,
despite not notifying him where she was. She expressed fear and panic in texts
to friends and suspected GPS tracking. Similar sightings occurred at a
restaurant and a Structube store in Kanata. Daley also sent texts shortly after
Sandra dropped off her van at the mechanic, suggesting he was aware of her
location.
[
39
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused is guilty of mischief. The Crown has proven that Mr. Daley
interfered with the lawful use and enjoyment of her vehicle by placing or
having placed a GPS tracking device in her vehicle and tracking Ms. Lofaro’s movements.
He is found guilty and convicted of this offence.
Released:   October 10, 2025
Justice T. Lipson