Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj245/2025oncj245.html

CITATION:
R. v. Rogers
, 2025 ONCJ 245
COURT FILE No.:  4711-998-24-47106538
DATE: 2025 05 02
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS
   MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
   AND  —
CLINT ROGERS
Before Justice
Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for Judgment on a Firearms Prohibition and Disposition
Application
Criminal Code
sections 111 and
117.05
Mr. I. Osowski....................................................................................................  
for the Crown
Mr. C. Rogers.............................................................................................  
on his own behalf
Fergus ODonnell J.:
Clint Rogers is a gun aficionado, licensed gun owner and
     licensed gunsmith.  This is an application by the Crown to prohibit
     Mr. Rogers from possession of firearms and to dispose of his firearms as a
     result of two non-criminal incidents involving Mr. Rogers, one in May,
     2024 and the other in November,  2024.  Mr. Rogers opposed the
     application, representing himself.
I heard from three witnesses, namely Constable Nolan Pink, who
     was one of the responding officers on the second incident and from Mr.
     Rogers himself and his wife Sandra.
[1]
Mr. and Mrs. Rogers have been married for almost nine years, but they have
     known each other since they were children.  Mr. Rogers is now
     fifty-five years old.  He has no criminal record.
Early 2024 was truly awful for Mr. Rogers.  Over the span
     of two weeks three people close to him died, including his father and one
     of his sons, after which Mr. Rogers tried to kill himself by an overdose
     of prescription pills.  He sent his wife a text, which she read as a
     suicide note, and she fortunately got home in time to find him.  He
     subsequently saw his family doctor and was prescribed anti-depressants.
In the fall of 2024, things were still going badly for Mr.
     Rogers.  In addition to those three deaths of people very close to
     him, he had now lost his job, there was a lot of stress between him and
     his wife and they were planning to separate.  He was away for a day,
     which according to his wife was not uncommon, but when it stretched to two
     days and he then sent her a message saying that he loved her and to give
     his property to his kids, she got worried and called the police, who
     pinged his phone and unsuccessfully searched for him around the pinged
     location. When they were reporting their unsuccessful efforts to Mrs.
     Rogers, she received a text from Mr. Rogers saying he needed help and
     giving his location as "beach".  Constable Pink attended an
     area Mrs. Rogers identified as being a common hang-out for Mr. Rogers and
     found him in his truck, "slumped" over the steering wheel. 
     He also had a vertical cut down his arm, which was bleeding, with blood
     pooling on the floor.  Constable Pink applied a tourniquet and EMS
     attended to take Mr. Rogers to hospital, where he stayed for a few weeks
     as a result of serious kidney failure, from which he continues to have
     some side effects.  Mrs. Rogers testified that she was aware from the
     doctor, from Mr. Rogers's GP and from the lab results that the kidney
     failure had been caused by something Mr. Rogers ingested having been
     spiked.  Mr. Rogers testified that it was something he had drunk at a
     party that evening that was spiked without his consent and that numerous
     other party-goers had also become ill as a result.
Mrs. Rogers agreed that her husband's absence in November was
     not from any sort of suicidal crisis similar to what happened in May, but
     because of their looming separation.  She had, after his prolonged
     absence, perfectly understandably jumped to a conclusion about Mr. Rogers
     perhaps engaging in self harm again, in light of the spring incident.
Constable Pink testified that Mr. Rogers told him at the beach
     that he had cut himself and also that he had consumed $700 worth of crack
     cocaine.  Constable Pink understandably seized Mr. Rogers's
     Possession and Acquisition Licence (PAL) from him because he was aware of
     Mr. Rogers's May attempt at suicide and considered the November incident
     to have been a second attempt at suicide, except with the degree of
     severity increasing from the first attempt to the second apparent
     attempt.  On the basis of what was known to Constable Pink at that
     time, which was less information than is now before the court, his beliefs
     were entirely justified.
Mr. Rogers agreed in his testimony that he had cut himself, but
     that the effect of the spiked liquor and its interaction with his
     anti-depressants left him in a state where he said he was in and out
     of consciousness because of his kidney failure.  He had not
     consciously tried to kill himself in November, he said.  Mrs. Rogers
     described her husband at the hospital the following day as being delirious
     still.  Mr. Rogers said that, notwithstanding whatever he said to
     Constable Pink or what Constable Pink took from his utterances, he
     had
not
in fact bought any cocaine, that his blood tests
     showed negative for cocaine and that while he had indeed taken $700 out of
     the bank while he was away from home, that that was money he was going to
     use to move north in light of his looming separation from Mrs. Rogers,
     where he would start a new life tracking, which was one of his
     skills.  He said he still had about $650 of that $700 on him when he
     returned home.  His message to his wife was simply for her to give
     his property to his boys as he was heading out for that new life up north,
     not because he
intended
to kill himself.  He said that he
     assumed he had made the cut to his wrist, but that he was basically
     incoherent at that time as a result of the kidney failure.
Mr. Rogers testified that guns have been part of his life and
     his family life for generations, reaching back to his grandfather in World
     War II, to his father, to his own engagement with guns from around the age
     of eight years old, engagement in cadets, the reserves, the armed forces
     and sniper training and reaching forward to the present day when all five
     of his sons are gun aficionados, as are various of his neighbours and
     friends.  As a gunsmith, he has about a dozen clients who are members
     of the Hamilton Police Service who use his services for their personal
     firearms, along with a handful of RCMP officers who do likewise.  He
     is training an apprentice as a gunsmith.  He and his family and
     friends shoot a couple of times a month at a gun club and they hunt
     frequently, providing his family with about five months' worth of food and
     also donating food and pelts to others.
Mr. Rogers provided letters from his personal doctor and from
     St. Joseph's Hospital.  The former letter referred to Mr. Rogers's
     physical condition and his depression and the latter made reference to
     treatment for substance dependence.  Mr. Rogers says he no longer
     drinks and has come off the anti-depressants in light of the interaction
     between them and whatever he consumed at the party during the November
     event.  Although the St. Joseph's hospital letter focuses on
     substance dependence, Mr. Rogers outlined how he had been provided with a
     series of drug-free techniques to deal with his mental health
     challenges.  Mr. Rogers also provided two letters from friends and
     neighbours who have known him for about a decade, outlining his expertise,
     responsibility and reliability in relation to all matters gun-related.
A peculiar feature of this application is that Mr. Rogers
     advised the court (and it did not seem to be disputed), that he has
     remained in possession of several long guns and very large amounts of
     ammunition over the course of the past year, even though he told the Crown
     of this as long ago as December, 2024 and  despite the fact that the
     Crown and police were reminded of this fact on a recent previous court
     appearance.  Although it is not entirely clear how the firearms
     currently in the possession of the police were seized, it would appear
     that it was either not by a search of the property or if there was a
     search that the search was not thorough enough to locate that armoury.
I certainly appreciate Mr. Rogers's confusion about how
     the Crown and police are seeking to restrain him from possessing firearms
     because he is a potential danger to himself or others while ignoring the
     fact that he has actually remained in possession of a significant majority
     of his firearms throughout the process, despite that being known to the
     authorities for a long time and with no warrant having been obtained for
     their seizure, even to this day.  I, too, find that confusing.
In one sense, however, it is irrelevant to the decision I have
     to make.  The decision I have to make is whether or not the Crown has
     demonstrated on a balance of probabilities that Mr.
     Rogers's possession of firearms creates a danger to himself
     and/or others in all the circumstances.  That decision must be based
     on all of the relevant evidence and, while one could read the authorities'
     failure to act on Mr. Rogers's continued possession of the other
     weapons as demonstrating that they do not actually perceive him to be a
     risk, it could just as likely, or probably more likely, simply reflect a
     "broken telephone" situation or simple but serious human
     oversight, in which relevant information has not been acted on by a person
     who should have acted on it or has not been passed on by someone to
     another person who should have acted on it.  As I am satisfied that
     the Crown's application is made entirely in good faith, that is that the
     Crown genuinely believes there is a risk here that satisfies the test set
     out in the
Criminal Code
, I view it as more likely that this
     information was shared with the authorities by Mr. Rogers but simply was
     never acted upon, as concerning as that is.
In another sense, however, Mr.
     Rogers's continued possession of these other weapons is at least
     "not entirely irrelevant".  From the time of his mental breakdown
     in May of 2024, as a result of three closely-timed deaths, through
     whatever happened in November, 2024, Mr. Rogers has remained in possession
     of that store of long guns and there is no suggestion at all that he has,
     in either incident, made use of them, although they were clearly easily
     accessible to him and would have been alternative methods for him to kill
     himself if he were so inclined to take that way out. But he did not.
As I have noted, the legal test in this case is fairly
     straightforward:
Section 111
of the
Criminal Code
gives the court power
      to prohibit a person from possessing firearms, ammunition, explosives and
      other weapons or devices in certain circumstances.  According to s.
      111(1) the question is whether it is, "not desirable in the
      interests of [Mr. Rogers] or of any other person that [Mr. Rogers] should
      possess any such thing."
Unlike a criminal trial, where the standard of proof is proof
      beyond a reasonable doubt, which is a very, very high standard since it
      involves labelling a person as a criminal and exposing them to sanctions
      including loss of liberty, the standard of proof on this application is
      proof on a balance of probabilities.
[2]
In other words, has it been shown as 50.1 per cent likely that Mr.
      Rogers's possession of weapons is contrary to his or the public
      interest.  Realistically, the question is whether Mr.
      Rogers's mental health challenges make it too risky for him to
      continue to be allowed to possess firearms.
The burden of proof lies on the party alleging Mr. Rogers's possession
      of firearms would be unsafe, that is, on the Crown.  In the
      vernacular, if the Crown cannot prove that their argument is stronger
      than Mr. Rogers's argument, the Crown's application fails.
The application does not involve any allegation by the Crown
      that Mr. Rogers is a bad person or that his
character
makes
      him unfit to be a gun owner.  Mr. Osowski for the Crown went out of
      his way to make it clear that he takes no such position, but to the
      contrary recognizes Mr. Rogers as an upstanding citizen, with a good work
      ethic, no conflict with the criminal law and excellent standing in the
      community.  Rather, the question is whether or not, in light of Mr.
      Rogers's challenges over roughly the last year, it is safe for him to be
      in possession of firearms, etc.
The application is forward looking, that is, it must look at
      whether a prohibition order is justified in the present
[3]
and future tenses, not the past tense.  It is not a question of
      whether or not Mr. Rogers's possession of firearms, etc. in May or
      in November would have been wise, but a future projection.  However,
      the events of the past twelve months are highly relevant to predicting
      the future or, put another way, assessing safety and risk in the
      future.  As Mr. Rogers noted a few times in his evidence and
      submissions, predicting the future is impossible.  That is true, in
      terms of there being no
guarantee
of what will happen in
      the future.  However, the task before me involves looking at
      probabilities:  is it more or less probable that Mr.
      Rogers's access to firearms, etc. will create a risk to him or
      others?
This determination of future risk is not what judges do most of
     their time.  For the most part, judges are tasked to determine what
     has happened in the past, based on evidence of particular facts that are
     determinable through various forms of evidence.  To a certain extent,
     judges' sentencing decisions look forward, for example in assessing
     whether a convicted offender requires specific deterrence, but sentencing
     is also largely a backward looking task:  what did the offender do,
     what was his moral responsibility when he did it and what was the effect
     on his victims.
The closest comparator for an application like this may be the
     bail hearing, in which a judge or justice of the peace must look at a
     person's past (in the bail setting, an alleged offender) and make a future
     determination of what risk a defendant would likely pose to society if he
     or she were released pending trial.  However, in keeping with Mr.
     Rogers's comments, none of us has a crystal ball.  Instead, we must
     make a prediction based on all of the known facts.  This is one of
     the most difficult and fraught decisions in the criminal law process
     because there are unquantifiable risks if some people are released and
     different but troubling risks if people are unjustifiably detained and it
     is impossible to say with absolute certainty that a given person is or is
     not a risk or will or will not continue not to be a risk.  It is all
     a matter of risk analysis and balancing of interests involving liberty and
     security and sometimes life and death.  It is not a task undertaken
     lightly.
There is room for reasoned debate about where the bounds of
     reasonable bail lie in any given case and there is room for reasoned
     debate about how the bail system should be structured.  Sadly, there
     is also often a maelstrom of ignorant, ill-informed, ill-considered and
     irresponsible invective by public figures --who should know better-- about
     the shortcomings of the court system when it comes to bail.  Similar
     criticisms might be made in relation to applications like this one, except
     that these applications are far, far less frequent.
Today's application, however, carries the same risk profile,
     same uncertainty and same lack of guarantees as a bail hearing, albeit in
     a context where Mr. Rogers is in no way accused of criminal
     wrongdoing.  Just as a bail hearing asks, "is it safe to release
     Mr. X?", this application asks, "Is it safe for Mr. Rogers to
     possess firearms in light of what happened over the past year?",
     although, the more accurate question in light of the wording of the
Criminal
     Code
is:  "Has the Crown proved that it is unsafe for Mr.
     Rogers to possess firearms?"
In doing his or her job, any responsible justice of the peace
     or judge presiding over a bail hearing will always have lurking in the
     back of his or her mind a concern about "getting it wrong" and
     about the potentially tragic or even fatal consequences of "getting
     it wrong".  Caution, but not paralysis, is a good characteristic
     for any judicial official. Our institutional memory is long when it comes
     to cases where a person was released on bail and proceeded to commit
     grave, sometimes fatal, offences.  Very recent local memory includes a
     case with an absolutely heartbreaking outcome resulting from offences by a
     repeat offender released on bail.  The "safest" response to
     such concerns might be seen as to "lock them all up" or, in
     firearms prohibition applications, to deny anyone with any history of
     depression, suicidal ideation or mental health challenges the privilege of
     firearm ownership.  However, just as  bombastic protestations to
     "lock them all up" in bail hearings would not only involve
     ignoring the law and result in imprisoning before trial huge numbers of
     presumptively innocent people for whom bail is appropriate, an overly
     cautious approach in firearms prohibition applications would likewise
     disrespect the law of Canada and disadvantage owners who do not
     objectively
appear
to be a risk.
But these are human processes.  As I have noted, history
     shows that people who are reasonably determined to be good candidates for
     bail do sometimes go on to reoffend while on bail, sometimes in horrific
     ways.  History also shows that people who are dealing with mental
     health issues sometimes do go on to engage in self harm or in serious
     injury to others or worse.  Last week's tragedy in Vancouver may be
     an example of just that.  The best society can expect is that the
     decision-makers in bail applications and applications like this approach
     the matter with a sense of the seriousness of the occasion and apply the
     legal standards set out by Parliament in light of the most reliable
     appraisal they can make of the evidence presented by the parties. Neither
     the bail decision nor this decision ever comes with any guarantee. 
     The
risk
of a bad outcome is always present.
In the present case, it is clear that Mr. Rogers tried to
     commit suicide in May, 2024 after the death of his father, son and another
     person close to him and that he took a course of anti-depressants in
     response to the depression underlying that attempt.  Nobody disputes
     that.  What happened in November is less clear.  Constable Pink
     perceived what happened in November as a second suicide attempt, by a
     different method, perhaps a combination of Mr. Rogers ingesting drugs and
     also attempting to slit his wrist.  On the information available to
     Constable Pink in that moment, those were perfectly reasonable
     conclusions.  However, Constable Pink did not have the benefit of Mr.
     Rogers’s information about the party, the spiked liquor, the
     alcohol-antidepressant interaction, his toxicology screens and so
     on.  Constable Pink can only be correct, however, that the cut to Mr.
     Rogers's arm was an attempt at self-harm, but that leaves open the
     question of whether that behaviour was actually a consequence of delirium
     brought on by an involuntary ingestion of tainted alcohol and the drug
     interaction, rather than a conscious choice of self-harm, that is, whether
     the slitting of the arm was externally induced.  Mr. Rogers was a credible
     witness and his evidence about the tainted alcohol toxicity is supported
     by his wife and by their reference to hospital records, but his assertion
     that his direction to his wife to give all his things to his sons was just
     because he was moving rather than because he was suicidal does not make
     perfect sense since if he was moving north to engage in a tracking
     existence, he would have needed some of those things.  That being said,
     just as the cut to his arm may have been the product of delusional
     behaviour during his kidney failure, so may his utterances and it would be
     unrealistic to parse them too closely.  To the extent that the November
     incident may have been a conscious or wilful second suicide attempt, Mr. Rogers
     did resile from it when he called his wife.
There are strengths and weaknesses in the evidence. 
     Constable Pink testified that Mr. Rogers told him he had spent $700 on
     cocaine in the two days he was away from home and I have no reason to
     disbelieve him on that.  Mr. Rogers, however, denies having done that
     and seems to suggest there is some confusion involving the money he took
     out of the bank and something Constable Pink may have misunderstood
     (perhaps something Mr. Rogers said in his delirium).
Neither the Crown nor Mr. Rogers has called any medical
     witnesses, although Mr. Rogers presented a letter from his family doctor
     and from the addictions clinic at St. Joseph's Hospital.  While the
     letter refers to addictions counselling and refers to the availability of
     concurrent mental health treatments if required, Mr.
     Rogers's description of what he learned from the St. Joseph's
     counselling reflects techniques that would be valuable in dealing with
     both substance dependence and mental health challenges.  He says that
     he has benefited from those sessions and applies the techniques learned in
     dealing with his ongoing emotional challenges.
Mr. Rogers is fifty-five years old.  He appears never to
     have had any involvement with the law, other than as a gunsmith for
     various police officers' personal firearms.  He has a commendation
     three years ago from the chief of police for Hamilton for his assistance
     in saving an elderly person who might otherwise have drowned in his car.
     The materials before me, both the evidence and the documents, suggest a
     person with a strong work ethic, a history of engagement with his
     neighbours and community and an inherited passion for firearms and hunting
     that serves also as a source of income and subsistence.  Both Mr.
     Rogers and Mrs. Rogers came across very powerfully as salt-of-the-earth
     types of people, who left no concern on my part for their honesty. 
     There is always a risk in cases of this nature, however, that people so
     closely connected to the issue, i.e. the firearms enthusiast Mr. Rogers
     and his devoted spouse, may see Mr. Rogers's mental health status more
     optimistically than it truly is, but on the record before me I really have
     nothing more than the speculative possibility of that happening rather
     than anything upon which I can pin a sense of that being an active risk
     here.  Both of them have testified, each in their own words, as to
     how Mr. Rogers still has grief issues to deal with but has benefited from
     his counselling at St. Joseph's Hospital and has acquired mechanisms to
     handle things when they might otherwise become overwhelming.  Mrs.
     Rogers testified to having her husband back, that he is a different man
     from who he was in the darkest times.
It is a good thing for judges to have a tiny person on their
     shoulder, whispering occasionally in their ear, "but what if you're
     wrong?"  Caution and restraint and balance should always be part
     of the judicial toolkit.  Ultimately, however, caution and prudence
     cannot be allowed to become paralysis and the horrific imaginings of
     "what if...?" cannot change the judge's role, which is to decide
     each issue before him or her based on the legal test, the burden of proof,
     the standard of proof and the evidence, however incomplete, that is put
     before them in a particular case.
In the present case, I understand entirely Constable Pink's
     concern and the Crown's caution.
[4]
The little person on my
     shoulder has asked a few times, "but what if you're wrong?  What
     if it all ends up horribly?"  When I look at the history here,
     however-- the awful combined losses underlying Mr. Rogers's suicide
     attempt in May, the uncertainty in light of the imperfect evidence of
     whether or not there was a second wilful suicide attempt in November, the
     evidence from Mr. Rogers and Mrs. Rogers of the progress he has made in
     counselling, his current condition and the coping methods he has learned
     through counselling and even balancing in the inherent dangerousness of
     firearms being in someone's possession if that person is mentally
     unstable--I find myself unable to say, on the record as it stands before
     me, that the Crown has shown that it is more likely than not that Mr.
     Rogers being in possession of firearms or other weapons would pose a risk
     of harm to himself or others.
I add that Mr. Rogers has spent almost his entire life around
     guns and dealing with issues of gun safety in various roles and on a
     seemingly constant basis.  Whatever issues he may have had, none of
     them in any way involved firearms and none of them involved injury or risk
     to other persons or any sort of mental health issues beyond grief and
     depression.  There is no indication of any sort of paranoid ideation
     or sense of persecution or any higher-order mental health issues that
     would suggest he is a risk to others.  The key focus of concern
     appears to be his handling of grief and depression, which are areas that,
     on the record before me, he appears to have under control.
Although this is not determinative to my decision, I do wonder
     if imposing a firearms prohibition on Mr. Rogers--a person whose very
     existence is inextricably intertwined with firearms, gunsmithing,
     training, target shooting, hunting, subsistence and tracking and whose
     family, friends and neighbours share similar engagement--I wonder if
removing
his access to that engagement and community would actually be more harmful
     to him than any risk of self-harm, which, as I have noted does not appear
     to have been made out on the record before me.
Accordingly, the Crown's application for a prohibition order
     under
s. 111
of the
Criminal Code
is dismissed.  That being
     the case, the issue of disposition of any weapons seized or in Mr.
     Rogers's possession becomes moot.
Released:     2 May, 2025
[1]
The rules of admissibility are relaxed on hearings of this nature
and some of the evidence included, for example, medical records and utterances
by doctors that were not placed before me or who did not testify but that were
within the knowledge of Mr. and/or Mrs. Rogers.  See:  See
R. v. Zeolkowski
,
1989 CanLII 72 (SCC)
.
[2]
See
R. v. Zeolkowski
,
1989 CanLII 72 (SCC)
[3]
See
R. v. Douglas
,
2013 ONCJ 649 (CanLII)
[4]
In the words of Justice M. Green of this court in
R. v. Douglas,
2013 ONCJ 649 (CanLII)
,
at paragraph
56
: “I begin with the obvious:  firearms are dangerous. 
Their possession by persons who are unstable or disposed to physical anger,
violence, intemperate behaviour or poor impulse control cannot be
countenanced. “