Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj359/2025oncj359.html

ONTARIO
COURT
OF
JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Enaya
, 2025 ONCJ 359
DATE:
2025 06 27
COURT
FILE
No.:
Halton
Info
#998 23 12101201
B
E
T
W
E
E
N
:
HIS
MAJESTY
THE
KING
— AND —
RYAN ENAYA
Before
Justice
Jennifer
Campitelli
Heard
on February 24, 25 and 26, 2025
Reasons
for
Judgment
released
on
June 27, 2025
Ms.
Ginn.................................................................................................. counsel
for
the
Crown
Ms. Ryan…………………………………………….counsel
for
the
accused
Ryan Enaya
CAMPITELLI J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Enaya faces three counts on the information,
as amended, which is before the court.  That he:
(1)
Between the 1
st
day of August in the
year 2022 and the 16
th
day of April in the year 2023, both dates
inclusive at the Town of Oakville in the said Region and/or elsewhere in the
Province of Ontario, unlawfully did, without lawful authority and knowing that Ramandip
Pahal was harassed or being reckless as to whether Ramandip Pahal was harassed,
engage in conduct referred to in
Section 264(2)
of
Criminal Code
,
thereby causing Ramandip Pahal in all the circumstances to fear for her safety
or the safety of anyone known to her, contrary to
Section 264(1)
of the
Criminal
Code of Canada
; and
(2)
Between the 1
st
day of August in the
year 2022 and the 16
th
day of April in the year 2023, both dates
inclusive, at the City of Burlington in the said Region and/or elsewhere in the
Province of Ontario, did by written or other means knowingly utter a threat to Ramandip
Pahal to cause bodily harm to Ramandip Pahal, contrary to
Section 264.1(1)
(a)
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
; and
(3)
Between the 1
st
day of August in the
year 2022 and the 16
th
day of April in the year 2023, both dates
inclusive at the City of Burlington in the said Region and/or elsewhere in the
province of Ontario, did by written means knowingly utter a threat to Ramandip
Pahal to cause death or bodily harm to Ramandip Pahal, contrary to
Section
264.1(1)
(a) of the
Criminal Code of Canada
.
Factual
Background
[
2
]
The complainant, Ms. Pahal and Mr. Enaya are
previous intimate partners.  Ms. Pahal characterizes their relationship as
volatile, and unhealthy.  She alleges that on three separate occasions, Mr.
Enaya threatened to harm her, and on one occasion Mr. Enaya threatened to cause
harm to her father.  Moreover,
Ms. Pahal
claims
that after she ended the relationship in August of 2022, Mr. Enaya continued to
contact her utilizing various forms of electronic messaging platforms in
addition to repeated telephone calls.  Ms. Pahal contends this continued and
unwanted communication escalated to a level that caused her to fear for her
safety, and the safety of her family.
[
3
]
Mr. Enaya strongly denies these allegations.  He
characterizes his relationship with Ms. Pahal as involving periods where they
parted ways, then later decided to reconcile.  With a view to any and all
contact between them, Mr. Enaya takes the position that it was mutual and
jointly engaged in.  He denies ever threatening to cause harm to Ms. Pahal and maintains
that the only time he referenced physical contact with Ms. Pahal’s father, was in
the context of self-defence.
Guiding Legal Principles
[
4
]
In
R. v. Kosikar
,
1999 CanLII 3775 (ON CA)
, [1999] O.J. No. 3569,
the Ontario Court of Appeal clearly outlines the five essential elements of the
offence with respect to a charge of criminal harassment, contrary to
s. 264(1)
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
.  They are as follows:
(1)
It must be established that the accused has
engaged in the conduct set out in
s. 264(2)
(a),(b),(c), or (d) of the
Criminal
Code of Canada
;
(2)
It must be established that the complainant was
harassed;
(3)
It must be established that the accused who
engaged in such conduct knew that the complainant was harassed or was reckless
or wilfully blind as to whether the complainant was harassed;
(4)
It must be established that the conduct caused
the complainant to fear for her safety or the safety of anyone known to her;
and
(5)
It must be established that the complainant’s
fear was, in all of the circumstances, reasonable:
R. v. Kosikar
,
1999 CanLII 3775 (ON CA)
, [1999]
O.J. No. 3569 (C.A.) at para
19
.
[
5
]
Threatening conduct need not be repeated in
order to violate
s. 264(2)
(d). A single threatening act directed at the complainant,
or a member of the complainant’s family may constitute criminal harassment. 
Moreover, the conduct itself need not be harassment, provided it causes the
complainant to be harassed:
R. v. Kosikar
,
at paras.
20, 22, 26
,
R.
v. Province,
[2019] O.J. No. 4003 (C.A.) at para. 121
.
[
6
]
It is not enough that the conduct vexes,
disquiets or annoys the complainant.  What is required is that the conduct
“tormented, troubled, worried continually or chronically, plagued, bedevilled
and badgered” the complainant:
R. v. Kosikar
,
at para.
24
, citing
R.
v. Lamontagne
,
(1998) 129 C.C.C. (3d) 337 (Que. C.A.) at para 188
,
R. v.
Province,
at para. 122.
[
7
]
The nature of the threatening conduct must
amount to a “tool of intimidation which is designed to instill a sense of fear
in the recipient”.  The conduct should be viewed objectively with due
consideration for the circumstances in which it took place, together with its
effect on the complainant:
R. v. Province,
at para. 123,
R. v. Burns
2008 ONCA 6
(C.A.) at para.
2
, citing
R. v. George,
2002 YKCA 2
,
R.
v. Sim
,
2017 ONCA 856
(C.A.) at para.
16
.
[
8
]
Additionally, given that Mr. Enaya, the
defendant, has provided evidence, the framework set out in
R .v. W(D.)
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] S.C.J. No. 26 applies. Specifically, the test outlined at paragraph 28:
(1)
If I believe the evidence of Mr. Enaya,
obviously, I must find him not guilty;
(2)
Second, even if I do not believe the testimony
of Mr. Enaya, but I am left in reasonable doubt by it, I must find him not
guilty;
(3)
Finally, even if I am not left in doubt by the
evidence of Mr. Enaya, I must ask myself whether on the basis of the evidence
which I do accept, if I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence
of the guilt of Mr. Enaya.
[
9
]
In turning my mind to the analysis I must engage
in, I have also reviewed the article written by Paciocco J.A. entitled,
“Doubt about Doubt: Coping with
W.(D.)
And Credibility Assessment” found
at 2017 22
Canadian Criminal Law Review
31. In that article, Justice
Paciocco helpfully breaks down the
W.(D.)
principles into five
analytical points:
(1)
Criminal trials cannot properly be resolved by
deciding which conflicting version of events is preferred;
(2)
A criminal fact-finder that believes evidence
that is inconsistent with the guilt of the accused cannot convict the accused;
(3)
Even if a criminal fact-finder does not entirely
believe evidence inconsistent with guilt, if the fact-finder is left unsure
whether that evidence is true there is a reasonable doubt and an acquittal must
follow;
(4)
Even where the fact-finder entirely disbelieves
evidence inconsistent with guilt, the mere rejection of that evidence does not
prove guilt; and
(5)
Even where the fact-finder entirely disbelieves
evidence inconsistent with guilt, the accused should not be convicted unless
the evidence that is given credit proves the accused guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt.
The Evidence of Ramandip Pahal
[
10
]
Ms. Pahal was not an impressive witness.  She provided
evidence that was internally inconsistent, and I find aspects of her evidence
were intentionally evasive and completely dishonest.  I did not find Ms. Pahal to
be a credible witness, nor did I find her evidence to be reliable.
[
11
]
Ms. Pahal testified that her and Mr. Enaya dated
for approximately two years; however, their relationship came to an end in
August of 2022.  Ms. Pahal acknowledged that one of the reasons she ended her
relationship with Mr. Enaya was because he didn’t give her enough attention or
time.  Both parties agree that Ms. Pahal’s parents would not have been happy
about Ms. Pahal’s relationship with Mr. Enaya.  As a result, Ms. Pahal
acknowledged that she concealed her relationship with Mr. Enaya from her
parents.  It was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that Mr. Enaya made threats to her
following the end of their relationship, which would have “started either end
of August or beginning of September 2022”.  She recalled Mr. Enaya used “those
words” either on text, or phone call”, and that he also showed her a video.  To
be very clear, the threats Ms. Pahal alleged are as follows:
(1)
“I am going to go to your house, I am going to
do something, I am going to shoot up your house, I am going to box your Dad in
the face”; and
(2)
“He said he was going to kidnap me, tie my legs
so that the blood stops and that would put me in a wheelchair so I would have
to stay with him”’, which she claimed Mr. Enaya communicated over the phone,
“around wintertime or right before I went to the police station”; and
(3)
Finally, “He’s going to put acid on my legs and
burn them”, which Ms. Pahal remembered Mr. Enaya stated the weekend before she
attended the police station. This threat could have been “in person, or phone,
or text” according to Ms. Pahal
[
12
]
It was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that Mr. Enaya sent
her a video over Snapchat, which was captured outside of her family home.  In
this video, Ms. Pahal recalled an individual, who she believed was Mr. Enaya,
was holding a knife in his hand.  It was “nighttime outside”, and the “knife was
being turned over and it was shining”.  When asked what she thought when she
saw this video, Ms. Pahal stated, “I thought that he’s actually capable of
being outside my house, so I felt super scared and I thought that he’s actually
able to bring something in his hand”.  Significantly, when Ms. Pahal was
pressed while under cross-examination with respect to whether she watched the
video more than once, after acknowledging that you can ‘replay’ videos on
Snapchat, it was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that she did not remember whether she
replayed the video or not.  Given the nature of what Ms. Pahal testified was
depicted in this alleged Snapchat video, I find it unbelievable that she is not
able to recall whether she replayed it.  Ms. Pahal did not save the Snapchat
video, and despite producing a bound volume of electronic messages for my
review, Ms. Pahal admitted while under cross examination that none of the
alleged threats are contained in any of the messages she captured.  This, notwithstanding
it was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that Mr. Enaya may have communicated threats to her
through text message.
[
13
]
Ms. Pahal recalled that, just prior to her
reporting the alleged incidents to the police, Mr. Enaya attended Oakville
Trafalgar Hospital, where she was visiting her grandfather, and a gym where she
taught a Zumba class.  It was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that she only engaged with
Mr. Enaya on those occasions, but not because she wanted to.  Rather, because
“if I don’t do something that he wants, it turns into threats and harassment so
everything is an obligation”.  Ultimately, on both occasions Ms. Pahal
testified that Mr. Enaya’s conduct within the context of their interactions
together caused her to be anxious and fear for her safety, and the safety of
her family.
[
14
]
It was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that she was
visiting her Grandfather at the Oakville Trafalgar Hospital on April 14, 2023,
when Mr. Enaya texted and asked her what hospital she was at.  Ms. Pahal
recalled that she told Mr. Enaya “Dundas”, hoping that he would not be able to determine
which hospital she was at.  But, when Ms. Pahal entered the parking garage, she
heard loud music and noticed Mr. Enaya right beside her car.  Ms. Pahal was
able to remember that Mr. Enaya was just “sitting inside the car with the
window rolled down and his black hoodie was on over his head and he was, he was
just sitting there blasting music”.  Initially, when asked whether she saw Mr.
Enaya following their encounter in the parking garage that evening, Ms. Pahal
said, “not that I could remember”.  However, following Mr. Enaya’s contention
that the pair engaged in sexual activity that evening, Ms. Pahal was pressed
further on her contact with Mr. Enaya on April 14, 2023.  I find she became
intentionally evasive.  When asked directly if she had a sexual encounter with
Mr. Enaya after he attended the hospital Ms. Pahal said, “not at the hospital.
I don’t know if there would have been anywhere else.”  When pressed further as
to whether she remembered having a sexual encounter anywhere with Mr. Enaya
that night, Ms. Pahal stated, “I don’t remember when those would be exactly”,
“I don’t memorize the dates that we had sexual things”.  I find this area of Ms.
Pahal’s evidence to be intentionally vague and unbelievable.  Ms. Pahal was
able to recall that Mr. Enaya was blasting music, that he was wearing a black
hoodie, which was on over his head, and that his car window was rolled down
when she encountered him in the parking garage.  I completely reject her
evidence that on that very same night, she was not able to remember if the pair
engaged in a sexual encounter.
[
15
]
I was also very troubled by Ms. Pahal’s evidence
surrounding whether the pair ever engaged in sexual activity between March of
2023 up to April 16, 2023, or from the end of August 2022 to April 16, 2023. 
Again, I found Ms. Pahal’s evidence to be intentionally evasive and dishonest. 
Initially, Ms. Pahal stated, “I don’t remember”, then she stated, “there could
have been possibilities; I just don’t know when the intimacy or sexual things
would have been”. Finally, her evidence was, “yes, but not because I wanted
to”.  I find Ms. Pahal was purposefully trying to distance herself from
intimate contact she ultimately admits to engaging in with Mr. Enaya, which
impacted her credibility and the reliability of her evidence overall.
[
16
]
Ms. Pahal also provided evidence with respect to
Mr. Enaya attending at a gym where she taught Zumba the day after he met her at
Oakville Trafalgar Hospital.  Ms. Pahal remembered that Mr. Enaya called and
was “excepting for me and him to see each other”, but she didn’t realize Mr.
Enaya would attend inside the gym.  It was Ms. Pahal’s evidence that Mr. Enaya
was expecting the pair to eat together, and that she agreed to that because she
felt like she “had to”.  Ms. Pahal testified that Mr. Enaya entered her motor
vehicle and took her phone.  There is no dispute between the parties that Mr.
Enaya went through Ms. Pahal’s phone on April 15, 2023, in an attempt to find
evidence of her infidelity towards him.  Eventually, Ms. Pahal recalled that
she left the parking lot, and needed to go to the Nike Outlet.  While she was
there, Mr. Enaya texted her and told her he was going to go to her house.  Ms.
Pahal claimed that this statement made her feel scared.  However, similar to Ms.
Pahal’s evidence relative to the Snapchat video, I must consider her expressed
feelings towards Mr. Enaya attending her family home against the backdrop of Ms.
Pahal’s own admission that she was concealing her relationship with him from
her family.  She made it clear that her family would not approve of Mr. Enaya
for a number of reasons, and one of the reasons she didn’t want Mr. Enaya to
have contact with her family is because she didn’t want her family to know about
their relationship.
[
17
]
Ms. Pahal’s evidence surrounding the assault
allegations she personally faces relative to Mr. Enaya was very troubling.  Ms.
Pahal acknowledged that she was charged with assault; however, it was her
evidence that she “didn’t know the meaning of the word assault”.  Ms. Pahal
testified that she remembered seeing the word assault, but she didn’t remember
the “direct definition of it”.  To be fair to Ms. Pahal, I engaged to ensure
she understood the question was looking for her general understanding, rather
than any particular legal definition.  Ms. Pahal continued to be evasive,
claiming she gets “stuck”, only seeing the word but not knowing what it means. 
Then, agreeing that she was charged with assault, yet has no idea why.  This,
notwithstanding Ms. Pahal was charged with assault in May of 2023 and has legal
representation.  Moreover, Ms. Pahal is a sophisticated witness.  I heard
evidence that Ms. Pahal is a professional currently working in the education
field.  To be very clear, I completely reject this area of Ms. Pahal’s
evidence.  I do not believe that she is unaware of what assault means, and I do
not believe that she is unaware of why she was charged with assault.
[
18
]
After very carefully considering Ms. Pahal’s
evidence, I do not find that Mr. Enaya’s behaviour relative to her rose to a
level of “harassment”.  I reject Ms. Pahal’s evidence that she feared for her
safety or the safety of her family members as a result of any of Mr. Enaya’s
conduct.  As such, I need not carry my analysis forward to determine whether Ms.
Pahal’s purported fear was reasonable in all of the circumstances.  Certainly, Ms.
Pahal feared Mr. Enaya would expose their relationship to her family; however,
I have concluded that is where any fear relative to her ended.
The Evidence of Mr. Enaya
[
19
]
Mr. Enaya testified in a clear, detailed, relatively
straightforward manner.  I found he was a credible witness, who provided
reliable evidence overall. Even when pressed while under cross examination, Mr.
Enaya’s evidence remained consistent and predominantly unshaken.  I found it
flowed logically and I have no reason to reject it.
[
20
]
Mr. Enaya testified that he met Ms. Pahal in
2020, but they didn’t start dating until April of 2021.  It was Mr. Enaya’s
evidence that the pair broke up after Ms. Pahal allegedly assaulted him by
punching him in the face after he looked at another woman.  Ms. Pahal was cross
examined with respect to this alleged assault.  Mr. Enaya recalled he did not
feel comfortable in the relationship afterwards, so he ended it.  Two weeks
later, the pair reunited.
[
21
]
Mr. Enaya remembered that in August of 2022, Ms.
Pahal went on vacation, which is agreed between them.  It was Mr. Enaya’s
evidence that while Ms. Pahal was on vacation with her family, things changed. 
Mr. Enaya testified that in September of 2022 he surprised her at a gym with
flowers and she said, “this is too late”.  However, Mr. Enaya maintained that
that they didn’t actually end their relationship until after an argument in
front of his home in October or November of 2022.
[
22
]
According to Mr. Enaya the pair reunited again
in March of 2023.  He was certain they were back together because they “talked
about it”, “she apologized”, “told me she loved me”, and “I apologized about
everything”.  Mr. Enaya recalled that he brought up his concerns about “the
hitting” and Ms. Pahal “assured him”.  It was his evidence that he was never
intimate with Ms. Pahal after she returned from vacation in August; however,
they were intimate twice in March, so he was certain they were “back together”.
[
23
]
Mr. Enaya provided detailed evidence about
meeting up with Ms. Pahal at Oakville Trafalgar Hospital.  He remembered they
were supposed to go on a “double date”, but Ms. Pahal wanted to go see her
Grandpa, so Mr. Enaya cancelled with the other couple.  It was Mr. Enaya’s
evidence that the pair were going to meet up to “go eat”, that Ms. Pahal had to
“go to her cousin’s to drop something”, and then the pair met up at
McDonald’s.  Mr. Enaya recalled Ms. Pahal “went home to her cousin, did what
she had to do”, then met him at McDonald’s and got into his car.  Mr. Enaya
testified that Ms. Pahal asked to go somewhere “low key”, so the pair went to a
“low key” spot and were intimate.  After what Mr. Enaya described as a sexual
encounter between them, he remembered that he drove back to McDonald’s and got
food.  While the pair remained in his motor vehicle, and just before Ms. Pahal
was about to kiss him, Mr. Enaya recalled her saying, “is it OK to kiss you, I
just, like, gave you oral sex”.  Mr. Enaya remembered clearly that her comment really
bothered him because he “never had an issue with her kissing me after oral
sex”.  Therefore, at that point in their interaction he thought, “this girl’s
been hooking up” or “doing stuff with other guys”.
[
24
]
It was Mr. Enaya’s evidence that his concern regarding
Ms. Pahal being unfaithful caused him to attend the gym she was teaching at the
very next day to confront her unannounced.  He recalled that he did not want to
give her any notice, so she could not delete any text messages or other
communication.  I found this aspect of his evidence to flow logically.
[
25
]
Mr. Enaya testified that on April 15, 2025, his
plan was to surprise Ms. Pahal at the gym and confront her, “you’re claiming you’re
fully faithful” so “may I please go through your phone after you backed it
up”.  Again, Mr. Enaya maintained that he was trying to catch Ms. Pahal off
guard, which I find to be plausible.  Both parties agree that Mr. Enaya did go
through Ms. Pahal’s phone that day and questioned her about messages she
exchanged with her boxing coach.  They also agree that Mr. Enaya sent messages
to her friends, in an attempt to expose her infidelity.  Ultimately, the
interaction between the pair escalates to a point where Mr. Enaya communicates
to Ms. Pahal, “I want to go talk to your Dad”.
Mr. Enaya had previously testified that Ms. Pahal was afraid of her
father, “like he would hit her or something”.  It was Ms. Pahal’s evidence when
pressed while under cross examination that she could not remember if Mr. Enaya
told her that he wanted to speak with her father about her cheating on him. 
However, when Ms. Pahal testified in-chief, she recalled that Mr. Enaya had
messaged her while she was in the gym and stated, “I am just going to go to
your house”, and that she felt scared.  Moreover, Ms. Pahal also initially
testified that while the pair were in her motor vehicle together, after going
through her phone, Mr. Enaya stated, “shut up”, “he’s just going to go to my
house and do something”.  I find these aspects of Ms. Pahal’s testimony to be
corroborative of Mr. Enaya’s evidence on this point.
The Electronic Communication
[
26
]
A volume of screenshotted electronic
communication was provided to investigators by Ms. Pahal  It must always be
remembered that screenshotted electronic communication produced in this fashion
inevitably deprives the trier of fact of necessary context.  Of note, with a
view to this electronic communication in particular, there are large gaps
between the messages and at times, they appear out of order.
[
27
]
Considered against the backdrop of the complete
evidentiary record, I find the electronic communication to be corroborative of
the following:
(1)
As Ms. Pahal acknowledged, none of the threats she
alleges were made by Mr. Enaya are contained in the text messages produced. 
This includes any threats Ms. Pahal alleged could have been made in writing or
through text message;
(2)
Mr. Enaya utilized electronic communication to threaten
Ms. Pahal, stating that he would expose aspects of their relationship to her father. 
This can be seen numerous times including within the following statements, “I
swear to god if you keep disrespecting me wallahi am just send everything to ur
dad and all the pahal accounts I screenshotted”, “I swear to god u better reply
to everything I said am go to ur house if u don’t wallah”, “I know where u live
where u work out where ur family Is in Woodstock how ur dad looks like. You say
I ruined your peace right I never ever showed up there or did anything”.  I do
not find the messages to be corroborative of Mr. Enaya threatening to harm Ms.
Pahal’s father, or her family;
(3)
Moreover, when Mr. Enaya writes, “Stfu I never
threatened you until two weeks ago remember you keep saying”, this message must
be viewed within the context of the messages I have been provided.  When viewed
in context, I find it is corroborative of Mr. Enaya’s evidence, that he was
referring to threatening to expose aspects of the relationship that existed
between the pair to Ms. Pahal’s father;
(4)
Mr. Enaya was concerned that Ms. Pahal was
unfaithful.  He acknowledged as much in his evidence, and this is clear within
the communication he exchanged with Ms. Pahal electronically.  The pair discuss
Ms. Pahal taking a lie detector test in the context of Mr. Enaya’s allegations
of infidelity, wherein Ms. Pahal expresses, “it’s gonna be a waste cause you
are never gonna stop, I know you”, and “I’m just saying it’s no gonna stop you
because nothing stopped you”.  Ms. Pahal attaches the ‘heart emoji’ to many of
Mr. Enaya’s messages, then two messages that follow include the ‘kiss emoji’. 
I do not find these messages corroborative of Ms. Pahal asking Mr. Enaya to
stop communicating with her, or her being fearful of Mr. Enaya.  They appear
more consistent with Ms. Pahal communicating that nothing will stop Mr. Enaya’s
jealousy.  The messages must also be considered against the backdrop of Ms.
Pahal’s evidence where she stated, “I tried to block his phone number. I tried
to block his Snapchat. I tried to block his Instagram. I tried to just not
reply to text messages or Instagram messages or Snapchat messages”.  It may be
the case that Ms. Pahal “tried” to stop communicating with Mr. Enaya; however,
the correspondence reflects that she, in fact, continued communication.
Analysis
[
28
]
I
have considered Mr. Enaya’s evidence within the context of the complete
evidentiary record, which has been placed before me.  I accept that he did not threaten
Ms. Pahal in the manner she alleges.  Rather, I find he exploited what Ms.
Pahal admitted was a desire to conceal her relationship with Mr. Enaya from her
father.  As previously stated, I have concluded the electronic communication is
corroborative of this aspect of Mr. Enaya’s evidence.  Mr. Enaya provided
evidence that was candid, detailed and it flowed logically.  I believe him.
[
29
]
With
a view to the criminal harassment allegations, I do not find that Ms. Pahal was
“harassed”.  Moreover, I completely reject any contention by Ms. Pahal that Mr.
Enaya’s conduct relative to her made her fearful of her safety, or the safety
of her family members.  I also reject Ms. Pahal’s assertion that she conveyed
to Mr. Enaya that she no longer wished to communicate with him at any point
prior to April 16, 2023.  The electronic communication is simply not
corroborative of this aspect of her evidence.  She may have “tried” to cease
communication with Mr. Enaya; notwithstanding, she herself continued with the contact.
[
30
]
Even
if I had completely rejected the evidence of Mr. Enaya, and it had not left me
in reasonable doubt, I was highly troubled by the evidence of Ms. Pahal I did
not find her to be a credible witness, nor did I find her evidence to be
reliable.  Carrying my analysis forward in the alternative, it would have been
unsafe to convict Mr. Enaya, relying on evidence such as this.
Conclusion
[
31
]
In
the result, I find Mr. Enaya not guilty as charged with respect to all counts
on the information before the court.
Released:  June 27, 2025
Justice Jennifer Campitelli