Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj368/2025oncj368.html

ONTARIO
COURT
OF
JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Kumar
, 2025 ONCJ 368
DATE:
2025
07
0
8
COURT
FILE No.:
4810 998
24
48107619
B
E
T
W
E
E
N
:
HIS
MAJESTY
THE
KING
— AND — BIPLOVE
KUMAR
Before
Justice David Rose
Heard
on
April
23,
24,
July
2,
2025
Written
Reasons
for
Judgment
released
on
July,
8
2025
Mr.
Deck
................................................................................................ counsel
for
the
Crown
Ms.
Smith, Mr.
Virk
...................................................................... counsel
for
the
Defendant
Rose
J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Kumar was charged with
Impaired Operation and Excess Blood Alcohol Operation on February 8, 2024. In
Court on July 2 I found Mr. Kumar guilty of both charges and reserved the right
to deliver further reasons. These are the reasons.
[
2
]
Mr. Kumar makes several
Charter
based arguments:
i)
Seizure of his breach was an
unreasonable seizure under s. 8;
ii)
There were no grounds to arrest
Mr. Kumar which is said to constitute a violation of his rights under s. 9;
iii)
While receiving medical attention
in the back of an ambulance he had a reasonable expectation of privacy but was
questioned in violation of s. 8;
iv)
He was questioned in the back of
the ambulance and at the police station in violation of his rights under s.
10(b);
v)
He was unsatisfied with his rights
to counsel and that the police violated his implementational s. 10(b) rights;
vi)
The arresting officers used
excessive force when they arrested him.
vii)
That all statements and breath
samples be excluded or alternatively a stay of proceedings be granted.
And
two legal arguments:
viii)
That the Crown has not proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that it was Mr. Kumar who was operating the vehicle
that night.
ix)
The Crown has not proven that Mr.
Kumar’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired at the time of
operation.
[
3
]
The trial heard from the arresting
officers, PCs Prekas and Toteda. The body worn camera (BWC) of PC Prekas was
played in Court. It recorded the events from the time he and PC Toteda arrived
on scene until Mr. Kumar was put into the rear of their scout car for transport
to Traffic Services for breath testing. The BWC was quite helpful in deciding
the case. It recorded what was said, what happened, and Mr. Kumar’s physical
condition at critical times.
[
4
]
PC Prekas testified that he and
Toteda arrived at Queen and Spadina at 4:38 am, in response to information
about a motor vehicle collision. The report was that a car hit an ambulance.
When he arrived on scene, indeed there was a red Mazda sedan parked behind an
ambulance with some damage to the Mazda’s front bumper. PC Prekas immediately
met an EMS attendant who pointed said that the Mazda had hit the ambulance and
pointed to its front bumper. She said that the Mazda driver tried to leave, had
possibly been drinking, and told Prekas that he is not being aggressive but she
believed he is under the influence. The driver was in the back of the ambulance
being assessed.
[
5
]
PC Prekas looked at the front of
the Mazda, inside the cabin where he said he could see loose weed, and went
into directly into the back of the ambulance. The BWC records the ambulance
being in the center lane of road which a TTC bus and other vehicular traffic
passing by to the right of the ambulance.
[
6
]
About one minute after arriving on
scene, the BWC records an EMS attendant opening the door to the ambulance and
PC Prekas climbing the few stairs up into the patient care area in the back of
the ambulance. Mr. Kumar is seated to the right, and the ambulance attendant
Mr. Kirkpatrick seated in front of Mr. Kumar, to PC Prekas’ left. The first
thing he says is “hey there, how is it going, so what happened today, what is going
on, can you tell me a little bit?”. Mr. Kirkpatrick says “we got rear ended her
at the light, this gentleman here had trouble putting his car in park I had to
coach him to do that, I was worried about his safety so I brought him here to
check his vital signs”. Kirkpatrick continued “he said he had a few beers and a
Jack Daniels”. To that Mr. Kumar says “exactly true and nods his head in the
affirmative”. PC Prekas asked what happened with the accident “just the
accident”. To that Mr. Kumar said “bad karma”. Prekas did not seem to
understand that so he asked him what he said and he again said “bad karma”. Mr.
Kumar continued that somehow he couldn’t gauge that the vehicle in front of him
had stopped, so he could not stop in time.
[
7
]
In his evidence PC Prekas
testified that Mr. Kumar’s eyes were blood shot and he appeared intoxicated. PC
Prekas asked what happened and Mr. Kumar said he was coming from a bachelor
party and had a few beers and a Jack Daniels. Prekas testified that there was a
strong odour of alcohol. In that conversation Prekas told him that he did not
have to speak to him “its totally up to you” , and that the camera was rolling.
Mr. Kumar said that “ I completely agree it was my fault but I just live
nearby”. He again admitted to drinking 3 beers and a Jack Daniels. Prekas
believed his speech to be slurred, and formed the belief that Mr. Kumar was
impaired. The paramedic cleared Mr. Kumar medically and PC Prekas asked Mr.
Kumar to step out of the ambulance. The BWC records him saying that his speech
was off and that he smelled of alcohol.
[
8
]
The WBC records Mr. Kumar
stumbling to his right as he left the ambulance, and as soon as Mr. Kumar steps
onto the roadway PC Prekas puts his hands on him and says that he is being
arrested for impaired operation. It was then 4:42 am. Mr. Kumar is seen to be
tensing up at that moment and PC Prekas tells him not to resist as he and his
partner attempt to put his wrists in handcuffs to the rear. The time from Mr.
Kumar leaving the ambulance, tensing up and being placed in handcuffs is a
matter of 30 seconds. Mr. Kumar immediately responds that his vitals are OK.
[
9
]
Within a minute Mr. Kumar is in
handcuffs and walked to PC Prekar’s police car, which is parked on the opposite
side of the street.
[
10
]
Rights to counsel is read at 4:42 by PC Toteda, while
Mr. Kumar is being arrested at the side of the ambulance. That language is
truncated, but read again 2 minutes later when Mr. Kumar is beside the scout
car. At that point Mr. Kumar is told to either have a seat or get into the back
of the police car six times but he protests, saying that he has been medically
cleared. Mr. Kumar does get in the back of the car but then tries to get out
and is put back into the back seat.
[
11
]
At 4:46 Mr. Kumar is cautioned and he says he
understands. He says that he does not have a lawyer and what should he do. PC
Prekas says that he will put Mr. Kumar in touch with a lawyer. It is during
this exchange, when PC Prekas asks him about whether he wants to call a lawyer
that he volunteers, “I just had one beer and a Jack Daniels”. He is cautioned
once again. He is then read a demand for a sample for an Approved Instrument.
He says he understands.
[
12
]
At 4:48 he is searched beside the
car, and he complains that the handcuffs are too tight. At 4:49 PC Prekas loosens
the handcuffs, saying “that is as far as I can go”.
[
13
]
Mr. Kumar is booked into the
police station at 5:15 am and was asked by the booking sergeant about his
alcohol consumption. He asked to speak with Duty Counsel, and PC Toteda called
the Duty Counsel line at 5:36. Duty Counsel called back some 18 minutes later
and Mr. Kumar was then put into a phone booth to take that call. He was taken
out a of the phone booth at 6am. At 6:20 am he asked to speak to a family
member. A call was made from a number in Mr. Kumar’s own phone, which had been
retrieved from his locker and at 6:24 am the call went directly to voice mail.
That was after the first sample was obtained.
[
14
]
The first breath test was taken at
6:08 am and recorded a BAC of 190 mg %. At 6:20 Mr. Kumar asked to speak to a
family member and PC Toteda called the number given to her by Mr. Kumar. That
was at 6:24. The call went directly to voice mail. At 6:33 Mr. Kumar provided a
second breath sample. The result was 170 mg %. The Certificate of Qualified Technician
recording those results was admitted by the defence for the truth of its
contents subject to the
Charter
Application.
[
15
]
The EMS attendant seen in the back
of the ambulance Ryan Kirkpatrick testified that he was working as a paramedic
on February 8, 2024 at 4:30 am. His ambulance was responding to a call going
east bound on Queen at Spadina. He was the passenger in the ambulance, not the
driver. They were stopped at the red light when they were struck from the rear.
He stepped out to see if there were any injuries. It was dark but the roads
were clear and the intersection was well lit. He described the collision as a
strong jolt forward. He didn’t suffer any injury from it.
[
16
]
After the collision he got out of
the ambulance and made eye contact with the driver of the car that hit his
ambulance. He approached the driver from the passenger side and made eye
contact with him. There was no one else in the car. He asked the driver if he
was ok and to put the car in park and turn it off. The driver smiled and
nodded, and said Ok in an apologetic way. The driver struggled to turn off the
car. He hit some other controls before turning the car off. He asked the driver
to step out so he could assess him and helped him to the back of the ambulance
with Kirkpatrick’s assistance. The driver was unsteady on his feet. When he got
into the ambulance Mr. Kirkpatrick assessed Mr. Kumar’s vitals and found no
medical issue. His vitals were normal. With that said, he believed that Mr.
Kumar was intoxicated by alcohol. He asked Mr. Kumar what he was doing that
night and he said he was coming from a bachelors party, and had a few beers and
a Jack Daniels. He offered to take him to the hospital but Mr. Kumar refused.
The Police arrived a few minutes later. Mr. Kirkpatrick testified in Court that
Mr. Kumar told him those things that night.
[
17
]
He said that when the police came
into the ambulance they asked what happened.
[
18
]
Mr. Kirkpatrick never identified
Mr. Kumar either on video or in person. He was not asked. From the evidence it
is beyond dispute that Mr. Kirkpatrick’s ambulance is the one seen on PC
Prekar’s BWC parked at the corner of Spadina and Queen on February 8, 2024 at
4:30 am. It is therefore him in the back of the ambulance and Mr. Kumar the one
being treated.
[
19
]
Video of the booking hall was
played at trial. It shows that Mr. Kumar was booked at 5:18 am. When he was
booked in he readily agreed with PC Prekas when he told the booking sergeant
about what Mr. Kumar told him about what he had been drinking that night. As he
stood before the booking sergeant he was visibly unsteady on his feet. It is
not pronounced, but it is visible. At that time he said he would like to speak
to duty counsel. He was asked about consumption of legal and illegal drugs. he
was asked about his post caution admission to the officer that he had consumed
alcohol. He recited his alcohol consumption and when he had his last drink,
which was 3 or 3:30 am. That questioning happened in the middle of
straightforward booking procedure which covered many other topics.
[
20
]
Cst. Perez, the QBT testified that
he administered breath testing on Mr. Kumar at 6:08 am and 6:33 am. He found
that Mr. Kumar had a very strong odour of an alcoholic beverage, brown, very
bloodshot eyes and was barefoot. The certificate of Qualified Technician
asserts that Mr. Kumar’s Breath readings were 190 and 170 mg % truncated,
respectively.
[
21
]
Mr. Kumar testified on the
Charter
Application
only. He testified that that he hit the ambulance in his Mazda and did indeed
accompany the ambulance attendance to the back of the ambulance to have his
vitals checked. He said that after 10 – 15 minutes another person came in. In
his evidence “ he never introduced himself to me, …never gave his
identification to me…I thought he was another employee from the paramedic
team”.
[
22
]
Mr. Kumar testified that he was
surprised he was arrested and didn’t know what was going on. He was confused.
He testified that he did not even know the officers were police officers. When
he was taken to the police station he was given no option but to answer the
officers questions. He didn’t know what a legal counsel means “as a meaning of
that nomenclature”.
[
23
]
He admits that he spoke with Duty Counsel but “I
didn’t know that I’m speaking to somebody as duty counsel”. I understood his
evidence to be an admission that he spoke with duty counsel but denies that he
understood he was receiving legal advice. As he said, he asked to speak with a family
member who was elderly and would have some legal contact to help him, but that
did not happen. He admitted that the police tried to reach that family member
in front of him and that the call did not connect.
[
24
]
In cross-examination Mr. Kumar
admitted that the officer in the back of the ambulance told him that he didn’t
need to say anything but that he was not aware the person was a police officer.
(WD). He admitted that the officer had a “POLICE” label on his uniform but he
just didn’t see his uniform, only his face. He testified that he did not know
he was speaking with a lawyer when he spoke with Duty Counsel. He was asked:
Q.
So, did you understand anything that was happening throughout this entire
evening?
A.
No.
Analysis
[
25
]
Before considering the legal
issues I would make the following findings about Mr. Kumar’s credibility. I
would identify at least three frailties in his testimony. The first is that he
claimed not to know that PC Prekas was a police officer. As he said in his
evidence “I – the – the legal jargons I did not understand at all because, I
mean, first of all, it was not audible to me because there was a distance
between me and him and, secondly until the time he arrested me, I was no even
aware he was a police officer”. When it was put to him in cross-examination
that he knew that PC Prekas was a police officer he disagreed.
[
26
]
That testimony is directly at odds
with PC Prekas’ BWC and the other video evidence including the booking video
which has PC Prekas wearing a full police uniform. It is absurd for Mr. Kumar
to say that he did not know that a fully uniformed police constable was a
police officer, and to say that he never noticed PC Prekas’ uniform because he
didn’t “really look at his clothes”.
[
27
]
It is also straining his
credibility to suggest as he did that he did not know that duty counsel was a
lawyer. As he said in his evidence:
Yeah, I spoke with duty counsel.
But just to clarify, I didn’t know that im speaking to somebody as duty
counsel. They said there will be a person will speak to you…I kept on asking
that person who was on the phone as well as after that call to the officers”.
In cross-examination he said “I spoke to a person. I didn’t know he was duty
counsel”
[
28
]
His evidence was that “I was just
offered a free lawyer, never – never provided one”.
[
29
]
His evidence therefore goes in two quite opposite
directions. In one he didn’t know he was speaking with duty counsel. On the
other he was never provided a free lawyer. This is a significant internal
inconsistency.
[
30
]
It is another inconsistency for
him to say, as he did that he was forced to take off his shoes while the police
offered him the option of leaving his shoes on or not. When pressed on that
inconsistency Mr. Kumar gave a long winded explanation that made little sense.
[
31
]
These three inconsistencies loom
large throughout his evidence. The result is that I would not accept his
evidence if it is not confirmed by the plentiful video evidence played at the
trial. He was not a credible witness.
[
32
]
There were no challenges to the
credibility of the Crown witnesses. Nothing in their testimony causes me to
question or minimize their veracity.
First issue – was Mr. Kumar the driver?
[
33
]
Mr. Kumar argues that there is insufficient evidence
to prove that he was the driver of the car that hit the ambulance. The evidence
is clear from Mr. Kirkpatrick that he was the passenger in the ambulance, and
after it was struck he left the ambulance and saw the driver which struck his
ambulance. There is no other evidence. The evidence of Mr. Kirkpatrick and the
video of PC Prekas BWC clearly establish that Mr. Kirkpatrick left his
ambulance after being hit. He found the driver of the car that hit him and took
him into the back of the ambulance. That person is Mr. Kumar. The Crown has proven
beyond a reasonable doubt that it was Mr. Kumar who drove the Mazda into the
back of the ambulance. It would be speculative to find that anyone else
operated the Mazda that morning.
Issue #2 Were Mr. . Kumar’s
rights to counsel violated when 1) PC Prekas spoke to him in the back of the
ambulance without being cautioned and 2) again when he was being questioned at
the station without being informed of his rights to counsel
[
34
]
In this argument the defence
places heavy emphasis on
R. v. G.T.D.
2018 SCC 7
. That case is a brief 6
paragraph endorsement by the Court. The defence rightly places emphasis on
paragraph 2 of the endorsement:
2. The right to counsel under s. 10(
b
) of the
Charter
obliges police to "'hold off' from attempting to elicit incriminatory
evidence from the detainee until he or she has had a reasonable opportunity to
reach counsel" (
R. v. Prosper
,
1994 CanLII 65 (SCC)
,
[1994] 3 S.C.R. 236 (S.C.C.)
, at p.
269)
. The first issue in this appeal is whether the question "Do you wish
to say anything?", asked at the conclusion of the standard caution used by
the Edmonton Police Service after G.T.D. had already invoked his right to
counsel, violated this duty to "hold off". We are all of the view
that it did, because it elicited a statement from G.T.D.
[
35
]
As regards the first limb of the argument, I find that
Mr. Kumar was not detained when PC Prekas first entered the back of the
ambulance. I find that Mr. Kumar went there with Mr. Kirkpatrick on his own for
purpose of Mr. Kirkpatrick checking his vitals. Those two men situated themselves
in the back of the ambulance. PC Prekas arrived on that scene. There is no
evidence that Mr. Kumar was physically detained – the video is sufficient to
make that finding. I also find that Mr. Kumar has not established on a balance
of probabilities that he was psychologically detained. In making this finding I
take into account 1) the brevity of the interaction in the back of the
ambulance; 2) that Mr. Kumar went there on his own to get his vitals checked
out after the collision; 3) that both parties to the collision were in the back
of the ambulance; 4) that the nature of the conversation was directed at both
Mr. Kirkpatrick and Mr. Kumar, and 5) Mr. Kumar took the position in his
evidence that he did not even know that he was speaking with a police officer
in the back of the ambulance.
[
36
]
As regards the nature of the
conversation, PC Prekas asked an open ended question, namely “hey there, how is
it going, so what happened today, what is going on, can you tell me a little
bit?”. Mr. Kirkpatrick then said “we got rear ended here at the light, this
gentleman here had trouble putting his car in park I had to coach him to do
that, I was worried about his safety so I brought him here to check his vital
signs”. Kirkpatrick continued “he said he had a few beers and a Jack Daniels”.
To that Mr. Kumar says “exactly true” and then nodded his head in the
affirmative. PC Prekas asked what happened with the accident “just the
accident”. To that Mr. Kumar said “bad karma”.
[
37
]
While PC Prekas may have been told
that the driver may have been impaired, the nature of the police conduct,
including the language was quite benign. It was Mr. Kirkpatrick who did most of
the explanation of the accident. Mr. Kumar on his own agreed with Mr.
Kirkpatrick. PC Prekas asked the straightforward question “what happened here”.
From this I find that the circumstances of the encounter would reasonably be
perceived as a general inquiry of two persons involved in a minor motor vehicle
collision. Both responded, Mr. Kumar less than Mr. Kirkpatrick. Based on the
evidence before me I cannot find that Mr. Kumar is of less sophistication. He
is 39 years old, and works for a multi-national bank in business intelligence
and data analytics. He appears to be of some level of sophistication. There is
nothing which can support a finding that he is vulnerable.
Applying
R. v.
Grant
(2009)
2009 SCC 32 (CanLII)
,
66 C.R. (6th) 1
SCC at par.
44
I find that Mr. Kumar was not
detained until he was asked to leave the ambulance. At that point he was under
compulsion from the police and he was arrested almost immediately. So, I find
that Mr. Kumar’s detention crystallized at the point when directed to step
outside of the ambulance and then arrested and given his rights to counsel.
Which was at 4:41am.
[
38
]
I also find that at the
preliminary stage of the investigation PC Prekas was under no obligation to
caution about utterances. These were roadside utterances, albeit in the back of
the ambulance where both parties to the collision were. This was part of the
roadside investigation which the police may use for investigation and with a
view to establishing grounds for breath testing, but may not be used to prove
the offence itself,
see
R. v. Orbanski
2005 SCC 37
. In this case the
Crown does not seek to use the utterances made by Mr. Kumar to the police to
prove the offence, but merely to establish grounds for breath testing. The
analysis is different with Mr. Kirkpatrick who received utterances himself
about alcohol consumption and gave them in his testimony.
[
39
]
The result is that there is no s.
10(b) violation in the back of the ambulance.
[
40
]
The second limb of the 10(b)
argument focusses on the booking.
[
41
]
The issue is whether the questioning by the booking
sergeant is the functional equivalent of an interrogation,
see
R. v.
McKenzie
(
2002)
2002 CanLII 45009 (ON CA)
,
167 C.C.C. (3d) 530 (Ont. C.A.)
., and
R. v. Smith
(2008),
2008 ONCA 127 (CanLII)
,
55 C.R. (6th) 92 (Ont. C.A.)
. As Moldaver JA, then in the Court of Appeal
explained
in
McKenzie
(
supra) at par. 4.
4. Although the word 'elicit' does
not lend itself to a short and precise meaning, I am of the view that the test
to be applied is one which concentrates on the interchange between the police
and the detainee with a view to determining whether, in all of the
circumstances, there is a causal link between the conduct of the police and the
making of the statement by the detainee.
[
42
]
I find that when Mr. Kumar was
booked into the station he asserted a wish to speak with duty counsel at 5:15.
During the booking procedure the booking sergeant asked him a number of
questions about his condition.
[
43
]
The booking was straightforward.
When he was booked in he readily agreed with PC Prekas who told the booking sergeant
what he was told about Mr. Kumar’s drinking that night. While Mr. Kumar was
there for breath testing, the booking procedure shows the booking sergeant
asking questions about his condition as any person being taken into the custody
at a police station. In my finding, PC Prekas was relaying to the booking sergeant
what Mr. Kumar told him when they were at the roadside. The only new issue was
when he last drank. Alcohol consumption therefore followed what PC Prekas said,
and was a very small part of the exchange.
[
44
]
For these reasons the booking was
not the functional equivalent of an interrogation. There is no basis on the
evidence for me to find that the booking sergeant was attempting to elicit
anything other than Mr. Kumar’s basic information for booking purposes.  There
is no s. 10(b) violation arising from the booking process.
Were the Applicant’s rights
under s. 8 violated because PC Prekas went into the back of the ambulance when
he was getting his vitals checked. Did Mr. Kumar have a reasonable expectation
of privacy in the back of the ambulance.
[
45
]
I would reject this argument.
There is no evidence that Mr. Kumar had a reasonable expectation of privacy in
the back of the ambulance or any control over who went into it. In this case
the BWC shows the ambulance driver opening the door for PC Prekas to enter as
he did. Nor is there any evidence that PC Prekas interfered with Mr. Kumar’s
medical care. The evidence is uncontroverted that he was having his vitals
checked out. Nothing more. There was no administration of medicine, or anything
more invasive that taking his pulse,
see
R. v. LaChappelle
2007 ONCA 655
at pars 32 – 38. Mr. Kumar’s reliance on
R. v. S.S.
2023 ONCA 130
is
misplaced. In that case the officer in the back of the ambulance was attempting
to intercept communications between the accused and the paramedic during the
course of the medical examination. That stands in stark contrast to this case
where PC Prekas asked an open ended question about what happened, the ambulance
attendant told him and Mr. Kumar agreed.
[
46
]
It is also relevant for this
finding that the back of the ambulance had not just Mr. Kumar but also the
ambulance attendant who was in the vehicle struck in the collision. Both men
were part of the incident. I also find that Mr. Kirkpatrick was the one who
volunteered what happened and what Mr. Kumar said to him. Mr. Kumar on his own
agreed with Mr. Kirkpatrick.
Did Cst. Prekas have
grounds to make an Approved Instrument breath demand at 4:42 am?
[
47
]
Grounds to make a valid breath
demand were
outlined in R. v. Bush
2010 ONCA 554
.
46        In the context of a
breath demand, the reasonable and probable grounds standard is not an onerous
test: see
R. v. Wang
,
2010 ONCA 435
(Ont. C.A.) at para.
17
. It must not
be inflated to the context of testing trial evidence. Neither must it be so
diluted as to threaten individual freedom:
Censoni
at para. 43.
47
There is no necessity that the
defendant be in a state of extreme intoxication before the officer has
reasonable and probable grounds to arrest:
R. v. Deighan
,
[1999] O.J.
No. 2413 (Ont. C.A.)
at para. 1
. Impairment may be established where the
prosecution proves any degree of impairment from slight to great:
R. v. Stellato
(1993),
1993 CanLII 3375 (ON CA)
,
12 O.R. (3d) 90 (Ont. C.A.)
, aff’d
1994 CanLII 94 (SCC)
,
[1994] 2 S.C.R. 478 (S.C.C.)
.  Slight
impairment to drive relates to a reduced ability in some measure to perform a
complex motor function whether Impacting on perception or field of vision,
reaction or response time, judgment, and regard for the rules of the road:
Censoni
at para. 47.
48
The test is whether, objectively,
there were reasonable and probable grounds to believe the suspect’s ability to
drive was even slightly impaired by the consumption of alcohol:
see
R. v.
Stellato
(1993),
1993 CanLII 3375 (ON CA)
,
78 C.C.C. (3d) 380 (Ont. C.A.)
, aff’d
1994 CanLII 94 (SCC)
,
[1994] 2 S.C.R. 478
(S.C.C.)
;
Moreno-Baches
and
Wang
, at para.
17
. Where appellate
courts are called upon to review the trial judge’s conclusions as to whether
the officer objectively had reasonable and probable grounds, the appellate
court must show deference to the trial judge’s findings of fact although the
trial judge’s ruling is a question of law reviewable on the standard of
correctness:
Wang
at para.
18
.
[
48
]
I have no difficulty finding that
PC Prekas has reasonable and probable grounds to arrest Mr. Kumar and read him
his breath demand. He was given information from the first EMS technician that
a car had hit the back of her ambulance, and may have been drinking. The driver
was in the back of the ambulance and the EMS technician told PC Prekas what
happened, as a witness to the collision. Mr. Kumar adopted Mr. Kirkpatrick’s
narrative. PC Prekas made observations about Mr. Kumar’s indicia of impairment.
These were born out to some extent by the video played in court. As the Court
in
Bush
said (at par.
47
) “There is no necessity that the defendant be
in a state of extreme intoxication before the officer has reasonable and
probable grounds to arrest”. Here the officer had an unexplained collision, and
indicia of impairment all proximate in time and place to the collision. I would
not describe the grounds for arrest as overwhelming but they easily and
objectively satisfied the constitutional standard. There is no s. 8 violation
in arresting Mr. Kumar, nor in reading him the Breath Demand. It follows that
the police did not violate his rights in detaining him during transport to the
police station.
Was there a violation of the implementation of Mr. Kumar’s rights to
counsel?
[
49
]
In this argument Mr. Kumar makes
much of the lack of evidence by either arresting officers that Mr. Kumar was
satisfied with his call with duty counsel. The argument is that the police were
not duly diligent in ensuring that Mr. Kumar understood his rights. I disagree.
[
50
]
In
R. v. Edwards
,
2024 ONCA
135
Doherty JA outlined the test to be applied when assessing a case such as
this where the claim is that the police did insufficient efforts to contact
counsel of choice.
37
The language used in some cases
suggests a different test if the police have assumed control over the means by
which counsel can be contacted, as for example in this case when the police
took the respondent's cellphone. Those cases speak in terms of the police
having to pursue access to counsel as "diligently" as the detainee
would personally have done so. This language suggests a personalized or
subjective component to the requirements imposed on the police by s. 10(b), and
raises the possibility that the police could act reasonably in attempting to
contact counsel and yet still breach s. 10(b) because, despite acting
reasonably, they failed to do something the accused would have done to contact
counsel:
see
R. v Jarrett
2021 ONCA 758
,
498 C.R.R. (2d) 38
, at para.
43
;
R. v. O'Shea
2019 ONSC 1514
,
372 C.C.C. (3d) 352
, at para.
42
;
R.
v. Doobay
2019 ONSC 7272
,
61 M.V.R. (7th) 225
, at paras.
30-31
;
R. v.
Maciel
2016 ONCJ 563
,
32 C.R. (7th) 174
, at paras.
42-43
;
R. v. Ali
2018
ONCJ 203
,
29 M.V.R. (7th) 143
, at paras.
57-59
, aff'd
2020 ONSC 1005
,
63 M.V.R.
(7th) 323
.
38
On my reading, these authorities
do not intend to, and more importantly could not as a matter of law, depart
from the "reasonable diligence" standard repeatedly accepted in the
Supreme Court of Canada jurisprudence:
Willier
, at paras. 33-35;
McCrimmon
,
at para. 17.
39
As I read the cases, while they
refer to acting as "diligently" as the detainee would have acted,
they also refer to the detainee as using reasonable diligence in seeking out
counsel: e.g. see
Ali
, at paras. 58-59. In other words, the diligent detainee
in the circumstances is a detainee who acts with "reasonable
diligence".
40
I would also observe that there
are significant difficulties in applying a diligence standard that would
incorporate the steps a particular detainee would take in a given situation.
The police would in most cases have no way of knowing what the detainee would
have done in the specific situation, and therefore no way of knowing how they
could properly comply with their obligation under s. 10(b). However, if the
police obligation is measured strictly in terms of reasonable diligence, the
police should have no difficulty in understanding the requirements imposed by
that obligation in any given situation.
41
A subjective test which looks to
the detainee's particular expectations could also undermine the very purpose of
s. 10(b). There are situations in which a particular detainee would do nothing
to contact counsel of choice, other than wait for the police to do so. The
protection afforded by access to counsel would be significantly diminished, if
the police were to be absolved of their responsibility to take reasonable steps
to connect a detainee with counsel, in cases where the police had assumed
control over contact, simply because on the evidence, the detainee would not
have taken any reasonable steps to contact counsel.
42
The purpose of s. 10(b) is best
served by testing police compliance with their requirements against the
reasonable diligence standard. That standard will, of course, reflect the
particular circumstances of the case, including the extent to which the police
have assumed control of the detainee's ability to contact counsel. If the
police assume that control, it is reasonable to expect that the police will
take a more active role in contacting counsel.
[
51
]
In this case Mr. Kumar never gave
the police the name or contact information of a lawyer to call instead of duty
counsel. He did give them the name of a family member who might help after the
first breath sample had been taken and after speaking with duty counsel. That
family member was called by the police and a message left. No one called back.
In the circumstances I have no difficulty in finding that the police complied
with a reasonable diligence standard to contact counsel for Mr. Kumar. They
called duty counsel because he had no lawyer, and they called his contact when
he gave it. The police acted promptly and diligently on the information Mr.
Kumar gave them about implementing rights to counsel. There is no evidence that
Mr. Kumar had anyone other than his mentor in mind. He never gave the officers
any other avenues to pursue counsel of choice. Beyond giving the name of the
mentor, who did not answer the phone, he was not reasonably diligent in
pursuing any other counsel of choice.
[
52
]
While I have rejected Mr. Kumar’s evidence as too
frail, it detracts from his
Charter
Application for him to say as he did
in evidence “…Yeah, I spoke with duty counsel. But just to clarify, I didn’t
know that I’m speaking to somebody as duty counsel. They said there will be a
person will speak to you…I kept on asking that person who was on the phone as
well as after that call to the officers. In cross-examination he said “I spoke
to a person. I didn’t know he was duty counsel”. His position in evidence is
that he never knew he was receiving legal advice when he spoke with duty
counsel. I therefore reject his claim that he was unsatisfied with the advice
of duty counsel. On his evidence he was both not satisfied and also never
received any advice at all.
Did the police use excessive force when they
arrested Mr. Kumar?
[
53
]
In submissions Mr. Kumar claims
that the police used excessive force when they “used for (sic) to arrest Mr.
Kumar, and then again to put him into the police cruiser”.
[
54
]
The police may use appropriate
force when taking an arrestee into custody. It is important to remember that an
arrest of someone who was previously at liberty by definition must involve some
force because the arrestee has lost the ability to move at will. After arrest
the person moves as the authorities determine. The question is whether in all
the circumstances the force used was reasonable,
See
R. v. Musclow
2024
ONSC 5630
, per Fraser J. at par. 127:
(i)
the suspect was acting in a hostile manner towards the
police, resisting arrest or failing to comply with an officer's arrest
procedure;
(ii)
the relative sizes and weights of the officer and the
suspect;
(iii)
the officer was at risk of harm;
(iv)
the police knew the suspect had a history which might
represent a threat to them; or,
(v)
the police understood that weapons might be on the
premises.
[
55
]
In his evidence Mr. Kumar
testified only about the arrest minimally. He said in direct testimony:
So, I – while coming down, I had to hold the bar to
get down and I never basically touched my head or banged my head on the
ambulance which was mentioned earlier. But after getting down, both of the
police officers – the other lady who was always outside – she never came in –
they basically held my shoulder and turned me around the ambulance, against the
ambulance, my face fronting the ambulance, and then they basically pushed me
against it and said that I’m under arrest and I was totally surprised because I
didn’t know what was going on”.
He
disagreed that he tensed up during the arrest and disagreed that he was arguing
with the officers in that moment. In his evidence he was “…just asking
open-ended questions”.
[
56
]
He then gave evidence that the
police “..basically threw me inside the car…”. There is no evidence that Mr.
Kumar was hurt in any way, or suffered any injury from the incident. At one
point he complained about his handcuffs being too tight and therefore
uncomfortable. PC Prekas then changed their setting to make them less
restrictive.
[
57
]
This case falls to be decided factually. Mr. Kumar has
failed to prove on a balance of probabilities that the police used excessive
force in their dealings with him that night. When he was arrested the video
shows him tensing up, to which the police tell him not to do that because he is
being arrested. When the police handled him in that moment they were using what
I find is an appropriate level of force to ensure that Mr. Kumar was handcuffed
to the rear as they were entitled to do in the circumstances. At that point Mr.
Kumar was not physically cooperating with the arresting officers. That can be
seen clearly on the video.
[
58
]
The evidence also establishes that
while Mr. Kumar was being arrested at the side of the ambulance vehicle traffic
was passing by. This arrest happened within inches of a live lane of traffic.
This required the police to establish physical control immediately.
[
59
]
That same finding applies to the moment when he was
put in the rear of the police scout car. At that time he was asked several
times to get into the car and, rather than follow directions, he protested.
When PC Prekas put his hand on Mr. Kumar’s head to force him into the police
car Mr. Kumar had been given several opportunities to do just that. When he
didn’t, the police exercised reasonable force by putting him into the back of the
car. I say that while finding that the force they used to do that was in no way
excessive based on the video evidence. There is a lack of evidence of excessive
force. This limb of the
Charter
Application falls far short.
[
60
]
For these reasons all
Charter
arguments
are dismissed. There was no violation of Mr. Kumar’s
Charter
rights.
Statutory elements of the offence
[
61
]
Was Mr. Kumar impaired in law? I
find that Mr. Kumar was involved in an unexplained accident with an ambulance.
The ambulance was a large vehicle, but it is also very brightly painted as
ambulances are. There is no explanation about why Mr. Kumar could not avoid
hitting the ambulance in front of him. Mr. Kirkpatrick was concerned about Mr.
Kumar’s impairment, and noted his smell of alcohol and bloodshot eyes. Mr.
Kumar’s difficulty leaving the ambulance is seen on the BWC. That is a physical
indicia of impairment. The combination of physical indicia and the accident
easily make out Mr. Kumar’s impairment. I would not describe them as gross
signs of impairment but they are far above the slight requirement, see
R. v.
Stellato
1993 ONCA 3375 at paragraph 14. Mr. Kumar was impaired by alcohol
when he drove his car into the back of the ambulance.
[
62
]
The defence fairly concedes the
essential elements of the 80 plus if he was the driver.
[
63
]
In the result Mr. Kumar is found guilty of both charges.
Released: July 8, 2025
Signed: Justice D. Rose