Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj45/2025oncj45.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Tinglin
, 2025 ONCJ 45
DATE: 
2025 01 20
COURT
FILE No:  Toronto- 4810 998 23 48107496
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
MARTIN TINGLIN
Before
Justice Katrina Mulligan
Heard
on November 25, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on January 20, 2025
A.
Haran......................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
J.
Hershberg......................................................... counsel for
the accused Martin Tinglin
Section 11(b) and s.
24(1) Charter Ruling
Judge K. Mulligan:
[
1
]
On June 5, 2023, Wayne Fevrier was involved in an altercation with a
number of individuals.  During that altercation, Mr. Fevrier was punched by a
male.  In retaliation, Mr. Fevrier armed himself with a machete and chased the
male who punched him, apparently threatening to “chop him up.” While chasing that
male, Mr. Fevrier was shot by another individual.  The police were called and,
while on scene, reviewed surveillance footage of the incident.  As a result of
their review, they came to believe that the Applicant, Martin Tinglin, is the individual
who shot Mr. Fevrier.
[
2
]
Mr. Tinglin was arrested on June 9, 2023.   On June 10, 2023, an
Information was sworn charging Mr. Tinglin with various firearm offences and
one count of assault bodily harm.
[
3
]
The Crown elected to proceed by indictment on all charges.  Mr. Tinglin
elected to be tried in the Ontario Court of Justice. On November 25, 2024, Mr.
Tinglin brought an Application seeking a judicial stay of his charges as a
remedy for a violation of his right to be tried without unreasonable delay as
guaranteed by
s. 11(b)
of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. Oral
submissions were made that day and the matter was adjourned to December 9,
2024, for a ruling.   Given the fast-approaching trial date, on December 6,
2024, I notified the parties by email of my decision that Mr. Tinglin’s s.
11(b)
Charter
right had been infringed. On December 9, 2024, I directed
a judicial stay of Mr. Tinglin’s charges pursuant to s. 24(1) therein to remedy
that
Charter
violation.  The reasons for that s 11(b) finding are set
out below.
The Law
[
4
]
Section 11(b)
of the
Charter
guarantees that any person charged
with a criminal offence has the right to be tried within a reasonable time. The
framework for assessing whether an accused’s right to a trial within a
reasonable time has been infringed is found in the Supreme Court of Canada’s
decision in
R v Jordan
,
2016 SCC 27
, (
Jordan
).
Jordan
established presumptive ceilings under which a trial must be completed.  For
trials that take place in the Ontario Court of Justice, that ceiling is
18-months.  In the Superior Court of Justice, the ceiling is 30 months.  The
Court held that cases that extend beyond those established ceilings, are
presumptively, unreasonably delayed and a stay of charges is the only means
available to redress the constitutional infringement.
[
5
]
The determination of whether an Applicant’s
s.11(b)
Charter
rights have been infringed requires a four-step analysis.  First the Court must
calculate the
total delay
, defined as the delay between the swearing of
the Information and the actual anticipated end of trial. Next the Court must
subtract any periods of time that were either waived by the defence or were
caused solely or directly by the defence. The delay remaining is defined as the
net delay
.  If the net delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling the delay
is presumptively unreasonable unless the Crown can demonstrate that the case is
either particularly complex or that exceptional or discrete circumstances arose
that were reasonably unforeseeable or outside the Crown’s control.  In order to
satisfy this burden, the Crown must show that they took reasonable steps to
circumvent and adapt to the problems before the delay exceeded the presumptive
ceiling.
[
6
]
Where the Applicant asserts that the delay at issue is below the
presumptive ceiling, he bears the burden to establish, on the balance of
probabilities, that the delay is unreasonable.  To do so he must show that he
took meaningful steps to demonstrate a sustained effort to expedite the
proceedings and that his case took markedly longer than it reasonably should
have.  I am mindful that the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that stays below
the presumptive ceiling should only be granted in the clearest of cases.
Summary of Timelines
[
7
]
The parties agree that the total delay between the swearing of the
Information to the expected end of the trial is 18 months and 4 days or 551.5
days (18x30.417+4). They agree that delay is above the
Jordan
ceiling.
[
8
]
The pertinent dates, as contained in the Applicant’s factum and supported
by evidence comprised of court appearance transcripts, emails sent between the
Applicant’s counsel, the assigned Crown and the Crown’s general email office address,
and a lengthy affidavit from the Applicant’s paralegal, are highlighted below.
The Crown accepts the facts as set out in the Applicant’s factum with two
exceptions. Those exceptions pertain to the first Crown Pretrial (CPT) held
November 8, 2023, and the extent of disclosure that still remains outstanding
though it does agree that disclosure still remains incomplete as of the date of
the application.  As the Applicant fairly points out, there was no evidence
filed by the Crown to support its version of the facts in these two areas and
so I can give no weight to their assertions in this regard.
June 10, 2023           Information sworn.
Applicant’s first appearance,
in custody, in Bail Court. Bail hearing not commenced. At the Applicant’s
request the matter was adjourned to Case Management court on June 14, 2023.
June 14, 2023
Applicant
appears in Case Management court. Applicant’s counsel requests matter to be
adjourned to July 13, 2023, to allow for disclosure.
June 21,
2023           Applicant makes written request for disclosure.
June 22,
2023           The complainant, Mr. Fevrier, conducts a videotaped interview
with police.
July 3, 2023              Applicant makes second written
request for disclosure.
July 4,
2023              Crown’s office responds to Applicant’s counsel advising that
no one has been assigned to the Applicant’s file.
An Assistant Crown Attorney
(ACA) is assigned to Applicant’s file.
July 12, 2023             The assigned Crown screens the
Applicant’s file.
July 13,
2023            Applicant’s second court appearance in Case Management court.  Disclosure
requested by Applicant. The ACA calling the list advises the Case Management
Court and agent for the Applicant’s counsel that disclosure is now available. 
Agent for counsel requests a remand to August 17, 2023, to allow for review of
disclosure and conduct of a CPT.
Applicant’s counsel receives initial
disclosure through the Ministry of the Attorney General’s electronic disclosure
system.  Neither Mr. Fevrier’s police video statement nor any surveillance
footage are included therein.
August 17,
2023       Applicant’s third court appearance. The Case Management Court is
advised that substantive disclosure is still missing. Agent for counsel asks
when missing “surveillance and other media files” will be available.  The ACA
calling the list has no update from the assigned Crown and advises Applicant’s
counsel to contact same as will she. The Applicant requests to return on
September 14, 2023.
Applicant’s counsel emails the
assigned Crown suggesting they “chat” regarding the missing items of
disclosure.  An “out of office message” is received in reply advising counsel
that the assigned Crown is away until August 21, 2023.  Applicant’s counsel
does not receive a reply to his email.
August 31,
2023       Applicant’s counsel is contacted by the “Myers Court Crown” asking
whether the Applicant is proceeding with, or waving, his 90 day detention
review in the Superior Court of Justice (SCJ). Applicant’s detention review hearing
date is scheduled for September 28, 2023, in the SCJ.
Sept 14,
2023           Applicant’s 4
th
court appearance. The Case Management
Court is advised that no further disclosure has been provided and that there
has been no response from the assigned Crown to Applicant’s counsel’s emails.
The ACA calling the list suggests a return date of October 12, 2023, and the
Applicant is remanded thereto.
Sept 18,
2023           Further disclosure provided to Applicant’s counsel via the
Ministry’s electronic disclosure system.  That disclosure does not contain Mr.
Fevrier’s videotaped police statement nor other, previously requested,
surveillance videos from the scene of the shooting.
Sept. 26,
2023          After a discussion between Applicant’s counsel and the Myers
Court Crown, the latter locates and provides the former with three surveillance
clips.
Applicant’s counsel serves and
files “Myers materials” with the SCJ.  In those materials, Applicant’s counsel
details the missing disclosure, its importance to the defence, the numerous
attempts made to date to obtain same and the lack of any response to those
attempts by the assigned Crown.
Upon receipt of the
Applicant’s Myers materials, the Myers Court Crown contacts the Officer in
Charge (OIC) of the Applicant’s case.  The OIC advises the Myers Court Crown
that Mr. Fevrier’s statement was uploaded to the assigned Crown “months ago” but
may not been viewable by the latter due to some glitch.  The Myers Court Crown
obtains the statement from the OIC and then provides it directly to Applicant’s
counsel. Applicant’s counsel advises the Myer’s Crown of his attempts to make
contact with the assigned Crown and indicates that he has received no response
from same.  Four minutes after that conversation, the assigned Crown contacts
Applicant’s counsel, by email, asking counsel to contact him to schedule a
CPT.  Applicant’s counsel does so, and a CPT is scheduled for October 3, 2023.
Sept. 28,
2023          The Applicant’s Myer’s hearing is conducted in the SCJ and the
matter adjourned to October 3, 2023 for ruling.
October 3,
2023       The Applicant is granted a surety Release with conditions including
house arrest and electronic monitoring.  In her reasons for release, the Court notes
that a significant amount of disclosure is still outstanding despite the
passage of 4 months since the Applicant’s arrest and detention.
The CPT is held and Applicant’s
counsel outlines what items of disclosure are missing and the effect those
missing items have on the Applicant’s ability to assess the Crown’s case,
consider his defence strategy and to make his election as to mode of trial. 
The assigned Crown advises that missing disclosure should be complete by early
November agreeing that the missing items are necessary to conduct a meaningful Judicial
Pretrial (JPT), as required given expected hearing time estimates, whether the
matter proceeds by preliminary hearing or trial.  A second CPT is scheduled for
November 8, 2023.
Applicant’s counsel sends the
assigned Crown a follow up letter by email summarizing their CPT discussions
and emphasizing why such disclosure is necessary to conduct a meaningful JPT.
October 12,
2023     The assigned Crown contacts Applicant’s counsel by email seeking to
change the time for the continuing CPT scheduled for November 8, 2023. 
Applicant’s counsel replies by email indicating that the assigned Crown may
contact him directly by phone at any time that is convenient for him during the
afternoon of November 8, 2023. He
provides the assigned Crown with his direct phone line. In his reply he also
reiterates that the missing disclosure is necessary to complete the CPT and to
hold a meaningful JPT thereafter.
Applicant’s 5
th
appearance. The Case Management Court is advised that disclosure is still
outstanding and that a second CPT is scheduled for November 8, 2023. There is
no update from the assigned Crown on the Crown’s Scheduling Crown Operations Prepared
Electronically (SCOPE) internal messaging and case tracking system, as to the
status of the missing disclosure or any steps taken to obtain same. The
Applicant is remanded to November 17, 2023.
Nov. 8,
2023             Applicant’s counsel receives an email from the assigned Crown
at approximately 4:00 p.m. indicating that he assumes counsel is otherwise
occupied which is why counsel he hasn’t contacted him.  In that email he
confirms that he is aware disclosure is still outstanding and suggests that a
JPT be scheduled.
Applicant responds 4 minutes
later, by email, advising he is available and has been waiting for the assigned
Crown’s call as previously arranged.  He also reminds the assigned Crown that
disclosure is still outstanding citing the fact that no new items have been
received since the last CPT.  Applicant’s counsel receives no reply email, no
phone call nor other response from the assigned Crown.
Applicant’s counsel resends
the email request for outstanding disclosure originally sent October 13, 2023,
following the first CPT.  Applicant’s counsel does not receive a response to
this email from the assigned Crown.
Nov. 16,
2023           Further disclosure received by Applicant’s counsel via the Ministry’s
electronic disclosure system.  None of the substantive items of missing
disclosure requested is contained therein.
Nov. 17,
2023           Applicant’s 6
th
appearance. The Case Management Court
is advised by an agent for Applicant’s counsel that substantive disclosure
remains outstanding and that he has discussed same with the assigned Crown. 
The ACA calling the list references items disclosed the day prior and suggests
that a JPT be scheduled.  The date of December 15, 2023, is suggested by the
ACA as a remand date and accepted by the Applicant.
Dec. 15,
2023           Applicant’s 7
th
appearance. The Case Management Court
is advised that no further disclosure has been provided. There is no update in
SCOPE from assigned Crown as to expected date for provision of disclosure. 
Applicant remanded to February 16, 2024.
Jan. 17,
2024            Applicant’s counsel sends another follow up letter to the
assigned Crown regarding missing items of disclosure.  Applicant’s counsel
never receives a response to this email from the assigned Crown.
Feb. 16,
2024           Applicant’s 8
th
appearance. His request for missing
disclosure is renewed. The ACA, through the Case Management Court, advises
agent for Applicant’s counsel to follow up with assigned Crown regarding the
missing disclosure and advises that they will send him a message to the same
effect as well.  The Court remands the Applicant to April 5, 2024.
March 11,
2024        Applicant’s counsel sends another email to the assigned Crown
regarding outstanding items of disclosure.  The Applicant does not receive a
response from the assigned Crown.
March 20,
2024        Further disclosure provided to Applicant’s counsel via the Ministry’s
electronic disclosure system.  None of the disclosure provided contains the
requested items agreed to be necessary for a substantive JPT.
April 4,
2024              Further disclosure provided to Applicant’s counsel via the
Ministry’s electronic disclosure system.  One of the outstanding items previously
requested by Applicant’s counsel and agreed to be substantive is contained
therein. From the new disclosure provided, Applicant’s counsel first becomes
aware that some of the on-scene police officers were wearing body worn cameras
June 5, 2023.
Applicant’s counsel sends an
email to the assigned Crown reminding him of the crucial items still
outstanding and requesting body worn camera footage from responding officers. 
Applicant’s counsel receives no response to this email from the assigned Crown.
April 5,
2024              Applicant’s 8
th
appearance.  The Case Management
Court is again advised about missing disclosure.  Applicant is remanded to May
17, 2024
May 10,
2024            Applicant’s counsel writes a detailed letter to assigned Crown
seeking the crucial items of disclosure and reiterates that he would like to
move the Applicant’s case along.  Applicant’s counsel receives no response from
the assigned Crown.
May 17,
2024            Applicant’s 9
th
appearance.  The missing disclosure
is raised again by agent for Applicant’s counsel with the Case Management
Court.  Applicant adjourned to June 14, 2024.
May 21,
2024            Applicant’s counsel sends a request for new items of disclosure
and reminds the assigned Crown that other, crucial, items still remain
outstanding.  Applicant’s counsel receives no response to this email from the
assigned Crown.
June 14,
2024           Applicant’s 10
th
appearance. Agent for Applicant’s
counsel advises The Case Management Court of continuing delays caused by
incomplete disclosure.  There is no update from the assigned Crown in SCOPE to
assist the ACA calling the list in advising the Court as to the status of
missing disclosure or the reason for the delay in providing same. The ACA
recommends that the matter go into the Intensive Case Management Court. 
Applicant remanded to July 19, 2024.
Assigned Crown telephones
defense counsel to discuss missing disclosure items. A JPT is scheduled for
June 27, 2024. Assigned Crown advises missing items of disclosure expected to
be completed in the interim.
June 26,
2024           Assigned JPT judge writes to parties advising that no JPT
package has been received by him from the Crown’s office and requests same from
assigned Crown in order to prepare for the JPT scheduled to take place the next
day.
Assigned Crown provides JPT
Form and package to JPT judge.
Applicant’s counsel forwards
Applicant’s SCJ Release ruling dated October 3, 2023, to JPT judge.
June 27,
2024           Parties attend for JPT.  Assigned Crown advises Applicant’s
counsel and the JPT judge that he understands that there are a number of
witness statements still outstanding that need to be reviewed by the OIC before
being disclosed.  Crown also advises JPT judge that he does not challenge the
Applicant’s assertion that the outstanding disclosure is fundamental to the
Applicant’s ability to make an informed election.  The parties agree to a
continuing JPT date of July 23, 2024.
After the JPT, Applicant’s
counsel emails the assigned Crown seeking a variation of the Applicant’s Release
conditions.  The assigned Crown does not respond.
July 19,
2024            Applicant’s 11
th
appearance.  No update from
assigned Crown in SCOPE with respect to missing witness statements discussed at
JPT or missing disclosure first requested 12 months ago. No update about
Applicant’s request for a variation of his Release conditions. Matter adjourned
by the Intensive Case Management Court to August 16, 2024.
7 gigabytes of disclosure sent
to Applicant’s counsel via the Ministry’s electronic disclosure system.
July 22,
2024            Applicant’s counsel sends an email to the assigned Crown
indicating the most recent batch of disclosure contains items already disclosed
but for 3 new body worn camera videos from June 5, 2023, which Applicant’s
counsel first became aware of April 5, 2024, and which he requested be provided
that same day.  Applicant’s counsel again requests missing items discussed at
the JPT and reiterates the reasons therefore.  Applicant’s counsel does not
receive a reply from the assigned Crown.
July 23,
2024            Continuing JPT held.  Assigned Crown advises that there are, in
fact, no further witness statements or surveillance clips to be disclosed and
that he and the Applicant are in possession of all the substantive disclosure
related to the case.  Applicant indicates his election of OCJ-trial and a trial
time estimate of 2 days is reached assuming both parties agree to certain
concessions discussed during the JPT that reduce the trial time estimate from 5
days to 2 days.
Applicant’s counsel sends another
detailed disclosure request to the assigned Crown seeking disclosure items
still outstanding.
August 11,
2024       Applicant’s counsel sends another letter to the assigned Crown
requesting a variation of the Applicant’s Release conditions.  The variation
requested is described by Applicant’s counsel as a way to streamline the
eventual hearing as it would lead to certain admissions by counsel that, as
discussed at the JPT, will reduce hearing time by days.  Applicant’s counsel
receives no response from the assigned Crown.
August 16,
2024       Applicant’s 12
th
appearance.  Applicant remanded to
September 6, 2024. No update by assigned Crown in SCOPE regarding proposed Release
variation. Judicial Intensive Case Management Court advised by Applicant’s
counsel that trial dates will be secured from the Trial Coordinator in the
interim.
August 25,
2024       Assigned Crown contacts Applicant’s counsel to discuss trial
concessions and proposed Release condition variation.  Both parties agree that proper
trial estimate, considering concessions now confirmed, is 2 days.
August 26,
2024       A 2 day trial date is obtained from Trial Coordinator for October 17
and 18, 2024.  Earlier trial dates of September 23 and 24, 2024, were offered
by the Trial Coordinator but Applicant’s counsel was unavailable on those
dates. A 2-day trial date was also offered in November.  Counsel for the
Applicant accepts the October dates conditionally, advising the assigned Crown
and Trial Coordinator that he is “double booking” in that he has a commitment
in the SCJ on those October dates but that he believes the SCJ trial dates may
soon be vacated.
August 29, 2024       Applicant’s Release is varied on
consent.
Sept. 6,
2024            Applicant’s 13
th
appearance.  Agent for Applicant’s
counsel advises the Judicial Case Management Court that two trial dates have
been obtained but that counsel is waiting to confirm that he will be available
to proceed on those dates given his prior commitment in the SCJ.  The Court
remands the Applicant to September 13, 2024, and advises Applicant’s counsel to
be in a position to set, or give back, the trial dates secured on or before the
next court date.
Sept. 11,
2024          Applicant’s counsel writes to the assigned Crown to advise that
his SCJ matter is proceeding on October 17 and 18, 2024, and that he is,
therefore, unable to ask the Court at the Applicant’s next court appearance, to
set those dates for the Applicant’s trial.
Sept. 13,
2024          Applicant’s 14
th
appearance.  Applicant’s counsel
advises the Judicial Intensive Case Management Court that new trial dates need
to be obtained from the Trial Coordinator given his SCJ matter, previously
scheduled, is in fact proceeding.  Applicant adjourned to September 27, 2024,
to secure new trial dates in the interim.
Sept. 24,
2024          January 2025 trial dates and an 11(b) Motion date obtained from Trial
Coordinator’s office.
Sept. 27,
2024          Applicant’s 15
th
appearance.  Applicant’s counsel
advises the Judicial Intensive Case Management Court that January trial dates
have been secured from the Trial Coordinator but that he would like to see if
the November trial dates, earlier offered by the Trial Coordinator’s office,
might still be or have again become, available before those January trial dates
are actually set by the Court.  Matter adjourned to October 18, 2024
Applicant’s counsel emails
assigned Crown and Trial Coordinator to determine if earlier trial dates in
November or December are available.  The trial Coordinator advises that the
November dates are now gone but that December 12 and 13, 2024, have opened up. 
Those December dates are selected and set aside.
October 18,
2024     Applicant’s 16
th
appearance.  Trial dates of December 12
and 13, 2024, are set by the Intensive Case Management Court. The
s.11
(b)
hearing is set for November 25, 2024.  Applicant remanded accordingly.
Nov. 25, 2025           s.11(b) Motion heard and oral
submissions made.
Dec. 9, 2024             Stay of charges entered and
December 2024, trial dates vacated.
Analysis
[
9
]
As I have described previously in such cases as
R v. Brown
[2018] O.J. No.6031
, and repeat herein, section 11(b) of the
Canadian
Charter or Rights and Freedoms
guarantees to every person charged with a
criminal offence the right to be tried within a reasonable time.  This right is
based on Canada’s expectation that its’ criminal justice system move
efficiently and expeditiously being as the stakes for both accused persons and
the community at large are incredibly high. A timely trial is essential to give
effect to the presumption of innocence that underpins our judicial system.  It
ensures that an accused person spends as little time as possible in pretrial
custody or on a release that places restrictions on their liberty.  It helps to
reduce the period during which a person alleged to be in conflict with their
community’s values and mores is subject to the stigma and shame of its’
allegations and the anxiety of its’ processes.  A trial without unreasonable
delay helps guarantee that evidence is preserved, moves victims and their
families towards a form of closure and minimizes the emotional and economic
impact on individuals and the community.  Not surprisingly, it is generally
agreed that a criminal justice system that allows matters to unreasonably drag
on risks being disrespected by the public it serves.
[
10
]
As
detailed in
Jordan
,
the spirit contained within the
Charter
’s
guarantees with respect of the right to a trial without unreasonable delay did
not always translate into reality.  Over time our system of criminal justice
seemed to grow tolerant to delay. For the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Jordan’s
case appears to have been somewhat of a tipping point.
[
11
]
Speaking
for the majority in
Jordan
,
Mr. Justice Moldaver clearly signaled that a
change of direction was required to the analytical framework governing the
analysis of s. 11(b) motions moving forward.  His Honour lamented the “culture
of complacency” that had slowly taken hold in our criminal courts with respect
to trial delay and, in effect instructed that it be rooted out, exposed to
light and addressed, ideally proactively at every turn.   The goal, the Court
was clear, is not perfection.  That’s because the reality is that despite
proper case management, even apparently straightforward trials can mushroom as
a result of unforeseeable circumstances. Perfection, therefore, is an
impossible standard to require of any party.
[
12
]
As
a result of
Jordan,
the concepts of justice and efficiency are no longer
considered to be sparring opponents but as co-dependents instead.  Criminal
justice system participants are recast conceptually as “enablers recognizing
that though each stakeholder’s role remains distinct all are expected work
together to reduce delay in the completion of all criminal trials”.
[
13
]
Since
it was recognized that no set number could magically give credence to the life
expectancy of all, let alone any particular case, the assessment of any delay
in question must also take into account “compelling case specific factors”. 
For that reason, the analytical framework in
Jordan
allows for the
reality that even those accused persons whose trials are expected to be
completed within or below the presumed ceiling might still suffer from
unreasonable delays that violate s. 11(b), nonetheless.  When Mr. Justice
Moldaver stated in
Jordan
,
“there is little reason to be satisfied with
a presumptive ceiling of 18 and 30 months,” he made it clear that the country
is tasked with stopping the delay before it exceeds the ceiling. The end goal,
therefore, is not to have Courts redress delay that has already occurred but to
motivate all stakeholders to consistently work to reduce the timelines
anticipated during the trial’s progress from beginning to finish. As I
understand from
Jordan
and the cases that have followed, rooting out and
addressing delay should be immanent for all stakeholders.
[
14
]
In
examining Mr. Tinglin’s case it is overwhelmingly apparent that, for the most
part, the only stakeholder who worked to minimize the delay in this matter was
the Applicant.  Applicant’s counsel wrote numerous requests for disclosure to
the assigned Crown, made it clear why the requested disclosure was important, advised
the Courts, at every appearance, of the issues causing delay, and tried to
accommodate a trial date offered even though he had another commitment in the
SCJ. The assigned Crown, on the other hand, rarely if ever responded to Applicant’s
counsel’s emails and never updated SCOPE as to what steps were being taken to
obtain missing items of substantive disclosure or the reasons for the delays in
providing same.  This is so even though the transcripts filed in support of
this application show that his colleagues sent him emails asking him for
updates too. Like the emails sent by the Applicant’s counsel, the assigned
Crown appears to have remained silent despite entreaties from his colleagues as
well.  The assigned Crown appears to have never proactively spoken to the OIC
of Mr. Tinglin’s case to share with her the Applicant’s disclosure requests and
to determine who exactly had been interviewed and what disclosure actually consisted
of.  Based on what the assigned Crown advised the JPT judge at the first
scheduled JPT, the OIC was either too busy to give proper attention to the actual
status of Mr. Tinglin’s disclosure or, perhaps, there existed a severe
miscommunication between her and the assigned Crown.  In the end, I cannot tell
whether the problems experienced by the Applicant were the result of
complacency, neglect or an under resourced Crown office or police force.
[
15
]
Given
the assigned Crown’s actions, or more accurately, his inaction in this case,
the Crown’s approach to this Application is somewhat curious.  The charges
against Mr. Tinglin are serious. Mr. Fevrier was shot and apparently, severely
injured. On the evidence before me, the trajectory of this case falls well
below the standards normally associated with the Toronto Crown Attorney’s
Office. From the evidence tendered by the Applicant, it appears that the
assigned Crown and the OIC never engaged in meaningful discussions about the
case and the disclosure until, perhaps, sometime proximate to the second,
scheduled JPT. I say that as it appears that it was only then that the assigned
Crown came to understand the true scope of his case and the actual evidence
gathered by the police in the course of the Applicant’s investigation.  Of
course, this is merely speculation being as the Crown filed no evidence
whatsoever in support of their assertion that Mr. Tinglin’s
s. 11(b)
Charter
rights were not violated. No affidavit from the assigned Crown or other ACA, no
affidavit from the OIC, and no materials from their Case Management Coordinator
which might have explained the history of this case. There may well have been
an explanation for the reasons for the delay experienced.  That explanation may
have allowed me to situate this case and its delays in light of “compelling
case specific factors” or otherwise. However, without some evidence, that was
all but impossible.
[
16
]
The
Crown, made instead, gnomic submissions about the Applicant failing to set a
JPT date in a timely fashion in order to move things along thus causing delay. 
Considering the fact that, as of the first JPT held June 27, 2024, it was the
assigned Crown’s opinion, incorrectly held as it turned out, that substantial
disclosure was still missing and that the missing items were crucial to the
Applicant’s ability to make an informed election as to mode of trial, the
Crown’s submissions on this application were completely contradicted by the
fulsome evidence that was tendered by the Applicant. The Crown’s submissions were
also contradicted by the JPT judge’s entry on the Applicant’s JPT form. Under
the pre-printed heading, “Missing Disclosure/Action Required”, the JPT judge
wrote, “June 27-Lots still outstanding, not enough to make an election, in
particular, video statements of all main witnesses, (assigned Crown) says they
will be ready soon.” Though we now know there really was only one central
witness, faced with the JPT judge’s notation of the reasons provided to him for
the parties’ inability to make informed decisions, the Crown’s oral and written
submissions in this regard are puzzling.  In fact, what the Crown did at this Application
was to advance a position opposite to that held and voiced by the assigned
Crown to the JPT judge at the relevant time.  To put it mildly, it is an
interesting revision of history. The judge’s note made at the continuing JPT on
July 23, 2024, indicates that Applicant’s counsel “received only 3 body worn
camera files” but that the assigned Crown “is now of the opinion that
substantive disclosure is complete.”  What that leads me to find is that as of
July 23, 2024, the assigned Crown, finally, understood his case and the extent
of the evidence in support of same.  It appears that there were no further
witness statements needing review or redaction and no further surveillance
images to be disclosed as he had previously assumed, had been advised, surmised
or however it was that he came to that mistaken conclusion.   As such I find
that the investigation and substantive missing items of disclosure were
complete as of the date of Mr. Fevrier’s video statement to police provided on
June 22, 2023. Indeed, the JPT form, not completed until 1 year later on July
23, 2024, lists a single Crown witness for the trial, that being Mr. Fevrier.
[
17
]
To
add further to the troubling history of the Applicant’s case I note that those
presiding in Case Management courts did nothing to “expose to the light” and
“wrestle down” the delays identified each time Mr. Tinglin’s case was addressed
therein.  In fact, the sole comment about delayed disclosure by a justice
presiding in a Case Management court was made on June 14, 2024, when, after
being advised of disclosure delay entering into its 11
th
month, the
Court declared that the issue should be dealt with “in the background with the
Crown’s office”.  The Justice made it clear that he had no time for the issue
the Applicant identified as the reason for the delays to date. Clearly this is
the antithesis of Jordan’s clarion call to counsel and the Courts to be
proactive in spotting and slaying delay.  The sad truth, based on the evidence
filed before me in this hearing, is that those who presided in Case Management courts
did not a single thing to actually and actively case manage Mr. Tinglin’s case.
This does not bode well for the Ontario Court of Justice in the sense that Case
Management courts are so named as they are supposed to be a fillip for actively
managing criminal cases.  In other words, there was nothing done by the Case
Management Courts, despite their moniker, to consistently work to reduce the
timelines anticipated, and actually occurring before them,  during the
Applicant’s trial’s progress from beginning to end.
[
18
]
To
be fair to the jurists presiding in Case Management courts at the Ontario Court
of Justice-Toronto, their lists are often so long that it is next to
impossible, as I understand it, to deal with matters substantively without
stretching the court day well into the evening.  In fact, I understand a
“triage system” was being used, and may still be being employed, to get through
the significant number of criminal cases that were and are on the Case
Management Courts’ dockets each day.  Though I have no clear understanding of
how ‘triaging” works in Case Management courts as I have never presided in
those courts, I understand that matters addressed via Zoom appearances are
first discussed by counsel and an ACA in a separate, digital, break-out room. 
The results are then summarized to the Justice presiding in the actual court by
one of the parties to the triage conversation or by the ACA assigned to that
court.  I can only guess this is what occurred during the Applicant’s court
appearance on October 12, 2023.  A review of the transcript filed shows that
there was no Crown input to the Court during this hearing. The remand was
presented to the Court as a sort of “fait accompli” as opposed to a substantive
weighing and judicial consideration of the reasons for the request to adjourn
Mr. Tinglin’s case yet again. Once again, I have no evidence and no experience
in this area.  I do, however, preside in this jurisdiction and am well aware of
the demands placed on justices in high volume Case Management courts.
[
19
]
It
appears that the high number of cases in Judicial Intensive Case Management
courts is evidence of the inability of Justices to actively and effectively
case manage matters when presiding in overwhelmed Case Management courts, as is
apparent in Mr. Tinglin’s case. Indeed, the Intensive Judicial Case Management court
at the OCJ-Toronto itself appears to be prone to the same fate. At present, it
seems as though the Judicial Intensive Case Management court is at risk of
simply becoming another form of institutionalized delay at the OCJ-Toronto. Perhaps
the Chief of the Ontario Court of Justice’s recent
Jordan
Compliant Trial
Scheduling Directive will eventually address this issue. I can say for absolute
certainty that Courts overwhelmed by lengthy dockets, whether those be in so
called Case Management or Intensive Judicial Case Management courts, are
definitely not in a position to do as
Jordan
instructs them to do.
Apportioning Delay
[
20
]
In
assessing the delay in the Applicant’s case, I categorically reject the Crown’s
submission that the Applicant should have insisted on setting a JPT once
provided with Mr. Fevrier’s statement and video surveillance clips by the
Meyer’s Court Crown on September 26, 2023.  Since everyone was of the belief
that substantive disclosure was still outstanding, the setting of a Crown
pretrial date was, itself, optimistic. As Her Honour stated in her judgement
releasing the Applicant after his 90-day detention review, “It is not possible
to identify the shooter from (the surveillance) video.  It is possible to pick
out some identifying features of the clothing worn by the shooter. The police
have security video of Mr. Tinglin inside the apartment building several hours
before the shooting.  He appears to be wearing similar clothing to the
shooter.  There appear to be several problems with the way the police asked Mr.
Fevrier to identify a photograph of the shooter. Nonetheless, Mr. Fevrier told
the police the street name of the person who shot him, which at least one
officer recognized as Mr. Tinglin’s street name.   Even if the Crown can prove
Mr. Tinglin was the shooter, he appears to have a viable defence.” Her Honour
then went on to identify the numerous defences Mr. Tinglin might put forward
based on the evidence disclosed at that time.
[
21
]
Given
Her Honour’s expressed opinion of the case, the revelation by the assigned
Crown thereafter that further witness statements and surveillance videos
existed but had yet to be disclosed, would certainly impact how the Applicant
might approach his options for trial.  A preliminary hearing might be the best
option for the Applicant to explore the evidence of these further witnesses as
it might relate to self defence or defence of others as well as the intent of
Mr. Tinglin, based on that circumstantial evidence, for shooting Mr. Fevrier
assuming the Crown could prove that he was, in fact the shooter.  Why the
assigned Crown advised that there were “numerous witness statements that needed
to be redacted and disclosed” at the first scheduled JPT, we will never know. 
That “fact” however, effectively extinguished any hope that accurate hearing time
estimates could be achieved given the Applicant’s inability to make his
election as to mode of trial based on the information he had at the time from
the assigned Crown.  The fact is, there is absolutely no evidence before me
that a JPT could have been completed any earlier than it actually was in the
circumstances as understood by all parties, as erroneous as that understanding
was.  Though no Court mentioned the
Jordan
-Compliant Trial Scheduling
Directive which came into effect November 1, 2023, at any point as the
Applicant’s case slowly wended its way to trial, which in and of itself is
surprising, there was no argument made that, in this situation, the Directive’s
application could have reduced the delays experienced in this case.
[
22
]
With
respect to the unavailability of the Applicant’s lawyer for the earlier trial
dates offered I note as follows.  On August 26, 2024, dates of September 23 and
24, 2024, were offered as trial dates.  Those dates were less than 30 days away
and so it is not surprising that Applicant’s counsel was unavailable for trial
on such short notice.  Even if he were, there would not have been enough time
to schedule the s.11(b) motion which, by the Ontario Court of Justice Practice
Direction relating to Delay Applications such as this, requires that they must
be heard at least 4 months prior to the trial date and that all of Applicant’s motion
materials must be served and filed 30 days before the scheduled motion date. 
Even if that Direction were bypassed and time limitations waived for service
and filing of the motion and response by both parties, I cannot fathom how the
motion materials could be gathered, served and filed by the defence, the
response filed by the Crown and all materials reviewed by the judge assigned to
hear the s.11(b) motion on such short timelines.
[
23
]
That
the October dates were accepted conditionally is yet further evidence that the
Applicant was doing everything possible to move the case along.  As it turned
out, his gamble failed.  As such he was required to select new trial dates.  By
the time he was able to confirm that the October trial dates wouldn’t work, the
November dates he was initially offered by the Trial Coordinator were no longer
available.  He accepted the next trial dates offered which were the January
2025 dates.  However, consistent with the Applicant’s sustained efforts to
reduce delay, he made another attempt to obtain earlier dates, aware of the
fluctuating availability of trial time given the constant ebb and flow trial
availability due to resolution and collapse of matters set for trial.  Because
of his concerted efforts, he obtained the earlier trial dates of December 12
and 13, 2024, with the
Charter
motion set for November 25, 2024.
[
24
]
Based
on the above and applying the
Jordan
framework in its most literal
reading, I find that the Applicant is responsible for the delay between October
18, 2024, and December 13, 2024, that being some 56 days.  Subtracting defence
delay from the total delay agreed by both parties to be 18 months and 4 days or
551.5 days, results in a
net delay
of 495.5 days or 16.3 months. Assuming
these calculations to be correct, the delay in the Applicant’s case is below
the presumptive ceiling of 18 months for a trial in the Ontario Court of
Justice.
[
25
]
I
hesitate at this point only to point out that I am not entirely convinced that
the Applicant is responsible for any delay in this case.  I say that as it
appears that, given the
Jordan
-Compliant Scheduling Directive, at the
time the Applicant was finally in a position to set his trial date, the Trial
Coordinator was obliged by that Directive to find the parties dates that were
within the 18-month
Jordan
ceiling. Had the parties been in a position
to have their JPT and set trial dates in 2023, as I find they should have been,
I suspect that the trial dates offered at that point in time would have been more
plentiful than those offered at a time when the 18-month ceiling was
effectively closing. In any event, a finding that the net delay was above the
Jordan
ceiling would have also resulted in a stay.
[
26
]
Assuming
that the net delay is below the
Jordan
ceiling, I am satisfied that the
Applicant has overwhelmingly shown that he took meaningful and sustained steps
to expedite the entirety of the proceedings and that the case took markedly
longer than it reasonably should have. Based on the evidence before me, I find that
a CPT and JPT could have taken place before the end of 2023, and a two-day
trial completed in late 2023 or, at very least, early 2024.  This one witness case
is not complex by any means and neither party argued it was.   The Disposition
Rate Statistics for Toronto, available on the Ontario Court of Justice’s public
website and filed as part of the Applicant’s motion, demonstrate that cases
similar to that of the Applicant’s, i.e. charges alleging “Major Assaults”, “Other
Crimes Against Persons” and/or “Weapons Offences,” took an average of between
209-265 days to complete in the OCJ-Toronto during the relevant time frame. 
These statistics are in line with my experience as an OCJ Judge presiding in
Toronto.    As such, I find that the Applicant case has taken markedly longer
than it should have.
[
27
]
Given
the above, I directed a stay of Mr. Tinglin’s charges.
[
28
]
Released: January 20, 2025                               
_________________________
Signed:
Justice Katrina Mulligan