Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj251/2025oncj251.html

CITATION:
R. v.
Luo
, 2025 ONCJ 251
DATE:  2025·05·07
COURT
FILE No.: 4810 998 24 48105179-00
(Toronto)
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
SHU LUO
Before
  Justice Peter Scrutton
Heard
  on April 14, 15, 16 and 25, 2025
Reasons
  for Judgment released on May 7, 2025
S. Capogreco..............................................................................................................  
  for the Crown
J. Kuang..................................................................................................................  
  for the Accused
Scrutton J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Shu Luo is
charged with robbing Michael Cheng and with conspiring with unknown men to
commit that robbery.  There is no dispute that the complainant, who ran a tea
business out of a unit in a Toronto plaza, was robbed by at least 3 men on
November 27, 2023.  He was assaulted repeatedly during that robbery and cash
and other items were stolen from him. Most of the key aspects of this
unfortunate interaction were caught on video surveillance footage.  The key
factual issues I must decide are whether the Crown has proved that the
defendant was the unmasked man in Mr. Cheng’s tea shop during the robbery and,
if so, whether he participated in it.
The
Evidence
[
2
]
Michael Cheng ran
his business out of a unit at 2100 Midland Ave.  On the second floor of the
building, it was accessible through an outside door, up a side stairwell,
through an internal door, then through the door to his unit.  The external and
stairwell doors were usually kept open during business hours; Mr. Cheng’s unit
was usually locked.  He had several security cameras inside and outside the
unit. Building management also operated security cameras in the stairwells and
other parts of the building.
[
3
]
Mr. Cheng does not
speak English, only Cantonese.  His customers make appointments to see him.  A
man he knew named Calvin phoned him prior to the robbery to arrange for a third
party to come the shop to buy tea.  Calvin said the man would be there at 2:30
p.m.  Mr. Cheng did not have the man’s name or phone number.  He arrived at his
shop at 2:00 p.m. to meet this prospective customer.
[
4
]
Mr. Cheng saw a man
approach his unit around 3:30 p.m. via a camera in the hallway that played on a
screen in his office.  He let the man inside, asked the man to sit down, and
began to discuss tea with him; they both spoke Cantonese.  He did not know the
man, whom he described as Asian, very slim and very short, aged between 30-40. 
He poured the man a cup of tea.  The man was not really speaking to him – he
kept looking at his phone.  Mr. Cheng thought he was using it to play video
games. Soon after, Mr. Cheng saw on the surveillance screen that three masked
men were coming from the stairs to his hallway – his first thought was that
they were there for maintenance.
[
5
]
The small man stood
up and opened the door to let the masked men inside.  The three men began to
assault Mr. Cheng almost immediately.  The unmasked man demanded money, $11,000,
claiming this related to a debt.  Mr. Cheng said he did not owe any money and
did not have any money.  He was struck several times by the other men, who
began to search the unit.  At one point, Mr. Cheng grabbed a chair to strike
back after which, perhaps coincidentally, the men fled. Mr. Cheng unsuccessfully
gave chase for a short time.  He watched some of the men get into a blue car
and drive away on Weybright Court.  He returned to the building and asked the building
manager to call the police.
[
6
]
Mr. Cheng suffered several
injuries, including a fractured rib, swollen eye, and multiple cuts to his lips
and head.  The men stole a satchel which contained his wallet and credit cards
and over $3,000 cash.  Mr. Cheng was, understandably, not challenged on the
substance of his account at trial, which was entirely corroborated by the
surveillance footage.  He disputed the suggestion that the Asian man was
surprised by the entrance of the other men and was not actually involved in the
robbery.  He acknowledged that the small man did not commit any of the physical
assaults on him. He recalled that the three men did communicate with the other
man in English during their time in his unit, but he could not understand what
they were saying, save for the word “money”.
Surveillance
Footage from the Building
[
7
]
Mr. Cheng and his
building manager provided the police with security footage on the day of the
robbery.  Video from inside the tea shop clearly shows a diminutive Asian man who
is wearing a bomber length jacket, with fur trim around the hood, a logo on the
shoulder, and what appear to be ornamental yellow tags or straps hanging down
from the left part of the back of the jacket by the waist.  He arrives at the
shop at 3:31 p.m.
[1]
[
8
]
Mr. Cheng poured
the man a cup of tea in a clear glass mug.  The man picked up the mug with his
left hand and his left thumb can be seen resting on the top of the handle of
the mug as he drinks from it.  The man speaks on his phone.  Immediately after,
he gets out of his seat.  He is not visible on camera letting the three men
into the room but they enter immediately after he gets out and walks out of the
camera’s view. Once the masked men enter, the small man covers his head with
his hood and begins pointing and gesturing at Mr. Cheng as the other men crowd
around him.  It is 3:34 p.m.   Footage from the stairwell shows all four men
leaving the unit together three minutes later.
Surveillance
Footage from Nearby Buildings
[
9
]
The police
canvassed other buildings nearby and received additional footage which showed
the arrival and departure of the four unknown men.  I ruled on the
admissibility of the footage from other building cameras on the third day of
trial in response to a defence objection that it had not been properly authenticated. 
Suffice it to say, I am satisfied with the authenticity of the footage from the
other buildings that was tendered through a police witness at trial.  I infer,
from its coherence with the footage from 2400 Midland that was authenticated by
people directly familiar with that recording system, and the
viva voce
evidence explaining how the police obtained the surveillance footage from 2410
Midland Avenue and 80 Weybright Court, that the videos are what they purport to
be and accurately capture the events preceding and following the robbery.
[2]
See
R.
v. C.B
.,
2019 ONCA 380
at paras.
63-68
.
[
10
]
Video from 80
Weybright Court, across the street from 2400 Midland Avenue, shows a blue sedan
arrive in the parking lot at 3:14 p.m.
[3]
At 3:24 p.m., a small Asian man who appears to be wearing the same clothes as
the putative tea customer can be seen leaving the backseat of that vehicle and
walking toward 2400 Midland Ave.
[4]
He returns to the car two minutes later and can be seen speaking to its
occupants before leaving again and returning across the street to 2400 Midland
Ave.  A few minutes after that, at 3:32 p.m., three taller, hooded, masked men
get out of that sedan and cross the street to 2400 Midland Ave.  It is clear
from their clothing that they are the same men who are caught on surveillance
footage robbing the tea shop.
[
11
]
Six minutes later,
the four men can be seen running away from 2400 Midland Avenue.  One man runs
alone toward that street.  Three others, including the Asian man, run back to
the sedan at 80 Weybright Court, get in the car, and drive away.
Seized
Evidence
[
12
]
Police executed a
search warrant at the defendant’s address on February 1, 2024.  They arrested
Mr. Luo in his bedroom and began to search for items relating to the robbery.  They
found a black bomber length jacket, Parajumper brand
[5]
, sized
XS, with fur trim on the hood, and two ornamental yellow straps or tags that
hang down from the jacket in his bedroom.  Mr. Luo’s heath and bank cards were
in its pocket.  They also found black and white Nike sneakers, youth sized, outside
the front doorway to the residence.
[
13
]
Detective Constable
Russell Hopkins compared stills of the Asian man from the surveillance footage
with photos of the seized items.  Images from 80 Weybright Court show the same
fur trim on the hood and the distinctive yellow tab or strap hanging off the
back.  Images from the tea shop show black Nike sneakers with white soles,
white swoosh symbol, and clear air pockets in the heal, consistent with the
shoes that were seized outside the defendant’s residence.  Stills from the tea
shop show the same logo on the jacket’s left shoulder and a yellow tag or strap
hanging from the front of the hood area which also match those visible on the jacket
seized from Mr. Luo’s room.
Forensic
evidence
[
14
]
After Mr. Luo was
arrested, he was taken to the police station, booked, and fingerprinted.  Special
Constable Thomas Lee used a scanner to capture digital images of Mr. Luo’s
hand, palm, thumb, and fingers, and uploaded them into a Toronto Police Service
database. Everything was routine and he did not note any difficulties.  The fingerprinting
process took less than 10 minutes.
[
15
]
D.C. Rhonda Haley
is a Forensic Identification Services officer who attended the robbery scene.  She
was qualified, on consent, to give expert opinion evidence on the lifting,
comparison, and analysis of fingerprints.  She photographed the scene and began
looking for trace evidence.  She was aware from the surveillance footage that
the suspect had drunk some tea while in the shop.  Accordingly, she swabbed and
fingerprinted the glass mug and some other items on the desk.  She examined the
mug at the scene by illuminating it with a flashlight and white powder to see
if there was sufficient “ridge detail” to lift a print.  She lifted five prints
from it.  The most relevant of these, which she labelled R3, was taken from the
top of the handle of the mug.  That print (and the other four) are clearly
visible on photos she took of the mug at the scene.  She described “R3” as “a
beautiful print to lift” with lots of friction and ridge detail.  Eventually
D.C. Haley uploaded these prints into a Toronto Police Service database.
[
16
]
Later, in March
2024, she was notified about a potential “match” between the prints she had
lifted from the scene and a known sample – prints taken from Mr. Luo’s booking
and examined both samples.  She explained generally that when fingers make
contact with objects, they can leave impressions on those objects from sweat or
sebaceous oils.  Fingerprints are visible impressions in the shape of ridges
that are left on an object caused by the friction of skin pressing against it. 
Ridge characteristics are unique.   She determined that the known and lifted
samples were suitable for comparison, which involves comparing the friction
ridges visible on the known impression to an impression lifted from the scene to
see whether there are enough common points to begin a side-by-side analysis.  This
latter step involves ascertaining whether there are any common ridge paths and
deviations (places where a ridge ends or bifurcates).
[
17
]
D.C. Haley
demonstrated, with side-by-side images of the respective prints, where she
identified commonalities in the ridge characteristics and how she marked the common
deviations.  She opined that there was sufficient quality and quantity of common
sequences to conclude that the impression on the mug’s handle was made by Mr.
Luo’s thumb.  She explained that there is no bright line threshold for this
determination – she would be satisfied that the lifted and known print were the
same if she were able to identify a dozen commonalities.  She identified over
20 common ridge deviations between the print from the mug and Mr. Luo’s booking
print; these were not the extent of the common deviations but a sufficiently
high number for her to be satisfied that she did not need to continue to look for
additional common points.
The
Parties’ Positions
[
18
]
Ms. Haley was not
challenged in cross-examination on the substance of her opinion or on the
manner in which she completed her work.  Defence counsel accepts that it can be
inferred from her evidence that the thumb print on the mug taken from the scene
was made by Mr. Luo but submits that this does not prove that Mr. Luo is the
Asian man captured on the surveillance footage because D.C. Haley’s analysis
cannot date
when
the print was left or establish that it was left during
the robbery rather than before it.  He argues that the case against Mr. Luo is
entirely circumstantial and that reasonably alternative inferences negate those
that the Crown seeks to draw.
[
19
]
Specifically, he
argues that the seized clothing cannot be relied on to prove identification
because the items are from popular brands with no unique hallmarks.  The
surveillance footage does not allow the trier of fact to conclude that the
defendant is the man in the tea shop, and no witness so identified him.  Even
assuming that the defendant’s identity is established, there is no audio from
any of the footage, so it is a reasonable possibility that the men, who were
unmasked when they were visible in the vehicle with the customer earlier, decided
to disguise themselves and rob the store without his knowledge, encouragement,
or assistance.
[
20
]
The Crown argues
that overwhelming evidence supports the defendant’s identification as the
person in the tea shop and in his participation and orchestration of this
robbery.  She relies on distinctive markings on the clothing the man was
wearing during the robbery – which completely match clothing the appellant was
arrested with – and the fingerprint analysis.   The totality of the evidence
proves definitively that he was the putative customer.
Relevant
Legal Principles
[
21
]
Mr. Luo is presumed
innocent of these charges.  The Crown must prove his guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt, a burden which never shifts.  Mr. Luo can only be found guilty of an
offence if, after considering all of the evidence, the Crown has proved each element
of each offence beyond a reasonable doubt.  If I am not sure, based on all the
evidence, or the lack of evidence, that Mr. Luo committed an offence, I must
find him not guilty of it.
[
22
]
To establish Mr.
Luo’s guilt, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was the
person caught on surveillance footage inside 2400 Midland Ave. and that he
participated in the robbery as a principal or party, and/or conspired with
others to commit the robbery.  Because the case against Mr. Luo is
circumstantial, not only in terms of the identity of the Asian man in the shop
but also of his knowledge of the robbery and participation in it, he may only
be found guilty of an offence if his guilt is the only reasonable inference
that the evidence permits:
R. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33
.
Factual
Findings with Respect to Identification
[
23
]
I agree with
counsel that I cannot be satisfied that Mr. Luo is the putative customer from
my own in-court comparison of him and the man in the various videos. I do find,
however, that the defendant and the man on the video bear a resemblance – both
are diminutive Asian men.
[6]
The only obvious dissimilarity I observe relates to hair style, which is not pronounced
and, regardless, is not an immutable characteristic.
[
24
]
I find that the
jacket and sneakers seized from Mr. Luo are identical to the items worn by the
customer in the tea shop.  While the jacket is clearly not custom made, its ornamental
yellow parachute straps are very distinctive.  The sneakers are certainly a popular
brand and style.  The combination of the resemblance I have identified, the very
distinctive jacket, and the same colour, brand, and style of sneakers, is
cogent, compelling evidence of the fact that Mr. Luo is the man who posed as the
customer.
[
25
]
The fingerprint
evidence, if accepted, when stacked alongside the other evidence, leaves no
room for doubt that the defendant is the man from the tea shop.  D.C. Haley was
qualified as an expert in this area on consent and her opinion that the
thumbprint from the mug at scene and the print of Mr. Luo’s thumb taken upon
his arrest were made by the same person was not challenged at trial.  Irrespective
of the parties’ positions, I am satisfied that this evidence meets the
Mohan
criteria for admission and should be accepted.  It is clearly relevant to a
material issue (identity), is not something that a trier of fact could
appreciate without assistance, is founded on otherwise admissible evidence, and
is the opinion of someone with specialized training who does this forensic analysis
as a regular part of her duties.  Further, there is nothing novel about this field
of expertise – fingerprint evidence is commonly tendered in courts, such that I
am satisfied it is sufficiently reliable to be admitted. Its probative value to
the issue of identity is high. I am satisfied there is no prejudice associated
with the admission of the evidence because I understand its limitation as
something that it is not, on its own, sufficient to implicate the defendant in
the commission of an offence:
R. v. D.D.T
.,
2009 ONCA 918 (CanLII)
,
[2009] O.J. No. 5486 (C.A.)
at para.
14
;
R. v. Mars
,
2006 CanLII 3460 (ON CA)
,
[2006] O.J. No. 472 (C.A.)
at para.
19
.
[
26
]
I accept D.C.
Haley’s opinion that the defendant left the thumbprint on Mr. Cheng’s glass
mug.  She was able to clearly explain her methodology, she documented every
step in the process of her work with digital images and visual aids, and she
transparently demonstrated how she came to her conclusion.
Factual
Findings with Respect to the Charges
i) Robbery
[
27
]
That Mr. Cheng was
robbed is incontrovertible. I find as a fact that Mr. Luo was an active
participant in this robbery.  In my view, no other inference is available, let
alone reasonable.  He arrived with the other robbers.  He opened Mr. Cheng’s
door so that they could enter the shop.  Rather than appearing surprised or as
a bystander, he covered his head with the hood of his jacket and gestured and
pointed at Mr. Cheng repeatedly as the men crowded around him and roughed him
up.  From my review of the video, he appears to speak to Mr. Cheng and the
other men during this interaction. I accept Mr. Cheng’s evidence that the
defendant was demanding money from him in Cantonese while speaking to the other
men in English during the robbery. The defendant attempted to keep his hood up
as he fled to the car.
[
28
]
I am satisfied that
the Crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Luo was a party to Mr.
Cheng’s robbery.  The fact that the defendant did not himself physically
assault Mr. Cheng or handle any of Mr. Cheng’s stolen property is immaterial to
his liability, given the overwhelming evidence of assistance and participation.
ii)    Conspiracy
[
29
]
A conspiracy is an
agreement between two or more people to commit a crime.  To prove the offence,
the Crown must prove that there was a conspiracy, that its object was the
indictable offence of robbery, and that the defendant was a member of it.  Proof
of the agreement may be established in a variety of ways, including by
inference from the manner in which the substantive offence was committed:
R.
v. Yumnu
,
2010 ONCA 637
at paras.
337-342
;
R. v. Carter
,
1982 CanLII 35 (SCC)
,
[1982] 1
S.C.R. 938
.  If the prosecution has proved the agreement beyond a reasonable
doubt, it must then prove that the defendant was a member of that conspiracy.
[
30
]
The case against
Mr. Luo on this count is circumstantial and the only proof of an agreement flows
from the way this robbery was committed.  Mr. Luo arrived with the three other men,
left them in the Weybright Court parking lot while he went to examine 2400
Midland Ave., returned to speak to them (presumably to relate his observations
of the building), gained entry to the shop on false pretences, provided the
other men access to the shop, participated in the robbery with them, fled with
them, and escaped with two of them in the same car they had arrived in.
[
31
]
This was a
carefully orchestrated robbery.  I am certain that it was planned and did not
happen on the sudden.  The advanced planning and coordination are highly
probative of an agreement between the men to rob Mr. Cheng.  I accept Mr.
Cheng’s evidence that the defendant did not engage in any meaningful
discussions about purchasing tea in the early part of their interaction.  The
robbery began immediately upon the masked men’s entrance to the tea shop.  I find
that the robbery was the sole reason for their attendance there.  Mr. Luo’s
actions clearly establish his knowledge that the men who arrived did so for the
purpose of committing this robbery.  I find that the robbery was also the defendant’s
sole reason for attending the tea shop that afternoon. I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the four men who robbed Mr. Cheng were part of a
conspiracy, that the conspiracy was to commit this robbery, and that the
defendant was a member of this group who played a critical role in the plot.
[
32
]
I find Mr. Luo
guilty of both counts.
Dated:     May 7, 2025                                                         __________________________
Justice
Peter Scrutton
[1]
Police verified
the time stamps on this surveillance footage on the day of the robbery when
they obtained the video from Mr. Cheng.
[2]
There is a 7-minute gap in this footage from 3:17 p.m. to 3:24 p.m., a
few seconds before the Asian man leaves the vehicle.  No evidence explains why
this period was not recorded.  Even though it is incomplete, I am satisfied
that relying on it would not cause any prejudice to the defendant because it
runs continuously during the most pertinent time period – before, during, and
after the robbery.
[3]
D.C. Hopkins  testified that he believed
the times indicated on this footage were accurate but did not
explain the basis for that belief.
Regardless, I accept that times are accurate because of how the footage on this
video coheres with the footage and verified timestamps from 2400 Midland Ave.
Additionally, the footage from 80 Weybright Court captures part of 2410
Midland, such that what is caught by one camera can be related to the same
activity captured by the other camera.
[4]
Both wore a black, fur-trimmed, hooded bomber
jacket with ornamental yellow straps, black pants, and black Nike sneakers with
air pockets and a white swoosh and lettering.
[5]
D.C. Hopkins was familiar with this brand
and explained that the distinctive yellow tags or straps are a signature
feature that relate to parachuting.
[6]
See
R. v.
Nikolovski
(1996),
1996 CanLII 158 (SCC)
,
111 C.C.C. (3d) 403 (S.C.C.)
;
R. v. Brown
(2009),
2009 ONCA 563 (CanLII)
,
251 O.A.C. 264
at para.
26
(Ont. C.A.)
;
R. v. Cole
(2006),
69 W.C.B.
(2d) 760
at para. 60 (Ont. S.C.J.)
;
R. v. John
,
2010 ONSC 6085 (CanLII)
,
[2010] O.J. No. 4738
at
para.
15
(S.C.J.)
.  The shoes seized from outside the defendant’s residence are
size 5Y and the jacket seized is size Extra Small.