Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj306/2025oncj306.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Martin
, 2025 ONCJ 306
DATE: 
June 5, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  0211-998-24-21000816-01
0211-998-24-21000264-00
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
LUKE ADAM
MARTIN
Before
Justice Robert S. Gee
Sentencing
Submissions Heard May 14, 2025
Reasons
for Sentence released on June 5, 2025
J.
Kim…………………………………………………………………………….for the Crown
V. Fedorchuk............................................ for
the Public Prosecution Service of Canada
E. Angevine............................................................................... for
the accused Luke Martin
Gee J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
On March 21, 2025, after a two day trial, the
accused, Luke Martin was found guilty of two counts of possession for the
purpose of trafficking. One of the counts related to fentanyl, the other to methamphetamine.
At the outset of his trial, the accused plead guilty to the theft of a Ford
F150, possession of break in instruments, and breach probation. Sentencing on
these three charges was delayed until after the trial for the drug related
matters.
[
2
]
After the finding of guilt, the matter was
adjourned for the preparation of a pre-sentence report. Sentencing submissions
were heard on May 14, 2025. These reasons will address the sentence to be
imposed on the accused for all charges.
[
3
]
A fulsome recitation of the facts in this matter
can be found in the trial judgment of, R. v. Martin,
2025 ONCJ 160
, dated March
21, 2025. A brief summary of the facts as I found them were that on January 24,
2024, the accused and his friend and former co-accused, Brandon Pfeiffer, were
in a 2012 Ford Escape they either borrowed or stole from Mr. Pfeiffer’s
neighbour, depending on who you believe. They left from Mr. Pfeiffer’s
residence in this Ford Escape. Not long after they saw a Ford F150 parked in the
driveway of its registered owner, Richard White. Mr. Pfeiffer got out of the
Escape and proceeded to steal the F150. As he drove away from the residence,
with the accused following in the Escape, Mr. White’s wife saw the F150 leaving
and texted her husband that it was being stolen. Mr. White tracked the F150 on
his vehicle’s Ford app and relayed its position to the police in real time. The
police attended the last known location of the F150 provided by the app and
when they arrived, they saw both the F150 and the Escape parked next to each
other. The accused was standing outside the Escape between the two vehicles and
Mr. Pfeiffer was still in the driver’s seat of the F150. When the police pulled
up, an officer opened the driver’s door to the F150 and attempted to arrest Mr.
Pfeiffer but he fled, striking the officer, but not seriously injuring him. He
also clipped another police cruiser that was arriving just as he was fleeing
the parking lot they were in. The accused made a brief effort to flee but was
apprehended at the scene quickly by the now two officers on the scene.
[
4
]
The Ford Focus that the accused had been
operating was searched and inside the trunk area, officers discovered a blue
Walmart shopping bag containing 442.1 grams of methamphetamine and 1,526.9
grams of fentanyl.
[
5
]
Inside a beige duffel bag on the rear, driver's
side seat, police located a Winchester 1300 Defender model 12 gauge pump action
shotgun missing the stock, and a Winchester, Model SXP 12 gauge pump action
shotgun. This firearm had 5 shotgun shells in the magazine. Also found was a
Henry Repeating Arms, Golden Boy model .22, a loaded ammunition belt containing
39, 12 gauge shotgun shells, and a black pistol style magazine, which is a
prohibited device as defined in
s. 84
of the
Criminal Code
[
6
]
The accused and Mr. Pfeiffer were initially
co-accused and had set a multi-day trial on the matter. On February 26, 2025 on
what was to be the first day of their multi-day trial, Mr. Pfeiffer plead
guilty to a number of charges, including dangerous operation, flight from
police, and two firearm offences relating to a loaded handgun that fell from
the F150 as he sped away. For these offences, he was sentenced to 7 years, consecutive
to a penitentiary sentence he was then serving for CDSA related charges he had
been on bail for at the time the offences in this matter were committed.
[
7
]
The estimated street value of 442.1 grams of the
methamphetamine in the City of Brantford in 2024 was between $44,210.00 and
$88,420.00 if sold by point which is 0.1 gram, $53,052.00 if sold by the gram,
and $10,610.00 if sold by the kilogram.
[
8
]
The estimated street value of the fentanyl in
the City of Brantford in 2024 was $305,380.00 if sold by point, $351,187.00 if
sold by the gram, and $22,903.00 if sold by the kilogram. Police also seized
multiple empty Ziplock bags and two digital weigh scales.
[
9
]
The accused’s date of birth is January 26, 1985,
and he is now 40 years old. On January 24, 2024, he was 38 years old, two days
shy of his 39
th
birthday. He has a criminal record containing six
convictions. His first set of convictions was on February 20, 2018, when he was
convicted of two counts of trafficking in a schedule I substance for which he received
a sentence of 29 months after credit for 84 days of pre-sentence custody. Since
his release from custody on those charges, his record has been comparatively
minor. On April 6, 2022, he was convicted of fail to appear, impaired
operation, and theft under. In total on these he received credit for 45 days
presentence custody and 12 months probation. His last conviction before these
charges was on April 20, 2023, when he was convicted of possession of a
schedule I substance and was given a suspended sentence and 12 months
probation.
[
10
]
The accused’s parents separated when he was 2
years old and he split his time equally between his parents homes as he grew
from a child to his teens. When he was 14 he went to live full time with his
father until he was 22 when he moved out on his own. He stated he had a good
relationship with both his parents and his family members. There was no known
history of drug or alcohol abuse in their homes nor was there any reported
forms of mental, physical or other abuse.
[
11
]
The accused now has two daughters with a former
partner who are 12 and 7 years of age. They currently reside with his former
partner’s mother, and his access to them is at her discretion.
[
12
]
In the past he has held a number of different
jobs, eventually ending up working in the construction industry where he was a
union member making $45/hour. However, since his release from the penitentiary,
he states he has struggled with employment due to a variety of factors from,
work locations, to his drug use, to what he described as his stupid decisions. He
obtained his high school diploma while in the penitentiary serving his sentence
for his prior trafficking conviction.
[
13
]
He has a long history of drug abuse beginning
with smoking marijuana starting in high school. He developed an opiate
addiction and recalls overdosing a few times. While on parole he has attended residential
drug treatment but was discharged early for failing a urine test which lead to
his parole being revoked. During his last probation period he again engaged in
drug counselling. He indicated he uses illicit substances to cope with stressors
of life.
POSITION OF THE PARTIES
[
14
]
In relation to the charges to which he plead
guilty, that being the theft of the Ford F150, the possession of break-in tools
and breach probation, the parties have a joint submission for 210 days of
pre-sentence custody, credited at the customary 1.5 to 1, for an effective
sentence of 315 days. This sentence, it is suggested, should be concurrent to
any sentence he receives for the drug charges. In addition to the custody to be
noted, a forfeiture of the break-in tools and a conductive energy device also
located in the Ford Focus is being sought and a sample of the accused’s DNA.
[
15
]
On the possession for the purpose convictions, the
prosecution seeks 15 years on the fentanyl related count and 6 years concurrent
on the methamphetamine count. To warrant a sentence such as this, the
prosecution points to the very large quantity of fentanyl, that being 1,526.9
grams, or just over 1.5 kilograms, or for those more familiar with imperial
measurements, 3.366 lbs. The quantity of methamphetamine was also substantial,
442.1 grams or just slightly less than 1 lb. In addition to this was the fact
there were several firearms located in the Ford Focus, the accused’s related
criminal record and the fact he was on probation at the time of these offences.
[
16
]
The accused argues an appropriate sentence on
the possession for the purpose convictions is 5 years. I am urged to view his
possession of the drugs in this matter more as a fleeting one time incident
akin to a drug courier. Mr. Pfeiffer testified at the accused’s trial and
stated the drugs were his alone and the accused was unaware of their presence
in the car. Notwithstanding, my rejection of Mr. Pfeiffer’s evidence, I am
still urged to view Mr. Pfeiffer as the driving force behind this drug trafficking
enterprise and to view the accused as simply a friend of his who was asked for
a favour this day and inadvertently got caught up in a situation, he otherwise
had no involvement in. The accused also argues the firearms ought to play no
role in the sentencing mix, as the Crown chose to withdraw those charges when
he plead to the other criminal code offences. The accused further urges me to
keep in mind the conditions of his pre-sentence custody, all of which was
served at the Maplehurst Correctional Complex, which has become notorious for
its overcrowding, routine lockdowns, and generally less than ideal treatment of
inmates.
[
17
]
As of the date of sentencing, the accused has
498 days of pre-sentence custody. When credited at the standard 1.5 to 1, this
equals 747 days, or just over 2 years. Both the accused and prosecution agree
this should be deducted from any sentence imposed.
ANALYSIS
[
18
]
The fundamental principle for all sentences is proportionality.
The sentence must be proportionate, in that it must balance the seriousness of
the offence and the circumstances under which it was committed, to the level of
blameworthiness of the offender, which looks at his or her personal
characteristics and circumstances that lead to the offending behaviour.
Sentences must also seek to achieve parity in that they must be similar to
sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances. Parity and individualization of the sentence, while
important are secondary to the principle of proportionality. These overarching
principles are set out in
sections 718.1
and
718.2
(b) of the
Criminal Code
. See
also: R. v. Parranto,
2021 SCC 46
at par.
10
.
[
19
]
The offences committed by the accused in this
case are extremely serious. It would be difficult to understate how serious and
dangerous they were. In R. v. Parranto (supra) Justice Moldaver described the
harm associated with fentanyl as follows:
96.  Beyond its
mere potential to cause harm, however, fentanyl has had -- and continues to
have -- a real and deadly impact on the lives of Canadians. Indeed, trafficking
in fentanyl is so deadly that various courts have described it as a national
crisis, reflective of an increased understanding of the gravity of the harm it
causes (see, e.g., R. v. Smith,
2017 BCCA 112
, at para.
50
(CanLII); R. v.
Vezina,
2017 ONCJ 775
, at para.
58
(CanLII); R. v. Aujla,
2016 ABPC 272
, at
para.
1
(CanLII)). This heightened understanding is supported by the available
statistical evidence. The expert evidence on the record before us establishes,
for instance, that fentanyl-related deaths in Alberta increased by 4,858
percent between 2011 and 2017, rising from 12 deaths in 2011 to 583 deaths in
2017. More broadly, federal statistics on opioid-related deaths show that,
between January 2016 and March 2021, approximately 23,000 Canadians lost their
lives due to accidental apparent opioid-related deaths, with fentanyl involved
in 71 percent of these deaths (Special Advisory Committee on the Epidemic of
Opioid Overdoses, Opioid and Stimulant-related Harms in Canada (September 2021)
(online). The epidemic also shows no signs of abating, with over 6,000
accidental deaths occurring in 2020 alone, 82 percent of which involved
fentanyl (Government of Canada, Federal actions on opioids to date (June 2021)
(online)). These figures throw into stark relief the dark and inescapable
reality that "[e]very day in our communities, fentanyl abuse claims the lives
of Canadians" (R. v. Loor,
2017 ONCA 696
, at para.
33
(CanLII)).
97.  The scale
of fentanyl's devastating impact becomes even more apparent when one considers
that, between 2016 and 2020, there were approximately 3,400 homicides across
Canada, a number far below the number of fentanyl-related deaths (Statistics
Canada, Table 35-10-0069-01 -- Number of homicide victims, by method used to
commit the homicide, July 27, 2021 (online)). This disparity makes clear that,
in a very real way, those individuals responsible for the largescale
distribution of fentanyl within our communities are a source of far greater
harm than even those responsible for the most violent of crimes.
98.  The time
has thus come for our perception of the gravity of largescale trafficking in
fentanyl to accord with the gravity of the crisis it has caused. Largescale
trafficking in fentanyl is not a crime marked merely by the distribution and
sale of an illicit substance; rather, it is a crime marked by greed and the
pursuit of profit at the expense of violence, death, and the perpetuation of a
public health crisis previously unseen in Canadian society. In many ways,
"[t]rafficking in fentanyl is almost the equivalent of putting multiple
bullets in the chambers of a revolver and playing Russian roulette. It is the
most efficient killer of drug users on the market today" (R. v. Frazer,
2017 ABPC 116
, 58 Alta. L.R. (6th) 185, at para.
11
). Put simply, it is a crime
that can be expected to not only destroy lives, but to undermine the very foundations
of our society.
[
20
]
The City of Brantford has not been spared these
effects. From 2022 to the end of 2024, there were 111 suspected fatal opioid incidents
in the city and another 659 non-fatal incidents. (See: Brantford-Brant
Community Drug Strategy Action Plan, page 3). The effects of this crisis as
well are not limited to deaths caused by overdoses. This court on a daily basis
sees case after case of persons addicted to opioids coming through the court
system after committing crimes primarily to support their addictions. Robberies,
thefts, break and enters, theft of and from motor vehicles, frauds etc, are
being perpetrated daily by opioid addicts. This crisis is not only killing and
harming the most vulnerable, it is also making our community less liveable.
[
21
]
The prosecution filed and referred to several
cases to demonstrate the sentence sought was reasonable in the circumstances. Starting
with R. v. Parranto (supra). That case dealt with the possession of 485.12
grams of fentanyl. Less than a third of what was found in this case The accused
in that case was charged while on bail, had a lengthy criminal record, a firearm,
and was described as a wholesale commercial dealer. In that case the sentence
was 14 years.
[
22
]
I was also referred to the case of R. v. Olvedi,
2021 ONCA 46
. In that case the accused was charged with both importing and
possession for the purpose of 500 grams of fentanyl. He was a 33 year old first
offender. The sentence in that case was 15 years for the importing and 12 years
concurrent for the possession for the purpose conviction.
[
23
]
Two other cases were highlighted by the
prosecution as they were said to be most like the present case. In R. v.
Celenk,
2023 ONSC 6360
the accused was 26 years old and had no prior record. He
had 1.35 kilograms of fentanyl and was also convicted of possessing two loaded
firearms. He was sentenced to 13 years. The other case most like the one here
is that of R. v. Dalia,
2023 ONSC 2114
. Mr. Dalia was in possession of 1.7
kilograms of fentanyl and 614 grams of cocaine. He had a related criminal
record and received a sentence of 13 years.
[
24
]
Before moving to the appropriate sentence in
this case, two issues should be addressed. Both these issues were raised on
behalf of the accused. The first is that this case should be viewed as more
akin to a drug courier case. It was the accused’s submission that I should find
he only briefly possessed the drugs as a result of Mr. Pfeiffer’s leaving the
Ford Focus to steal the F150 and that it was really Mr. Pfeiffer who was the
driving force behind any drug dealing scheme.
[
25
]
That was Mr. Pfeiffer’s testimony at trial. He
testified the drugs belonged solely to him. He had placed them and the guns in
the Ford Focus unbeknownst to the accused and it was his intention to sell them
to provide funds for his family before starting the penitentiary sentence he
was about to receive for the charges for which he was on bail.
[
26
]
I rejected this evidence of Mr. Pfeiffer. Simply
put, I did not believe any of it. The narrative he told was that he was the
sole drug dealer. The accused was there that day to help him move out of his
apartment, and that it was only the result of a series of unfortunate circumstances,
that left the accused in possession of the drugs and guns. The reasons for
rejecting Mr. Pfeiffer’s evidence are set out in a more fulsome manner in the
trial judgment but the biggest flaw in his testimony was his assertion there
were only two ounces of fentanyl in the Ford Focus, a wildly inaccurate
statement, and that the guns were in the trunk area with the drugs, when in
fact they were in the back seat.
[
27
]
After hearing the evidence at trial, I was
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt the accused had knowledge of the drugs in
the car and control over them. And to be clear, if it seemed ambiguous from the
trial judgment, to clear it up, I was also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
the only available inference on all the evidence presented at trial was that
the in addition to being in possession of the drugs, the accused was aware of
the quantities of each of the drugs too.
[
28
]
In submissions, the accused also pointed to the
fact the prosecutor acknowledged in his submissions there was no evidence of
active or ongoing drug dealing by the accused. This is supportive of a view, according
to the accused, that he was only briefly in possession of the drugs and not the
driving force in the enterprise. The prosecutor did acknowledge that there was
no evidence presented of ongoing drug dealing, but I find that only reflected
the reality of how the drugs were discovered in this case.
[
29
]
This was not, initially a drug investigation. There
was no ongoing surveillance of the accused by police, no undercover buys from
the accused or information supplied by confidential informers that one might expect
in a drug focussed investigation. The drugs were found, when the police rushed
to the scene to find and recover a recently stolen vehicle and arrested the
accused on the scene. So, in these circumstances it is not surprising there was
no other evidence of ongoing drug dealing by the accused. Notwithstanding this
though, there can be no argument made that these drugs were not destined to be
trafficked. This is an extremely large quantity of drugs that was intercepted
before it could be sold. As such, I find the absence of evidence of prior or ongoing
drug dealing by the accused does not lead to a finding that he was merely in
possession of them by happenstance as he is urging me to find.
[
30
]
The next issue raised by the accused is whether
I can find the possession of the firearms by the accused located in the
backseat of the Ford Focus can be relied on as an aggravating factor on
sentence. The accused argues since the Crown with carriage of the criminal code
charges chose not to proceed with these charges after the accused entered
guilty pleas to the other criminal code charges, it would now be unfair to
treat his possession of these firearms as an aggravating factor.
[
31
]
I disagree. Guns and drugs are a toxic, deadly
mix. Courts routinely find the presence of firearms along with drugs an
aggravating factor. The accused was aware of the allegation these firearms were
present in the vehicle he was driving, and they were referred to throughout his
trial. He cannot now claim to be surprised his possession of them will be
viewed as an aggravating factor on his sentencing.
[
32
]
The aggravating factors in this matter are
obvious and plentiful. Starting with the substances themselves. Fentanyl is an
extremely deadly substance, lethal in very small doses. Methamphetamine is also
a deadly drug, not as deadly as fentanyl but it as well is very addictive and leads
to many social ills.
[
33
]
Next is the quantities of the drugs the accused
had. 1,526.9 grams of fentanyl is an extremely large quantity. In R. v.
Parranto (supra), Justice Moldaver described the accused in that case as a
wholesale commercial dealer and he possessed less than a third of the amount
the accused was in possession of here. There is not sufficient evidence here to
classify the accused in this case as a wholesale dealer, but there is no doubt
he is closer to that end of the spectrum than he is to the street level
addict-dealer. 1,526.9 grams would constitute 15,269 individual sales if sold by
the point. Similarly for the methamphetamine. This was also an extremely large
quantity of a very harmful substance that was destined to be trafficked on the
street.
[
34
]
Next is that the accused was also in possession
of several firearms at the same time. As noted, drugs and firearms are a deadly
mix. These firearms were not going to be used for a legitimate purpose. They
were destined to be used for furtherance of criminal activity and it is only
their seizure that has prevented this.
[
35
]
The criminal record of the accused, though not
extensive is aggravating in that he has a prior drug trafficking conviction
from 2018 which attracted a penitentiary sentence. Further, he was on probation
at the time of these offences.
[
36
]
The mitigating factors are fewer. He still has a
supportive mother in his life. He has two children with whom his access is not
completely shut off, he has an ability to maintain employment when not controlled
by his addictions, which unfortunately, has not been for some time.
[
37
]
He chose to have a trial on these matters. That
is not an aggravating factor, but it means he is not entitled to the type of
mitigation that flows from a guilty plea. Guilty pleas are a sign of remorse so
that is absent here in relation to the drug charges. Guilty pleas also save
court time. In this case, the accused had a trial and therefore cannot claim
the full benefit that would flow from the saving of court time that comes with
a guilty plea. He did though make several admissions that reduced the required
trial time significantly. For that he deserves credit, and I will view that
time saving feature of how he conducted this trial as a mitigating factor.
[
38
]
Although no records were filed outlining the
accused experience during his pre-sentence custody at Maplehurst, I am prepared
to accept the harsh pre-sentence conditions he would have experienced there is a
mitigating factor. Most of the in-custody accused persons who appear in
Brantford courts are held at Maplehurst. For at least the past several years,
almost everyone of them comes to court with the same tale of near inhumane
treatment and conditions at the facility. Triple bunking, and daily lockdowns
though supposed to be rare, are the norm. Recently, there was an outbreak of
Strep A that led to a number of inmates falling ill. I am prepared to accept,
without requiring evidence from the accused that his time in Maplehurst was no
different and he is entitled to have theses harsh conditions treated as
mitigating.
SENTENCES TO BE IMPOSED
[
39
]
Dealing first with the criminal code charges to
which the accused plead guilty, that being the theft of the Ford F150, the
possession of the break-in tools and breach probation, I find the joint
submission proposed of 210 days of pre-sentence custody credited at 1.5 to 1
for a functional equivalent of a 315 day, or 10 month sentence on each charge
concurrent, to be an appropriate sentence and it will be imposed for these
three offences, plus one further day on each, concurrent to each other and
concurrent to the sentences on the drug charges. I will also sign the
forfeiture order requested and there will be an order for DNA on the theft of
the motor vehicle charge.
[
40
]
On the possession for the purpose of trafficking
convictions, I find the prosecutor’s request for a 15 year sentence on the
fentanyl and 6 years concurrent on the methamphetamine to be in the appropriate
range. The 5 years requested by the accused in this case I find is simply too
low given the seriousness of the offences here and the court’s need to deter
and denounce this type of conduct.
[
41
]
I find in this case that when all the
aggravating and mitigating factors are kept in mind, a proportionate sentence
that will properly reflect the fundamental principle of sentencing, is one of
13 years jail for the possession for the purpose of trafficking in fentanyl and
a concurrent 6 year sentence for the possession for the purpose of trafficking
in methamphetamine.
[
42
]
The accused has been in custody on these matters
since his arrest on January 24, 2024. That is 498 days to date. At 1.5 to 1
that is the equivalent of having served 747 days, or just over 2 years. He is
entitled to credit for this time. 13 years is 4,745 days. Deducting 747 days
from that leaves 3,998 days to serve on the possession for the purpose of
trafficking in fentanyl. In relation to the possession for the purpose of
trafficking in methamphetamine, 6 years is 2,190 days. Deducting 747 days from
that leaves a further 1,443 days to serve on that sentence. Again, these
remnant sentences are to be served concurrently to each other.
[
43
]
I will also sign the forfeiture order sought by
the prosecution on the drug charges These relate primarily to other items seized
from the Ford Focus or the accused. There will be a DNA order and a s. 109
order for life. All surcharges are waived.
Released:  June 5, 2025
Signed:
Justice Robert S. Gee