Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj50/2025oncj50.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Gilbert
, 2025 ONCJ 50
DATE: 
2025 01 28
COURT
FILE No.:  Hamilton 998 24 47105668
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
LORD LELAND GILBERT
Reasons
for Judgment
Before
Justice Davin M.K. Garg
Heard
on November 5-6 and December 20, 2024, January 22, 2025
Reasons
released on January 28, 2025
Mark Dean............................................................................................ counsel
for the Crown
Geneviève Eliany....................................................... counsel
for the accused Mr. Gilbert
GARG J.:
[
1
]
The accused, Mr. Lord Leland Gilbert,
[1]
is charged with committing sexual offences against the eight-year-old
son of his ex-girlfriend. The complainant described how the accused would touch
and perform oral sex on his penis and anus. The accused is also charged with
breaching a court order that prohibited him from communicating with children
under the age of 16 without receiving certain permissions.
[
2
]
This case requires me to consider the role of
cross-examination in undermining the credibility or reliability of a child
witness. Cross-examination is fundamental to an accused making full answer and
defence. But in assessing its impact, the trier of fact can keep in mind the
unnatural experience for the person being cross-examined—especially when that
person is a 9-year-old child.
[
3
]
Nevertheless, despite the able submissions of
Mr. Dean, I am not convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused committed
the sexual offences. Based on my consideration of the evidence as a whole, I
find that the evidence is not sufficiently credible and reliable to ground a
conviction on these offences.
[
4
]
I am, however, convinced beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused was in the company of and communicated with the complainant. I
am satisfied that the offence is made out even if the accused only communicated
with the complainant over video chats. By breaching this prohibition order, the
accused also breached his probation order.
Legal Principles
[
5
]
The Crown bears the onus of proving each and
every element of the offences charged beyond a reasonable doubt. The accused
carries no onus to prove or disprove anything. He is presumed innocent of all
charges. The burden of proof never shifts to the defence. It is not enough for
me to believe that the accused is probably or likely guilty of an offence. In
that situation, I would need to acquit. While the Crown is not required to
prove its case to an absolute certainty, proof beyond a reasonable doubt falls
much closer to an absolute certainty than the balance of probabilities.
Reasonable doubt can arise from the evidence or from the absence of evidence.
[
6
]
The complainant is a child. He was eight years
old at the time of the alleged offences, eight years old when he spoke to the
police, and nine years old when he testified. I must assess his evidence with
reference to criteria appropriate to his mental development, understanding, and
ability to communicate. I must take a “common sense approach” when assessing
the testimony of a young child and not impose “the same exacting standard” on a
child as I might on an adult:
R. v. B.(G.)
,
1990 CanLII 7308 (SCC)
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 30 at 54-55;
R. v. W.(R.)
,
1992 CanLII 56 (SCC)
, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 122 at 133-134. “While children may not be
able to recount precise details and communicate the when and where of an event
with exactitude, this does not mean that they have misconceived what happened
to them and who did it”:
B.(G.)
at 54-55. See also
R. v. D.F.
,
2023 ONCA 584
at paras.
63-69
per
Hourigan J.A.
[2]
To be certain, the standard of
proof is not lower in cases that rely on a child witness. Guarding against the
injustice of a wrongful conviction demands a solid evidentiary foundation
before returning a guilty verdict.
[3]
Summary of the Alleged
Sexual Abuse
[
7
]
The evidence of the alleged offences was elicited
through the complainant’s in-court testimony and videotaped statement to the
police. The statement was admitted on consent under
s. 715.1
of the
Criminal
Code
.
[
8
]
The complainant described multiple instances of
the accused touching him in an explicitly sexual manner. The complainant
explained how the accused would touch his “no no square”, which became clear to
include his penis. The complainant also described how the accused would bob his
head up and down on his groin area, referring to oral sex. The complainant was
ultimately explicit: “He put his head on my penis and just started sucking”. The
complainant also described sexual contact on his bottom. He alleged that the
accused put his finger in his own mouth and then placed it in the complainant’s
anus, which the complainant described as his “bum hole”. The complainant also
explained how the accused would lick his bum.
[
9
]
The complainant said that the alleged offences happened at two
places: his own home in Fort Erie and the accused’s apartment in Hamilton. He
explained how his mother was sometimes present or nearby, sleeping or outside
of the room. The complainant said that he kept his clothes on during the incidents.
He had a difficult time explaining how the incidents occurred with his clothes
on.
[
10
]
The complainant’s mother testified. She supported
the complainant’s account by confirming the accused’s opportunity to commit the
offences and by recounting her observations of seeing the complainant in the
accused’s bed from time to time.
Analysis of the
Complainant’s Evidence
[
11
]
There was a major inconsistency in the
complainant’s evidence that cannot be attenuated by his young age. This
inconsistency impacted the complainant’s credibility and reliability with
respect to the alleged sexual offences. In the complainant’s video statement
and examination in-chief, he referenced physical acts that the accused had
committed in person. But the complainant deviated from that position in
cross-examination. He repeatedly limited his experience with the accused to video
chats.
[
12
]
Near the beginning of the cross-examination, the complainant agreed
with counsel’s suggestion that he only saw the accused on video, save for one in-person
encounter where the accused had sent him and his mother away.
[4]
This initial inconsistency was potentially explainable by the
complainant’s age and immaturity. Perhaps he was confused by the question. He
might not have understood counsel’s phrasing. He might have been referring to
video chats that had occurred before the in-person visits. Young children can
be suggestible—perhaps the complainant would simply agree with any suggestions
put to him.
[
13
]
The Crown urged me to put this inconsistency in
context. The complainant responded to counsel’s leading question with a single
word: “yes”. By contrast, the complainant described the sexual offences in
vivid detail during his video statement in response to open-ended questions. He
used hand motions to describe some of the acts, such as masturbation. He
described the acts in a child’s voice, with phrases like “doing the mountain”
and “then I belly face-plant”. He described the sequence of events in a manner
expected from a child. For example, instead of saying, “Mr. Gilbert performed
oral sex on my anus”, the complainant said, “… he also put his head to my bum …
He was moving his head forwards, and I tried to move his head backwards … He
sticked his tongue out … And started licking … my bum hole”. There were also
times that the complainant corrected the interviewing officer.
[
14
]
Nevertheless, I find that the totality of the
cross-examination left me uncertain on whether I could rely on the
complainant’s articulation of the sexual offences. As the cross-examination
wore on, counsel returned to the suggestion that the complainant had not
seen the accused in person. The complainant continued to agree with that
suggestion, even when counsel changed how she phrased the question. For
example:
•
The complainant agreed that meetings with the accused were video
chats once he and his mother had moved to Fort Erie.
[5]
•
The complainant agreed when it was put to him again that he had only
seen the accused on video, until the meeting when the accused sent him and his
mother away. The complainant acknowledged how the absence of in-person visits created
confusion about how the accused could have engaged in the described sexual acts
while the complainant was wearing his clothes.
[6]
•
In his statement, the complainant commented how the accused never
went under him. When the officer asked what that meant, the complainant
responded, “Well, I don’t know … I’m just gonna leave that part out … I just
get confused”. The complainant agreed in cross-examination that it was
confusing because he was never alone with the accused in person.
[7]
[
15
]
The cross-examination also established that the complainant was
capable of disagreeing with counsel’s suggestions. It showed me that the
complainant was not simply agreeing with everything that was put to him during
the examination.
[
16
]
I am not concerned with exaggerations in the complainant’s
statement that go directly to his age and immaturity. For example, the
complainant exaggerated the number of times that he had seen the accused. I
find that his manner of calculating the frequency of events was an appropriate
way for a child of his age to say, “a lot” or “many times”.
[8]
[
17
]
But the inconsistency about whether the
complainant saw the accused in person is a significant problem. Whether the
complainant saw the accused in person is not a peripheral matter—it is part and
parcel of the core allegations: see
D.F.
, at paras. 67-68. Even when I
consider the compelling aspects of the complainant’s video statement, I am
left unable to choose between the inculpatory and exculpatory parts of his evidence.
I appreciate that there were points in the complainant’s cross-examination
where he said that the accused was alone with him or described seeing the
accused in person at his home.
[9]
But these passages do not mitigate the portions that undermined the inculpatory
evidence.
[
18
]
I remain concerned that the complainant was coached
to make the sexual allegations against the accused, notwithstanding the
language he used to describe the offences in his video statement. Defence
counsel asked if the complainant was trying to remember a story that he had
been told. The complainant responded in the affirmative. While the Crown
questioned the value of this response given ambiguities in the question, the
complainant’s suggestibility was demonstrated through his statement when he said
that he hit the accused to make him stop because “it sounded like the right
thing to say”. Oddities in the complainant’s statement also support the coaching
theory. The complainant told the police that the accused wanted to “hook
up” with a particular woman. The complainant testified that he did not know the
meaning of “hook up”. The phrase “hook up” is not commensurate with the complainant’s
immature manner of speaking on other subjects. It is entirely possible for an
immature child to pick up mature phrases here and there. But the complainant’s
testimony about how he knew that the accused wanted to hook up with this woman left
me wanting. He essentially denied hearing it from anybody—not the accused, not
his mother, not third parties. He simply did not know—or of greater concern,
refused to say—how he learned this tidbit about the accused.
[
19
]
The coaching theory is not an all-or-nothing proposition. I
appreciate the argument that important portions of the complainant’s video
statement do not seem coached. There are times that the complainant’s language
and mannerisms feel authentic. But other aspects of the statement, and
particularly the cross-examination, support the coaching theory. For example, I
noted how the complainant switched to describing acts in an adult voice when he
added, “he started sucking my penis too” near the end of his statement. It
might be that the complainant was coached yet also shared authentic
recollections. The trouble is that I cannot sufficiently discern what might
have happened to safely rely on the complainant’s evidence about the sexual
offences.
[
20
]
I find that the flaws exposed in cross-examination were not
rehabilitated by the limited re-examination. The Crown asked the complainant, “[defence
counsel] asked you about trying to remember a story … but when it comes to what
you’ve told us about [the accused], and touching your body in your no, no
square, is that a story that someone told you or is that what actually
happened?” This question left a young witness with a binary choice. Given what
had unfolded in cross-examination, I put little weight on the complainant choosing
the latter alternative among the two options put to him. The complainant’s susceptibility
could have led him to select the seemingly correct option.
Analysis of the Supporting Evidence
[
21
]
The testimony of the complainant’s mother supported
how the complainant had initially recounted the alleged events. Her testimony provided
a path for me to accept and rely on the evidence from the complainant’s video
statement.
[
22
]
However, I find that the complainant’s mother was
neither sufficiently reliable nor credible to corroborate the complainant’s
account of the sexual offences. In terms of her reliability, she recognized
that she struggled with memory problems. She sometimes responded to questions
by saying that she could not remember what had happened last week. In terms of
her credibility, she struggled to follow the court’s direction to limit herself
to answering questions. Counsel would ask a straightforward question, and she
would supply a combative response that was not always on point. Her evidence
did not alleviate the concern that the complainant might have alleged the
sexual abuse at the urging or direction of his mother. I am not saying that
such fabrication did in fact occur. But I cannot discount the possibility.
[
23
]
For example, her testimony did not alleviate
concerns about whether the accused could have committed the alleged offences in
her presence in the manner described by the complainant. The complainant
explained in his statement how some of the alleged offences, like those at his own
home, led him to scream at the top of his lungs. Both the accused’s apartment
and the complainant’s home are relatively small spaces. The complainant agreed
that there were times, beyond the alleged offences, where he would call for his
mother at their home and she would respond. Yet the complainant’s mother was
unnecessarily resistant to the same suggestion—saying that she might not even
hear the complainant screaming—by pointing to how they lived on a busy street,
even though their home was an apartment at the back of a house. In short, when
it comes to the abuse that allegedly occurred while she was home, the
complainant’s mother did not provide credible explanations for why she would
not have heard the complainant while she was awake or why she would not have woken
up. The complainant’s mother might be a deep sleeper, but I do not trust her
evidence that she would sleep through “an atomic bomb” dropping beside her
head. The same could be said for whether she would have heard her son screaming
in the accused’s studio apartment while she slept without the benefit of her
CPAP machine.
[
24
]
Her evidence about how she would find the
complainant sleeping with the accused also caused me to question her
credibility and reliability. When asked how many times she would wake up to
find the complainant sleeping with the accused, she responded “pretty much
every single time” that they stayed together in the same home. She testified
that she would check to make sure that the complainant was wearing his clothes
and noted that the accused was wearing boxer shorts. She would question her son
about whether anything had happened. This testimony tells me that she highly
suspected the accused of foul play. Yet on her own account, she continued to put
the complainant in the same situation with the accused. Whether the
complainant’s mother did enough to protect her son is beside the point. What matters
is the inconsistency between her apparently taking protective measures (e.g., checking
the clothing of her son and the accused) yet also making risky decisions (e.g.,
leaving her son alone with the accused). Her evidence does not add up and
struck me as exaggerated.
[
25
]
The complainant’s mother was also challenged on
whether she had a financial motive to coach her son to make the allegations against
the accused. She admitted that she was struggling to pay the bills and was focused
on trying to set up a good Christmas for her son. She was shown text messages
that purported to show her trying to extort money from the accused in exchange
for having the police drop the charges. She denied sending the messages.
[
26
]
At a minimum, I find that her evidence when
questioned about the messages undermined her credibility. I found her reaction
when confronted by the messages to be inauthentic. She argued with counsel right
from the outset:
Q. Okay. So, I’ll show you some text
messages.
A. You want text messages, I could show you
text messages too if I can put them through court but see, I’m not allowed to.
[
27
]
The evidence also presents a compelling
circumstantial case that the complainant’s mother had sent the messages:
•
The messages refer to a $690 loan to the accused
that the sender wants repaid, and the complainant’s mother, before the messages
were put to her, referred to the accused owing her $690.
•
The sender has some knowledge about a history
between the accused and his sister Ashley. The complainant’s mother
acknowledged her understanding of that history.
•
Someone could have sent the messages to implicate
the complainant’s mother. This possibility was weakened by the evidence of the
accused’s current wife, who testified that she was handling the phone when the
messages arrived. She added that the accused was at home when she received some
of the messages. I found the accused’s wife to testify credibly on this point.
She recognized that she could not be certain on the sender’s identity.
•
The complainant’s mother seemed to stumble into
admitting that she had sent the messages. Defence counsel had previously
suggested that the complainant’s mother only met the accused in August 2023;
the complainant’s mother asserted it was earlier. When flipping through the
pages, she noticed a date stamp from June. Based on this date stamp, she pointed
out that she must have known the accused before August, given that the message
had been sent in June.
[10]
[
28
]
Even without making a finding on who sent the
messages, I find that the complainant’s mother was not sufficiently credible or
reliable to resolve my concerns with respect to the sexual offences.
[
29
]
There were also inconsistencies between the
complainant and his mother, including the type of clothing worn by the
complainant (e.g., whether he wore onesies) and whether the complainant’s
mother wanted money from the accused. The former inconsistency is not
peripheral, as it goes to whether the accused could have committed the offences
in the manner described by the complainant. The mother also did not see any
blood in the complainant’s bed or underwear, which highlights an absence of
evidence given how the complainant described bleeding from some of the alleged
offences.
[
30
]
In conclusion, I am troubled by the possibility
that a young child witness was confused in cross-examination and innocently
agreed with suggestions that led him into inconsistencies:
R. v. F. (C.C.)
,
1997 CanLII 306 (SCC)
, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1183 at para.
48
. But after considering all the evidence, I
find that I am not able to look past the significant inconsistencies. Even when
applying the reduced scrutiny associated with child witnesses, “one of the most
valuable means of assessing witness credibility is to examine the consistency
between what the witness said in the witness box and what [they] said on other
occasions”:
R. v. A.M.
,
2014 ONCA 769
at para.
14
; see also
R. v.
M.G.
,
1994 CanLII 8733 (ON CA)
, [1994] O.J. No. 2086 at paras.
23
, 29. “Obviously a contradicted
videotape may well be given less weight in the final determination of the
issues”:
F. (C.C.)
at para.
47
. The inconsistencies do not undermine the
totality of the complainant’s evidence. But I am left uncertain that the
accused committed the sexual offences or had the opportunity to commit them as
described. While a relaxed standard applies when assessing a young complainant’s
evidence, the standard of proof that incumbers the Crown remains the same.
Breaches of
Court Orders
[
31
]
During his relationship with the complainant’s
mother, the accused was bound by a prohibition order imposed under
s. 161
of
the
Criminal Code
. The order directed the accused as follows:
Do not be in the company of or communicate,
directly or indirectly, by any physical, electronic or other means, with males
or females under the age of 16 years unless you have written permission of your
probation officer and the local child protection authority and the lawful
guardian of that child.
[
32
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused had not obtained the requisite permissions. He did receive
permission at some point from the complainant’s mother (the complainant’s
“lawful guardian”). And the Crown called no evidence from a probation officer. But
the evidence establishes that the accused did not receive permission from the
local child protection authority. The defence did not challenge this conclusion
during submissions.
[
33
]
The Crown called a worker from the Catholic
Children’s Aid Society, which is a “local child protection authority” in
Hamilton. The worker was assigned to the file for the complainant and his
mother. The worker never provided permission for the accused to see the
complainant. The agency’s records did not disclose any permissions. And I
accept the worker’s evidence on why he would have been made aware through
information sharing if the accused had sought permission from a different child
protection authority, including those based in different jurisdictions.
[
34
]
The defence contested the breach charge by asking
me to doubt whether the accused had been in the company of the complainant or
communicated with him. While recognizing that the complainant had seen the accused
on video chats, the defence argued that the contact in those instances was
fleeting and superficial.
[
35
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused was in the physical company of the complainant. I appreciate that
the complainant’s inconsistent evidence on this point contributed to my doubt about
the sexual offences. But that inconsistency only led me to doubt whether the
accused and complainant were together in a manner that allowed the accused to
commit the sexual offences. It does not cause me to wholesale reject any
evidence going to the complainant and accused meeting in person: see
R. v.
J.H.
,
2005 CanLII 253 (ON CA)
, [2005] O.J. No. 39 at para.
44
. While there was merit to the
complainant being coached on the sexual offences, there is no merit in this
case to him being coached to simply put himself in the accused’s company. The
complainant’s mother was sufficiently credible and reliable to support the less
controversial point of the complainant being in the direct company of the
accused. I can accept some, none, or all of a witness’s evidence:
R. v. S.H.
,
2011 ONCA 215
at para.
8
. Unlike the allegations of sexual abuse, the mother
provided direct evidence on the complainant being in the accused’s presence.
[
36
]
I also find that the accused and the complainant
had a relationship. This finding supports my conclusion that the accused
communicated with the complainant. I accept the mother’s evidence that the
complainant called the accused “daddy”. I find it instructive that the
complainant called the accused “dad” in a spontaneous manner during his police
statement.
[11]
I make this finding despite the complainant saying in cross-examination that he
did not call the accused “dad”. I note that the complainant had seen someone
else in the courtroom that he identified as “dad” at the time of his testimony.
[
37
]
Finally, I accept the mother’s evidence about
how the complainant would communicate with the accused over video chats on
Facebook Messenger. The mother provided detailed evidence about who was
present, the device they used, and where the accused was located during the
chat.
[
38
]
In conclusion, I find beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused breached his prohibition order at various points between May 1 and
December 1, 2023. He breached the order through in-person and electronic means.
By virtue of this breach, the accused also breached the condition of his
probation order to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
Verdicts
[
39
]
I find Mr. Gilbert not guilty on counts 1, 2, 3,
5, 6, and 7. I find Mr. Gilbert guilty on counts 4, 8, 9, and 10.
Released:  January 28, 2025
Signed:
Justice Davin M.K. Garg
[1]
The identification of the accused does not disclose any information that could
identify the complainant.
[2]
Hourigan J.A.’s dissenting opinion was affirmed on appeal:
2024 SCC 14
.
[3]
See also:
Joyal, Lisa, et al.
Prosecuting and
Defending Offences Against Children
. Toronto: Emond Montgomery, 2021 at 31-32.
[4]
Transcript, November 5, 2024 at p. 37.
[5]
Transcript, November 5, 2024 at p. 40.
[6]
Transcript, November 5, 2024 at pp. 40-41. In the abstract, I am not troubled
by the young complainant’s difficulty describing how the acts occurred with his
clothes on. My concern is that his difficulty ties into him potentially only
seeing the accused on video.
[7]
I appreciate that the complainant testified to some of the offences occurring
when his mother was present. But he also testified to offences occurring when
his mother had dropped him off with the accused.
[8]
The complainant also said that the sexual conduct lasted “4,000 million
minutes”.
[9]
E.g., Transcript, November 5, 2024 at p. 55.
[10]
The June date stamp does not in fact assist on establishing when the
complainant’s mother knew the accused. Given the content of the messages, they
must have post-dated the charges, meaning that the date stamp refers to June
2024.
[11]
Officer: “Tell me about Leland”. Complainant: “He’s my dad and
he broke up with my mom”.