Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj387/2025oncj387.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
of the
Criminal Code
.  These subsections
and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code
, which is concerned with
the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
, read as follows:
486.5  ORDER
RESTRICTING PUBLICATION
— VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
—     (1)
Unless an order is made under section 486.4, on application of
the prosecutor in respect of a victim or a witness, or on application of a
victim or a witness, a judge or justice may make an order directing that any
information that could identify the victim or witness shall not be published in
any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is
of the opinion that the order is in the interest of the proper administration
of justice.
(2)
JUSTICE SYSTEM PARTICIPANTS —
On
application of the prosecutor in respect of a justice system participant who is
involved in proceedings in respect of an offence referred to in subsection
(2.1), or on application of such a justice system participant, a judge or
justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify
the justice system participant shall not be published in any document or
broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is of the opinion
that the order is in the interest of the proper administration of justice.
.   .   .
(2.1) OFFENCES
–
The offences for the purposes of subsection (2)
are
(a)   an offence under section
423.1, 467.11, 467.111, 467.12, or 467.13, or a serious offence committed for
the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal
organization;
(b)   a terrorism offence;
(c)   an offence under
subsection 16(1) or (2), 17(1), 19(1), 20(1) or 22(1) of the
Security of
Information Act
; or
(d)   an offence under
subsection 21(1) or section 23 of the
Security of Information Act
that
is committed in relation to an offence referred to in paragraph (c).
(3)
LIMITATION
– An order made under this section does not apply
in respect of the disclosure of information in the course of the administration
of justice if it is not the purpose of the disclosure to make the information
known in the community.
. . .
486.6  OFFENCE
—
(1)
Every person who fails to comply with an order made
under any of subsections 486.4(1) to (3) or
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Radmehr
, 2025 ONCJ 387
DATE: 
2025 07 18
COURT
FILE No.: Newmarket – Central East
4911-998-23-91107114
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
MAHYAR RADMEHR
Before
Justice M. Townsend
Heard
on May 12, 2025, and May 13, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on July 18, 2025
R. Gill..................................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
C. Gill............................................................ 
counsel for the defendant Mahyar Radmehr
TOWNSEND J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Radmehr stands charged on the following
count:
That between the 1
st
day of
June, in the year 2023, and the 30
th
day of June, in the year 2023,
in the City of Richmond Hill in the Regional Municipality of York, he did
without lawful authority, and knowing that another person was harassed, engage
in threatening conduct directed at that person, and cause S.A.  to reasonably
fear for her personal safety, contrary to
section 264(2)
(d) of the
Criminal
Code of Canada
.
[
2
]
The Crown elected to proceed summarily, and Mr.
Radmehr plead not guilty. The trial commenced with reference to the Crown’s
application for a publication ban pursuant to
section 486.5
of the
Criminal
Code
.
[
3
]
That issue was eventually argued on Day 2 of
this trial, with an agreement that any publication ban put in place would apply
retroactively to the beginning of the trial. After argument, I ruled that an
Order under
section 486.5
was appropriate and imposed the publication ban. Oral
reasons for that judgment can be found in the trial transcript.
[
4
]
The central issue for me on this trial is
whether the Crown has proven the offence as charged beyond a reasonable doubt.
For the reasons that follow, I find that the Crown has not met its burden and
has not proven the offence before the Court as against Mr. Radmehr beyond
a reasonable doubt.
[
5
]
In the alternative, the Crown asks that I
exercise my common law jurisdiction and impose a common law peace bond upon Mr.
Radmehr prohibiting him from contacting or communicating with the complainant. I
will address this issue later in my reasons.
[
6
]
For the sake of brevity, the complainant
indicated that she prefers to be referred to as Ms. K.
Overview of the Evidence
[
7
]
At the outset of the trial, an agreed statement
of fact was filed as Exhibit No. 1. That agreed statement of fact provides as
follows:
1.
Malahat Kheradyar, the defendant’s mother was
captured on video surveillance on June 28
th
, 2023, at approximately
3:02 p.m. leaving pieces of paper consisting of the link to [name removed].com
inside the Hudson’s Bay, located [address removed], Ontario.
2. Four complete transcripts are posted on [name
removed].com consisting of the following:
a) complete trial
proceedings from June 21, 2019, before the Honourable Justice Pirraglia. The
Crown sought dismissal of the charges at trial and Radmehr, Mahyar was found
not guilty.
b) family court
proceeding disposition of Ms. K. from November 9
th
, 2018. Family
court proceedings disposition of Ms. K. from May 23
rd
, 2019.
[
8
]
Mr. Radmehr and Ms. K. met in 2006 and were married in Toronto in 2007. Together they
have two daughters. They separated in 2018 and were the subject of an eventual
Family court trial in 2022 and the divorce was finalized in and around 2023.
[
9
]
Ms. K. provided a statement to the police on
June 30
th
, 2023. In that statement, and in her testimony before the
court, she stated that a couple days before her statement to the police, she
was advised by some of her co-workers at the Hudson’s Bay that there was a
woman leaving pieces of paper at The Bay with a website name on it.
[
10
]
Through the agreed statement of fact, we know
that that woman was Mr. Radmehr’s mother, and the website name was [name
removed].com.
[
11
]
This website, [name removed].com, was created by
Mr. Radmehr. There is no dispute about that. Ms. K. was taken through the
website, and many screenshots of the website were entered as exhibits on this
trial.
[
12
]
The website, consistent with the agreed
statement of fact, contains several court transcripts relating to family court
proceedings, and criminal court proceedings in which Mr. Radmehr was the
accused.
[
13
]
The website also contains information about the
employment history of Ms. K., and information relating to her family members –
in particular, her brother. It also contains information about Ms. K.’s
previous husband, intimate and common-law partners. The information relating to
these individuals (i.e. the previous partners of Ms. K.) is not particularly
negative, but it is written in such a way that it paints Ms. K. in a
particularly bad light with respect to how she treated these people while in a
relationship with them.
[
14
]
Throughout the website, Ms. K. and her brother
are constantly referred to as “fraudsters” and “impersonators”. There are
allegations contained on the website that Ms. K. engaged in an attempted
forgery at one of her places of employment. There is also an allegation that
Ms. K. attempted to fraudulently obtain a line of credit from the Royal Bank.
Again, these are all just allegations made by Mr. Radmehr, as I do not believe
that any formal charges were ever laid against Ms. K. There is a picture
of Ms. K. and her brother on
the home page of the website.
[
15
]
The Crown asked Ms. K. the following question at
the beginning of her examination-in-chief:
Q. Okay. And how did you feel the first
time you saw the website on that day?
A. I feel constantly harassed. Very
disappointed. Helpless. I lost my confidence since that website is on.
[
16
]
Ms. K. testified that when she initially saw the
website under her name some time before June of 2023, there was simply a
placeholder page – presumably from the website provider GoDaddy.com – which
said, “Something Cool is Coming Soon”. Ms. K. believed that Mr. Radmehr
created the website before June 2023 but he was bound by some kind of court
imposed restriction that prevented him from posting anything relating to Ms. K.
on the internet, and that that restriction expired on June 28
th
,
2023 when they had their final family court appearance.
[
17
]
Throughout the website, Mr. Radmehr calls Ms. K.
a “dangerous person” and a “liar”. He makes the same comments with respect to
her brother. The website constantly suggests that Ms. K. forged documents and
made false allegations with respect to a number of things. All of which Ms. K.
denies.
[
18
]
In the introductory section of the website, Mr.
Radmehr clearly identifies that he is the author of the website and sets out
why he created the website. He cites two main reasons for creating the website.
The first is:
“Reason No. 1 is to expose [Ms. K.] as a
dangerous person and a liar who can and will accuse anyone for the purpose of
displacing them by Police force to serve an unrelated purpose. I do not want
anyone else to meet the same fate as I did and if they do, they have something
to show for her evil pattern of behaviour. I was wrongfully accused and
arrested thrice on charges of assault, threat and harassment. The 2nd time I
was found not guilty in a trial but on the 1st and 3rd occasions, the cases
against me were withdrawn without a trial so there is no transcript or closure.
In all 3 cases I had no legal recourse. [Ms. K.] is a serial accuser who has
had Police encounter with at least 5 male partners (me included) and a female
since 1997 and yet every time she decides to accuse someone, she is celebrated
as a new victim with no regard to her past records.” (spelling mistakes in
original)
[
19
]
The second reason for creating the website is
that Mr. Radmehr takes issue with the way he perceives that men are treated in
the family court system and in the criminal justice system. He believes that
there is an inherent unfairness in the way that men are treated in family
court, and when accused of criminal offences by former intimate partners. That
is simply his opinion.
[
20
]
At the bottom of the introductory page, he
states: “If you have any information about [Ms. K.] that I do not know about
with supporting document and you want to share it please call or e-mail me at [name
removed].com or call [telephone number removed]”. That is his cell phone number
and his email address.
[
21
]
In response to this last paragraph, Ms. K.
stated in her examination-in-chief:
Q. How do you feel seeing that Mr. Radmehr
is asking for more information to come forward?
A. Constantly harassed.
Q. Okay.
A. All the time I have fear, what’s next.
Q. Okay.
A. I’m disappointed.
[
22
]
Throughout her testimony, Ms. K. expressed a
feeling of embarrassment that her co-workers and friends could access this
website and know personal details about her. In particular, that she was
accused of forgery, and that she was the subject of an arranged marriage early
on in her life.
[
23
]
Ms. K. frequently testified that this website
gives her anxiety, she is embarrassed these private details of her life are out
in the public domain, and it really bothers her that information about her past
is available for co-workers to see. At one point in her examination-in-chief
Ms. K. stated:
A. This is affecting my life, my kid’s
life, my job, my – my everything. It’s all of these reports and everything it’s
– it’s affecting my life.
Q. Okay
A. I – I – I lost my self confidence. I –
that’s not me. I used to be like more in public or – I – I don’t like even –
like I have a fear even search something in the internet, or you know just like
the simple thing. Or in public like – like I feel all the time like embarrassed
and constantly like harassed.
[
24
]
Throughout the examination-in-chief, Ms. K. went
through the history of her relationship with Mr. Radmehr and his family. It was
not without turmoil. It seems that Mr. Radmehr and Ms. K. have had difficulty
in their relationship from the beginning. Family members seem to have never
really got along, Ms. K. and her mother-in-law seem to frequently be at odds,
and from time to time the police were involved.
[
25
]
Eventually Ms. K. was asked:
Q. Okay. And when you say you have fear,
what – can you expand on that? What or who are you fearful of?
A. Mr. Radmehr. Because since 2018 in each court
– after each court he hurt me and harmed me, in different ways. In the creative
ways. And I have to just you know for them to prove – to ask the police how –
it’s not easy. And now, he created this website. He’s bringing up about the
ex-boyfriend, first husband about 20-25 years ago. He’s putting my transcript.
Why he’s not putting his transcript. Why he’s not showing all the fraudulent
documents he did to the – to the Revenue Canada, to the other companies, to the
court, and the other stuff he’s blaming me. He’s blaming me on this website
that he has a very heavy bail condition. I’m not the one put the bail condition
on him. He’s blaming every single thing, and he's putting me down. It’s – I am
extremely busy to raise two teenage girls in this society. The only request I
have he move on. Leave me alone, because my focus is my kids. This website is
not just hurting me and my future. It’s about my kids and also about my
brother.
Q. Okay. So, I’m going to pause you there
because you gave us a lot of information. First, I’ll ask, how do you feel
testifying in this trial?
A. It’s not easy because all this stuff
it’s in there - it’s in this website...
Q. Okay.
A. ... I testified already in my family
court. I – I – I talked about in my questioning. I talked about in every court.
Like in other trial. Like why he just keep going back and mentioning, because I
can’t forward. I have to block this stuff. It’s – it’s bothering me. It’s
making me nervous. It’s making me anxiety. It’s – and that fear it’s not easy.
….
Q. Okay. Do you have concerns for your
safety seeing your workplace listed there?
A. Of course, I see because I mentioned
about the guy who was a stalker. I just – you know I just don’t want to like
find me. And also, it’s – it’s about more than me. It’s about my ex-husband.
Like it’s just public – putting in public that where am I working. What am I
doing. Like this and that. It's....
[
26
]
Ms. K. appears to be a very private person. The
fact that this website is out there, and personal details relating to herself
and members of her family bothers her. She is frustrated and embarrassed by the
fact that her co-workers and friends have seen this material and frequently ask
her about it. This website makes her feel harassed and gives her constant
anxiety and embarrassment.
[
27
]
In cross-examination, Ms. K. agreed that all
criminal allegations that she has levied against Mr. Radmehr have either had no
charges laid, been dismissed by the Crown or Court, or he has been found not
guilty.
[
28
]
Ms. K. also agreed that in the statement that
she gave to the police on June 30
th
, 2023, the concern that she
expressed to the police with respect to the actions of Mr. Radmehr was
“embarrassment” that her children and co-workers would find things out about
her past and relationship with Mr. Radmehr.
[
29
]
Ms. K. wants the website taken down, she wants
the embarrassment to stop, and she wants both she and Mr. Radmehr to move on
with their lives independent of any contact or communication with
or about
(my emphasis) one another.
Analysis
[
30
]
Section 264(1)
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
sets out the offence of criminal harassment. More specifically,
s.264(2)
specifies that the offending conduct can amount to criminal harassment in a
number of ways:
(1) No person shall, without lawful
authority and knowing that another person is harassed or recklessly as to
whether the other person is harassed, engage in conduct referred to in
subsection that causes that other person reasonably, in all the circumstances,
to fear for their safety or the safety of anyone known to them.
(2) Prohibited conduct - The conduct
mentioned in subsection (1) consists of
(a) repeatedly
following from place to place the other person or anyone known to them;
(b) repeatedly
communicating with, either directly or indirectly, the other person or anyone
known to them;
(c) besetting or
watching the dwelling-house, or place where the other person, or anyone known
to them, resides, works, carries on business or happens to be; or
(d) engaging in
threatening conduct directed at the other person or any member of their family.
[
31
]
Mr. Radmehr has been charged under
section 264(2)
(d)
– frequently referred to as criminal harassment – threatening conduct.
[
32
]
The burden of proof in this, and in all criminal
trials always rests with the Crown, it never shifts. That burden, proof beyond
a reasonable doubt, must be met in relation to each essential element of the
offence. That burden is a heavy one.
[
33
]
As is often cited in many criminal trials, a
reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, far-fetched, or frivolous doubt, nor is
it a doubt based on sympathy for either party or prejudice for or against any
party. A reasonable doubt must be a doubt based on reason and common sense. It
is a doubt that logically arises from the evidence, or the absence of evidence.
See:
R. v. Lifchus
,
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC)
, [1997] S.C.J. No. 77.
[
34
]
To be clear, it is not sufficient that on the whole
of the evidence, I am satisfied that Mr. Radmehr is probably guilty. Probable
guilt is not the criminal law standard of proof - it is closer to certainty. A
reasonable doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense which must be
logically based on the evidence or lack of evidence. See:
R. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33 (CanLII)
, [2016] S.C.J. No. 33. It is open to me as the trial judge to accept some, none
or all of a witness’ testimony.
[
35
]
Justice Martin in
R. v. Kruk
,
2024 SCC 7 (CanLII)
, [2024]
S.C.J. No. 7, stated the following at paragraph 62:
Reasonable doubt applies to credibility
assessments such that if the evidence the Crown adduced does not rise to the
level required of a criminal conviction, an accused cannot be found guilty
simply because they are disbelieved. … Some elements of the totality of the
evidence may give rise to a reasonable doubt, even where much – or all – of the
accused’s evidence is disbelieved. Any aspect of the accepted evidence, or the
absence of evidence, may ground a reasonable doubt. Moreover, where the trier
of fact does not know whether to believe the accused’s testimony, or does not
know who to believe, the accused is entitled to an acquittal.
[
36
]
The Crown submits that the creation of the
website by Mr. Radmehr, the inclusion on the website of personal details with respect
to Ms. K.’s past, her employment history and dating history, along with
allegations that both she and her brother are “fraudsters” and “impersonators”
has created within her a sense of fear. The Crown argues that a reasonable
person in Ms. K.’s circumstances
would feel that the website has created a sense of fear within her.
[
37
]
Counsel for Mr. Radmehr submits that there is
nothing contained within the website which is designed to instill a sense of
fear or intimidation in Ms. K. While the actions of Mr. Radmehr are not to be
condoned, and while his actions may be embarrassing and frustrating for Ms. K.,
they do not rise to the level of engaging in threatening conduct.
[
38
]
In
R. v. Martinez-Calderon
,
[2025] O.J.
No. 2865 (CJ)
, the elements of criminal harassment in the context of
section
264(2)
(d) were put succinctly at paragraph 23:
The elements of the offence of criminal
harassment were discussed by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in
R. v.
Kosikar
1999 CanLII 3775
and
R. v. Kordrostami
2000 CanLII 5670
.
Applying those principles to this case, in this case, the Crown must prove that
(1) the defendant engaged in threatening conduct toward the complainant, (2)
this harassed her, (3) the defendant knew the complainant was harassed or was reckless
or wilfully blind to it, (4) the defendant's conduct instilled fear in the
complainant, and (5) this fear was reasonable.
[
39
]
See also:
R. v. Province
,
[2019] O.J. No.
4003 (CA) at paragraph 120
.
[
40
]
The
mens rea
requirement for the offence
of criminal harassment – threatening conduct is the intent to commit the
prohibited act. In this case, that prohibited act is the creation of and
authorship of the website. The knowledge requirement can be satisfied either by
an expression of direct intention to harass the complainant, or recklessness or
willful blindness as to whether the complainant is harassed.
[
41
]
R. v. Sim
,
[2017]
O.J. No. 5792 (CA)
, outlined with reference to other authority how the
actus
reus
is to be treated:
[13] Sim was convicted under paragraph
(2)(d) -- "engaging in threatening conduct directed at the other
person". In lengthy reasons, the trial judge found that the Crown had
established the mental element or
mens rea
of the offence:
The Crown has
also established well beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused's threatening
conduct towards the complainant was done while he was at least reckless as to
whether she was harassed. The
mens rea
of count one is made out as well.
[14] Sim does not challenge this finding.
He does, however, challenge the trial judge's finding that the actus reus had
been made out. The trial judge found:
I have found
that the
actus reus
of threatening has been made out on the basis of all
the evidence I accept. In particular the accused's recklessness at least about
the link being made between the real-life [P.L.] and the on-line [P.L.]. As
well as the recklessness about the complainant finding out about the home page
and the whole website, as she eventually did.
[15] Sim submits that the trial judge erred
in law in making this finding because establishing the
actus reus
of the
offense requires proof that the accused subjectively intended to engage in
threatening conduct. The trial judge acknowledged that if the
actus reus
imports a requirement to prove an accused's subjective intention, then Sim was
entitled to be acquitted. But the trial judge held that there was no such
requirement. I agree. For that reason, I do not accept Sim's submission.
[16] In
R. v. Burns
,
2008 ONCA 6
, 77
W.C.B. (2d) 402 -- relying on the judgment of the Yukon Territory Court of
Appeal in
R. v. George
,
2002 YKCA 2
, 52 W.C.B. (2d) 530 -- this court
endorsed an objective standard for determining the actus reus of harassment by
engaging in threatening conduct. At para. 2, the court wrote:
To establish
harassment under
s. 264(2)
(d) of the
Criminal Code
, the Crown had to
establish that the appellant engaged in "threatening conduct". We
accept the definition of threatening conduct given in
R. v. George
at
para.
39
that, in order to meet the objectives of s. 264, the threatening
conduct must amount to a "tool of intimidation which is designed to
instill a sense of fear in the recipient". The impugned conduct is to be
viewed objectively, with due consideration for the circumstances in which they
took place, and with regards to the effects those acts had on the recipient.
[Citation omitted.]
[17] In support of his submission, Sim
focuses on the word "designed" in the phrase "tool of
intimidation which is designed to instill a sense of fear in the
recipient". I do not read this phrase or the word "designed" in
the way Sim does for two main reasons.
[18] First, Sim's submission is
inconsistent with s. 264(1) of the
Code
and thus is contrary to
Parliament's express intent. Subsection 264(1) specifies that the
mens rea
component of criminal harassment can be met by an accused's knowledge or
recklessness. To suggest that the
actus reus
of threatening conduct
requires a specific intent to instil fear is contrary to the plain language of
s. 264(1).
[19] Second, as this court said in
Burns
,
under
s. 264(2)
(d) the conduct in question must be viewed objectively. In other
words, would the accused's threatening conduct cause a reasonable person in the
complainant's situation to fear for her safety? The word "designed"
does not require the Crown to prove the accused's subjective intention. And, in
assessing whether an accused's conduct is threatening under
s. 264(2)
(d), a
judge is not required to get into the accused's mind.
[20] Instead, the word "designed"
is meant to focus on the effect of the accused's conduct on a reasonable person
in the shoes of the target of the conduct. In
Burns
, this court
clarified that the objective assessment must consider the circumstances in
which the conduct took place, and the effects that the conduct actually had on
the complainant. Although an accused's threatening conduct may not affect every
target of that conduct, in every conceivable situation, it could well instill
fear in a reasonable person in the complainant's specific situation,
particularly when the actual effects of the conduct on the complaint are
considered. That is the case here. The trial judge did not err in finding that
the Crown had established the actus reus of the offence.
[
42
]
It is clear that Mr. Radmehr created this
website. He is the sole author of it. The content of the website is directed at
Ms. K. and her family. In fact, Mr. Radmehr clearly set out his intention on
the introductory page of the website.
[
43
]
While the Court in
Sim
stated at the
conclusion of paragraph 19 that “in assessing whether an accused's conduct is
threatening under
s. 264(2)
(d), a judge is not required to get into the
accused's mind”, in the case before me we are in a unique situation in that the
stated intention of the accused is clearly outlined on the website. Mr. Radmehr
wanted to “expose” the perceived wrongdoings of Ms. K.
[
44
]
While I do not condone, encourage, or agree with
the actions of Mr. Radmehr, this is a situation, different than in
Sim
,
where it is important to look at the word “designed”. On my assessment of the
website, and the content included therein, this website was “designed” almost
exclusively to embarrass and frustrate Ms. K. That assessment is consistent
with the stated objective of the website, and with the resulting effect of the
website on Ms. K. This website was not “designed” as a tool of intimidation.
Embarrassment appears to be the effect that the conduct actually had on the
complainant.
[
45
]
At paragraph 123 of
R. v. Province
, Mr.
Justice Watt stated:
A final point concerns the nature of the
"threatening conduct" under s. 264(2)(d). That conduct must amount to
a "tool of intimidation which is designed to instill a sense of fear in
the recipient". The conduct should be viewed objectively with due
consideration for the circumstances in which it took place and its effect on
the complainant:
R. v. Burns
,
2008 ONCA 6
, at para.
2
, citing
R. v.
George
,
2002 YKCA 2
, 162 C.C.C. (3d) 337, at para.
39
; see also
R. v.
Sim
,
2017 ONCA 856
, 41 C.R. (7th) 416, at para.
16
.
[
46
]
Viewed objectively, I do not see this website as
"tool of intimidation which is designed to instill a sense of fear in the
recipient". One of the main reasons for this, and which may be
distinguishing for other cases or situations, is that in all the content on the
website Mr. Radmehr never once actively solicits action from anyone. He never
tells people to go to Ms. K.’s place of employment, never asks people to
contact her or her family, never even directs comments at Ms. K. He is stating
what he believes, erroneously, to be fact.
[
47
]
Throughout her testimony, Ms. K. repeatedly
stated that as a result of the website she felt anxious, was embarrassed, got
stressed out, and feels like she lost her self-confidence. At one point, she
did mention that she felt fear, but when asked to specify she indicated that
she felt fear of “what is to come next”.
[
48
]
In
R. v. Benyamin
,
[2024] O.J. No. 5224
(SCJ)
, Justice Schabas sitting as a summary conviction appeal judge stated the
following:
[20] Assessing the reasonableness of a
complainant's fear requires consideration of how a reasonable person would have
felt in the circumstances of the complainant:
R. v. Sim
,
2017 ONCA 856
,
at para.
19
. This includes having regard to the complainant's personal
circumstances and experience with the offender.
[21] Reasonable fear in this context can
include fear for one's physical safety, and fear of and freedom from, mental,
emotional, or psychological trauma caused by psychological violence:
R. v. Finnessey
,
2000 CanLII 16862 (ON CA)
at para.
16
. The Crown does not have to prove threats
of violence. Protecting psychological safety is an objective of the
legislation. As Durno J. stated in
R v. Wisniewska
,
2011 ONSC 6452
at
para.
38
:
Indeed, the
uncertainty as to what the harasser could do, in itself can often establish the
fear component and its reasonableness. In addition, the past conduct of the
accused and the past relationship between the parties can inform the assessment
of the reasonableness of the fear even when that background evidence is not
within the timeframe of the information or indictment.
[
49
]
I fully accept that Ms. K. “felt harassed” by
the creation of the website. But that is not the test. She was embarrassed that
her co-workers knew of her past, she was embarrassed that her friends read the
content on the website, and she did not want her children to read what their
father was writing about their mother. As a result of her co-workers being
aware of the website, Ms. K. did not return to work.
[
50
]
I also accept that the website caused Ms. K. some anxiety – that is a perfectly
reasonable response. Being called a “fraudster” is very likely anxiety-inducing
for many people. The difficulty here is that over and above embarrassment,
frustration, and perhaps even extreme anger, I am not satisfied that a
reasonable person in the circumstances of Ms. K. would have seen this as
threatening conduct, or experienced fear at the existence of the website.
Conclusion on Trial Proper
[
51
]
I find that the Crown has not met its burden of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt with respect to each of the essential elements
of the offence in
section 264(2)
(d). Criminal harassment as outlined in
section
264(2)
(d) is a very specific charge. Had the Crown charged under a different
offence, or a different section, the outcome may have been different.
[
52
]
As a result, Mr. Radmehr I find you not guilty,
and the remaining charge against you is dismissed.
Crown Request for a Peace Bond
[
53
]
At a couple of points throughout the trial, the
Crown expressed that in the event that Mr. Radmehr is acquitted, the Crown
would ask the Court to impose a common law peace bond restricting contact between
Mr. Radmehr and the complainant and perhaps even a term of the peace bond that
the website is to be taken down.
[
54
]
Justice Carnegie commented at paragraph 24 of
R.
v. Mackie
,
[2020] O.J. No. 3594 (CJ)
:
[24] Stringent application of the rules of
a criminal trial do not apply in a non punitive proceeding, as here. Parliament
intended peace bonds to be a preventative tool for courts to address public
safety. Succinctly put, in
R v Schafer
the Yukon Territorial Court of
Appeal recently and persuasively highlighted the applicable evidentiary
standard:
The informant
(whether a peace officer or a person concerned about personal safety) is not
required to act on the basis of evidence admissible at trial. The issue for the
judge is whether there are reasonable grounds for the subjective fear, not
whether the facts underlying that fear can be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
In these circumstances, Parliament cannot be taken to have intended that the
judge strictly apply the rules of evidence. This latter point is reinforced by
noting that the test for granting a peace bond is no different if the
application is made by a person concerned about personal safety. It would
defeat the purpose of the provisions if such a person could not rely on hearsay
evidence to justify a reasonable fear of harm, but could only secure the protection
of a peace bond on strictly admissible evidence.
...
... The role of
the judge is to assess whether the grounds tendered in support of the stated
fear are objectively reasonable and sufficient to justify the imposition of a
recognizance with terms and conditions. In my view, hearsay evidence that is
credible and trustworthy is relevant to that question.
[
55
]
Justice Rowe writing for the Court in
R. v.
Pennusi
,
2019 SCC 39 (CanLII)
, [2019] S.C.J. No. 39 went through a bit of the history and evolution
of the peace bond as we know it today:
[12] The peace bond is an instrument of
preventive justice. The prevention of crime is a well-recognized purpose of the
criminal law. As Locke J. explained in
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. of
Canada v. The Queen
,
1956 CanLII 4 (SCC)
, [1956] S.C.R. 303: "The power to legislate in
relation to criminal law is not restricted, in my opinion, to defining offences
and providing penalties for their commission. The power of Parliament extends
to legislation designed for the prevention of crime as well as to punishing
crime" (p. 308; see also
R. v. S. (S.)
,
1990 CanLII 65 (SCC)
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 254, at p.
282).
[13] In
Mackenzie v. Martin
,
1954 CanLII 10 (SCC)
, [1954]
S.C.R. 361, Kerwin J. (as he then was) wrote that a peace bond delivers
preventive justice by "obliging those persons, whom there is probable
grounds to suspect of future misbehaviour, to stipulate with and to give full
assurance to the public, that such offence as is apprehended shall not happen;
by finding pledges or securities for keeping the peace, or for their good
behaviour" (p. 368, citing W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of
England (16th ed. 1825), cited in
R. v. Parks
,
1992 CanLII 78 (SCC)
, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 871, at
p. 911, per Sopinka J.).
[14]
R. v. Budreo
(1996),
1996 CanLII 11800 (ON SC)
, 27 O.R. (3d)
347 (Ont. Ct. Gen. Div.) ("
Budreo S.C.
"),
dealt with a constitutional challenge to the peace bond under
s. 810.1
of the
Criminal Code
. Then J. referred to the preventative nature of the peace bond:
The court in
considering what constitutes fundamental justice in a liberal society must
refer to the history of a particular power and the policy rationale behind it.
Preventive justice is the exercise of judicial power not in order to sanction
past conduct but to prevent future misbehaviour and harm. The exercise of this
power is justified by the risk of harm or dangerousness posed by certain
individuals ... . [pp. 368-69]
This was echoed by Laskin J.A. in his
decision affirming the reasons of Then J. (
R. v. Budreo
(2000),
2000 CanLII 5628 (ON CA)
, 46 O.R.
(3d) 481 (C.A.) ("
Budreo C.A.
"), leave to appeal dismissed,
[2000] S.C.C.A. No. 542, [2001] 1 S.C.R. vii:
The criminal
justice system has two broad objectives: punish wrongdoers and prevent future
harm. A law aimed at the prevention of crime is just as valid an exercise of
the federal criminal law power under
s. 91(27)
of the
Constitution Act
,
1867, as a law aimed at punishing crime. [Footnote omitted; para. 27]
[15] The modern peace bond can be traced
back as early as the 1300's, to the common law practice of "binding
over". "Binding over" described a judicial authority to make
preventive orders to maintain social order despite no specific crime having
been charged, aimed at preventing a wide range of undesirable activity. The
earliest reference to the practice was in the
Justices of the Peace Act 1361
(Eng.), 34 Edw. 3, c.1, where the power was granted to justices to "take
of people who came before them sufficient mainprise of their good behaviour
towards the king and his people" (Law Commission No. 222,
Binding Over:
Report on Reference under Section 3 (1)(e) of the Law Commissions Act 1965
(1994), cited in D. Orr, "Section 810 Peace Bond Applications in
Newfoundland" (2002), 46 Crim. L.Q. 391, at p. 391).
[16] In 1892, existing English law was
codified in the
Criminal Code
, including the common law peace bond.
Section 959(2) of the
Criminal Code
, 1892, S.C. 1892, c. 29, provided:
2. Upon
complaint by or on behalf of any person that on account of threats made by some
other person or on any other account, he, the complainant, is afraid that such
other person will do him, his wife or child some personal injury, or will burn
or set fire to his property, the justice before whom such complaint is made,
may, if he is satisfied that the complainant has reasonable grounds for his
fears, require such other person to enter into his own recognizances, or to
give security, to keep the peace, and to be of good behaviour, for a term not
exceeding twelve months.
[17] The 1892 peace bond provision bears
strong similarity to the modern day peace bond provisions, but like the common
law peace bond, there was no requirement to hold a hearing. Where a justice was
satisfied that the "complainant" had a reasonably founded fear, the
justice could require the "other person" to enter into a recognizance
to keep the peace and to be of good behaviour for a period not exceeding 12
months.
[18] Regarding the procedural requirements
of common law peace bonds, Chief Justice Lamer, writing in dissent in
Parks
,
cited a decision of the English Court of Appeal which noted:
That is not to
say that it would not be wise, and indeed courteous in these cases for justices
to give such a warning; there certainly would be absolutely no harm in a case
like the present if the justices, returning to court, had announced they were
going to acquit, but had immediately said "We are however contemplating a
binding-over; what have you got to say?" I think it would be at least
courteous and perhaps wise that that should be done, but I am unable to elevate
the principle to the height at which it can be said that a failure to give such
a warning is a breach of the rules of natural justice. [Emphasis in original;
pp. 893-94, quoting
R. v. Woking
Justices
, Ex p. Gossage,
[1973]
2 All ER 621, at p. 623 (Eng. C.A.)
.]
[19] In the 1954 amendments to the
Criminal
Code
, S.C. 1953-54, c. 51, the phrases "cause the parties to
appear", "evidenced adduced", and reference to the court
"before which the parties appear" were introduced into s. 717 (a
predecessor of s. 810). These amendments resulted in a more procedurally robust
peace bond scheme; one where a hearing was required so that the defendant could
have the opportunity to respond to the alleged fear and contest the peace bond.
As will be discussed below, I respectfully cannot accept the conclusion of the
Court of Appeal that the enactment of provisions which include the phrase
"cause the parties to appear" (e.g. ss. 810(2) and 810.2(2)) are
"special provisions to compel appearance", or that their enactment
created a unique "scheme for dealing with peace bond Informations"
(para. 50) to compel the attendance of a defendant to a hearing. Rather, the
introduction of the wording most likely reflected the requirement that, before
ordering a defendant to enter a recognizance, a judge must hold a hearing to
determine whether the informant's fear is reasonably founded.
[20] In addition to the general peace bond,
based on fear of personal injury or damage to property (s. 810), Parliament has
since the early 1990's added a number of specialized peace bonds respecting:
fear of a criminal organization offence, including intimidation of a justice
system participant or a journalist (s. 810.01); fear of a terrorism offence (s.
810.011 and s. 83.3);1 fear of an offence related to forced marriage or child
marriage (s. 810.02); fear of a sexual offence committed against a minor (s.
810.1); and fear of serious personal injury (s. 810.2).
[
56
]
Given that it was mentioned a number of times
throughout the trial, Mr. Radmehr was always on notice that the Crown was going
to ask for a common law peace bond at the conclusion of the trial should he be
acquitted. Counsel for both Mr. Radmehr and the Crown conducted their
examinations-in-chief and cross-examinations in such a fashion that it
incorporated all aspects of what would have been a secondary hearing relating
to the issuance of a peace bond into the trial proper.
[
57
]
When assessing whether to exercise my common law
jurisdiction pursuant to my preventative justice powers and have Mr. Radmehr
enter into a peace bond, one of the first things I have to do is assess the
reasonableness of the fear proposed by the complainant.
[
58
]
The complainant just wants to move on with her
life. Hopefully Mr. Radmehr does as well. Why he is so focused on her is beyond
me. Their marriage did not sustain, there was disagreement and perceived
criminality between them, but they are divorced, their relationship is over,
family courts have given their final decision on what is to happen with their
children. Mr. Radmehr needs to grow up, move on, and stop with the fixation on
Ms. K. and her family.
[
59
]
I am unable to get past the first task I must
perform with respect to the imposition of this common law peace bond. As per my
findings above, I do not find there to be any reasonable fear on the part of
the complainant toward Mr. Radmehr solely as a result of the creation of this
website.
[
60
]
Given that the cause of the fear purported to be
the website, and I have found that fear to be unreasonable, I have no
jurisdiction to impose a term on Mr. Radmehr that he take down the website.
[
61
]
Ms. K. has stated that she wishes not to have
any contact with Mr. Radmehr. I truly hope that Mr. Radmehr respects those
wishes and leaves Ms.  K. and her family alone.
[
62
]
Given that I am unable to find a reasonable fear
upon which to base the exercising of my common law jurisdiction pursuant to my
preventative justice powers, and I find no nexus between the existence of the
website and the offence upon which Mr. Radmehr was arraigned, I decline to order
that Mr. Radmehr enter a peace bond with respect to Ms.
K. or any member of her immediate family.
Released:  June
18, 2025
Signed:
Justice M. Townsend