Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj298/2025oncj298.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Smith-Stebbins
,
2025 ONCJ 298
DATE:  2025·05·30
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
KYLE JAMES SMITH-STEBBINS
JUDGMENT
Evidence and
Submissions Heard: February 6,7, 2025.
Delivered: May 30,
2025
Ms. Roxana Jahani-Geran.....................................................................  
counsel for the Crown
Mr. Douglas Lent ..............................................................................   counsel
for the defendant
KENKEL J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
A license plate query in a local hotel
parking lot showed that the plates were not registered to the vehicle they were
attached to. P.C. Schwetz looked for the car’s VIN (Vehicle Identification
Number) and saw it was covered by a piece of paper. He suspected the vehicle might
be stolen given recent criminal activity associated with that hotel including
stolen vehicles parked there to “cool off” immediately after a theft.
[
2
]
A short time later Mr. Smith-Stebbins was
stopped as he drove the vehicle towards the parking lot exit. He was arrested for
use of unauthorized plates contrary to s 12 of the
Highway Traffic Act,
RSO
1990, c H.8 (HTA).  When he was identified, the officer learned that there was
a warrant outstanding for his arrest. P.C. Schwetz also received information
from another officer that the vehicle was stolen.
[
3
]
Mr. Smith-Stebbins was charged with
possession of stolen property with a value over $5000 contrary to s 354(1) and
three counts of operating a conveyance while prohibited contrary to s 320.18.
[
4
]
Constable Schwetz had grounds to arrest Mr.
Smith-Stebbins for the possession offence, but the Crown at the close of their
case conceded that they did not call sufficient evidence to prove the vehicle
was stolen.
[
5
]
Section 320.18 prohibits operation of a
conveyance while a person is prohibited from doing so by an order made under
the
Criminal Code
,
or by any other form of legal restriction imposed by
Federal or provincial law in respect of a conviction or discharge under the
Criminal
Code
. The Crown tendered in evidence three sets of documents under seal of
the Ontario Ministry of Transportation. The documents marked as Exhibits 1-3
were ruled admissible by the combined operation of s 40 of the
Canada
Evidence Act,
RSC 1985 c C-5 and s 210 of the provincial
Highway Traffic
Act
. The officer’s evidence proved the alleged operation of the vehicle and
Exhibits 1-3 proved that Mr. Smith-Stebbins was prohibited from operating a
motor vehicle on January 23, 2023, and that restriction was in effect on
January 12, 2024.
[
6
]
The submissions of both counsel identify four
remaining issues for decision:
•
Was the stop for an
HTA
offence in a private
parking lot lawful?
•
Did the prohibition apply only to operation in a
“public place”? If so, was this parking lot a “public place”?
•
Did the officer breach Mr. Smith-Stebbins’ right
to counsel by not reading him right to counsel advice after arresting him on
further charges of driving while prohibited?
•
If there was a right to counsel breach, is there
evidence “obtained in a manner” to which the 24(2) remedy could apply? Should
any evidence be excluded?
Charter ss 8,9 – HTA Stop in a
Parking Lot
[
7
]
The defence submits that the Supreme Court’s
decision in
R v McColman,
2023 SCC 8
makes it plain that the provincial
Highway
Traffic Act
is not operative in private places like parking lots. The stop
of Mr. Smith-Stebbins to investigate the license plate offence was therefore
unlawful and contrary to sections 8 and 9 of the
Charter.
The breach had
a serious impact on the accused given the further offences that were revealed
after the stop.
[
8
]
The broad statement that the
HTA
does
not have any application in private places like parking lots was rejected by
the Ontario Court of Appeal in the case cited by the Crown,
R v Hajivasilis,
2013 ONCA 27
. The court held that some sections in the HTA signal that they
apply only to the operation of a vehicle on a highway either by specific use of
that term “highway” or by reference to other terms like “driver” that s 1(1) of
the HTA defines as a person who drives a vehicle on a highway.
[
9
]
Justice Doherty explained at paras 36-40
that numerous sections of the
HTA
do not use the word “highway” or any related
word. Many of those sections cannot reasonably be contingent or limited to
circumstances in which the motor vehicle is used on a highway. The stop in this
case was to investigate the use of license plates not authorized for that
vehicle contrary to s 12(1)(d) of the HTA. There is nothing in that section
either expressly or by implication that limits its operation to a “highway”.
[
10
]
The decision in
McColman
considered
the random stop power in s 48(1) of the
HTA
. That section authorizes the stop
of “drivers” for the purpose of determining whether there is evidence to
justify a demand under
sections 320.27
or
320.28
of the
Criminal Code
.
The
definition of “driver” in s 1(1) of the HTA thereby limits the application of s
48 to persons operating a motor vehicle on a highway.
McColman
considered
only the specific HTA provision at issue and did not make any broader statement
about other provincial offence investigations.
[
11
]
Constable Schwetz had authority under s
12(1)(d) of the
HTA
to stop Mr. Smith-Stebbins in the parking lot to
investigate that offence. The stop was not arbitrary, and it did not breach the
accused’s rights under sections 8 or 9 of the
Charter.
Section 320.24(8) Public Place
[
12
]
A
Criminal Code
motor vehicle prohibition
order applies only to operation on a “street, road or highway, or in any other
public place” (
une rue, sur un chemin public ou une grande
route ou dans tout autre lieu public)
– s 320.24(8). Older
cases that discuss the pre-2018 prohibition section 259 remain relevant as that
section contained similar wording: “…street, road, highway or other public
place”.
[
13
]
Mr. Smith-Stebbins was stopped after he was
driving in the parking lot of a Best Western hotel on Yonge Street in
Newmarket. The defence submits that operation in that location is not
prohibited by a s 324.24 order as it’s not a street or a public place. It’s a
private hotel parking lot. The Crown submits that the offence section s 320.18
does not refer to streets, roads, highways or public places so that’s not an
element of the offence. In the alternative, this parking lot is a public place
within the meaning of the section.
[
14
]
While the offence section does not refer to
operation on streets etc., the cases cited below have held that the Crown must
prove the vehicle was operated contrary to the prohibition, including operation
in a place prohibited by s 320.24(8). Whether the vehicle operation in this
case was contrary to the accused’s prohibition orders turns on the
interpretation of the phrase “any other public place”.
[
15
]
The defence cites the case of
R v
Maxwell,
2011 NWTTC 4
where the court held that the term “any other public
place” does not mean
any
other public place. The term read in context was
held to mean a place upon which motor vehicles can be driven, to which a
significant segment of the public has a right of access and where it can be
reasonably anticipated that the motor vehicle will come into close proximity to
pedestrians or other motor vehicles” (
Maxwell
at para
63
). The court
provided examples of other places that would meet the definition including
trails, paths, thoroughfares, parks and other open areas close to the municipal
boundaries of a community, explaining at para 64 that public places include
areas where snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles may operate.
[
16
]
In
R v Dunsford,
2013 ONCJ 416
the
court agreed with the finding in
Maxwell
at paragraph
54
of that
decision that the purpose of the section is, “…to protect members of the public
from disqualified persons operating motor vehicles in places to which the
public has ready access”. The court applied the modern (Driedger) approach to
statutory interpretation and held at paragraphs 35 and 36 that the term “public
place” in this context means:
35. This
reading of the section is intrinsically tied to the sentencing sanction of the
driving prohibition. There should be a loss of driving privilege on any place
where motor vehicles are normally used, namely roads, streets and highways. But
in addition, there is a prohibition covering any place where members of the
public will be impacted by a prohibited driver operating a motor vehicle.
36. "Public
place" in this sense is a place where a non-trivial number of the
population can be expected to be present and expect to be protected from
exposure to prohibited drivers operating motor vehicles.
[
17
]
That interpretation was affirmed on Summary
Conviction Appeal in
R v Keeper,
2014 ONSC 6149
, (joint appeal by Keeper
and Dunsford on this point). That decision is persuasive and is also binding on
this court as to the legal test to be applied. The court agreed with the
finding in both cases that while not open to the general public, the roads on
the Pikangikum First Nation were both roads and public places within the
meaning of the prior s 259(1).
[
18
]
In
Marin c R,
2016 QCCA 1937
, the
Quebec Court of Appeal cited the decision in
Dunsford
as consistent with
earlier decisions in that province and applying the correct test. In that case
the court upheld the trial court’s finding that a parking lot for a building
with 20 apartments involved sufficient public access to find that it is a
public place within the meaning of the predecessor to the current section. The
public had sufficient access to make it a place where the safety of those
present might be threatened by a driver subject operating a vehicle while
subject to a driving prohibition under the
Criminal Code
–
Marin
at
para
32
. See also:
R c Labbé,
2007 QCCQ 21923
.
[
19
]
It makes sense to start with the defence
submission that there was little evidence called as to the nature of the
parking lot in question, including the numbers of cars at that time. The defence
submits that the evidence provides little factual basis for a finding of
“public place” regardless of which test is applied. The court cannot speculate
as to the circumstances of this parking lot. Lack of evidence was the problem
in
Maxwell
as the Crown did not lead evidence as to the place of
operation and whether it was private or a place to which the public had access.
[
20
]
The evidence showed that the driving
occurred in the parking lot of a Best Western hotel on Yonge Street in
Newmarket. It requires no speculation to find that the entire business of a Best
Western hotel is based on constant, open public access to its premises and
parking lot. The accused and the officers as members of the public plainly had
access to the parking lot. Yonge street is well known as the major commercial artery
in York Region.
[
21
]
This hotel parking lot was a place to which
members of the public have access and can be expected to be present. The safety
of those present could be compromised by a person operating a vehicle while
being subject to a
Criminal Code
driving prohibition. I find this
parking lot was a public place within the meaning of s 320.24(8).
Charter s 10 – Right to Counsel
[
22
]
Mr. Smith-Stebbins was advised of new
charges as the investigation progressed. There’s no evidence of a s 10(a)
breach.
[
23
]
After arrest, Constable Schwetz placed Mr.
Smith-Stebbins in the back of his patrol car and then read him right to counsel
advice. The accused was told he could call any lawyer he wished, or he could
speak to duty counsel. Mr. Smith-Stebbins replied, “not now” which the officer
took to mean, “not at this particular stage”. The officer told him if he
changed his mind at any point he should let the officer know.
[
24
]
Three minutes later Mr. Smith was
re-arrested for a criminal offence – possession of a stolen car. Right to
counsel advice was again provided and Mr. Smith-Stebbins said “yes” he
understood. He said he didn’t have a lawyer and the officer reminded him he
could call any lawyer he wished or call duty counsel for free legal advice. Mr.
Smith-Stebbins said he would let the officer know if he wished to speak to a lawyer,
but he didn’t want to speak with anyone at that time.
[
25
]
Ten minutes later Mr. Smith-Stebbins was
arrested for three further charges of operating a conveyance while prohibited s
320.18. The officer did not repeat the right to counsel advice as he’d just
read it twice and received the same answer. P.C. Schwetz believed that the
accused would tell him if he’d changed his mind about speaking with a lawyer.
Mr. Smith-Stebbins did not ask to speak to counsel.
[
26
]
At the station Acting Sgt. Hamilton asked
Mr. Smith-Stebbins if he wished to speak with counsel of choice or duty
counsel. P.C. Schwetz was present and heard that conversation during booking.
At first Mr. Smith-Stebbins said he wanted to speak to duty counsel, but then
immediately after booking he changed his mind and said he didn’t want to speak
with any lawyer. Constable Schwetz read him a
Prosper
warning about
waiver of the right to speak with counsel.
[
27
]
The defence challenged Constable Schwetz’s
evidence on this point as the exchange at booking was not in his notes. The
constable explained that it wouldn’t be in his notes but would be in the Acting
Sergeant’s notes. It was also recorded on audio and video and is a routine part
of booking. The officer’s evidence was logical, and I accept his evidence as
credible and reliable.
[
28
]
Mr. Smith-Stebbins was provided right to
counsel advice a fourth time when P.C. Schwetz went through a YRP (York
Regional Police) Form 51 interview form which advised Mr. Smith-Stebbins that
he could speak with a lawyer of his choice or a legal aid lawyer. He again
declined to speak with any lawyer.
[
29
]
Mr. Smith-Stebbins was provided right to
counsel advice four times and ultimately chose not to speak with any lawyer. 
The only breach is a technical one – the accused was not read right to counsel
advice for a third time at the roadside when he was arrested for the driving
while prohibited charges. The defence submitted that it’s an extremely serious
breach as the accused’s jeopardy changed significantly.
[
30
]
As the arresting officer conceded, perfect
practice would have been to read the right to counsel advice a third time at
the roadside, despite the previous answers. Even though the accused was asked
if he wanted to speak to counsel two more times at the station, the failure to
repeat the advice after the drive prohibited arrest at the roadside is a
breach, albeit a very minor one in the overall context.
[
31
]
It’s not plain though that there is any
evidence on the drive prohibited charges that was “obtained in a manner” so as
to engage the remedy the defence seeks under s 24(2). The driving prohibitions
were imposed by courts well before this investigation. There’s no nexus between
the prohibitions and the right to counsel breach. The observation of Mr.
Smith-Stebbins operating a vehicle was made before he was even stopped. There
does not appear to be any evidence relevant to the remaining counts that was
“obtained in a manner” that could engage consideration of s 24(2). The minor
breach described could not lead to a stay of proceedings under s 24(1).
[
32
]
In the alternative, if s 24(2) were applied,
the breach was not serious in context. Mr. Smith-Stebbins was provided with
right to counsel advice four times. The reason he didn’t speak with a lawyer is
because he didn’t want to. The failure to provide right to counsel advice a
third time at the roadside had no impact on the accused’s interests protected
by s 10(b). Society’s interest in the truth-seeking function of the criminal
trial process would outweigh any concern arising from the technical breach. To
exclude the evidence of the prohibitions or the observations of the accused
driving would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
Conclusion
[
33
]
The Possession Over count #1 is dismissed. I
find that the Crown has proved the three remaining counts beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Delivered:  May 30, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel