Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj615/2025oncj615.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Henderson
, 2025 ONCJ 615
DATE: 
November 25, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  24-21002504
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
JUSTIN HENDERSON
Before
Justice R. S. Gee
Heard
on September 11, 2025, October 15 and 24, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on November 25, 2025
C. Torr and J. Mociak........................................................................ counsel
for the Crown
S. Price and M.
Pei……………………………………………………………for the accused
Gee J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
At approximately 12:09 am on August 17, 2024,
OPP Constable Theodore Nicholson saw the accused swerving in his vehicle while
driving on Indian Road in Brant County. Officer Nicholson pulled the accused
over to investigate and ultimately arrested him for impaired operation and made
a breath demand.
[
2
]
The accused was transported to the OPP
detachment where he provided two samples of his breath which when analyzed,
registered 270 and 250 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood. A charge of excessive
blood alcohol concentration, or 80 plus, was laid based on these readings.
Additionally, given the high readings, a further charge of dangerous operation
was also laid against the accused.
[
3
]
The trial on these three charges, and three provincial
offences for not surrendering his licence, proof of ownership and insurance, commenced
on September 11, 2025. At the conclusion of the trial, the Crown indicated it
would not be seeking convictions on the provincial offences and as such, those
charges will be dismissed.
[
4
]
The accused has alleged his Charter rights were
breached in three ways, any of which should lead to the exclusion of the breath
results. First, he alleges his s. 8 and 9 rights were breached because Officer
Nicholson did not have grounds to arrest him for impaired and demand samples of
his breath. Second, he alleges his 10(b) right to counsel was breached because the
police were not diligent enough in locating his cell phone so he could access
counsel of choice. Then third, he alleges his 10(b) right was breached when he
told Officer DeJong that
duty counsel, who he did speak
to, had hung up on him and Officer DeJong did not offer to reconnect him with
duty counsel or ask if he was satisfied with the advice he received
.
[
5
]
On the impaired and dangerous operation charges,
the accused’s position is the Crown has failed to prove either beyond a
reasonable doubt.
[
6
]
I disagree with the accused on two of his three
alleged Charter breaches but do agree with him on one. I find that Officer
Nicholson had more than sufficient grounds to arrest the accused for impaired operation
and to make a demand for samples of his breath. I also find the accused has not
demonstrated a lack of diligence by the police in locating his cell phone so he
could call counsel of choice. I do agree with the accused though, that when he
told Officer DeJong duty counsel had hung up on him, and officer DeJong neither
offered to call duty counsel back for him or at least inquire if he was
satisfied with the advice he did get, that this was a breach of the accused’s
right to counsel. This breach I also find is sufficiently serious to warrant an
exclusion of the accused’s breath results.
[
7
]
The accused may ultimately view this as a pyrrhic
victory though, because I have found the Crown has proven the impaired charge
beyond a reasonable doubt. On the dangerous, the Crown did not make submissions
to support a conviction, wisely so in my view, as the evidence I find is not
capable of supporting a conviction on this charge either.
[
8
]
The balance of these reasons will explain why I
have come to the conclusions I have.
Analysis
[
9
]
The trial proceeded in a blended fashion with
the evidence on the trial and Charter application all heard together. Only Officer
Nicholson testified for the Crown. The accused and his wife, Katrina Leng both
testified with their evidence applying to the trial and the Charter
application.
[
10
]
Before delving into the issues concerning the
alleged Charter breaches, or the evidence on the trial itself, some comments on
the credibility of the witnesses is warranted. I’ll address first, the evidence
of Officer Theodore Nicholson. I found him to be an excellent and compelling
witness. His evidence was very detailed and thorough. Much of his testimony was
consistent with the body worn cameras of the various officers, or the in-car
camera in his cruiser. His answers in both direct and cross examination, were clear
and responsive to the questions asked. Where there were gaps in his memory or
notes, he admitted it.
[
11
]
He was subject to a lengthy and very thorough
cross examination by experienced and skilled counsel. Notwithstanding, his
testimony was unshaken. His testimony was challenged by the accused in several
aspects which the accused argues should lead to a finding his evidence is not
worthy of belief or is unreliable. For instance, when Officer Nicholson
observed the beer can being thrown from the accused’s vehicle was argued to be
unclear. As well, his claim that the accused’s vehicle was constantly swerving was
challenged. In this regard the in-car camera of Officer Nicholson was shown,
and the accused’s vehicle swerves to where the left side tires are over the
centre line of the road. It then swerves back over, and its right-side tires
come into contact with the fog line. Then it continues straight for a period
until it moves slightly again when Officer Nicholson pulls along side him to
observe the driver at which point it again drifts away some. When Officer
Nicholson then pulls back in behind the accused and activates his roof lights
to pull the accused over, the accused continues straight until he pulls off to
the right side of the road.
[
12
]
The accused argues to describe this driving as
constant swerving is inaccurate and an embellishment from what the video
evidence displays. I find that the way Officer Nicholson describes the
accused’s driving, does not detract from either his credibility or reliability.
It seems to me it is more of a matter of semantics. What he also testified to
was he observed the accused swerving prior to activating his in-car camera so
in addition to the swerving that was observed on video, he saw other incidents
of it that were not captured. If over a short distance a person is observed swerving
several times like was seen on the in-car camera, this is a pattern of poor
driving that someone might understandably describe as constant swerving, given
how it deviates from expected normal driving behaviour. It does not have to be
like a race car driver, swerving back and forth aggressively behind the safety
car or pace car while warming their tires before the race commences to be
described in this manner.
[
13
]
Overall, I found Officer Nicholson to be a very
fair, careful, and honest witness. I did not detect anything in his testimony
that would make me find he was either embellishing or careless with the truth. Any
alleged discrepancies or inconsistencies in his evidence as alleged by the
accused are more apparent than real.
[
14
]
The testimony of the accused on the other hand,
was quite the opposite. After a careful assessment of his evidence, I find I am
not able to believe any of it, nor does it leave me in a state of doubt. There
are several reasons why I have come to this conclusion. At times during his
cross examination, I found the accused to be argumentative. His testimony was
also inconsistent between his direct examination and his cross examination. He
also refused to admit things even when they were clearly shown to be otherwise
on the videos. Other parts of his testimony were inherently implausible.
[
15
]
Some examples of these flaws in his testimony
are as follows. When it was pointed out to him by the Crown he was smiling and
giggling at times while at the police station, he denied this was the case.  He
became argumentative on the point and refused to admit it even when pointed out
to him on the videos. An example where he was inconsistent came from the issue
of his gait that night. In chief, he testified he was walking normally. When
the crown played the in-car camera and showed him where he appeared to be
walking with a sway or wobble, he stated he was never told to walk straight and
that he has a knee issue from his work as an arborist, so he always walks with
this so-called wobble.
[
16
]
There were several aspects of his testimony that
were rife with implausibilities.  One such implausibility concerns what and how
much he drank. He testified he went to a friend’s in St. George after work, had
been there for approximately 6 hours or so and drank while there. When asked in
cross examination how much he drank, he said he couldn't remember. When asked
what he was drinking, he again said he couldn't remember, but it was probably
beer. I don’t believe either of these answers were truthful. If you spend the
night drinking at a friend’s house, and not long after leaving get pulled over
and charged with drinking and driving and other offences, the events of that
night are going to be of significance to you. My impression was the accused at
least would have a general sense of how much he had drunk and would most
certainly remember what he drank. This lack of memory he now claims I find, was
feigned because the accused knew to testify truthfully about these issues would
undermine his case.
[
17
]
He also testified that Officer Nicholson was
unpleasant with him and appeared irritated in his dealing with him.  This claim
though is inconsistent with the video evidence that captured significant
portions of the events. Throughout it all, Officer Nicholson was the opposite.
He was very patient, professional and respectful in his dealings with the
accused. In fact, it seemed to me he went over and above what was required of
him and what many officers would do in the circumstances.
[
18
]
An example of this is after the conclusion of
the investigation when the accused was released from the station, Officer
Nicholson offered to drive the accused where he wished to go as it was late at
night and his vehicle had been impounded. This was something Officer Nicholson
was not obligated to do and was done as an act of kindness and as a courtesy to
the accused.
[
19
]
The accused though has tried to flip this act of
kindness on its head and characterize it as a dangerous and vindictive act by
Officer Nicholson. The accused testified that on this ride, Officer Nicholson
was angry and upset that the accused was keeping him from being able to see his
girlfriend. He stated during the drive, Officer Nicholson was driving in an
extremely dangerous manner and at one point saw the speed display in the
cruiser hit 183 kmh. He stated when they approached red lights, he would make a
quick turn to the right then quickly back to the left to avoid having to stop
for the light. I don’t believe this. It was inconsistent with the respectful,
professional manner Officer Nicholson was behaving that night as seen on the
videos, it was inconsistent with his calm, professional demeanour in court and
would be wholly inconsistent with his duties and training.
[
20
]
On top of this, the accused claimed he asked the
police to transport him to his home in Waterford, but Officer Nicholson, for
reasons only known to himself, drove him instead in the opposite direction to
St. George. The accused testified he never asked him to, nor did he tell him
any address or anything that would connect him to St. George. Even the address
on his driver's licence was for his home in Waterford so why Officer Nicholson
took him to St. George was unknown to him.
[
21
]
This again is something I simply do not believe
and something I find the accused has made up to try to bolster his allegations
about the mistreatment he says he received at the hands of Officer Nicholson. Given
what I saw of Officer Nicholson on the videos and how he displayed himself in
court I wouldn't believe this allegation for those reasons alone, but the most
glaring reason why this claim by the accused is untrue is something else.
Notwithstanding, he never asked to be driven to St. George, never told Officer
Nicholson he wanted to go there and there was nothing to indicate Officer
Nicholson knew of any connection he had to St. George, of all the places he
could drop him off in St. George, apparently Office Nicholson randomly and
coincidentally chose to drop the accused off at what turned out to be his
parent’s house. The chance of Officer Nicholson without any prior knowledge or
direction from the accused, choosing to drive him in the opposite direction
from where he wanted to go, to a town some significant distance away and
choosing to drop him off at some random house that turns out to be the house of
the accused’s parent’s is so astronomically small as to be completely
unbelievable.
[
22
]
It is for all these reasons I find I cannot
believe any aspect of the testimony of the accused. As well, given how he
appears to be careless with the truth and willing to invent aspects of his
testimony that are easily disproven, his testimony also does not leave me in
any state of doubt.
[
23
]
Katrina Leng, the accused’s partner also
testified. She testified primarily about the accused’s speech, his knee issues,
and the fact his phone was in his vehicle when they went to retrieve it in the
days following the incident. I don’t put much weight in her testimony. She
confirmed his claim that he has knee pain at times due to his work. That may be
the case, but I would note that even though the accused testified he can get
knee pain form his job, he never actually claimed to be suffering from knee
pain on the night of his arrest. As well, she testified he is prone to mumbling
whether drinking or not, especially when he’s nervous or excited. However, he
seemed to have some ability to control that, at least when sober as he stated
he was nervous testifying in court but did not display signs of mumbling then.
[
24
]
Turning to the alleged Charter breaches, the
accused claims his s. 8 and 9 Charter rights were breached because Officer
Nicholson lacked grounds to make the breath demand which resulted in an
unlawful seizure of his breath samples and an arbitrary detention.
[
25
]
The onus lies on the accused to demonstrate this
on a balance of probabilities, and I find they have failed to do so. To make a
demand, an officer must believe the accused’s ability to operate their motor
vehicle was impaired, even to a slight degree, by alcohol. There is no
requirement that the accused be in an extreme state of intoxication. The officer’s
belief in this regard must be objectively reasonable. See:
R. v. Bush
,
2010 ONCA 554
at paragraphs
47-48
.
[
26
]
In this case, Officer Nicholson stated his
belief the accused was impaired was based on several observations. His
attention was first drawn to the accused because he observed his vehicle
swerving on the roadway. He also observed the accused throw a beer can from the
vehicle before it was stopped. When he did stop the accused, he spoke to him
while he was still seated in the driver’s seat and detected an odour of alcohol
coming from his breath and his speech was slurred.
[
27
]
At this point he felt there were grounds for an
ASD demand, so he asked the accused to step out of his vehicle. He did, and as
he walked to the cruiser, Officer Nicholson stated he also saw the accused swaying
and not able to walk in a straight line. After seeing this, he concluded he had
more than a suspicion the accused had alcohol in his system and was of the
opinion he was impaired. So based on all these observations he arrested the
accused for impaired and made the breath demand.
[
28
]
The accused challenges the sufficiency of these
grounds and argues at best, there were grounds for an ASD demand as Officer
Nicholson initially turned his mind to. Other non alcohol related explanations exist
for some of the observations such as the accused’s speech and gait as discussed
earlier.
[
29
]
These arguments do not help the accused nor
detract from the officer’s grounds. What was known to the officer at the time
is what is to be assessed. Here, Officer Nicholson said he saw the accused vehicle
swerving several times and a beer can being thrown from the window. He then activated
his dash cam which captured more incidents of this swerving. He spoke to the
accused who had an odour of alcohol coming from his breath, his speech was slurred,
and he was unsteady on his feet.
[
30
]
When the totality of these circumstances is
considered, Officer Nicholson’s belief the accused was impaired by alcohol is
objectively reasonable. There is no scorecard or minimum number of indicia that
need be present. Nor is the fact that other non-alcohol related explanations
might be available for some of the observation mean the officer is not
permitted to consider them in coming to his or her opinion. It is the totality
of the circumstances presented to the officer at the time that should be
considered. See
Bush
,
paragraphs
54-57
. I find, in this case, given the observations of the accused Officer
Nicholson made, he had grounds for the arrest of the accused and for the demand
for samples of his breath. This alleged Charter breach therefore fails.
[
31
]
The next alleged Charter breach concerns the
accused’s 10(b) right to counsel. The accused alleges this right was breached
in two ways. First, the police were not diligent enough in assisting him to get
his cell phone so he could access his contacts and call his counsel of choice
and second, when he told Officer DeJong duty counsel had hung up on him, the
police ought to have taken further steps to confirm with the accused he was
satisfied with the advice he did get or to reconnect him with duty counsel so
he could continue their conversation. Since the police did neither, this was a
breach of the accused’s right.
[
32
]
Section 10(b) requires the police on arrest or
detention to advise the accused they have the right to counsel. If the accused
then wishes to speak to counsel, the police are obligate to hold off
questioning the accused further and are obligated to take reasonable steps to
assist the accused in implementing this right. When a detainee indicates they
want to speak to counsel, there is a corresponding duty on them to be diligent
in the exercise of that right. See:
R. v. Willier
,
2010 SCC 37
at paragraphs
30-35
. In this matter, it is alleged the
police failed in their implementational duties by not making a concerted enough
effort to assist him in locating and accessing his phone so he could find the
name and number of his counsel of choice.
[
33
]
Starting with the first alleged 10(b) breach, I
would begin with the observation that I found Officer Nicholson to have a well-honed
understanding of both the accused’s rights provided by s. 10(b) and the
obligations placed on police in assisting an accused in implementing their
access to counsel.
[
34
]
In the cruiser, Officer Nicholson advised the
accused of his right to counsel and when the accused indicated a desire to
speak to counsel, he moved the conversation toward determining if the accused
had a counsel of choice. Much of this conversation was captured on the audio of
the in-car camera of Officer Nicholson.
[
35
]
He advised the accused he could call his own
lawyer if he had one, so he asked him if he had a lawyer. His response was
“nah”. Officer Nicholson then asked if he had one in his phone. He did not get
a clear response to that, so he asked further if he had his phone and the
response was “I don’t have it on me”. The accused was then asked by Officer
Nicholson if it was in the car. Even though we heard it several times during
the trial, and I have listened to it several times since, I am not able to make
out what the accused’s response was. The accused argued he advised Officer
Nicholson it was in the car, but even if I find that was not the case, the police
should have looked for the phone in the car in any event.
[
36
]
The accused’s argument is that Office Nicholson
and the police in general should have done more. When at the station and he was
been turned over to the breath technician, Office Nicholson told him the
accused didn’t have his contacts on him to call a counsel of choice so the
accused was asked if he would like to speak to duty counsel and he agreed. The
accused position is that Officer Nicholson should have searched the accused’s
vehicle for the phone or even later, radioed to the officer involved with the tow
to search the vehicle to see if they could locate the accused’s phone. In
failing to take any of these steps, it is argued the accused’s 10(b) right was
violated.
[
37
]
I disagree. As the Supreme Court found in
Willier
as noted above, there is an
obligation on the accused to be diligent when wishing to speak to counsel of
choice. In this matter, throughout the investigation, the accused was asked
several times if he had his own lawyer and whether he had his phone available
to access his contacts. I find, after reviewing the audio of the in-car camera,
watching the videos and based on the testimony of Officer Nicholson, at no time
did the accused ever give a clear response to any of these inquiries by the
police. At no time did he ever indicate the name of a lawyer, nor did he ever
clearly articulate the whereabouts of his phone. His responses in the cruiser
were, I find either incoherent, non-responsive to the questions asked by
Officer Nicholson or unclear. Officer Nicholson, I find was very diligent
throughout the entirety of the investigation in his attempts to assist the
accused in this regard.
[
38
]
As noted, the accused has an obligation to be
diligent and I find here he was not being so. There is no obligation, when
faced with a situation like this where the accused is unresponsive, or
incoherent or unable to articulate where his phone may be, for the police to
embark upon a kind of scavenger hunt to locate the accused’s phone. The police
made more than sufficient efforts to help the accused access counsel of choice
and when the accused was not able to help himself and assist in this regard,
his choice to speak to duty counsel did not result in a breach of his 10(b)
rights. This alleged Charter breach fails as well.
[
39
]
The next alleged breach relates to the accused’s
call with duty counsel. The body camera of Officer DeJong was played. He goes
to get the accused after his call from duty counsel. He opens the door to the
phone room and asks the accused if his call is finished. The first part of the
accused’s response is unclear, but the next part was not, he clearly said that
duty counsel had hung up on him. At this point Officer DeJong didn’t ask the
accused if he would like to call duty counsel back or if he was satisfied with
the advice he did receive, he just confirmed he did speak to them and then
proceeds to take him from the phone room for the breath tests.
[
40
]
This I find is a violation of the accused’s
10(b) right. At this point, the ability to access counsel is under the control
of the police. The accused did not have the ability to call back when duty
counsel hung up. The accused clearly made police aware that the call with duty
counsel ended prematurely. At the very least, when told this by the accused,
Officer DeJong should have asked if he wanted to call back or if he was
satisfied with the advice he got. He did neither. He simply confirmed he talked
to duty counsel and then took him for the breath tests. This breach allegation
is well founded.
[
41
]
Turning to whether the breath results should be
excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) I find they should be for the following reasons. Applying the framework in
R. v. Grant
,
2009 SCC 32 (CanLII)
, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353, three
factors guide the analysis. First, the seriousness of the Charter-infringing
conduct is in this is case significant. While not deliberate, the failure to
act after an explicit indication of incomplete legal advice reflects neglect of
constitutional obligations. This factor would favour exclusion. Second, the
impact on the accused was substantial. He was denied informed legal guidance when
he needed it most. This factor also favours exclusion. Third, society has an
interest in adjudicating impaired driving offences. The carnage caused on our
roads by impaired drivers is well known and difficult to understate. The
exclusion of the breath results here will be fatal to the Crown’s case on the
80 plus charge. This factor favours inclusion of the results.
[
42
]
In balancing these factors I find, exclusion is
warranted. The breath readings, though probative, were obtained after a clear
s. 10(b) violation. The right to counsel and timely legal advice upon arrest is
a cornerstone to our justice system. Admission would signal tolerance for
constitutional breaches, eroding the integrity of the justice system.
Accordingly, the evidence is excluded pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter. As
such the 80 plus charge will be dismissed.
[
43
]
Focussing on the impaired operation charge, I
find that Crown has proven this charge beyond a reasonable doubt. The evidence
presented by the Crown on this charge I find is substantial. As noted, Officer
Nicholson observed the accused swerving over the centre line of the roadway
several times and throwing a beer can from his vehicle. After observing this,
he activated his in-car camera which again captured the accused drifting over
the centre line then back to where his right-side wheels touched the fog line.
When he was pulled over, the odour of alcohol was on his breath, and his speech
was slurred. When he exited from his vehicle, he was unsteady on his feet.
[
44
]
Much of these observations were captured on the
video and audio of the in-car camera. The unsteadiness by the accused was
clearly visible when he walked from his car to the cruiser. It was captured
again when he went to walk back toward his car before being called back to the
cruiser. Inside the cruiser, at times his speech was slurred to the point of
incoherence. His laughing and giggling at the station was, given the situation
he was in, I find, due to his impaired state. Added to this is his admission he
had been consuming alcohol for the better part of the evening and alcohol was
in his vehicle when stopped.
[
45
]
The accused has argued there are explanations of
these signs that ought to leave me with a doubt. First, he points to the knee
issues mentioned earlier for his swaying, and the mumbling while nervous
explanation for his speech. Neither of these leave me with any doubt. As noted,
although he said at times his knees hurt, he did not actually claim to have
knee pain on this occasion. His speech too, I find was not because of
nervousness. He didn’t mumble in court and wasn’t mumbling at other times on
the videos. His slurring and incoherence in the cruiser I find were because of
alcohol.
[
46
]
The accused also points out that the signs of
impairment were not constant. There were periods while driving that he was
staying within his lane, and he pulled over appropriately when requested to do
so. Also, there were periods at the station where the unsteadiness on his feet
was not apparent and the slurring not present.
[
47
]
I do not find these facts detract from my
conclusion he was impaired. To ground a conviction, the Crown only need prove
any level of impairment from slight to great (see:
R.
v. Stellato
, (1993)
1993 CanLII 3375 (ON CA)
, 12 O.R. (3d) 90). As well, signs
of impairment in cases such as this are not static. The initial observations
were made shortly after midnight while the observations at the station were an
hour or more later. Signs of impairment can vary from time to time and do not
necessarily remain static or constant (see:
R. v.
Grant
,
2014 ONSC 1479 (CanLII)
, [2014] O.J. No. 1143 at paragraph
53
).
[
48
]
When the circumstances are looked at in their
totality, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was
impaired by alcohol while operating his vehicle. His difficulty maintaining his
vehicle in its lane, his difficulty walking, and his speech slurred to the
point of incoherence, lead to the inescapable conclusion the alcohol he
admitted to drinking that night had significantly impaired his ability to
operate his motor vehicle. As such a finding of guilt will be made on this
charge.
[
49
]
This just leaves the dangerous operation. This
charge was not laid until after the accused’s breath readings were obtained and
the police decision to lay it seemed related to that. Now that the breath
readings have been excluded, that evidence is not available. The Crown did not
make submissions supporting a conviction on this charge and I find that was the
right thing to do. Although anyone who drives drunk is dangerous, the actual
driving observed here I find did not rise to the level dangerousness that this
offence calls for and as such this charge will be dismissed.
Conclusion
[
50
]
Given these findings, the exclusion of the
breath results means the 80 plus charge is dismissed, as is the charge of
dangerous operation. However, the Crown has proven the impaired operation
beyond a reasonable doubt and as such a finding of guilt will be made on that
charge.
Released:  November 25, 2025
Signed:
Justice Robert S. Gee