Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj283/2025oncj283.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v.
Sri
, 2025 ONCJ 283
COURT FILE No.: 4810
998 23 48106717-00
DATE:  2025·05·26
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
JANANAN SRI
Before Justice Peter Scrutton
Reasons for Judgment
Released on May 26, 2025
M. Walia....................................................................................................................  
for the Crown
G.J. Partington........................................................................................................  
for the Accused
Scrutton
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
Jananan Sri is charged with sexually
assaulting I.C. on the morning of May 24, 2023.  Both parties accept that the
complainant and defendant were not known to each other prior to the
allegations.  DNA evidence incontrovertibly establishes that they engaged in
sexual intercourse.  I.C. alleges that none of the sexual activity they engaged
in was consensual and that she communicated this to the defendant.  He testified
that she was the one who initiated their sexual activity and consensually
participated in all of it.  In determining whether the Crown has proved this
offence beyond a reasonable doubt, I must assess their respective accounts,
which will require a detailed review of the evidence.
I.C.’s Account
[
2
]
I.C. is a middle-aged woman who had been
addicted to crack cocaine and other drugs for over a decade.  As of May 2023,
she had been sober for approximately 6 months and was living in a recovery
home.  Sometime during the night of May 23
rd
or the early morning
hours of May 24
th
, she relapsed and left her residence to buy
drugs.  She remembered smoking methamphetamine and, later, spending the rest of
her money on a considerable amount of crack cocaine.  She did not recall how
much she bought but knew that she had smoked a lot and, not having recently
used any drugs, got very high.  She was not sure how long she was out and about
after she left her home – she did not have a good sense of time.  She thought
she had drunk some beer.  She did not think that she had eaten.
[
3
]
I.C. felt euphoric and stimulated by the
crack cocaine.  It sped things up and made her manic and “all over the place.” 
It also made her very trusting.  She had a history of mental illness but
testified that the only kind of delusion she experienced that day was a common
one when she was high – she believed in people, trusted them, and thought
everyone was good and full of love.
[
4
]
I.C. has only muddled memories of first
meeting the defendant.  He had a small bike and a red bandana.  She recalled
meeting him in an alley off Sherbourne Street.  She may have smoked crack with
him – that is what a lot of people in that area did and she had been smoking
with different people.  She recalled that he made a remark about how she could
be his step-mother which she found creepy and caused her to walk away but had
no other memories of their first interaction.
[
5
]
When she met the defendant again some time
later near a church, she had run out of money and drugs.  I.C. did not recall
how this conversation began but remembered the accused holding open his hand to
show her he had some crack cocaine.  He suggested going to his friend’s
apartment to smoke it.  I.C. wanted to smoke more drugs and was happy to go
with him.  Because of the comment he had made earlier, she told him that she
was not going to have sex with him.  She did not remember exactly what she was
thinking when she decided to leave with him – she was high, wanted more crack,
and was fine just going along with him.  I.C. was challenged on the
unlikelihood that a stranger would simply share drugs upon first meeting her
with her with no strings attached but explained that in her experience, this was
not uncommon.
[
6
]
I.C. had no concerns about accompanying the
defendant until they arrived at his friend’s apartment.  He was unsuccessful
getting buzzed in and they had to wait for someone else to enter to get through
the security doors.  I.C. became scared as soon as they got to the unit.  The
apartment was filthy, with dirty clothes everywhere – she described it as “squalor.”
It was a bachelor apartment and the main room was very dark.  A black man and a
woman were having sex on a bed in the living room.  Another woman was there;
she thought the women were being trafficked.  The defendant took her into the
bathroom, which was filthy and had a clogged toilet.  She said she had to
leave, that she did not want to be there.  Someone said she could not leave –
she thought it was the black man.  The bathroom had no door and was completely
open to the living area next to it where the people were.
[
7
]
The defendant pulled down his pants and told
her to suck him.  He had scabs on his penis and she was disgusted. She said she
did not want to do this.   She began to fellate him and gagged; she felt like
she was going to throw up.  He held her head over his penis.  She fellated him
for around 15 minutes.  She kept saying “stop”, that she did not want to do
this.  After, without asking, he bent her over the bathtub and penetrated her
vagina from behind before ejaculating inside her.  She thought the sexual activity
lasted for around 20 minutes.  She did not consent to any of it and expressed
that throughout.  She just wanted to get out of the apartment.  She said she
wanted to go but someone in the apartment said she could not leave, that the
door was locked from the inside.  She had remembered hearing the door lock when
they came in.  Someone said something to the effect of “this one is too pretty,
people are going to be looking for her, you should let her go.”
[
8
]
Three other people were in the room at this
point – the black man, the woman he had been having sex with, and the defendant. 
As between the defendant and the black man, she did not know who said what.
When they left the apartment, I.C. told the defendant they were horrible people
and he laughed at her.  They took the elevator down together.  At some point,
she asked him if he wanted to go to jail and he laughed again.  She left the
building and went directly to 51 Division to report the sexual assault, then
went to the hospital where she participated in a sexual assault evidence kit.  She
was still high when she spoke to the police.  She felt horrified by what had
happened.
[
9
]
At the time of her testimony, I.C. was
sober and had been properly medicated for her bipolar disorder for some time. 
She was in recovery and said that she had given her life over to God.  She was
upset about the defendant’s lack of kindness and empathy but had forgiven him
and did not care about the outcome of the prosecution.
i)
Challenges to I.C.’s Evidence
[
10
]
I.C. denied that she had prostituted herself
with the defendant for drugs.  She denied that she had agreed to fellate him in
exchange for crack and disagreed that she initiated the sex because she was so
happy with the crack.  She also denied that she had fabricated these
allegations because she was angry after their sex when she learned he had run
out of drugs and felt like she had been misled.  She said that even when in the
throes of addiction, she would never hurt anyone but would steal from donation
boxes, even eat out of garbage bins.  She denied the suggestion that she only
met the accused once that day but acknowledged having memory gaps about when
she thought she first met him and other aspects of the day.  She agreed that
she was coming down from her high and was craving more crack when she met the
defendant the second time but did not agree that she was so desperate that she
would do anything for more.  When asked how he could have known she smoked
crack, she explained that it would have been obvious as she had been smoking there
for some time and that it was what people did at that corner.
[
11
]
I.C. disputed that she smoked crack in the
bathroom or the apartment.  Ultimately, she allowed that it was possible she
had smoked in the apartment.  She was cross-examined on having told the police
that she had smoked crack in the apartment but as I read the passage of the interview
that was put to her,
[1]
it is clear she was referring to her earlier drug use, which she clarified in
re-examination.  She thought the apartment’s address was 200 Sherbourne but
agreed that she had been wrong when she told the police it was by a Dollarama
store, which was a few blocks south.  She agreed that she had told the police
she did not know why she accompanied the defendant to the apartment despite
knowing that she had gone there for drugs.  She confirmed it was not the
defendant who locked the door to the apartment, and that she was not threatened
during her time there.  She testified that she thought she had drunk some beer
that day but told the police she had drunk a cooler, explaining that the cooler
was made by Coors (a beer company).
Mr. Sri’s Account
[
12
]
Mr. Sri is in his early thirties.  He became
addicted to crack cocaine sometime during COVID when he had CERB money to
spend.  He was homeless and would mostly sleep on friends’ couches.  In May
2023, he was moving between various buildings in the Dundas and Sherbourne area
of Toronto.  He had been up all night on May 23
rd
.  Around 5:30 a.m.,
he sold some jewellery in exchange for crack.  He was walking around the
neighbourhood when he saw I.C., whom he did not know, sitting in a parking lot
by Filmore’s strip club, looking sad.  This was the first and only time they
met that day.  He asked what was bothering her and she said she had been
smoking crack and had run out of money.  He told her he had crack and asked
what she would give him for it.  She told him she would give him a blowjob and
then sex if the crack was good.  He did not want to do any of this in public
and she agreed to go to his friend’s.
[
13
]
They made small talk as they walked and then
waited to enter the building before taking the elevator to his friend’s
apartment on the fourth floor.  He knocked and they went in.  The apartment was
dark and the door locked automatically upon closing – only his friend was able
to unlock it.
[
14
]
They both went to the washroom, which had no
door.  They smoked and she said something like “this is really good crack, I am
happy and horny, people always rip me off” before fellating him.  After, she
offered him sex and he agreed.  He said I.C. pulled her shorts down and bent
over.  They had sex for 5 minutes or so and he ejaculated inside her.  When she
learned he was out of drugs, she got really angry and said she wanted to
leave.  He told her the front door was locked and went to his friend’s room.  He
described his friend as “preoccupied” with a woman so they waited for him to
let them out, then went to the elevator.
[
15
]
Mr. Sri denied that he had any scabs on his
penis, positing that if he did, it would have been too painful for him to
engage in the sexual conduct they had both described.  He denied that I.C. had
ever protested or tried to leave.
Cross Examination of Mr. Sri
[
16
]
Mr. Sri elaborated that he knew I.C. was sad
when he saw her in the parking lot because she was crying and covering her face.
 He offered to share his crack because of that, thinking maybe she would feel
better after a toke.  Later in his testimony, he said that he would not
normally give drugs to a stranger but that he wanted to help her, out of the
goodness of his heart, and she was the one who raised the crack for sex trade.
[
17
]
Mr. Sri did not recall the name of the
friend whose apartment they went to. He described him as an older black man.  Mr.
Sri initially described the apartment as a one room “bachelor” but later said
it had an enclosed bedroom.  It was dark in the apartment, such that he could
not see how many people were inside, potentially as many as four people.  His
friend was “pre-occupied” when he opened the door.  Mr. Sri acknowledged that
it was possible people were having sex in the living area of the unit when they
entered but then indicated he did not remember this, though he said people may
have been having sex in the bedroom.  He did not think anyone was in the living
area when they were in the bathroom.
[
18
]
Mr. Sri acknowledged that the apartment was
dirty, with clothes all over it but disputed that it was filthy or a “trap
house.”  He did not know whether the washroom toilet was clogged because its
seat was down.
[
19
]
At some point during the 15 minutes of oral
sex, they took a break and smoked some more crack.  When asked if there was any
discussion of protection, he said that he had told I.C. that he did not have
any condoms and she replied, “I don’t care I’m horny, I’m clean, let’s have
sex.”  They did not discuss ejaculation – Mr. Sri did not assume it was fine
for him to ejaculate inside her but said she knew “there was a chance, a slight
chance, that I could.”  The intercourse lasted for 5 minutes or more and at one
point, I.C. looked back at him and smiled.  He did not say anything before he
ejaculated – that was something that just happened.
[
20
]
Mr. Sri knew I.C. was angry when she left
the apartment.  Although he initially said he had not been laughing when she
left the building, he agreed that she looked angry on the video and also that
he was laughing.  He said his laugh must have been in response to something
funny that she said.
Surveillance Video from the
Apartment Building
[
21
]
Mr. Sri and I.C. went to 251 Sherbourne Street
just after 6:00 a.m.  Many different areas of that building have video
surveillance cameras.  The parties agree that the time stamps noted on this
footage are accurate.  At 6:05 a.m., I.C. and Mr. Sri enter the building.  He
is riding a small bike and is wearing a red bandana and necklaces.  She is
wearing shorts, a purple sweatshirt, and flip flops.  They can be seen speaking
together; I.C. mostly has her hands in her pockets.  In my view, their
interaction, the distance between them, and their body language looks platonic.
 I.C. appears to be very tired, almost to the point of looking groggy.  It
takes almost 5 minutes for them to gain entry through the security door.  Neither
witness has any specific recollection of their conversation during this period.
 They behaved similarly as they rode up the elevator.
[
22
]
I.C. and Mr. Sri are next visible on the
footage leaving the fourth floor at 6:54 a.m. I.C. stands farther apart from Mr.
Sri relative to when they had arrived; their body language is similar, except
that I.C.’s arms are akimbo.  At one point in the elevator, I.C. makes an
animated hand gesture in the defendant’s direction.  I.C. did not recall what
she had said at that moment but remembered being angry and thought that she had
said something like “what you did is not ok.”  Mr. Sri can be seen smiling and
then laughing in response to whatever was uttered.
[
23
]
At 6:56 a.m., as she leaves the building, I.C.’s
demeanour is noticeably different – she speaks to the defendant with her arms
out wide and twice gives what looks like an exaggerated or exasperated
shrug-like gesture with both hands.  She testified that she was yelling at him
at that moment and thinks she said something like “do you want to go to jail?” 
Mr. Sri appears to be smiling but his face is only briefly visible in the
frame.
Forensic Evidence
[
24
]
I.C. attended Mount Sinai Hospital for a
Sexual Assault Evidence Kit on May 24, 2023.  A CFS biologist external
genitalia and vaginal swabs collected from her and compared them to a DNA
sample of Mr. Sri’s that the police obtained.  He cannot be excluded as the
source of a male DNA profile located on both swabs and it is estimated that it
is more than one trillion times more likely that the male DNA originates from
him than from an unknown person unrelated to him.
The Parties’ Positions
[
25
]
Defence counsel submits that I.C. is an
unreliable witness.  While adamant throughout that she did not consent to any
sexual activity, her evidence is fraught with gaps and contradictions.  With
respect to her description of their first encounter, it is likely that she is
confusing the defendant with someone else she met that day, given how
intoxicated she was.  There were many aspects of her narrative that she was
unsure about and she acknowledged problems with her memory which were likely
caused by the drugs.  Further, she lied to the police when she said she did not
know why she went with Mr. Sri to the apartment.  Ultimately, she craved the
drug so much that she sold her body for it and then fabricated the allegation
out of anger when she learned he had no more drugs.
[
26
]
The Crown argues that I.C. was a credible
witness who answered questions fairly, did not exaggerate, and was consistent
on all material issues.  She struggled to remember antecedent events but had a
clear memory of what transpired at the apartment.  Her fragmented memories
should not affect the assessment of the credibility of her core memory of the
sexual assault.  His evidence was not credible and should be rejected.
Relevant Legal Principles
[
27
]
Jananan Sri is presumed innocent of these
charges.  The burden of proof is on the Crown, who must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Sri is guilty of sexual assault.  There is no onus on
him to prove anything.  The standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt is an
exacting one.  It is more than probable or likely guilt and falls much closer
to absolute certainty than it does to proof on a balance of probabilities. 
Ultimately, I may only find the accused guilty if I am sure that he committed
the offence alleged.
[
28
]
Mr. Sri testified and is entitled to the
full weight of the Supreme Court of Canada's direction to trial judges in
R.
v. W. (D
.),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 742.   If I believe his evidence that he did
not sexually assault I.C., then I must find him not guilty.  If I do not
believe his testimony but am nonetheless left in reasonable doubt by it, he
must similarly be found not guilty.  Even if I am not left in doubt by his
evidence, I must ask myself whether, on the basis of the evidence which I do
accept, I am convinced beyond a reasonable doubt by that evidence of Mr. Sri’s
guilt.
[
29
]
The purpose of the
W.(D.)
framework
is to emphasize the burden of proof and the presumption of innocence by
ensuring that criminal cases are not reduced to credibility contests.  The
issue is not whose evidence I prefer but whether the Crown has proven the case
against the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. In making this determination,
I can accept some, none or all of a witness’ evidence. No magic formula that
applies in assessing credibility.  A witness’ evidence is to be considered
using a common-sense approach that is not tainted by myth, stereotype or
assumption.  Many factors may be relevant to determining credibility.  Some key
ones include whether the witness’ evidence is internally consistent, whether it
coheres with evidence from other witnesses or exhibits, whether the witness has
motive to fabricate, whether inconsistencies in the evidence are about
important or minor matters, what explanations are given for any
inconsistencies, and whether the inconsistencies suggest that the witness is
lying.
[
30
]
I must be mindful of the distinction between
credibility and reliability.  Credibility relates to the honesty or sincerity of
the testimony.  Reliability relates to its accuracy, which engages a
consideration of the witness’ ability to accurately observe, recall and recount
an event:
R. v. H.C
.,
2009 ONCA 56
, at para.
41
.  Here, I.C.’s lack of
memory and intoxication raise questions about her reliability as a witness that
I must consider.
Credibility Assessments and
Factual Findings
[
31
]
I understand that there is no rigid order in
which the evidence must be analyzed and that compliance with reasonable doubt
principles is a matter of substance:
R. v. C.L.Y
.
2008 SCC 2 (CanLII)
, [2008] S.C.J. No. 2,
para.
7
.  In this case, it is convenient to begin the analysis with the
evidence of Mr. Sri.
i)
Mr. Sri
[
32
]
When Mr. Sri first described meeting I.C. in
the parking lot, he said that she looked sad and he signalled his willingness
to give her drugs if she gave him something in return.  In cross-examination,
he said that he had initially offered her his crack for money but said that he had
forgotten that when testifying in chief.  I do not accept this evidence.  Mr.
Sri testified that I.C. told him she was out of drugs and money when he asked
her why she was sad – it would not make sense to suggest a cash sale in these
circumstances.  This is also incongruous with him having sold some of his
belongings to buy a relatively small amount of crack hours earlier for his own
personal use.
[
33
]
Mr. Sri elaborated that he knew I.C. was sad
because she was crying and covering her face.  He also said that he offered her
crack to make her feel better, because he wanted to help her, “out of the
goodness of his heart”, and that she was the one who brought up an exchange.  I
find these to be significant inconsistencies.  There are obvious differences
between “looking sad” and being “distraught”, and between a gift and a barter
(or altruism and self-interest).  I do not accept Mr. Sri’s account of this
meeting or that he came upon I.C. for the first and only time when they had
this exchange.  He testified that he had been up all night.  He did not have
any memory of where he spent that time.  I infer that he was out and about in
the neighbourhood during part of the time that I.C. was out.  It would be at least
random and at worst predatory to approach a distraught stranger and immediately
engage in a crack-for-fellatio negotiation.  I accept I.C.’s evidence that Mr.
Sri did interact with her in some fashion before this.
[
34
]
I do not believe Mr. Sri when he says that
he does not recall the name of his friend at 251 Sherbourne.  On his own
version of events, this was a friend with whom he was sufficiently close to
arrive at his apartment, unannounced, at 6:00 a.m., accompanied by a stranger with
whom he intended to smoke crack and engage in sexual activity.  Nor do I accept
his description that the apartment had an enclosed bedroom – as set out above, he
initially described it as having only one room.
[
35
]
Further, I do not accept Mr. Sri’s
explanation that he did not have scabs on his penis on the basis that those
scabs would have made the sexual activities he engaged in very painful.  He
said that he would not have had sex if he was in that condition.  Mr. Sri did
not testify that he knew what it felt like to have sex with scabs on his penis
and no other evidence was tendered from which this could be inferred.  Scabs
are different from open sores. Nothing about his behaviour that morning
demonstrates any concern about engaging in safe sex.
[
36
]
I reject Mr. Sri’s explanation for smiling
and laughing at I.C. as they left the apartment building.  Initially, he
disagreed with the suggestion that he had done so until he was shown video of
them leaving together.  He then explained that he was responding to something
funny I.C. had said.  Even on his own version of events, there was nothing
funny about this situation – I.C. was angry with him and they were leaving
together because she was angry. He said they were talking about her anger in
the elevator.  Defence counsel concedes that her demeanour is noticeably
different leaving the building than it was on arrival, a characterization that
I agree with.
[
37
]
Apart from these deficiencies in his
evidence, in my view, the most salient parts of his testimony with respect to
the factual issues I must resolve come from the aspects of I.C.’s account that
Mr. Sri confirmed.  He agreed that I.C. was not exhibiting any signs of
delusion or mental illness, that they interacted and communicated in a normal fashion
that morning, which is itself evident from the video.  He disagreed that his
friend’s apartment was filthy, but agreed it was disorganized with clothes all
over the floor.  He also described the apartment as dark, which is notable
because it was light outside.  He confirmed that the apartment door locked
automatically and that his friend was the only person who could open it.  This
is a strange detail that raises obvious safety concerns.  He confirmed that
there was no door on the bathroom.  He confirmed that his friend was “pre-occupied
with a woman” when he attended, which I interpret as a euphemism for having
sex.  He initially admitted that people may have been having sex in the living
area when they first entered the apartment but then said he could not see
anyone in the living area.  Finally, Mr. Sri agreed that when I.C. was angry
and wanted to leave, he had to ask his friend to let them both out because of
the way the door was locked.
[
38
]
For these reasons and others that I will
expand on below, I reject Mr. Sri’s version of events that he and I.C. engaged
in consensual oral and vaginal sex in exchange for crack cocaine as failing to
raise a reasonable doubt.
(ii)      I.C.
[
39
]
I will begin my assessment of I.C.’s
evidence by noting that in my view, she sincerely tried to be fair in her
testimony.  She had clearly reviewed her statements before testifying but
rather than adhering to them like a script she proactively referred to the
events she had previously recounted but which she could not remember.  While
she had a tendency to interrupt defence counsel during his questions, in my
view she did not do so in an obstreperous or argumentative way; it seemed to me
that she genuinely wanted to answer his questions, albeit often without waiting
for the entire question.  She acknowledged that there were real gaps in her
memory and did not speculate or try to fill them in.  She acknowledged her use
of drugs that night and the extent of her intoxication.  I accept her evidence
that, while intoxicated, she was of sound mind and not experiencing any
delusions or other symptoms of her bipolar disorder.  I also accept that she is
sincere when she says that she is not interested in the outcome of this case
because she has forgiven the defendant.  I reject the defence theory that she
was motivated to fabricate this allegation because she felt angry and misled by
Mr. Sri.
[
40
]
While counsel demonstrated some
inconsistencies between I.C.’s evidence and her prior statements, in the main I
do not find them to be material.  Most of them clearly relate to peripheral
issues.  For example, she described the location of the apartment building as by
the Dollarama near Queen and Sherbourne when it was actually north of Dundas Street.
 She thought they had gone to 200 Sherbourne when the building was actually 251
Sherbourne.  The surveillance footage incontrovertibly establishes that they
went to a secure apartment building.  I accept I.C.’s evidence that she has a
bad sense of direction and do not find that these mistakes undermine her
general reliability.  Whether I.C. was wrong about having drunk beer or coolers
that evening is clearly peripheral and not the sort of detail I would expect
anyone to remember two years later absent the distinction between drinks having
some particular significance.
[
41
]
I.C. described scabs on the defendant’s
penis in her testimony.  Counsel suggested that she told the police she did not
see any scabs.  Review of the transcript of her interview, however, establishes
that she told the police the defendant had scabs and when asked to describe
them said: “I didn’t really see them…I just kind of felt them, they were all
over his penis, like scabs and …”.  She went on to describe the scabs as
feeling “rough” and “gross.”  I do not find this to be an inconsistency, let
alone an inconsistency that would cause me to question the credibility or
reliability of this aspect of her testimony: see
R. v. A.M
.,
[2014] O.J.
No. 521 at paras. 13-14
and
R. v. Duncan
,
2020 ONSC 7428
at para.
17
.
[
42
]
Counsel initially disputed that I.C. told
the police anything about consuming drugs that night but then retracted that
submission when presented with parts of her statement where she told the police
she was on drugs and intoxicated.  The only potentially material inconsistency
that I find counsel successfully demonstrated is that I.C. testified that she
went to the apartment to smoke crack with the defendant but told the police she
did not know why she went to the apartment with him.  Initially, I.C. explained
in her testimony that she had meant she did not know why she would put herself
in that position, why she had been so foolish.  After extensive questioning,
she ultimately agreed she had gone there for crack but did not tell the police that.
 This is an inconsistency, but I do not find that it suggests that she was
lying in her testimony or trying to mislead the police when she gave her
statement.  She told the police she was intoxicated from drugs and that she
went with a stranger to an apartment.  Part of the prior statement counsel put
to her was in response to being asked why she followed the man to the bathroom.
 I.C. did not explain why she neglected to tell the police she went to the
apartment to smoke crack. It is not hard to think of reasons she may have had
for withholding that detail but I will not rely on any of these to explain or justify
this inconsistency, given that I.C. offered no explanation for it.  Ultimately,
while I recognize this inconsistency is potentially capable of negatively impacting
the credibility of her account, I am satisfied that it does not.
[
43
]
I.C.’s inability to remember where she was,
who she was with, and what she was doing prior to meeting the defendant the
second time is certainly a factor that I must consider when determining the
reliability of her account of what she does remember that morning.   I accept
her evidence that she was very high on drugs during this period, which explains
the gaps in her memory and her poor sense of time.  She was fair and candid in
her testimony on this issue and did not attempt to fill in her memory gaps with
speculation, a frailty that could potentially have undermined the credibility
or reliability of her entire account.  On both witnesses’ versions of events,
this interaction in the apartment happened some time after I.C. had finished
her own drugs.  I.C. admitted to “craving” crack when she went to the apartment
with the defendant and said that she was “coming down” after not having smoked
crack for some indeterminate period of time.   Nothing in either of their
accounts suggests that she was demonstrating any significant impairment as they
went to the apartment – she was acting rationally and communicating normally. 
From my review of the surveillance footage, she does not appear to be
intoxicated – or at least very intoxicated – she simply looks very tired. I
accept that she has a reliable memory of what happened in the apartment that is
not undermined by her inability to remember many of the antecedent events.
[
44
]
I.C. was unwavering in her evidence that she
did not accompany the defendant to the apartment for sex, did not consent to
any sexual activity in the apartment, and actively communicated her lack of
consent.  I accept that she had no concerns about accompanying the defendant
until they entered the actual apartment.  I.C. said that she was immediately
scared once they arrived and it is easy to understand why.  The apartment was
dark and she could see two people she had never met having sex; the former description
was confirmed by the defendant and he did not contradict the latter.
[
45
]
I.C. evocatively described the filth of the
apartment and the feeling of disgust it engendered in her.  I accept her
evidence on this point as sincere and accurate.  This description, too, was
partly confirmed by the defendant.  In noting these pieces of confirmatory
evidence, I do not mean to suggest that any aspect of I.C.’s evidence required
corroboration before it could be relied upon.  But it is notable, in my
assessment of her credibility, and Mr. Sri’s, in the context of all the
evidence at trial, that many of the material parts of her account are confirmed
by his evidence.  I accept that I.C. heard the door lock when they entered,
that she relayed the gist of the conversation about the locked door that she
overheard, and that she was genuinely terrified because she believed she would
be trapped there.  A self-locking door that could only be opened from the
inside by the resident of the apartment is a strange, concerning, singular
detail, one that the defendant confirmed.  On both versions of events, they
engaged in sexual activity in a small bathroom with no door for a considerable
period of time, a place that was visible to anyone in the main room of the
apartment.
[
46
]
After considering all of the evidence, and
for the reasons explained above, I reject Mr. Sri’s evidence that he and I.C.
engaged in consensual oral and vaginal sex in that bathroom.  Not only do I
disbelieve his evidence, it does not leave me with a reasonable doubt.  I
accept I.C.’s testimony that she only accompanied Mr. Sri to the apartment to
smoke crack cocaine, not because she had agreed to prostitute herself for crack
cocaine.   I find that the Crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that she
did not consent to any sexual activity in that apartment, that she did nothing
to communicate consent, and that the defendant knew she did not consent to any
of the sexual activity they engaged in.  Accordingly, I find Mr. Sri guilty of
sexual assault.
Dated:    May 26, 2025                                                        __________________________
Justice
Peter Scrutton
[1]
Exhibit B, p. 6.