Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj354/2025oncj354.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Kumar
, 2025 ONCJ 354
DATE: 
2025 06 26
COURT
FILE No.:  Halton Infos #998 24 12103700,
1211210
3328, 21-986
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
BRIAN KUMAR
Before
Justice Jennifer Campitelli
Heard
on April 10, 2025 and May 30 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on June 26, 2025
N. Chiera............................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
J. Kushnir................................................................ counsel
for the accused Brian Kumar
CAMPITELLI J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Kumar was arrested and charged with three
counts of fraud over $5000 on March 17, 2021.  Information number
(21-986)
was sworn on April 20, 2021, and reflects
those counts.  On October 7, 2021, Mr. Kumar was charged with an additional
eight counts of fraud over $5000.  The information related to those counts was
sworn on November 16, 2021 (1211210 3328).  On November 12, 2024, a replacement
information was sworn joining all counts (
998 24 12103700
). 
All three informations are currently subject of this application.
[
2
]
Mr. Kumar argues that his rights as protected by
section 11(b)
of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
have been
violated in that he has not been provided with a trial within a reasonable
time.  Mr. Kumar asks me to stay these proceedings as a result.
History of the Proceedings:
[
3
]
Following the initial information being sworn on
April 20, 2021, there was an intake phase where Mr. Paquette appeared for Mr.
Kumar and asked for time to review disclosure.  However, of note, on this
record, the defence review of disclosure fell outside what would normally be considered
a typical intake period, which would have ended on July 13, 2021.  Rather than
moving the matter forward, defence counsel requested time to review disclosure and
adjourned the matter for that purpose between July 13, 2021, and September 14,
2021
(63 days)
.  At that
point in time, the defence engaged in a series of 11(b) waivers, again
asserting additional time was required to review disclosure and prepare related
correspondence.  Those waivers continued until December 7, 2021, with respect
to information (21-986)
(84 days)
.
[
4
]
On November 16, 2021, information
(1211210 3328)
was sworn, and Mr. Kumar began
appearing separately from his appearances related to information (21-986).  The
intake process with a view to this information again extended beyond the
traditional intake period, which would have ended on February 8, 2022.  After
that point in the proceedings, Mr. Kumar began requesting the matter be adjourned
citing additional disclosure, the necessity to prepare and serve a
Stinchcombe
application, and a desire to retain counsel. Those defence requested
adjournments continued from February 15, 2022, until December 6, 2022 without
an explicit 11(b) waiver
(294 days).
Within that timeframe, both informations first appeared together,
on April 12, 2022.
[
5
]
On December 6, 2022, Mr. Micheli appeared on Mr.
Kumar’s behalf and indicated that Mr. Kumar was still in the process of
perfecting his retainer, and disclosure was being reviewed.  He requested the
matter be adjourned to February 14, 2023, and explicitly waived 11(b)
(70 days).
[
6
]
Both informations next appeared on February 14,
2023.  When they were addressed, Mr. Kumar was no longer on the line.  The
relevant transcript suggests he was required in another courtroom; however, his
instructions were to adjourn the matter for two months, until April 11, 2023,
with an 11(b) waiver.  The Crown opposed his request because of his absence, and
the matter being dated.  A bench warrant was issued but endorsed for Mr.
Kumar’s release.  His matter next appeared on February 21, 2023 (
7 days).
[
7
]
On February 21, 2023, Mr. Kumar appeared in
court, advised that he was in the process of retaining Mr. Micheli, and
requested his matter be adjourned.  Between this date and July 7, 2023, both
informations are adjourned for the purpose of Mr. Kumar retaining Mr. Micheli
with explicit 11(b) waivers.  The court is advised that Mr. Micheli is
partially retained
(136 days).
[
8
]
Both informations appeared before Justice
Puddington in a case management court on July 7, 2023.  Against Mr. Kumar’s
objection, and his request for a longer adjournment with an explicit 11(b)
waiver, Justice Puddington scheduled a self-represented judicial pre-trial on
July 14, 2023.
[
9
]
On July 14, 2023, Mr. Kumar appeared with Mr.
Micheli, who assisted him as a friend of the court for a self-represented judicial
pre-trial before Justice Nadal.  Following that pre-trial, Justice Nadal noted
Mr. Kumar was anxious to retain Mr. Micheli, and the pair shared a history. 
Justice Nadal accepted Mr. Kumar’s explicit 11(b) waiver and adjourned both
informations to September 20, 2023, for a continuing judicial pre-trial
(68 days).
[
10
]
Both informations then appeared on September 20,
2023 before Justice Latimer for a continuing judicial pre-trial.  At that time,
Mr. Kumar advised Justice Latimer that he was in the final stages of perfecting
Mr. Micheli’s retainer prior to additional charges, unrelated to this
application, coming to light.  Mr. Kumar requested all matters return on
November 15, 2023, to provide Mr. Micheli with an opportunity to prepare
himself and potentially resolve some of the outstanding matters.  Justice
Latimer asks Mr. Kumar if he is personally agreeable with the requested
adjournment; notwithstanding, it will cause a “bit of delay in your case”.  Mr.
Kumar responds, “that’s fine”
(57 days).
[
11
]
On November 15, 2023, another judicial pretrial
was scheduled before Justice Puddington on December 19, 2023.  On December 19,
2023, Mr. Kumar attended and advised that Mr. Micheli was going to appear and was
largely retained.  However, Mr. Kumar advised Justice Puddington that Mr.
Micheli was delayed by a criminal matter in Walkerton.  As such, Mr. Kumar requested
to adjourn both informations to January 30, 2024 with an explicit 11(b) waiver
(76 days).
[
12
]
Both informations appeared on January 30, 2024
before Justice Latimer, where he scheduled another self-represented judicial
pre-trial on February 23, 2024.  Mr. Micheli was present; however, he was not in
a position to confirm he was able to represent Mr. Kumar.  As such, Justice
Latimer scheduled the matter to proceed to judicial pre-trial on the earliest
date available to the assigned Crown; notwithstanding, the date selected conflicted
with Mr. Micheli’s vacation schedule.  This adjournment must be considered
against the appropriate backdrop.  A self-represented judicial pre-trial had
already been scheduled by Justice Puddington on July 7, 2023, it was held
before Justice Nadal on July 14, 2023, and a continuing self-represented
judicial pre-trial was then adjourned before Justice Latimer at the request of
Mr. Kumar.  As a result, I find any ongoing delay caused by the scheduling and
re-scheduling judicial pre-trials after July 14, 2023, to be defence-caused
delay
(24 days).
[
13
]
On February 23, 2024 Mr. Kumar appeared for a
self-represented judicial pre-trial, which took place before Justice
Puddington.  Mr. Kumar indicated that he was still in the process of retaining
Mr. Micheli, and expressed to Justice Puddington that it was his intention to
have a trial in the Superior Court of Justice, with a preliminary hearing.  As
such, a five-day estimate was reached with respect to a preliminary hearing. 
However, Mr. Kumar was not formally put to his election.  The matter was
remanded for the purpose of scheduling preliminary hearing dates and next
appeared on March 15, 2024.  On that date, Mr. Kumar was advised his
preliminary hearing scheduling had to occur through a specialized process, as dates
were being set on a with or without counsel basis, albeit keeping Mr. Micheli’s
schedule in mind. Both informations were then adjourned several times for the
purpose of Mr. Kumar scheduling the five days for the preliminary hearing
estimated by Justice Puddington.  At this point in the proceedings, Mr. Kumar
expressed a desire to consult with Mr. Micheli before formally being put to his
election.  On April 23, 2024, Mr. Kumar is directed back before Justice Latimer
on April 26, 2024
(63 days).
[
14
]
Mr. Kumar appeared before Justice Latimer on
April 26, 2024, and he advised the court that he was very close to retaining Mr.
Micheli.  Mr. Kumar expressed a desire to consult with counsel prior to making
a formal election, and explicitly waived 11(b) for that purpose.  Justice
Latimer provided Mr. Kumar with that opportunity, and the matter was adjourned
to June 6, 2024.  On June 6, 2024, Mr. Kumar appeared before Justice Latimer
and communicated his retainer of Mr. Micheli was imminent.  In fact, he
anticipated the funds being secured by Monday.  Of note, June 6, 2024, was a
Thursday.  Justice Latimer agreed to adjourn both informations to June 13,
2024, with Mr. Kumar expressing he was “happy to provide an 11(b) waiver”
(48 days).
[
15
]
Mr. Micheli appeared on June 13, 2024 and
expressed that he had been retained for a “limited scope” just eight minutes
prior to 1:00 p.m. that day.  Mr. Micheli advised Justice Latimer that his
retainer included the review of disclosure and requested four weeks for that
purpose.  Mr. Micheli also suggested he might possibly conduct a Crown
pre-trial.  As a result, the matter was adjourned to July 24, 2024, with Justice
Latimer specifically noting that the matter had been in the case management process
“too long”.  This adjournment request must be considered bearing in mind that Mr.
Micheli first appeared on this record on December 6, 2022, and advised the
court at that point in time that disclosure was being reviewed.  That being
some eighteen months prior to June 13, 2024. On December 6, 2022, both
informations had been sworn and were appearing in court together.  Consequently,
I find this request for additional time to review disclosure material to be
defence-caused delay
(41 days).
[
16
]
Both informations appeared before Justice
Latimer for a judicial pre-trial on July 24, 2024 with Mr. Micheli assisting
Mr. Kumar.  Mr. Kumar elected to have a trial in the Superior Court of Justice
with a preliminary hearing, and his election was formally noted.  The matter was
adjourned with discussion of an 11(b) waiver to August 20, 2024, with
scheduling process apparently happening in the background.  However, when Mr.
Kumar appeared on August 20, 2024, he advised the court that he wished to alter
his election and proceed to trial in the Ontario Court of Justice.  As such,
both informations were remanded back before Justice Latimer on August 30, 2024,
where Mr. Kumar confirmed his intention to re-elect and proceed to trial in the
Ontario Court of Justice.  This, notwithstanding the transcript reveals that
dates had already been scheduled.  Justice Latimer acceded to Mr. Kumar’s request,
vacated the previously scheduled dates, and noted his re-election.  But he also
remarked that Mr. Kumar had engaged in “six or seven months of pre-trial”
process, having “engineered” a number of dates to set preliminary inquiries. 
Then, requested that the court “scrub” the related process, and re-set dates in
the Ontario Court of Justice.  Mr. Kumar expressed that he had not engineered
any of the process.  However, Justice Latimer commented, “it certainly looks
like it from this perspective”.  After thoroughly reviewing all the relevant
transcripts, I agree with my former colleague.  I find all the delay occasioned
by Mr. Kumar re-electing his mode of trial to be defence deductible delay,
whether there were explicit 11(b) waivers or not.  Ms. Kushnir appeared for Mr.
Kumar on September 19, 2024, and the matter was then scheduled for yet another
judicial pre-trial given Mr. Kumar’s re-election on October 9, 2024.  That judicial
pre-trial took place on October 18, 2024
(77 days).
[
17
]
On October 18, 2024 Ms. Kushnir appeared before
Justice Latimer and conducted a judicial pre-trial on Mr. Kumar’s behalf.  The
matter was remanded for the purpose of scheduling trial dates in the Ontario
Court of Justice to November 12, 2024.  On November 12, 2024, the joint
information is before the court (998 24 12103700), a
Stinchcombe
application,
an 11(b) application and trial dates are all scheduled.  The date the matter is
scheduled to complete in the Ontario Court of Justice is October 9, 2025.
The Legal
Framework:
[
18
]
In
R .v. Jordan
2016 SCC 27 (CanLII)
, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 631
(SCC), the Supreme Court of Canada addressed the unduly complex nature of the
Morin
framework, highlighting that courts must avoid failing to see the “forest
for the trees”:
Jordan
supra. at para. 37 (SCC) citing
R .v. Godin
[2009] S.C.R. 3 at para. 18 (SCC).  The court also identified a “culture of
complacency” towards delay, which had emerged within the criminal justice
system:
Jordan
supra. at para. 40. The court found that the
Morin
framework
did not address this “culture of complacency”, as delay was either condemned or
rationalized at the “back end”, which did not encourage police, Crown counsel,
defence counsel, courts, provincial legislatures and Parliament to address
inefficient practices and resourcing problems:
Jordan
supra. at para. 41
(SCC).
[
19
]
In response, the Supreme Court of Canada introduced
a new 11(b) framework setting the presumptive “ceiling” in the Ontario Court of
Justice at 18 months.  If the total delay from laying the charges to the actual
or anticipated end of the trial (minus defence delay)
exceeds
the
ceiling, then the delay is presumptively unreasonable.  To rebut this
presumption, the onus falls to the Crown to establish the presence of
exceptional circumstances.  If it cannot, the delay is unreasonable and a stay
will follow:
Jordan
supra. at para. 46 and 47 (SCC).
[
20
]
Defence delay has two components.  First, is delay
waived by the defence.  Waiver can be either implicit or explicit; but it must
be clear.  The second component of defence delay is delay caused solely by the
conduct of the defence.  For example, the defence will have directly caused the
delay if the court and the Crown are ready to proceed, but the defence is not. 
However, defence actions legitimately taken to respond to the charges fall
outside of the ambit of defence delay.  Defence must be allowed preparation
time, even where the court and the Crown are ready to proceed:
Jordan
supra.
at paras. 61, 63 and 64 (SCC).
[
21
]
Exceptional circumstances are not rare or
entirely uncommon.  However, they lie outside of the Crown’s control in that,
“(1) they are reasonably unforeseen
or
reasonably unavoidable,
and
(2) Crown counsel cannot reasonably remedy the delays emanating for those
circumstances once they arise”.  The Crown must show that it took reasonable
and available steps to avoid and address the problem
before
the delay
exceeded the ceiling.  This might include prompt resort to case management
processes, seeking assistance from the defence to streamline evidence or other
appropriate procedural means.  The Crown is not required to show that the steps
it took were ultimately successful; rather, just that reasonable steps were
taken in an attempt to avoid the delay:
Jordan
supra. at paras. 69-70
(SCC).
Analysis:
Calculating the Total Delay
[
22
]
Mr. Kumar takes the position that the total
delay in this matter should be calculated from the date the first information
was sworn, April 20, 2021. He argues there is a sufficient nexus between the
counts on both informations, and points to the fact that all of the charges he
must answer to result from the same ongoing police investigation.  Mr. Kumar
stresses the Crown has chosen to proceed on a joint information and thus, the
calculation of delay ought not be bifurcated.
[
23
]
I do not find that there is any binding
authority in this area, which directs my analysis.  Rather, I find that each
case turns on its own individual factual record.  Relevant factors may include:
any nexus between counts, similarity of delict, the nature and number of
transactions associated with each count, and the seriousness of the alleged charged
conduct when considered across counts.  On this particular record, I find that
there is a sufficient nexus between these counts such that the total delay will
be calculated from April 20, 2021.  The counts on the joint information all
allege the same criminal conduct and were all borne out of the same ongoing
criminal investigation.
[
24
]
The parties agree that the total delay between
the time when information (21-986) was laid, and the estimated completion of Mr.
Kumar’s trial is 1634 days.  The parties also agree that the presumptive
ceiling, calculated on this record, is 547.2 days, or eighteen months.
Therefore, the total delay exceeds the presumptive ceiling in the Ontario Court
of Justice.
Calculating the Net Delay
[
25
]
The net delay is calculated by subtracting any
defence caused delay from the total delay.  Defence delay is subtracted because
“the defence should not be allowed to benefit from its own delay-causing
conduct”:
Jordan
supra. at para. 60 (SCC).
Was there any delay waived by the
defence either expressly or implicitly on this record? Additionally, is there
any delay, which lies at the feet of the defence on this record?
[
26
]
Mr. Kumar candidly acknowledges that there was
delay explicitly waived on this record, in addition to defence-caused delay. 
However, he asks me to vitiate any waivers of 11(b), arguing they were not
properly informed because of the Crown’s altering positions on outstanding
disclosure.  Disclosure, which was ultimately produced to Mr. Kumar.  Moreover,
Mr. Kumar submits that the defence-caused delay on this record ought to have
been managed by the case management process and mitigated.  He takes the
position that this record demonstrates a problematic “culture of complacency”,
stressing the system did not do enough to mitigate the compounding delay before
it exceeded the ceiling.
[
27
]
It is not disputed between the parties that the
investigation, which resulted in the charges subject of this application, was
initiated in the context of an unrelated prosecution involving Mr. Kumar.  The Crown
also concedes that material connected with the unrelated prosecution involving
Mr. Kumar is relevant to the allegations subject of this application, and disclosable. 
This was not the position taken by the Crown in March of 2022, and it is the Crown’s
altering position regarding this specific disclosure material that Mr. Kumar
argues renders fifty percent of his 11(b) waivers uninformed.  I disagree. 
What is clear when the entire record is reviewed is that Mr. Kumar was aware of
both the existence and nature of the outstanding disclosure.  Moreover, Mr.
Kumar refers to the need to schedule a
Stinchcombe
application relative
to outstanding disclosure as early as February of 2022.  It is not for me, as I
decide this application, to weigh the merits of any possible
Stinchcombe
application. 
Rather, I must determine whether Mr. Kumar was aware of the outstanding
disclosure when he explicitly waived 11(b) such that he was engaging in those
waivers from a voluntary and informed perspective.  I find that he was.  The material
had been specifically requested and referenced in correspondence exchanged
between the parties.  Additionally, the Crown took a position relative to the
outstanding disclosure material in March of 2022, indicating it would not be
produced.  At that point in the process, Mr. Kumar, who disagreed with the
position taken by the Crown could have scheduled a
Stinchcombe
application. 
An application he was clearly aware of and referenced in February of 2022, yet scheduled
in November of 2024.
[
28
]
Mr. Kumar also argues the case management
process did not do enough to mitigate the compounding delay on this record. 
Consequently, he asks me to characterize a significant amount of delay caused
by his repeated requests for adjournments in various case management courts as non-deductible. 
Mr. Kumar takes the position that there was a “culture of complacency” present
on this record, which allowed both informations to exceed the ceiling.  Again,
I disagree.  We must be careful not to conflate compassion with complacency.  Mr.
Kumar was not a self-represented litigant who was lost in the criminal intake
process.  In direct contrast, Mr. Kumar was a litigant who appeared frequently
with the assistance of counsel or articulately communicated instructions that
he maintained had been provided to him by counsel.  Mr. Kumar characterized his
retainer of Mr. Micheli as being in the final stages on numerous occasions.  He
made it seem imminent, at one point, expressing his retainer of Mr. Micheli was
mere days away. I have the benefit of reading the transcript of one proceeding
before immediately reading the next.  This is a benefit my colleagues were not
afforded as they presided over this matter.  They were not able to see, as I
am, that Mr. Kumar was calculated in his approach to each court appearance. 
Carefully and articulately repeating his submissions, making it appear as
though his retainer of Mr. Micheli was imminent, with no actual result being
achieved in the background.  I am not persuaded that it was incumbent on my
colleagues to press Mr. Kumar forward in a self-represented fashion. 
Particularly, taking into consideration his repeated assertions, and keeping
the nature of the prosecution he must ultimately answer to front of mind. 
Respectfully, I simply do not see that a “culture of complacency” emerged on
this record.
[
29
]
What I do see is that Mr. Kumar was the author
of this delay, he engineered it.  He expressed absolutely no desire to move his
matters expeditiously through the case management process, in fact, quite the
opposite.  He delayed these matters intentionally, and repeatedly so that he
could fully retain counsel to represent him, which he has now facilitated.  It
is through this lens that the entire record in this matter must be viewed.
[
30
]
I appreciate that considering the period of
delay globally, may also involve assessing the conduct attached to each
information independently.  This will not always be the case; however, on this
record, there was an obvious period of overlap after the second information was
laid on November 16, 2021.  Each information appeared separately, and remained
siloed in its process, until the informations began appearing together on April
12, 2022.  Significantly, deducting the period of explicit 11(b) waiver
attached to information
(21-986)
during this period
has the net effect of compressing the intake period inevitably allotted to
information
(1211210 3328)
in the overall
calculation of delay.
[
31
]
I have considered this overlap carefully and
contextually, and on this evidentiary record, I find compression of the total
intake period characterized as non-deductible delay can be reconciled for two
reasons.  First, when I consider this issue against the backdrop of Mr. Kumar’s
arguments in support of the total period of delay being calculated globally, I
find the nexus between counts, and their stated connection to the same ongoing police
investigation is relevant.  There is obvious overlap with respect to the
disclosure material, which serves to compress the overall intake period
required across all counts globally.  Second, as stated previously, Mr. Kumar
expressed absolutely no desire to expedite his matters through the case
management process.  Even if a traditional intake phase is contemplated with a
view to either information, the defence caused delay far exceeded any
acceptable period of review and was then followed by explicitly waived delay. 
Moreover, it must be remembered that notwithstanding the intake period may
appear compressed with a view to information (1211210 3328), Mr. Kumar still
receives the benefit of the non-deductible delay attached to information
(21-986) in the total calculation.  Again, these informations are being
considered globally.
[
32
]
Given the overall conduct of Mr. Kumar and
counsel prior to Ms. Kushnir, I find it is appropriate to deduct
all
explicitly
waived or defence-caused delay from the total period of delay on this record. 
Non-deductible delay will be allotted for a compressed amount of global intake,
the time required to schedule one judicial pretrial on July 7, 2023, and the
time required to schedule trial dates in the Ontario Court of Justice on
October 18, 2024.
Conclusion:
[
33
]
In the result, the total delay is
1633 days
.  The defence delay to be
subtracted (explicitly waived and defence-caused) is
1108
days
, leaving the net delay at
525 days
(17.3 months)
.  Therefore, the delay in this matter does not exceed the ceiling
outlined in
R .v. Jordan
, and I do not find it to be unreasonable on
this record.  Mr. Kumar’s rights as protected by
Section 11(b)
of the
Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
have not been violated.  Mr. Kumar’s
application is dismissed, and these matters will proceed to trial.
Released:  June
26, 2025
Justice
Jennifer Campitelli