Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj264/2025oncj264.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Bakker
, 2025 ONCJ 264
DATE: 
2025 05 13
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region  998 23 21101422
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
Victoria Bakker
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on January 3 & April 28, 2025
Reasons
for Sentence released on May 13, 2025
Mr. H. Limheng.................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Mr. M. Bury.....................................................................................  
counsel for the accused
De Filippis,
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
What is the right sentence when an otherwise good
person suddenly commits a crime that results in catastrophe?
[
2
]
Victoria Bakker caused the death of a boy, Lucas
Thomas, and bodily harm to his mother, Rosalie Thomas.  The impact of this
event on others, especially the family of Lucas Thomas, is devastating. 
Victoria Bakker pleaded guilty.  Her remorse is genuine and substantial. Her
suffering cannot be compared to that of those who love Lucas Thomas, but it is
significant and long lasting.
[
3
]
The sentence I impose cannot bring back Lucas
Thomas.  Moreover, I doubt that any of the sentence options available to me can
do much to ease the pain experienced by all concerned.  The gift of healing,
which I hope, in time, will come, will happen through strong family bonds and
faith.  I have this hope because of the evidence before me at the sentence
hearing in this matter.
[
4
]
What I can do – it is my duty – is to impose a
sentence that accords with the fundamental principles set out in the
Criminal
Code
and the guidance provided by other Courts in similar tragic cases.  These
reasons explain why I conclude that the right sentence is two years (less one
day) of house arrest, community service work, and a seven-year driving
prohibition.
THE OFFENCE
[
5
]
The following is the agreed statement of facts in this matter:
This document forms the factual
basis for the guilty plea of Victoria Bakker (DOB: May 4, 1991, 31 years old at
time of incident) to 1 count of Dangerous Operation of a Conveyance causing
Death contrary to
section 320.13(3)
of the
Criminal Code
and 1 count of
Dangerous Operation of Conveyance causing Bodily Harm contrary to
section
320.13(2)
of the Criminal Code arising from events that occurred on March 30,
2023.
On March 30, 2023, at
approximately 5:30pm, Victoria Bakker was operating a Jeep Wrangler motor
vehicle eastbound on the Queen Elizabeth Highway (QEW). Ms Bakker’s Jeep drove
directly into the rear of a 2017 Honda CRV being operated by Rosalie Thomas,
and containing passengers 10 year old twins Lucas and Ethan Thomas. As a result
of the collision, the Thomas motor vehicle spun uncontrollably into the rear of
a 2019 Honda CRV being operated by April Canning. Rosalie Thomas received
serious injuries as a result of the collision. Lucas Thomas died as a result of
injuries caused by the collision. April Canning received minor injuries.
Approximate alignment
at impact between the Jeep Wrangler and
2017 Honda CR-V based on photos taken with the UAV
Approximate
collision sequence of the 2017 Honda CR-V
The QEW in this location, near
Tufford Road in the Town of Lincoln, is a 3-lane highway, with posted speed
limit of 110km/h. At the time of the collision, the weather was clear, and
roadway dry. Traffic was heavy and slowing as a result of normal volume of
vehicles at this time of day.
An analysis of the internal
crash-data recording device of the vehicles showed that prior to the collision,
the Thomas and Canning vehicles were braking and slowing in accordance with the
speed and level of traffic on the highway.  The Thomas vehicle was travelling
22km/h and the Canning vehicle was travelling 9km/h.
The analysis for the Bakker
vehicle showed it was travelling 123km/h prior to the collision. There is no
evidence of any braking or evasive activity from the Bakker vehicle prior to
the collision.
There is no evidence of any
mechanical or roadway defect that contributed to this collision.
Victoria
Bakker told police that she was on a handsfree phone call when another call
came in. She was attempting to put the incoming call through to voicemail prior
to collision. As a result, Victoria Bakker failed to recognize the slowing
traffic ahead and took no steps to avoid or mitigate the collision.
By driving above highway
speeds, and failing to maintain proper attention to the roadway, and taking no
steps to avoid the collision, Victoria Bakker’s driving conduct was dangerous
to others on the roadway, a marked departure from a driver in the
circumstances, and the significant contributing cause to injuries to Rosalie
Thomas and the death of Lucas Thomas.
THE VICTIMS
[
6
]
Eleven individuals prepared victim impact
statements.  All but one chose to personally read them in the packed courtroom.
 When a person is tragically killed there is often an understandable
instinct for vengeance.  That was not what I heard.  What I heard was the anguish and sorrow of these eleven victims.  I will do my best to
summarize these powerful statements.
[
7
]
Rosalie Thomas is the mother of Lucas Thomas. The first few
paragraphs of her statement capture the enormity her suffering:
There is no way to truly
express the depth of my pain, the weight of my grief, or the permanent hole
that has been left in my heart. My life, my family's life, and everything we
once knew has been shattered beyond repair.
Physically, I endured a
fractured neck and rib, injuries that required hospitalization, physiotherapy,
and chiropractic care. But the physical pain is nothing compared to the
emotional suffering I endure every single day. I cannot drive on highways
anymore. I've had panic attacks causing me to have to turn around and go home.
I am forced to take a lower-paying job close to home because my independence
was stolen from me. Even the simplest things-things I once took for
granted-have become a struggle.
But the hardest part is the
loss of my son, Lucas.
There is no greater pain than
losing a child. It is a grief that has no end, no relief, and no way to fix
what has been broken. My life will forever be divided into two parts: before
and after. Before, when Lucas was here, when our family was whole. And
after-this endless, hollow existence where nothing feels complete.
[
8
]
Robert Thomas is the father of Lucas Thomas.  He described the
impact on a family member that need not be repeated here for privacy reasons. 
His statement also included these comments:
The moment that my son Lucas
was taken from us, I felt the very essence of my life shatter. A piece of me
died that night, and nothing-nothing-has been the same since. Lucas wasn't just
my son. His laughter, his curiosity, his energy-these were the things that
filled our home with life. He was my little boy, my pride and joy, and losing
him has left an emptiness that I will never be able to fill.
The accident caused by Ms.
Bakker, which took the life of my son, Lucas, has devastated our family in ways
that words can hardly capture….
…..
I will never be the same. I
miss Lucas every second of every day.
My hope is that we can move
forward as my smart daughter once said to me, although we can never move on.
Lucas will be a part of our lives forever, just not in the way we wanted.
[
9
]
Caitlyn Thomas is the sister of Lucas Thomas.  She told me the
following:
March 30, 2023, was the day my
life changed forever. A part of me will always be missing-one that can never be
replaced. Not a single day goes by that I don't think about my brother, Lucas,
and how much I miss him. In his short time on this earth, he touched so many
lives, and no matter what, he will always be a part of me.
……
No matter how much time passes,
the loss will always be there. But so will my love for him.
[
10
]
Ethan Thomas is the twin brother of Lucas Thomas.  He is 12 years
old.  He read his statement to me, including the following:
The day of
the
accident
was
the
worst day
of
my
life.
That day
I lost
my
brother, Lucas Thomas, and
he was my best
friend. We were very close and
we
did
everything together….
I'm
scared of
dying and
of
mom
and
dad
dying. I don't
want
anyone
else
to
die
but
I
think I will
be
next because I am
the second child.
I
think of
mom and
dad dying each day and
it
scares me.
I
am helping mom
and
dad feel more
comfortable
and
I
am
there
for
them.
I
have
to
teach
mom
and
dad to have
dreams
of
Lucas
(my
brother)
because
it
will
make
them
feel better
and
maybe
even
feel
like
he is
still
alive.
At
night
having
dreams
of
Lucas
is
what
makes
me
happy
and
I
want
mom
and
dad
to be
happy
too
.
When
mom
and
dad have
dreams
about
Lucas,
I
want
them
to
feel the
same
way
that
I
do
-
feeling
like Lucas
is
still
alive
and
with
us.
I
have
dreams
about
Lucas
all
the
time.
I
miss
Lucas
a lot
and
I
will
never
have
a
best
friend
like
him
ever
again.
[
11
]
Helen Pelzer is oma to the Thomas children.  Her statement was
read by their opa.  These are the grandparents.  Ms. Pelzer wrote that one is
never prepared for the telephone call we received that their daughter had been
in a car accident…[and]…. the emotional trauma is daily, as we no longer have Lucas
with us….We think of Lucas constantly – he will never be forgotten and we have
that HOPE we will see him again”.
[
12
]
Kevin Krestinski and Lisa Pelzer are uncle and aunt to the Thomas
children.  Having no children of their own, they were overjoyed when the twins
were born. The boys became the centre of their family. They described the
traumatic events of the day when Lucas Thomas died.  Mr. Krestinski said it has
been extremely painful and that he thinks of his nephew every day. He concluded
as follows: “We rest in the promises of our loving God that you are way better
than we could ever be here on earth.  We miss you sweet boy. All that you were was
simply amazing.  You are deeply loved”.  Ms. Pelzer added these comments:
The emotional trauma of the
death of Lucas was too much for me to bear. I could not work for 5 months, I
could not eat, I had constant pain in my stomach, my hair started to fall out,
the stress of his death took a huge emotional toll on me. Social settings were
extremely difficult to be a part of and I lost friendships during this time.
Grief changes everything. I continue to feel like I am in a terrible dream,
hoping that I will wake up and it is all not true. However, it is true, and I
have to live with his loss every day. Through counselling and much prayer, I
have learned how to live with this loss. What a horrible reality that is.
Lucas was so smart, sweet,
silly and sneaky all rolled into one. There will never be another boy like him.
It is so unfair that Lucas is not with us today. A senseless act has taken him
away from us and I will miss him forever.
[
13
]
Jacqueline Thomas and Ian Thomas are aunt and uncle to the Thomas
children. Ms. Thomas said that “Lucas’ death has had a profound and lasting
impact on our family”.  I will not repeat the impact on one family member for
privacy reasons.  Her husband, Mr. Thomas added these comments:
Trying to support my brother
through something no parent should ever have to endure has had a profound
emotional impact on me. It has changed how I view life, how I interact with my
own children and how I approach each day. Even now, months later, just thinking
about that night can bring me to tears.
…..
I often think of Lucas. His
absence is still so deeply felt. I continue to be there for my brother-always a
set of ears when he needs to talk. The struggle of losing Lucas is one that
never goes away. It's something we carry, quietly but constantly, every day.
[
14
]
April Canning was the driver of the second motor
vehicle involved in the collision.  Her daughter was in the vehicle.  Ms.
Canning provided a detailed account of the impact of the terrible event.  She
noted that, “[t]his accident has changed me in every imaginable way.
Physically, emotionally, professionally, socially. I am not who I used to be. I
live each day with anxiety, sadness, fear, and an overwhelming sense of loss. I
grieve for the boy who passed away, for his family, and for the parts of myself
and my life and daughter that were taken from us on that day.” Ms. Canning has
also suffered financially because of lost employment opportunities and medical
bills.
[
15
]
Jennifer DeCoff is the Principal at St. Mark Catholic Elementary
School.  She described how the news of Lucas Thomas’ death profoundly affected
the school community.  To honour his memory it was decided to create a garden in
front of the school, made possible by $20,000 in donations.  Ms. DeCoff reported
that,
On
Friday, June 21,
Lucas'
Garden was
blessed by
Father Paul McNeil,
with the
Thomas family,
Lucas'
classmates, chaplains, and
staff in
attendance
.
This
space is
used daily by
many children,
and
I hear their laughter while
playing,
just
as
Lucas
would
have.
THE OFFENDER
[
16
]
A presentence report was prepared with respect
to Ms. Bakker.  Ms. Bakker is 33 years old.  She had a good childhood in a
family that has always been close.  Christian values and religion were a
significant part of her upbringing.  She does not consume illicit drugs and may
have alcohol once or twice a month.
[
17
]
Ms. Bakker has been in a romantic relationship with
Scott Pocock for six years.  There are no children.  She works two days a week
as a hairstylist and three days a week as a dental hygienist.  Ms. Bakker has
the strong support of a large group of family and friends.  In addition, she relies
on psychotherapy services to address her feelings of guilt and anxiety.
[
18
]
Ms. Bakker does not have a prior criminal
record.  She has seven prior provincial offences; two related to motor vehicle
insurance and five for speeding within a range of between 10 and 15 kilometres
per hour over the legal limit.
[
19
]
The author of the presentence report made the
following observations:
The subject accepted full
responsibility
for
her
actions
in
relation
to
the
offences
currently
before
the
Court
and
it
was clear
the
accident had a major impact on Ms. Bakker. The subject became visibly upset
when expressing her regret and sadness and noted “if she could, she would go
back and change the events of that day”. Ms. Bakker recognized the victim’s
family’s profound loss and the immense grief the family is going through. The
subject wished “she could take away the family’s pain” and acknowledged she too
will carry the mental and emotional consequences of the accident for the rest
of her life.
…….
The subject doesn’t appear to
have unstructured free time as she maintains
full-time employment as
a
dental
hygienist
and
hairstylist,
while
operating
her
own
small
business
and
working
occasionally
for her
family’s nursery.
…….
Ms. Bakker has no significant
issues or particular needs that would indicate a risk of her committing another
criminal offence in the future. While the subject is deemed a suitable
candidate for community
supervision,
it
is
assessed
that
Ms.
Bakker
would
not
benefit
from
or
require
any
services Probation and Parole could
provide at this time. Instead, it appears the subject could benefit from
continued participation in one-to-one counselling with a psychotherapist to
address the guilt and consequences associated with the incident before the
Court.
[
20
]
Thirty-two people wrote letters in support of
Ms. Bakker.  They include her family, friends, and co-workers.  All describe a
person, known to most as Tori, as a person of good character, who is kind,
loyal, and industrious. She is the favourite aunt to many nieces and nephews. The
few excerpts below convey the sentiments of all with respect to the impact of this
terrible event on her.
[
21
]
John Bakker is the father of Victoria Bakker. He
noted that his son brought his daughter to his home after the collision and
reported the following:
I cannot begin
to explain the grief and sorrow at that time. When she later learned that the
child she saw taken from the accident had died, she was inconsolable. For a
long time, she was unable to speak to anyone. For many weeks she would stay in
bed weeping. This grief has not left Tori, it never will. A life has been lost
of the child who died in this accident, but life has also been lost in my
daughter Tori. Her grief will go on. Tori says that she is willing to deal with
whatever punishment she is given as a result of this accident. I believe this
too is because of her character, a willingness to suffer for another. But I
would ask that consideration be given to the punishment that she has already
been given. One that she will live with forever.
I know that we
cannot bring comfort to the family who has lost their son, and I cannot begin
to imagine the great sorrow. But I do understand the love a parent has for a
child and I do know the grief a parent goes through when you see your child
broken by what has happened.
It is my
understanding that this family knows who their Lord and Savior is and it is my
hope that He will be the one to give them hope. For that is the only true
solution to the brokenness we face.
[
22
]
Renee Bakker is the mother of Victoria Bakker.
She noted that:
It was a shock
to learn of the horrific accident Tori was involved in and later learning that
a young boy had lost his life. The horror Tori felt at that moment I can only
describe as inconsolable, distraught and guilt ridden. She stayed at our house
for over a week. She couldn't sleep, couldn't work, she felt worthless. This
has had a profound effect on her.
……
I can not
imagine and don't want to minimize what it's like to lose a child and what the
family has and is going through. I truly am so sorry for their loss. It is my
prayer that this family over time will find healing and forgiveness from the
loss of their son. There is not a day that goes by that Tori doesn't think
about all that has happened and feels such regret.
In my eyes,
Tori is already serving a life sentence….
[
23
]
Brenda Thomson is a retired dental hygienist who
has known Victoria Bakker for several years and is the mother of her partner.  She
described the offender as “a sweet and gentle soul” and added that the “depth
of her remorse, her regret, will be forever life changing”.
[
24
]
Lucy D’Addario Belchoir has known Victoria
Bakker for many years.  She wrote as follows:
Professionally,
I serve as the Regional Director for Children Services at the YMCA of Niagara.
I have worked as a leader with the YMCA for my 31 years of employment. I am
deeply connected to the Niagara community especially our elementary schools in
the region. I have been involved with St. Mark School, for over 20 years. I
remember the day I heard about the accident which resulted in the heartbreaking
loss of a child who attended St. Mark School, almost a day later, I was
heartbroken again, when I learned the accident also involved Tori. The impact
of this loss on the school community has been profound. The beautiful front
garden was created in loving remembrance of the child, serving as a constant
tribute to his life. As a mother of two, I can only imagine how devastating it
is to lose a child. This is a tragedy, but an additional tragedy would be to
forget about Tori, as a child of a wonderful family as well.
…..
When the
accident occurred, Tori was completely forthcoming about what happened. She did
not attempt to make excuses or shift blame, as some might have done. She could
have cited external factors such as the sun in her eyes or a sneezing episode,
but she did not. Tori's honesty and responsibility are cornerstones of her
character, and she has fully acknowledged the tragic outcome of the accident.
She now faces the burden of that event, which is a heavy emotional toll to
bear.
[
25
]
Before this matter was taken under reserve, Ms.
Bakker apologized to the victims and others present in Court.  She began to cry
and was unable to say more.
SUBMISSIONS
[
26
]
The Crown suggests that the range of sentence in
this matter is two to four years in the penitentiary and submits that a
two-year jail sentence, along with a seven-year driving prohibition, for Ms.
Bakker accounts for the mitigating circumstances.  Counsel acknowledges that the
offender is a good person apart from this horrible incident and that the only
sentencing principles at play in this case are denunciation and general
deterrence.
[
27
]
The Crown points out that Ms. Bakker was driving on a busy
highway and indifferent to what was going on in front of her and was speeding “albeit
slightly over the limit”.  Moreover her “modest driving record” may indicate a
“cavalier attitude about the rules [of the road]”.  Counsel adds that the
mitigating facts – the guilty plea, remorse, and strong family support – does
not diminish Ms. Bakker’s moral blameworthiness.
[
28
]
The Crown filed statistics that show an
increase, over the past 10 years, in non-impaired dangerous driving causing
death and bodily harm cases. Driving is a highly regulated activity.  It
is a privilege that requires care and judgement.  Counsel added that the 2018
amendments to the
Criminal Code
signal Parliament’s intention that
sentences in these cases should increase.
[
29
]
The Crown acknowledges that a conditional sentence order (CSO) is
available for these offences.  While opposing such a disposition, counsel
submits that if it is imposed, it should be for the maximum period, along with
community service and a twelve-year driving prohibition.
[
30
]
The Defence submits that a CSO in the range of
eighteen months to two years less one day (the maximum) is appropriate, along
with community service and a driving prohibition up to three- and one-half
years.  In support of this submission, counsel reviewed the “positive”
presentence report and the letters of reference and emphasized the mitigating
factors and significant impact of this event on the offender.
ANALYSIS
[
31
]
In imposing sentence, I am guided by Part XXIII of the
Criminal
Code
.
Section 718.1
is especially important: “A sentence must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender”.
[
32
]
Doherty J.A. of the Court of Appeal for Ontario stated in
R.
v. Hamilton
2004 ONCA 5549 (CanLII) that:
[90] The
"gravity of the offence" refers to the seriousness of the offence in
a generic sense as reflected by the potential penalty imposed by Parliament and
any specific features of the commission of the crime which may tend to increase
or decrease the harm or risk of harm to the community occasioned by the offence….
[91] The
"degree of responsibility of the offender" refers to the offender's
culpability as reflected in the essential substantive elements of the offence
-- especially the fault component -- and any specific aspects of the offender's
conduct or background that tend to increase or decrease the offender's personal
responsibility for the crime….
[92] In
R.
v. Priest
….Rosenberg J.A. described the proportionality requirement in this
way:
The principle of
proportionality is rooted in notions of fairness and justice. For the
sentencing court to do justice to the particular offender, the sentence imposed
must reflect the seriousness of the offence, the degree of culpability of the
offender, and the harm occasioned by the offence. The court must have regard to
the aggravating and mitigating factors in the particular case. Careful
adherence to the proportionality principle ensures that this offender is not
unjustly dealt with for the sake of the common good.
[93] Fixing a
sentence that is consistent with
s. 718.1
is particularly difficult where
the gravity of the offence points strongly in one sentencing direction and the
culpability of the individual offender points strongly in a very different
sentencing direction. The sentencing judge must fashion a disposition from
among the limited options available which take both sides of the
proportionality inquiry into account. As indicated in Priest, supra, factors
which may accentuate the gravity of the crime cannot blind the trial judge to
factors mitigating personal responsibility. Equally, factors mitigating
personal responsibility cannot justify a disposition that unduly minimizes the
seriousness of the crime committed.
[
33
]
Crown and Defence counsel brought many cases to
my attention to assist in this most difficult matter. I have read them.  No two
cases are identical.  Most are distinguishable.  The following ones are
similar, but the results differ. This reflects how fact driven sentencing is in
such cases. Indeed, the Court of Appeal for Ontario, recently noted in
R v
Lojovic
2025 ONCA 319
that, “The circumstances of these types of
offences vary significantly and each sentence must be tailored to the specific
circumstances of each case”
[
34
]
In cases similar to the present one, jail
sentences were imposed in
R. v. Vaziri,
[2004] O.J. No. 327
(fifteen months and a five year driving prohibition) and
R v Kirkpatrick
2018 ONCJ 208
(
14 months and a two
year driving prohibition). A CSO was
imposed in
R v Hutchison
2022 ONCJ
276
(the maximum and a ten year driving prohibition),
R v He
2022 ONSC
2100
(18 months and a three and one-half year driving prohibition) and
R
v Beedawia
2024 ONSC 3247
(the maximum and a three year driving
prohibition).
[
35
]
I note the following comments in
R v
Beedawia
[45]  I acknowledge that the
2018 legislative amendments were intended as a clear direction to trial judges
that the range of sentence for convictions for dangerous driving offences must
increase.   However, had Parliament intended to remove the
availability of a conditional sentence altogether, it would have done so
expressly by providing for a minimum term of imprisonment. It did not do
so.  A conditional sentence remains available if the circumstances
establish that same would be fit and appropriate.
…..
[48]  
  The Ontario Court of Appeal commented upon blameworthy conduct for
dangerous driving offences in
R. v. L. (J.
at para. 3 where it was stated:
...the particular offence is
very much driven by individual factors, especially the blameworthiness of the
conduct. The more that the conduct tends towards demonstrating a deliberate endangerment
of other users of the road and pedestrians, the more serious the offence and
the more likely that a lengthy prison term will be required.
…..
[62]  
  The problem in crafting an appropriate sentence in a case like this
is that the court is faced with, on the one hand, the untimely and tragic
death of a young child.  The experience of losing a child in these
circumstances is beyond the imaginable. On the other hand, the court must
impose a sentence on a relatively youthful, extremely remorseful offender
having low moral blameworthiness, with a young family who are dependent on his
emotional and financial support, and who comes before the court for the first,
and what I anticipate will be the last, time.
[
36
]
In all the above cases, the sentence imposed, whether to jail or
under house arrest, was in the reformatory range; that is, up to two years,
less one day.  Having regard to the aggravating and mitigating factors in the
present case, I find that to be a proportionate sentence in the present case.
[
37
]
The seriousness of this offence can scarcely be overstated.  It
is a tragedy for all concerned.  Primarily so for the family of Lucas Thomas. 
An extended family is devastated.  Tragic as well for Ms. Bakker who is
painfully aware of the harm she has caused and is consumed with guilt.
[
38
]
The Crown says the mitigating effect of Ms.
Bakker’s good background does not diminish her moral blameworthiness. I
disagree. In any event, the nature and extent of her misconduct in this offence
is relevant to blameworthiness.
[
39
]
Ms. Bakker was not under the influence of alcohol or involved in other
high-risk behaviour such as making frequent and abrupt lane changes, street
racing or road rage.  That she was speeding
–
123
km/hr in a 110/hr zone – is relevant but not significant. The reason this
terrible event happened is that she was not paying attention to what was in
front of her such that she collided into the victim’s vehicle without any
attempt to brake.  Given the agreed statement of facts it reasonable to conclude
that her distraction was relatively brief in time.  Indeed, her misconduct is
less than that of the offenders in all cases referenced above. Of course, these observations about the offender do not alter
the seriousness of the offence.
[
40
]
The record before me makes it clear that there is no need for the
Court to act to specifically deter Ms. Bakker from future criminal activity or
assist in her rehabilitation.  The only issues at play are denunciation and
general deterrence; that is, the sentence must condemn what Ms. Bakker has done
and send a warning message to others. In many, if not most, cases only a jail
sentence can send that message. The present case is an exception.
[
41
]
In balancing the seriousness of this offence – at the highest end
of the spectrum – with the moral blameworthiness of this offender – at the
lower end of the spectrum – I conclude that a CSO is justified and
appropriate.
[
42
]
Section 742.1 of the
Code
lists four criteria that a court must
consider before deciding to impose a conditional sentence: (1) the offender
must be convicted of an offence that is not punishable by a minimum term of
imprisonment; (2) the court must impose a term of imprisonment of less than two
years; (3) the safety of the community would not be endangered by the offender
serving the sentence in the community; and (4) a conditional sentence would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing set out in
ss. 718 to 718.2.  There is no dispute that the first three criteria are met in
this case.  Where the Crown and Defence part company is with respect to whether
a CSO in this case serves to denounce and (generally) deter.
[
43
]
Denunciation and deterrence can be reflected through a
conditional sentence, even in the most serious offences. The Court of Appeal
for Ontario explained this in
R. v. Kutsukake
,
2006 CanLII 32593 (ON CA)
, [2006] O.J. 3771, a case
involving criminal negligence causing death.
[
44
]
House arrest is not jail.  It is, however, a significant
restriction on liberty. Moreover, unlike jail, there is no remission.  The
sentence will be served in full, without parole.
[
45
]
The CSO will be for the maximum term allowable, and the house
arrest will be for the duration of that term.  The house arrest and
exceptions to it will be subject to electronic monitoring.  The sentence is
punitive, effective, and meaningful.
CONCLUSION
[
46
]
Ms. Bakker will serve a conditional sentence for a period of two
years, less one day, in accordance with the electronic supervision program and
subject to these terms:
Report immediately to a
supervisor of conditional sentence orders and thereafter, as required;
Perform 240 hours of community
service work, to begin within 60 days and to be completed at not less than ten hours
per month;
With respect to the exceptions
to house arrest, I note that Ms. Bakker is a single woman who lives in an
apartment with her three-year-old Golden Retriever.  This order lasts for two
years.  There will be a limited exception to accommodate this fact.  Ms. Bakker
will have to rely on family and friends to take care of the dog at other
times.
Remain on the property her
residence, except as follows;
i)  
  Medical emergencies;
ii)   To go
directly, to and from, and be at employment, religious observance, community
service work, counselling, medical and legal appointments;
iv)   To shop for
the necessities of life for a four-hour period per week;
v)  To be outside with her dog
for a one-hour period each day
vi)   Except for
medical emergencies, she must provide the dates and times for the forgoing
exceptions to the supervisor, in advance of such activities.
vii)   For any other
exceptional purpose that may be approved of by the supervisor.
[
47
]
In addition, Ms. Bakker is prohibited from driving for a period
of seven years. She will provide a sample of her DNA and pay the victim fine
surcharge within 60 days.
Released:  May 13, 2025
Signed:
Justice J. De Filippis