Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj376/2025oncj376.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. McCausland
, 2025
ONCJ 376
DATE:  2025·07·14
OTTAWA
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
NATHANIEL
MCCAUSLAND
ABUSE OF PROCESS APPLICATION
Evidence and Submissions Heard: July
3,14, 2025.
Reasons Delivered: July 14, 2025.
Mr. Lorne Goldstein.........................................................  
counsel for the Crown/Respondent
Mr. David Anber..............................................................  
counsel for the Defendant/Applicant
KENKEL J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
On April 21, 2023, Mr. McCausland crashed
into an OC Transpo bus. He is charged with Impaired Operation Causing Bodily
Harm, Dangerous Operation Causing Bodily Harm and six
Highway Traffic Act
offences. The trial is scheduled to commence September 2, 2025.
[
2
]
Mr. McCausland applies for a stay of
proceedings or other remedy under s 24(1) of the
Charter
for an alleged
abuse of process. He submits that the Crown offered a plea agreement to resolve
these charges by way of a conditional sentence. The Crown subsequently reneged
on that offer in circumstances so tainted by bad faith or improper motive that
to allow the Crown to proceed to trial on these charges would tarnish the
integrity of the judicial system and thus amount to an abuse of process.
[
3
]
This application was heard on July 3, 2025.
The defence completed their evidence on the application, but there wasn’t time
to hear the Crown’s evidence. The Crown applied at that point for dismissal of
the application as the defence had failed to show that there was a plea
agreement. The Crown agreed that if its application failed, they would be bound
by the finding that there was a plea agreement that was reneged upon and would
not be permitted to revisit that point when the application continued with
their evidence.
[
4
]
There are three potential issues for decision.
The applicant must show that a plea agreement was offered, entered into by the
defendant and subsequently revoked by the Crown. Once that has been
established, the evidentiary burden shifts to the Crown to show the
circumstances behind that decision. The ultimate burden of proving an abuse of
process remains on the applicant –
R v Nixon,
2011 SCC 34
at para
63
. If the applicant proves there has been an
abuse of process, the third step would be to determine the appropriate remedy
under s 24(1). The “clearest of cases” test would apply to the request for a
stay of proceedings –
R v Nixon
at paras 37, 42.
[
5
]
I agreed with the Crown that as the defence
evidence on this application was complete, and the Crown was not seeking to
call evidence on this point, it would be logical and efficient to rule on the
threshold issue. The further issues arise only if the applicant has proved the
existence of an agreement subsequently revoked by the Crown. If an agreement is
proved, then the next phase of the hearing would focus entirely on the Crown’s
reasons for repudiation and the remedy if those reasons are shown to amount to
an abuse of process.
[
6
]
On the last day, full submissions on the
Crown’s motion were heard from both counsel. Mr. McCausland then asked to speak
to the matter directly and add further points. He was permitted to do so, and permitted
to do so today his comments showed that he followed the application closely.
[
7
]
After the matter was adjourned for a ruling,
I am advised Mr. McCausland discharged his counsel. He is representing himself
for any further proceedings in relation to this application.
Abuse of Process
[
8
]
Courts have a duty to protect the integrity
of the justice system by dissociating themselves from state conduct that
constitutes an abuse of the judicial process –
R v Brunelle,
2024 SCC 3
at para
1
. Abuse of process refers to Crown conduct that is egregious and
seriously compromises trial fairness (main category) and/or conduct that
affects the integrity of the trial justice system (residual category).
[
9
]
The decision to resile from a plea agreement
falls within the scope of prosecutorial discretion, reviewable only for abuse
of process. “In the absence of any prosecutorial misconduct, improper motive or
bad faith in the approach, circumstances, or ultimate decision to repudiate,
the decision to proceed with the prosecution is the Crown's alone to make.
Reasonable counsel may … differ on whether a particular disposition is in the
public interest in the circumstances of the case.”  –
R v Nixon,
2011
SCC 34
at para
68
. The repudiation of plea agreements should nevertheless be a
rare occurrence.
The Evidence
[
10
]
The applicant’s evidence of a plea agreement
is based on the testimony of the defence lawyer acting for Mr. McCausland at
that time, Mr. Jason Gilbert. Mr. Gilbert was a credible witness who testified
in a detailed and thoughtful manner. I fully accept his testimony.
[
11
]
On September 14, 2023, Mr. Gilbert attended
bail court in Ottawa and spoke with an Assistant Crown Attorney (hereinafter
“the bail Crown”). He advised the Crown that Mr. McCausland was seriously
injured in the crash and the bail Crown was sympathetic. Release terms were
agreed upon, but Mr. Gilbert testified that the Crown went further and said
that he thought the charges could be resolved by way of a conditional sentence.
The bail Crown invited Mr. Gilbert to provide information about Mr.
McCausland’s medical condition that might support such an approach and that
might help the Crown “justify that position” to others in his office.
[
12
]
Mr. Gilbert testified that he “didn’t have a
great recollection of the bail conversation”. That’s understandable given the
context. We don’t really know what was said by either party. There was no email
afterwards confirming details of any plea agreement. However, I accept Mr.
Gilbert’s evidence that the notion of a possible resolution via a conditional
sentence originated solely with the bail Crown. Mr. Gilbert knew nothing of the
case and had simply shared what little information he had about his client’s
injuries as relevant to bail – whether Mr. McCausland continued to pose a
threat to public safety. He had not reviewed the evidence in the case, and he
agreed in cross-examination there was no basis to enter into plea negotiations
at that time. He said, “
It’s not like there was an agreement that Mr.
McCausland would plead
”.
[
13
]
It’s necessary to pause here and consider
the circumstances in detail because this is the “offer” the applicant now seeks
to enforce. The applicant submits that a plea agreement was extended by the Crown
in broad terms during this bail discussion. The “offer” of resolution for a conditional
sentence was ongoing from this point onward. While the defence could not accept
any such “offer” at the bail stage, the applicant submits that subsequent
communication with the bail Crown shows both parties were working on the
details of the proposed resolution.
[
14
]
It’s not plain how or why an Assistant Crown
Attorney in a busy Ottawa bail court would turn their mind to the ultimate resolution
of a serious case at that stage. In considering the applicant’s submission that
a plea agreement was initiated, it’s important to review the details. It does
not appear that the bail Crown could have conducted an assessment of the public
interest so early in the case:
•
The bail Crown knew almost nothing about the
file. The central disclosure document in this case contains 5,072 pages. Both
the bail Crown and defence were working from a few paragraphs in a synopsis
prepared for the bail hearing.
•
The bail Crown did not know the blood alcohol
readings, which are a significant aggravating factor in this case and are
typically essential to the formulation of any Crown resolution position.
•
Mr. Gilbert provided some information about his
client’s injuries, but the bail Crown specifically asked for further detailed
information including treatment information.
•
If the bail Crown had only very limited
information about the accused’s injuries, they had even less information about
the injuries inflicted upon his passenger and the impact of the crash on the
persons in the OCTranspo bus that was hit at 176km/hr. The impact of the
offences upon the victims is typically considered by the office of the Crown
Attorney before the negotiation of a plea agreement.
•
The
Criminal Code
prohibits a conditional
sentence where an accused like Mr. McCausland has been convicted of two previous
impaired driving offences. To enter into an agreement to resolve the matter by
way of a conditional sentence, the bail Crown would have had to first obtain
authorization from the Crown’s office not to file the Notice of Increased
Penalty.  No such authorization was ever given in this case.
[
15
]
Mr. Gilbert recognized that a conditional
sentence would be “highly unusual” in these circumstances and an “exceptional”
sentence. He kept in touch with the bail Crown in the weeks that followed. He
provided further information about Mr. McCausland’s medical conditions and his course
of treatment.
[
16
]
Initially there was communication about a 6-month
conditional sentence. Then in further emails the bail Crown indicated that he
didn’t think a 6-month conditional sentence would be adequate or would be
approved by his office. The bail Crown then considered a 12–18-month
conditional sentence. By November Mr. Gilbert had reviewed the file to the
point where he emailed the Crown to ask whether they could move this matter
towards resolution. The evidence showed Mr. Gilbert was seeking a formal Crown
offer to resolve that he could take to his client for instructions.
[
17
]
That prompted the bail Crown to send an
email overview of the case on November 14, 2023, to a senior Crown Mr. Lem.
That process was referred to indirectly in Mr. Gilbert’s evidence. The email
was directly referred to by Mr. McCausland in his further personal submissions.
The November 14
th
email set out a proposed plea to 4 charges for a
conditional sentence of what was now 2 years less 1 day, 3 years probation and
a 10-year driving prohibition. Further details were provided. Mr. Gilbert’s
evidence shows that the bail Crown’s suggested offer was never approved. The
case was transferred to the senior Assistant Crown Attorney Mr. Lem shortly
afterwards. It was still just two months since the bail hearing.
[
18
]
Mr. Lem advised Mr. Gilbert that the Crown
was proceeding by indictment, and they were seeking a penitentiary sentence.
Resolution discussions continued, but eventually trial dates were set. Mr.
Gilbert was discharged by Mr. McCausland. He was removed as counsel of record
in September of 2024.
Analysis
[
19
]
There’s an important difference between plea
discussions and a plea agreement. The distinction is crucial as courts have no basis
to review the exercise of core Crown discretion during plea negotiations. It is
only where a plea agreement has been offered, accepted by the defence then
subsequently revoked that the court has a limited jurisdiction to review Crown
conduct for a potential abuse of process.
[
20
]
There’s no evidence of a plea agreement in
this case. Although resolution discussions were initiated by the bail Crown, the
evidence as to that discussion is vague. The subsequent emails and discussions never
progressed to the point where the Crown made an offer to the defence indicating
the counts on which the accused was to plead guilty, the facts that had to be
admitted, the exact sentence the Crown was seeking, the fact that the Crown
would not tender the notice that would preclude a conditional sentence, the
specific terms of any conditional sentence, the length and terms of any
probation and the ancillary orders the Crown would be seeking. There was never
any authorization given to the bail Crown to make such an offer to the defence.
[
21
]
Mr. McCausland is correct that the email he
referred to in his further personal submissions does contain specific
information that could amount to a Crown resolution offer. However, the Crown’s
office did not approve that suggestion, and it was never conveyed to the
defence.
[
22
]
Contrast the “plea agreement” in this case
with the circumstances in
Nixon.
In that case the Crown’s resolution
offer came after a preliminary hearing where both parties were fully informed
about the circumstances of the case. The Assistant Crown Attorney obtained
advice from colleagues in the office before making the offer. The Crown sent
the defence counsel for Ms. Nixon a written offer confirming they would accept
a guilty plea to a specific provincial offence for a joint recommendation for a
specific penalty and a withdrawal of the criminal charges –
R v Nixon,
2008
ABPC 20
at para
4
. The defence formally accepted that offer, abandoned their
election for trial by jury, and re-elected trial in the provincial court.
[
23
]
While not every plea agreement is reduced to
writing and signed, details are important. The details are what separate an
idea, direction or “path” of discussion as Mr. Gilbert put it, from an actual
agreement which can be acted upon. As the Superior Court of Justice held in the
context of civil contracts, “Before a court concludes that a contract has been
established, it must be satisfied that the parties concluded their negotiations
and settled the fundamental terms of their bargain” –
Electek Power Services
Inc. v Greenfield Energy Centre Limited Partnership
2022 ONSC 894
at para
106
.
[
24
]
The discussions in this case between the
bail Crown and Mr. Gilbert were simply that – discussions of an idea. For a
plea agreement details matter. The Crown’s position was a moving target,
revised three times as the Crown became aware of the details of the case. It
was plain from the evidence that any offer had to be approved by the Crown’s
office and the bail Crown never obtained that approval.
[
25
]
When the file was assigned to Mr. Lem and
the position of the Crown’s office was conveyed, Mr. Gilbert continued with
case management in a Judicial Pre-Trial meeting and continued discussions with
the Crown’s office. He was not removed as counsel of record until September of
2024. At no time did this very experienced and respected counsel bring an
application alleging an abuse of process for the withdrawal of a plea agreement
he was a party to. That circumstance is not conclusive, lawyers can reasonably
disagree on the merits of a particular argument. However, the fact that the
direct party to the bail conversation and the emails thereafter never suggested
an abuse of process is yet another circumstance consistent with the finding
that there was no plea agreement in this case.
Conclusion
[
26
]
The applicant/defendant has failed to prove
on the balance of probabilities that there was a plea agreement that was
reneged upon by the Crown.
[
27
]
While that is sufficient to conclude the
matter, it’s also worth noting that the applicant’s evidence on this
application is complete and there was no evidence of any Crown misconduct. To
show an abuse of process the defence would have to show Crown conduct that was
unfair, oppressive, tainted by bad faith or improper motive. There was no
evidence of misconduct.
[
28
]
The application is dismissed.
Reasons Released:       July 14, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel