Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj591/2025oncj591.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Bains
, 2025 ONCJ 591
DATE: 
2025 11 10
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto Information #4810 998 25 50002873
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
ARSHDEEP SINGH
BAINS
Before
Justice J. Trehearne
Heard
on September 11 and 12, 2025 and
Reasons
for Judgment released on November 10, 2025
S. Aki..................................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
X. Xu....................................................... counsel
for the accused
Arshdeep Singh Bains
TREHEARNE J.:
I.  Introduction
[
1
]
Mr. Bains stood trial before me on nine counts
of theft under $5,000 contrary to
s.334
(b) of the
Criminal Code of Canada
,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, all counts involving alleged thefts of alcohol from
various LCBO locations between February 8, 2024 and November 24, 2024.  In
addition, Mr. Bains is charged with failing to comply with a Probation Order
contrary to
s.733.1(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
by breaching a condition
not to attend any LCBO location on the date of the last alleged theft on November
24, 2024.  The Crown elected to proceed summarily on all charges.
[i]
[
2
]
The parties very helpfully filed an Agreed
Statement of Fact in this matter, which streamlined the issues on the theft
counts to a single one – that of identity.  There is no dispute that a person
or different people stole the alcohol as alleged from the various LCBO
locations on the various dates set out in the Information.  Nor is there any
dispute as to the value of the goods stolen.  The only question on the theft
counts is whether the Crown proved Mr. Bains’s identity as the thief in
relation to each count beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
3
]
To prove Mr. Bains’s identity as the thief in
each case, the Crown filed video clips taken from surveillance footage from the
various LCBO locations, and asked me to compare Mr. Bains’s appearance in Court
with the appearance of the individual or individuals in the video clips,
pursuant to
R. v. Nikolovski
,
1996 CanLII 158 (SCC)
, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 1197.  In the Crown’s
submission, this exercise reveals that Mr. Bains is the thief, beyond a
reasonable doubt.  In the defence’s submission, this exercise reveals that the
individual in the video clips is different than Mr. Bains, or at least that I
should have a reasonable doubt about whether the individual in the video clips
is Mr. Bains.  The defence conceded the authenticity and continuity of the LCBO
video clips.
[
4
]
The Crown submits in addition, or in the
alternative, that I should compare the appearance of the person or people in
the LCBO video clips to the body worn camera of the officer who arrested Mr.
Bains on these charges, still photos from the booking hall video from 23
Division recorded at the time of Mr. Bains’s arrest on the charges before the
Court, and a mugshot or arrest photo of someone the Crown claims is Mr. Bains.  The
Crown says that this evidence, too, shows that Mr. Bains is the thief on the
dates in question.  The defence did not contest the admissibility of the
officer’s body worn camera, nor of the booking hall video still photos.  The
defence did contest the admissibility of the mugshot or arrest photo.  The
defence further submitted that a comparison of the individual or individuals who
committed the thefts in the LCBO video clips with the body worn camera, booking
video still photos, and mugshot or arrest photo shows Mr. Bains was not the
thief, or at least that I should have a reasonable doubt.
[
5
]
As for the alleged breach of probation, the
defence again challenged whether Mr. Bains’s identity had been established as
the person who breached the Probation Order beyond a reasonable doubt.  As I
understand the defence position, the defence argued not only that (as with the
theft counts) the Crown had failed to prove that Mr. Bains was the person who
entered the LCBO on November 24, 2024, but also that the Crown had failed to
prove that the accused before me was the same person as the person bound by the
Probation Order.
II.  The Foundational Legal Principles Applicable to All Criminal Cases
[
6
]
Every person charged with an offence is presumed
to be innocent, unless and until Crown counsel proves every essential element
of the charge against that person beyond a reasonable doubt: D. Watt, K.C., and
J. Makepeace,
Watt’s Manual of Criminal Jury Instructions, 2024
, Thomson
Reuters Canada Limited, Final 11 – Presumption of Innocence;
R. v. Ménard
,
1998 CanLII 790 (SCC)
, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 109 at ¶23.
[
7
]
The obligation to prove an accused person’s
guilt rests with Crown counsel.  From start to finish, that obligation never
shifts.  A person charged with a criminal offence does not have to present
evidence or prove anything: D. Watt, K.C., and J. Makepeace,
Watt’s Manual
of Criminal Jury Instructions, supra
, Final 12 – Burden of Proof;
R. v.
Lifchus
,
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC)
, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320 at ¶27.
[
8
]
The phrase “beyond a reasonable doubt” is a very
important part of our criminal justice system.  It is one of the principle
safeguards which seeks to ensure that no innocent person is convicted:
R. v.
Lifchus
, supra,
at ¶13.  A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary,
far-fetched, or frivolous doubt.  It is not a doubt based on sympathy for or
prejudice against anyone involved in the trial.  It is a doubt based on reason
and common sense.  It is a doubt that logically arises from the evidence, or
the lack of evidence: D. Watt, K.C., and J. Makepeace,
Watt’s Manual of
Criminal Jury Instructions, supra
, Final 13 – Reasonable Doubt;
R. v.
Lifchus
,
supra,
at ¶¶30-31.
[
9
]
Proof of probable or likely guilt is not proof
of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  However, it is nearly impossible to prove
anything to an absolute certainty.  Crown counsel is not required to do so. 
If, at the end of the case, after considering all the evidence, I am sure that
the accused person committed the offence, I must find that person guilty of it,
since I would have been satisfied of the person’s guilt of that offence beyond
a reasonable doubt.  If, at the end of the case, based on all the evidence or
the lack of evidence, I am not sure that an accused person committed an
offence, I must find the accused person not guilty: D. Watt, K.C., and J.
Makepeace,
Watt’s Manual of Criminal Jury Instructions, supra
, Final 13
– Reasonable Doubt;
R. v. Lifchus
,
supra,
at ¶14, ¶¶31-39.
III.     The Thefts
A.
The evidence
[
10
]
As noted above, the Crown filed video clips from
the surveillance videos from the LCBOs where the thefts occurred on the various
dates in question.  These were marked as numbered Exhibits without objection by
the defence.
[
11
]
In addition, the Crown called Officer Joshua
Regisford as a witness.  Officer Regisford testified that on March 10, 2025, he
arrested Mr. Bains on the charges before the Court.  Officer Regisford
identified Mr. Bains in Court as the person whom he arrested.  He identified
the video from his body worn camera on the date in question, which video was
marked as Exhibit 17 on the proceedings.  Officer Regisford also identified
himself and Mr. Bains in three still photos taken from the booking hall video
from 23 Division at the time of Mr. Bains’s arrest.  These photos were marked
as Exhibits 18A-C on the proceedings.  Officer Regisford agreed that he had
never met Mr. Bains before arresting him on March 10, 2025.  However, the
defence did not dispute that Mr. Bains is the person in Officer Regisford’s body
worn camera video.  Moreover, while the defence did not explicitly concede that
Mr. Bains is the person in the still shots from the 23 Division booking hall
video, neither did the defence suggest that Mr. Bains is not the person in
those still shots, nor cross-examine Officer Regisford to establish that Mr.
Bains is not that person.
[
12
]
Finally, the Crown sought to enter into evidence
an arrest photo or mugshot, which the Crown introduced through DC Borch.  DC
Borch identified the photo as an arrest photo of Mr. Bains taken April 4, 2024,
which he retrieved from a Toronto Police Service database.  DC Borch testified
that he compared this arrest photo to still images from the LCBO videos when
identifying Mr. Bains as the person involved in those thefts.  DC Borch did not
take the arrest photo, nor was he present when it was taken.  He agreed that
his only interaction with Mr. Bains was a fairly brief glance at Mr. Bains when
Mr. Bains was in the cells at 23 Division following his arrest on the charges
before the Court.
B.
The parties’ positions
[
13
]
The Crown’s position was that I should compare
Mr. Bains’s appearance in Court to the individual or individuals in the LCBO
video clips, and that this exercise would reveal that Mr. Bains was the thief
beyond a reasonable doubt.  The Crown further submitted that I should also
compare the individual or individuals in the LCBO video clips with the body
worn camera video of Mr. Bains at the time of his arrest, the still photos of
Mr. Bains at the time of his arrest taken from the 23 Division booking hall
video, and the arrest photo or mugshot of Mr. Bains, and that this exercise
would also reveal that Mr. Bains was the thief beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
14
]
On the question of the admissibility of the mugshot
or arrest photo, the Crown submitted that the arrest photo was authenticated pursuant
to
s.31.1
of the
Canada Evidence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5.
The
Crown submitted that DC Borch identified the photo as one from the Toronto
Police Service database, and that I could compare the appearance of the
individual in the arrest photo to the appearance of Mr. Bains in Court, to the
appearance of Mr. Bains in Officer Regisford’s body worn camera video, and to
the stills taken from the booking hall at 23 Division to authenticate the
mugshot or arrest photo.  The Crown relied on
R. v. George
,
2023 ONCJ
303
.  In that case, the Crown sought to have admitted a photo which provided
evidence of the identity of the shooter.  The Crown asserted confidential
informer privilege over the origin of the photo.  The Crown also introduced
video footage of the same events depicted in the photo, which video was
unchallenged by the defence (see ¶14).  Justice Fraser concluded at ¶22 of
George
that he could compare the background and clothing depicted in the photo with
the video of the same scene to determine whether the photo was authentic.
[
15
]
The defence submitted that a comparison of Mr.
Bains’s appearance in Court to the LCBO video clips should cause me to have a
reasonable doubt on the question of identity.  As for the question of comparing
the appearance of the individual or individuals in the LCBO video clips with
Mr. Bains’s appearance in the body worn camera video and the stills from the 23
Division booking hall video, the defence position was that this was not a
permissible legal exercise.  According to the defence, that sort of comparison
between photos or videos is not what the Court envisaged in
Nikolovski
.
Counsel
pointed out that there are a number of factors which affect how a person
appears in a photo or video, such as the lens used, the lighting, and the
relationship between the person being captured and the person with the camera. 
Thus, such a comparison might not result in reliable identification evidence,
as it is not as high quality as having the very person in Court (as in
Nikolovski
)
to compare to the photo or video of the offence.  Moreover, even if I were
to engage in the exercise of comparing the individual or individuals in the
LCBO video clips to Mr. Bains in the body worn camera and the still photos from
the booking hall video, I should nonetheless have a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Bains is the person in the LCBO video clips.
[
16
]
As for the mugshot, the defence position is that
this photo could not be authenticated through DC Borch, who had no personal
involvement in taking the photo, nor any personal knowledge of whether the date
indicated on the photo was in fact the date it was taken.  The defence further
submitted that I could not authenticate the photo myself in the manner Justice
Fraser did in
George
, because there was no evidence as to how Mr. Bains
looked on the date the mugshot or arrest photo was taken.  In other words, in
George
,
Justice Fraser was asked to compare a known to an unknown, whereas here I
am being asked to conclude that two unknowns corroborate each other.  In the
alternative, if I were to admit the mugshot or arrest photo, its comparison to
the individual or individuals in the LCBO video clips should cause me to have a
reasonable doubt on the issue of identity.
[
17
]
Finally, the defence provided two additional
cautions.  First, the Crown relied heavily on the full lips and strong brow of
the individual in the LCBO video clips, characteristics which Mr. Bains also
has.  However, the defence submitted that these features are common to people
of South Asian descent, and therefore do not help to identify Mr. Bains as the
thief in the LCBO video clips, or at least not to a sufficient extent.  Second,
the defence pointed out that zooming in on the LCBO video clips causes
pixelation, which makes it hard to discern whether one is observing features of
the individual in the video clips, or artifacts of the pixelation.
C.
The applicable legal principles
i.
The legal principles applicable to the
comparison of Mr. Bains’s appearance in Court with the appearance of the person
or people in the LCBO video clips
[
18
]
In
R. v. Nikolovski
,
supra,
at ¶23,
the Supreme Court of Canada made clear that a trier of fact can use video
evidence as the sole basis for the identification of the accused before them as
the perpetrator of the crime.  In fact, as the
Nikolovski
Court
recognized at ¶21, in some ways, video evidence such as that introduced in this
case can provide better evidence than that of an eye witness.  As the
Nikolovski
Court explained, the video tape acts as a silent, trustworthy, unemotional,
unbiased and accurate witness who has complete and instant recall of events. 
In addition, as the Court noted in
R. v. Sheardown
,
2010 ONSC 4235
at ¶36,
unlike a live witness feeling the pressure of an alleged crime as it occurs in
real time, a trier of fact generally has the opportunity to observe the accused
in a well-lit area, free of distraction or undue stress, and can observe the
accused and the comparator video for as long as the trier deems necessary.
[
19
]
However, as the Supreme Court cautioned at ¶¶30-32
of
Nikolovski
, although a trier of fact is entitled to reach a
conclusion on identification based solely on videotape evidence, they must
exercise care in doing so.  A trier of fact should consider the clarity and
quality of the videotape, as well as how long the alleged accused person
appears on the video, in determining whether the accused’s identity as the
perpetrator has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  In addition, where the video
evidence is the only evidence on the question of identity, the trier of fact
must keep that in mind in applying the reasonable doubt standard.  There may be
changes or differences in the appearance of the persons involved.  See also
R.
v. Anderson
,
2025 ONCA 408
at ¶148, and
R. v. C.B.
,
2019 ONCA 380
at
¶102.
[
20
]
I would add to these legal propositions that the
trier of fact must also consider the extent of their opportunity to observe the
accused person in the courtroom in determining whether the Crown has proven
identity beyond a reasonable doubt.  It is only logical that a trier of fact’s
ability to compare the appearance of the perpetrator on video with the
appearance of the accused in Court is affected by the trier of fact’s ability
to observe both.  This proposition was also recognized by my colleague Justice Dellandrea
in
R. v. A.M.
,
2019 ONCJ 835
at ¶165, where the Court held that a trier
of fact’s opportunity to compare the accused to the video evidence will depend
on such things as the length of the proceedings, where the accused person is
positioned in Court, whether the accused person gives evidence from the witness
stand, and the Court’s ability to make simultaneous comparison between the
images and the person.
ii.
The legal principles applicable to the
comparison of the person or people in the LCBO video clips with Mr. Bains’s appearance
in the body worn camera video and the stills from the booking hall video
[
21
]
With respect to the question of whether I can
compare the person or people in the LCBO video clips with Mr. Bains’s
appearance in the body worn camera video and the stills from the booking hall
video, I note that numerous Courts have held that such an exercise is
consistent with, and does not offend, the principles from
Nikolovski
. 
For example, in
R. v. Keating,
2018 ONCJ 1005
at ¶70, affirmed
R. v.
Keating
,
2020 ONCA 242
at ¶¶23-26, the trial Judge compared the accused’s
mugshot with Facebook photos identified by the complainant as the person who
trafficked her to conclude that the accused was the person who trafficked the
complainant.  See also
R. v. Hudson
,
2020 ONCA 507
at ¶¶46-47.
[
22
]
In engaging in the exercise of comparing the
person or people in the LCBO video clips with Mr. Bains’s appearance in the
body worn camera video and the stills from the booking hall video, I will bear
in mind Mr. Xu’s caution that a number of factors can affect how a person
appears in a photo or video.  However, on the other hand, as I noted above, the
Supreme Court of Canada observed in
Nikolovski
at ¶21 that a camera,
unlike an eyewitness, records accurately and dispassionately all that comes
before it, and is akin to an unbiased witness with instant and total recall.  Moreover,
the trier of fact may review the photo or video evidence as often as desired. 
Here, not only has the Crown filed stills from the booking hall video, which
only capture Mr. Bains in static images, but I also have available a fairly
lengthy, and clear, body worn camera video of Mr. Bains as he interacts with the
arresting officer and moves about.  Thus, I can observe Mr. Bains’s mannerisms,
as well as his appearance from various angles.
iii.
The legal principles applicable to the
comparison of the person or people in the LCBO video clips with the person in
the mugshot or arrest photo purported to be of Mr. Bains
[
23
]
I will now turn to the question of the
admissibility of the mugshot or arrest photo which the Crown says depicts Mr.
Bains.
Section 31.1
of the
Canada Evidence Act
provides:
Authentication
of electronic documents
31.1  Any person
seeking to admit an electronic document as evidence has the burden of proving
its authenticity by evidence capable of supporting a finding that the
electronic document is that which it is purported to be.
Section 31.8
of the
Canada Evidence
Act
defines “electronic document” as “data that is recorded or stored… in
or by a computer system”, and includes a “display, printout or other output of
that data”.
[
24
]
In
R. v. C.B.
,
supra,
at ¶¶63-68
and ¶78, the Court of Appeal for Ontario explained that at common law,
authentication requires the introduction of
some
evidence that the item
is what it purports to be.  The requirement is not onerous, and may be
established by either or both of direct and circumstantial evidence.  Under
s.31.1 of the
Canada Evidence Act
, the party who seeks to admit an
electronic document has the burden of proving its authenticity.  To meet the
burden, the party must adduce evidence
capable
of supporting a finding
that the electronic document is what it purports to be.  As at common law, the
threshold to be met is low.  When the threshold is satisfied, the electronic
document is admissible.  However, it does not follow from admissibility that
the trier of fact must find that the evidence is, in fact, what it claims to
be.  The trier of fact must still decide what weight, if any, to assign to the
evidence.
[
25
]
If the mugshot or arrest photo were to be
admitted in this case, then I can consider to what extent I should give it any
weight.  If I choose to give it some weight, the same principles would apply as
set out above in section III(C)(ii) of these Reasons, allowing me to compare
the appearance of Mr. Bains in the mugshot with the appearance of the person or
persons in the LCBO video clips.
iv.
The legal principles applicable to the question
of cross-racial identification
[
26
]
Finally, I note that Mr. Bains and I appear to
be from different ethnic or racial backgrounds, and I remind myself that
cross-racial mis-identification is a well-recognized danger:
R. v. Smith
,
2025 ONCA 494
at ¶15;
R. v. Richards
,
2004 CanLII 39047 (ON CA)
, [2004] O.J. No. 2096 (C.A.) at ¶32. 
In
R. v. Ali
,
2021 ONCA 277
at ¶15, the Court of Appeal for Ontario
expressed some hesitation that this danger necessarily presents itself in a
situation such as this, in which the trier of fact has video clips they can
watch and re-watch, as opposed to a situation in which an eye witness testifies
as to their observations of an event.  Nonetheless, I have cautioned myself to
be mindful of this concern in assessing the evidence in this case.
D.
The legal principles applied
i.
What was not evidence of identity in this case
[
27
]
I want to start my analysis by clarifying what
evidence I did not consider on the question of identity in this case.  In
particular, I did not consider the evidence of Officer Borch that he had
satisfied himself that the person or people involved in the thefts is Mr.
Bains.  In
R. v. Leaney,
1989 CanLII 28 (SCC)
, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 393 at p. 413, the Supreme
Court of Canada held that a trial judge may admit the
viva voce
evidence
of a witness who identifies a person on a video as the accused person. 
However, the witness must have a prior acquaintance with the accused person,
such that he would be in a better position than the Court to identify the
accused person in the video clips:
R. v. Leaney
,
supra,
at p.
413;
R. v. Brown
,
2006 CanLII 42683 (ON CA)
, [2006] O.J. No. 5077 (C.A.) at ¶39. Officer Borch did
not testify to having a prior acquaintance with Mr. Bains, such that he would
be in a better position than the Court to identify Mr. Bains in the LCBO video
clips.  Nor did he go through each theft incident and explain how or why he
concluded that Mr. Bains was involved.
[
28
]
In addition, the Crown did not bring a similar
fact Application in this case.  As such, I did not consider the evidence across
counts.
[
29
]
Having made those two clarifying points on the
issue of identity, I will now turn to my application of the principles in
R.
v. Nikolovski
,
supra,
by which I compared the appearance of Mr.
Bains in Court to the appearance of the person or people in the LCBO videos committing
the various thefts in question.
ii.
A comparison of Mr. Bains in Court to the person
or people in the LCBO video clips
[
30
]
On the basis of the exercise of comparing Mr.
Bains in Court to the person or people in the LCBO video clips standing alone, I
am left in a reasonable doubt about whether Mr. Bains is the person in the LCBO
videos.  The following circumstances of my observations of Mr. Bains in Court made
it impossible for me to conclude that the Crown had proven identity beyond a
reasonable doubt based on that comparison.
[
31
]
First, my opportunity to observe Mr. Bains in
Court was limited by his placement in the prisoner’s box.  I estimate the
prisoner’s box to be approximately 15 feet from the bench in courtroom 1102,
where the trial was held.  The lighting over the prisoner’s box is not
particularly good.  I had to view Mr. Bains through the glass which surrounds
the prisoner’s box, which appears to have a slight tint.  The layout of the
prisoner’s box means that when Mr. Bains was seated, as he was for most of the
proceedings, my view of him was in profile, such that I only had an opportunity
to observe the left side of his face.  Further, the video screen used for Mr.
Bains to view the LCBO video clips is in the lower part of the prisoner’s box,
such that as he was watching the LCBO video clips, he was looking down, so my
opportunity to observe his face was further limited.  Moreover, Mr. Bains chose
not to testify, as is his right, which meant I did not have a good opportunity
to observe his mannerisms or affect.
[
32
]
In this regard, I note that following the
evidence and submissions, on October 10, 2025 Mr. Bains also briefly appeared
before me 1001 Court to reschedule the date for this Judgment.  I was very
struck at how much more clearly I could see Mr. Bains in that courtroom.  Courtroom
1001 is on an outer wall of the courthouse, and has an extra frosted window
through which natural light can come from outside.  On October 10, 2025, there
was natural light streaming through the outer windows of the courthouse and on through
the inner windows of courtroom 1001, which made a significant difference in my
ability to observe Mr. Bains.  However, Mr. Bains’s appearance in courtroom 1001
was brief, and I had only a couple of minutes to observe him.  Moreover, the
circumstances of this particular observation still required me to view Mr.
Bains through glass, and largely in profile.  As such, I do not feel
comfortable relying on that very brief opportunity to observe Mr. Bains as
proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  However, that brief interaction was
instructive, in that it highlighted the relatively poor lighting over the
prisoner’s box during the trial.
[
33
]
A second difficulty relating to my observations
of Mr. Bains during the trial is that at the time of trial, he had long hair,
which he chose to wear down and around his face.  This made it more difficult
to make observations of his face.
[
34
]
A third difficulty of comparing Mr. Bains in
Court to the person or people in the LCBO video clips is that Mr. Bains was
clean shaven in Court, whereas the person in the LCBO videos (with the
exception of the last incident) had facial hair.  To be clear, I understand
that facial hair can easily be changed.  However, I found this difference
between the appearance of Mr. Bains in Court and the appearance of the person
or people in the LCBO video clips made it more difficult to assess whether Mr.
Bains is, in fact, the person in the LCBO video clips.
[
35
]
At the end of the day, by virtue of the
observations of Mr. Bains in Court, I would have said that he exhibited in
Court more of a woebegone affect than the individual in the LCBO videos.  I
would also have said that Mr. Bains’s skin tone appeared in Court to be
somewhat paler than the individual or individuals generally depicted in the
LCBO videos.  However, none of this is to say that by virtue of my observations
of Mr. Bains in Court, I have concluded that Mr. Bains is
not
the person
in the LCBO videos; rather, it is to say that based on the circumstances of my
observations of Mr. Bains in Court standing alone, I cannot say beyond a
reasonable doubt that he
is
the person in the LCBO video clips.  The woebegone
affect to Mr. Bains’s appearance, as well as his paler skin tone, may well have
been a result of any number of factors, including that Mr. Bains was in custody
on criminal charges and may have been nervous, as well as by the difficulties
of observing Mr. Bains in the courtroom due to the distance, tinted glass, and
relatively poor lighting.  The point is that based on my observations of Mr.
Bains in Court, and comparing those observations to the person or people in the
LCBO video clips, the Crown has not proven on that basis that Mr. Bains is the
person in the LCBO video clips.
[
36
]
I wish to make one final note with respect to my
observations of Mr. Bains in Court.  During submissions, Mr. Xu asserted that
Mr. Bains has a light-coloured scar on his forehead.  Mr. Xu conceded that the
scar was hard to see at a distance.  The Crown neither agreed with, nor
disputed, the existence of the scar.  From my vantage point on the bench, I
could not observe the scar.  This is not to say that I doubt Mr. Xu’s assertion
as an officer of the Court.  However, I am not sure how much it can assist me to
determine this case that Mr. Bains has a scar which is difficult to see in
person, and is also presumably difficult to see in moving or still images.  Indeed,
I did not receive a sufficient description of the scar to determine whether I
should be able to see it in images of Mr. Bains, nor could I see it in the
video and stills which are undisputed to depict Mr. Bains.  This information about
the scar therefore cannot assist in my deliberations to any great extent.
iii.
The admissibility of the mugshot or arrest photo
[
37
]
With respect to the admissibility of the mugshot
or arrest photo of Mr. Bains filed as Exhibit ‘B’ on the proceeding, I am
satisfied that the Crown has met its burden of proving authenticity pursuant to
s.31.1
of the
Canada Evidence Act
.
In other words, the Crown has
adduced evidence capable of supporting a finding that the mugshot is what it
purports to be.  As noted above, the threshold to be met is low.  I acknowledge
that DC Borch was not present when the photo was taken, so he had no personal
knowledge of when it was taken, nor whom it depicted.  However, there is some
value to DC Borch’s evidence that he drew the photo from a Toronto Police
Service database of mugshots, as presumably the photo was taken, labelled, and
entered into the database by someone having a personal knowledge of the matters
being recorded and under a duty to make the record, which provides some
circumstantial guarantee of trustworthiness:
Ares v. Venner
,
1970 CanLII 5 (SCC)
, [1970]
S.C.R. 608 at 617, 626.  Moreover, there is an identity between the birthdate
listed under the mugshot and Mr. Bains’s birthday as listed on the Information.
[
38
]
Even more importantly, pursuant to the
principles of
Nikolovski
as applied in
R. v. Keating
(ONCA),
supra
,
at ¶¶23-26 and
R. v. Hudson
,
supra,
at ¶¶46-47, I can compare the
mugshot filed as Exhibit ‘B’ with the acknowledged depictions of Mr. Bains in
the body worn camera video and the stills from the booking hall video to
determine whether the Crown has established that the mugshot is what it purports
to be.  In this regard, the case is, as the Crown submitted, akin to
R. v.
George
, supra
, in that I am comparing the unknown of the mugshot to the
known of the body worn camera and booking hall video stills.  Having engaged in
that exercise, I am satisfied that the mugshot is admissible in evidence.  The following
characteristics are similar as between the individual in the mugshot and Mr.
Bains in the body worn camera video and stills from the booking hall: hair
colour; skin colour; eye colour; thick dark eyebrows that extend fairly low
down so as to end parallel to the corners of Mr. Bains’s eyes; a fairly bulbous
nose; similar ears; and, an oval-shaped face.  The mugshot is said to have been
taken just under a year before Mr. Bains’s arrest, and the two individuals
appear to be about the same age.  Perhaps most striking is that not only does
Mr. Bains and the person in the mugshot have full lips, but that both the
individual in the mugshot and Mr. Bains in the known images and video have an
upper lip which seems to be slightly lower, or to extend not quite as close to
the nose, on the left side (when facing the images and video) than on the
right.  Below I have included a cropped still shot from the body worn camera
video, which I paused at 0:00:33, which depicts the similarities in all these
features, and in particular the slightly higher raise on the right side of Mr.
Bains’s upper lip.  I have also inserted the mugshot for comparison:
A comparison of the still photo from
the booking hall marked Exhibit 18A in particular also reveals these similarities
(albeit Mr. Bains’s lips are less visible in the booking hall stills).  I
include a cropped version of Exhibit 18(A) below for comparison purposes:
[
39
]
I acknowledge that Mr. Bains’s hair in the mugshot
seems to be slightly shorter than how it appears in the body worn camera video
and booking hall still photos.  However, this difference does not undermine my
conclusion on the authentication of the mugshot, as his hair could easily have
grown a small amount between April of 2024 and March of 2025.
[
40
]
However, although I am admitting the mugshot
into evidence, I caution myself against placing too much weight on it in
assessing whether the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Bains
is the person in the LCBO video clips.  The mugshot is a single static photo
from only one angle, and captures Mr. Bains only from the shoulders up.  Mr.
Bains’s expression in the mugshot is quite different from that in the body worn
camera and still photos from the booking hall video.  I also note that the
lighting in the mugshot casts shadows on Mr. Bains’s face, and that (perhaps
because of the lighting), Mr. Bains’s skin looks more yellow in the mugshot
than in the body worn camera video and the booking hall stills.
[
41
]
On the basis of the admissibility of the
mugshot, I will now compare the body worn camera video, the still shots from
the booking hall, and the mug shot, to the person or persons in the LCBO video
clips to determine whether the Crown has proven Mr. Bains’s identity in those
clips beyond a reasonable doubt.
iv.
Count 1 – The evidence of the theft on February
7, 2024
[
42
]
The Crown filed three video clips, marked as
Exhibits 2a to 2c, of the theft which occurred on February 7, 2024 at the LCBO
located at 2181 Steeles Avenue West, Toronto.  Exhibit 2c gives the clearest
view of the individual who committed the theft.  I have cropped a photo of the
individual’s face from the still image the Crown filed as Exhibit C(1), which
itself was taken from Exhibit 2c, to demonstrate my findings set out below:
[
43
]
I am not convinced beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person in Exhibit 2 is Mr. Bains.  There are many similarities between
Mr. Bains and the individual in Exhibit 2.  However, the skin colour of the
person in Exhibit 2 appears darker than Mr. Bains’s skin colour in the body
worn camera video, stills from the booking hall, and mugshot.  Moreover, the
person in Exhibit 2 looks older than the person in the known video and images
of Mr. Bains.  I note as well that the individual in Exhibit 2 has deeper lines
running from his nose to the sides of his mouth than Mr. Bains appears to have
in the known video and images, as well as deeper lines running diagonally and
down across his cheeks from the inner corners of his eyes.  Finally, Mr.
Bains’s upper lip appears fuller in the known photos and video than does the
individual’s upper lip in Exhibit 2.  While it is my view that Mr. Bains may
well be the person depicted in the videos filed as Exhibit 2a-c, and that the
differences I have observed between the individual in Exhibit 2 and the known
images and video of Mr. Bains could be because of lighting, camera angles, and
other variable factors, that is not enough.  I am not sure Mr. Bains is the
thief on this occasion.  I therefore find Mr. Bains not guilty of count 1.
v.
Count 2 – The evidence of the theft on February
14, 2024
[
44
]
The Crown filed four video clips, marked as
Exhibits 3a to 3d, of the theft which occurred on February 14, 2024 at the LCBO
located at 2946 Finch Avenue East, Toronto.  To demonstrate my findings as set
out below, I have cropped two photos from Exhibit 3.  First, I cropped a
profile view of the individual from Exhibit 3c by pausing it at 0:00:07:
Second, I cropped a photo of the
individual’s face more head-on by pausing Exhibit 3d at 0:00:06:
[
45
]
I have a reasonable doubt about whether Mr.
Bains was the thief on this occasion.  This individual, like the individual
depicted in Exhibits 2a-c, appears to have deeper lines around his mouth than
does Mr. Bains in the known images and video.  In addition, this individual’s
features seem to be less spread out on his face than does Mr. Bains’s features
in the known images and video.  Moreover, the individual in the videos filed
collectively as Exhibit 2 appears to have a less fulsome upper lip than does
Mr. Bains in the known images and video.  Finally, I note that in the crop of
the still frame taken from Exhibit 3c set out above, the individual’s nose
seems to come to a sharper point than does Mr. Bains’s nose.  Again, I
acknowledge there are many similarities between the thief and the known images
and video of Mr. Bains.  In fact, it appears to me that the individual in the
videos filed as Exhibit 3 may be wearing the same mustard-coloured fleece or
hoodie under his coat as Mr. Bains appears to be wearing in the mugshot. 
However, I cannot be sure that the garment is the same, and more than one
person could own a similar mustard-coloured fleece.  While I believe Mr. Bains could
be the individual in the videos filed as Exhibit 3, I am not sure that he is
that person.  I therefore find Mr. Bains not guilty of count 2.
vi.
Count 4 – The evidence of the theft on March 1,
2024
[
46
]
The Crown filed four video clips, marked as
Exhibits 5a to 5d, of the theft which occurred on March 1, 2024 at the LCBO
located at 1563 Steeles Avenue East, Toronto.  Exhibit 5d gives the clearest
view of the individual who committed the theft, although 5b and 5c provide some
more useful views as well.  To demonstrate my findings as set out below, I have
cropped three photos from Exhibit 5.  First, I cropped a view of the individual
by pausing Exhibit 5b at 0:01:39:
Second, I cropped a view of the
individual by pausing Exhibit 5c at 0:00:17:
Finally, I cropped a view of the
individual by pausing Exhibit 5d at 0:00:13:
[
47
]
I have a reasonable doubt about whether Mr.
Bains is the individual in Exhibits 5a-d.  The individual in Exhibits 5a-d
appears older and with more pronounced lines under his eyes than does Mr. Bains
in the known images and video of him.  The individual in Exhibits 5a-d appears
to have darker skin than does Mr. Bains in the known images and video.  The image
immediately above depicts someone who almost appears to be missing a bit of
facial hair from the upper moustache, exposing a bit of the cupid’s bow.  While
Mr. Bain’s upper lip appears to be higher on the right side, this individual
has almost a heart-shaped bald patch above his lip which Mr. Bains does not
share.  The nose of the individual in Exhibits 5a-d appears bigger and broader
than Mr. Bains’s nose in the known video and images.  Mr. Bains does share many
characteristics with the person in Exhibits 5a-d.  While I think Mr. Bains could
be the person depicted in Exhibits 5a-d, I am not sure.  I therefore find Mr.
Bains not guilty of count 4.
vii.
Count 7 – The evidence of the theft on March 20,
2024
[
48
]
The Crown filed four video clips, marked as
Exhibits 8a to 8d, of the theft which occurred on March 20, 2024 at the LCBO
located at 145 Silver Reign Drive, Toronto.  Exhibits 8a-8c do not provide a good
view of the individual’s face.   Exhibit 8d provides a clearer view.  To
demonstrate my findings as set out below, I have cropped a photo from Exhibit
8d by pausing it at 0:00:08:
[
49
]
I have a reasonable doubt that Mr. Bains is the
person in Exhibits 8a-d.  I note that the screenshot above from 8d shows the
individual at a very similar angle to Exhibit 18a, reproduced here in a cropped
version for ease of comparison:
While again, Mr. Bains looks similar to
the individual in Exhibit 8, and in fact more similar in this case than those
counts I have already considered, I still note some differences between Mr.
Bains and the individual in Exhibit 8.  In particular, Mr. Bains’s nose seems
to be narrower across the bridge and to broaden more at the nostrils, while the
nose of the individual in Exhibit 8d appears to be broader more uniformly from
the bridge to the nostrils.  Moreover, while the skin colour of the individual
in Exhibit 8 appears to be lighter than the skin colour of the individual or
individuals in the counts already considered, it still appears to be slightly
darker than Mr. Bains’s skin colour.  Again, it may be that Mr. Bains is
the individual in Exhibit 8, and that the differences
observed are due to lighting, camera angle, and other variable factors. 
However, on the basis of the evidence before me, the Crown has not proven
identity on this count beyond a reasonable doubt.  Accordingly, Mr. Bains is
not guilty of count 7.
viii.
Count 8 – The evidence of the theft on May 2,
2024
[
50
]
The Crown filed seven video clips, marked as
Exhibits 9a to 9g, of the theft which occurred on May 2, 2024 at the LCBO
located at 145 Silver Reign Drive, Toronto.  To illustrate my findings as set
out below, I have included a cropped still photo of the individual from Exhibit
9a, paused at 0:00:06, and a cropped still photo of the individual from Exhibit
9g, paused at 0:00:05:
[
51
]
I have a reasonable doubt about whether the
individual in Exhibits 9a-g is Mr. Bains.  The skin colour of the person in
Exhibits 9a-g appears darker than the known images and video of Mr. Bains.  The
lines on the individual’s face in Exhibits 9a-g appear deeper than those on Mr.
Bains’s face.  And, the features on the face of the individual in Exhibits 9a-g
appear to be more crowded together than Mr. Bains’s features.  Again, the
individual in Exhibits 9a-g may be Mr. Bains, but that has not been proven
beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
52
]
I acknowledge that it appears that the
individual in Exhibit 9 is wearing a black hoodie under his jacket which
appears to be very similar to the black hoodie worn by Mr. Bains in his
mugshot, with a distinctive white stripe around the hood and some black
lettering in the white band.  However, I cannot get a good enough look at the
hoodie from the videos marked collectively as Exhibit 9 to determine if the
markings are the same.  To the extent that I can discern the markings in
Exhibit 9 and in the mugshot, they appear to be different.  I have drawn the
following cropped photo from Exhibit 9f paused at 0:00:38 to illustrate this,
as compared to the mugshot photo.  As best as I can tell, the markings in black
in the white stripe of the hoodie in Exhibit 9 are more like hieroglyphics,
whereas those in the mugshot are largely letters:
Mr. Bains is therefore found not guilty of
count 8.
ix.
Count 11 – The evidence of the theft on May 6,
2024
[
53
]
The Crown filed three video clips, marked as
Exhibits 10a to 10c, of the theft which occurred on May 6, 2024, at the LCBO
located at 1563 Steeles Avenue East, Toronto.  Neither 10a nor 10b provide a
particularly good view of the individual.  10c provides a clearer view.  To
demonstrate my findings as set out below, I have cropped a photo from Exhibit 10c
by pausing it at 0:00:12:
[
54
]
To the extent it is possible to tell, it appears
this individual is wearing the same hat, as well as the same black hoodie with
the white stripe with black characters, as the individual in Exhibits 9a-g.  Like
the individual in Exhibits 9a-g, this individual appears to have darker skin
than Mr. Bains, and deeper lines between his nose and mouth than does Mr.
Bains.  This individual also appears to have a slight bald spot in his
moustache, as did the individual in Exhibit 5, although Mr. Bains does not
appear to share this bald spot.  Again, the individual in Exhibits 10a-c may be
Mr. Bains, but I have a reasonable doubt.  Accordingly, Mr. Bains is not guilty
of count 11.
x.
Count 15 – The evidence of the theft on May 23,
2024
[
55
]
The Crown filed four video clips, marked as
Exhibits 13a to 13d, of the theft which occurred on May 23, 2024, 2024 at the
LCBO located at 1571 Sandhurst Circle, Toronto.  Exhibit 13d provides the
clearest view of the individual.  To demonstrate my findings as set out below,
I have cropped a photo from Exhibit 13d by pausing it at 0:00:08:
[
56
]
I have a reasonable doubt about whether the
individual in Exhibits 13a-d is Mr. Bains.  The individual in Exhibits 13a-d
appears to have darker skin than Mr. Bains, as well as more pronounced lines
under his eyes and between his nose and mouth than Mr. Bains has.  This
individual also appears to have a mark on his nose, which Mr. Bains does not
have in the known images or video.  While the mark may simply be a cut which
subsequently healed, I cannot tell that from the videos filed as Exhibit 13.  Mr.
Bains may be the individual in Exhibits 13a-d, but I am not sure.  Accordingly,
I find Mr. Bains not guilty of count 15.
xi.
Count 16 – The evidence of the theft on May 28,
2024
[
57
]
The Crown filed four video clips, marked as
Exhibits 14a to 14d, of the theft which occurred on May 28, 2024, at the LCBO
located at 145 Silver Reign Drive, Toronto.  Exhibit 14d provides the clearest
view of the individual.  To demonstrate my findings as set out below, I have
cropped a photo from Exhibit 14d by pausing it at 0:00:06:
[
58
]
I have a reasonable doubt about whether Mr.
Bains is the individual in Exhibits 14a-d.  The individual’s skin appears
darker in 14a-d.  This is particularly noticeable in his hands.  A cropped
still photo drawn from the body worn camera (Exhibit 17) as paused at 0:00:03
shows this distinction:
In addition, the lines on the individual’s
face in Exhibits 14a-d appear deeper than the lines on Mr. Bains’s face in the
known images and video.  Again, the observed differences may be due to
lighting, camera angles, or other variable factors.  However, based on the
evidence before me, I have a reasonable doubt about the individual’s identity. 
Accordingly, I find Mr. Bains not guilty of count 16.
xii.
Count 17 – The evidence of the theft on November
24, 2024
[
59
]
The Crown filed four video clips, marked as
Exhibits 15a to 15d, of the theft which occurred on November 24, 2024, at the
LCBO located at 2181 Steeles Avenue West, Toronto.  To demonstrate my findings
as set out below, I have cropped a still image taken from Exhibit 15d, paused
at 0:00:04:
[
60
]
Of all the incidents of theft, this is the one
where the individual looks the most similar to Mr. Bains.  The lines around the
individual’s nose and mouth are less pronounced than in the other incidents,
and are more similar to the lines on Mr. Bains’s face.  The skin colour of the
individual in Exhibits 15a-d is more similar to Mr. Bains’s skin colour in the
known stills and video than in the other incidents.  However, I am still not
sure this individual is Mr. Bains.  Mr. Bains’s nose appears wider near the
bottom than the above individual’s, and his eyebrows appear thicker.  In
addition, Mr. Bains’s skin appears to be a richer brown than the individual
above.  I have included below the still image drawn from the body worn camera
video paused at 0:00:33 for comparison:
Of all the counts, this one gave me the
most anxious consideration.  However, while I think Mr. Bains is likely guilty
of this count, that does not meet the standard.  I find Mr. Bains not guilty of
count 17.
IV.  Count 18 – The alleged breach of probation on November 24, 2024
A.
The evidence
[
61
]
With respect to the alleged breach of the
Probation Order, the Crown filed as Exhibit 1 two certified Informations, to
which a single Probation Order dated November 5, 2024 attached.  That Order
prohibited the person bound by it from attending any LCBO in the Province of
Ontario for a period of 12 months.  The Order binds an accused person with the
same first, middle, and last name as Mr. Bains, as well as the same birth
date.  The accused’s address on the two Informations which underlie the
Probation Order is the same, but a second address for the accused is found on
the Probation Order itself.  Mr. Bains’s address as reflected on the
Information before me is not the same as the addresses found on the two
Informations underlying the Probation Order and the Probation Order itself.
[
62
]
Officer Cameron Parry testified that he arrested
someone named Arshdeep Bains on two warrants, one relating to one count of
theft under $5,000, and the other relating to four counts of theft under
$5,000.  Those charges are reflected on the Informations to which the Probation
Order attaches.  Officer Parry identified the accused in Court as the person
whom he arrested on the two warrants.  Officer Parry agreed that his
interactions with the Arshdeep Bains whom he arrested were fairly brief.  He
also acknowledged he did not ask the person whom he arrested to identify
himself by name.  However, Officer Parry said he identified the Arshdeep Bains
whom he arrested
via
MTO, ISS, and mugshot.  Officer Parry agreed he did
not make a note of identifying the person whom he arrested by mugshot, but
testified he had an independent recollection of doing so.
B.
The parties’ positions
[
63
]
As noted above, the defence challenged whether
Mr. Bains’s identity had been established as the person who breached the
Probation Order beyond a reasonable doubt.  In Mr. Xu’s submission, not only
had the Crown failed to prove that Mr. Bains was the person who entered the
LCBO on November 24, 2024, but also that the Crown had failed to prove that the
accused before me was the same person as the person bound by the Probation
Order.  The Crown did not make submissions on this issue, but presumably relied
on the evidence of Officer Parry to establish Mr. Bains was bound by the
Probation Order.
C.
The applicable legal principles
[
64
]
With respect to the question of whether the
accused person before me is the same person who was bound by the Probation
Order in question, the law permits me to consider the identity of names between
the person named in the Probation Order and the person before me, as well as
the identity of address or other biographical details:
R. v. Webster
,
2016 ONCA 189
at ¶6;
R. v. St. Pierre
,
2016 ONCA 173
at ¶10.
[
65
]
In addition, I remind myself that in-dock
identifications are notoriously unreliable and should be given little weight:
R.
v. Izzard,
1990 CanLII 13295 (ON CA)
, [1990] O.J. No. 189 (C.A.) at ¶13;
R. v. Reitsma,
1997 CanLII 3607 (BC CA)
, [1997]
B.C.J. No. 2314 (C.A.) at ¶¶56-60
per
Rowles J.A. dissenting, appeal
allowed
1998 CanLII 825 (SCC)
, [1998] S.C.J. No. 38 at ¶1.  I also remind myself that in-dock evidence
is deceptively credible because it is largely honest and sincere:
R. v.
Hibbert
,
2002 SCC 39
at ¶50.
[
66
]
As for the question of whether Mr. Bains is the
person who stole the items from the LCBO on November 24, 2024, the same
principles relating to identity apply as I have articulated in the above
section relating to the theft counts.
D.
The legal principles applied
[
67
]
I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused person before me is the same as the person bound by the Probation
Order.  I put very little weight on Officer Parry’s identification in Court of
Mr. Bains as the person whom he arrested on the charges which underlie the
Probation Order.  This is because of the frailties of in-dock identification,
as well as the fact that Officer Parry only had a brief interaction with the
person whom he arrested.  However, Officer Parry’s evidence is corroborated by
the identity of names and birth dates as between the person bound by the
Probation Order and the accused before me, Mr. Bains.  While the address noted
for the individual bound by the Probation Order is not the same as the address
noted for Mr. Bains on the Information before me, neither is the address the
same as between the Probation Order and the Informations which underlie it.  This
does not cause me to have a reasonable doubt, as addresses can easily change.
[
68
]
However, as I have concluded that the Crown has
not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Bains was the individual in the
LCBO on November 24, 2024, I find Mr. Bains not guilty of count 18.
V.  Conclusion
[
69
]
Mr. Bains is therefore found not guilty of
counts 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, and 15-18, with the other counts having been disposed
of in his favour previously.  I would like to thank both counsel for the highly
professional, collegial, and organized way in which they conducted this case.
Released: 
November 10, 2025.
Signed:
Justice J. Trehearne
[i]
The Information alleges 18 counts of theft under $5,000
(counts 1-17 and count 19) and two counts of breach of probation (counts 18 and
20).  However, before the trial began, the Crown withdrew counts 9, 10, and
13.  Further, at the close of the evidence in this matter, the Crown invited me
to acquit Mr. Bains of counts 3, 5, 6, 12, 14, 19 and 20.  Therefore, this
Judgment pertains to counts 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, and 15-18.