Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj331/2025oncj331.html

CITATION:
R.
v. Mohammed
, 2025 ONCJ 331
DATE:  June 16, 2025
ONTARIO
  COURT OF JUSTICE
Toronto
BETWEEN:
HIS
  MAJESTY THE KING
—  
  AND  —
KHALILA
  MOHAMMED
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
For
  the Crown
J.
  Spare
For
  the Defendant
B.
  Greenspan and A. Zhang
Heard:
December 18, 2024; March 28,
  2025
REASONS for SENTENCE
RUSSELL
SILVERSTEIN, J.:
A.
INTRODUCTION
[1]
On December 18, 2024, Ms. Mohammed pleaded guilty before me
to one count of being an accessory after the crime of manslaughter contrary to
s.
463
(a) of the
Criminal Code
.
B.
THE
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE OFFENCE
[2]
An agreed statement of fact (ASF) setting
out the details of the offence was filed as an exhibit on the sentencing
hearing. A somewhat edited version is set out in Appendix “A” to these reasons.
The full ASF should be consulted for the full text messages referred to in the
ASF.
[3]
A victim impact statement was read to the
court by Adrian Makurat, the husband of the deceased, Karoline Huebner-Makurat.
He and she are the father and mother of their two children. That victim impact
statement is also an exhibit.
C.
THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE
OFFENDER
[4]
Ms. Mohammed is now 25 years old. She was 23 years old when
she committed this offence. She has no prior criminal record. She is currently
living with her parents who are her sureties on a relatively strict release
order.
[5]
Ten letters of support on her behalf were filed as exhibits.
They are from family, friends, and associates. These letters describe Ms.
Mohammed as kind, generous and selfless. Her supporters all say that the
offence is very much out of character for her. This is further evidenced by her
work history at the South Riverdale Community Health Centre.
[6]
Her family has been immensely supportive as she struggled
with ADHD and anxiety as a young girl and with alcoholism as an adult.
[7]
Upon her release after her arrest, she sought professional
counseling and has committed herself to Alcoholics Anonymous and a rigorous
fitness regime. She hopes to return to school and obtain a graduate degree in
psychology.
D.
THE POSITIONS
OF THE PARTIES
[8]
Mr. Spare, for the Crown, seeks a custodial sentence of two
years less some credit for presentence custody and strict bail conditions. He
opposes the imposition of a conditional sentence.
[9]
Mr. Greenspan and Ms. Zhang, for Ms. Mohammed, argue that a
notional sentence of 18 months less presentence custody and bail credit is
appropriate. They argue for a net non-custodial conditional sentence of nine months.
E.
THE PRINCIPLES OF
SENTENCING
[10]
The principles of sentencing are set out in Part XXIII of the
Criminal Code
.
[11]
According to
s. 718
of the
Criminal Code
, the
"fundamental purpose" of sentencing is to contribute to "respect
for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society" by
imposing "just sanctions" that have one or more of the following
objectives, namely: (a) to denounce unlawful conduct; (b) to deter the offender
and others from committing offences; (c) to separate offenders from society
where necessary; (d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders; (e) to provide
reparations for harm done to victims or the community; and (f) to promote a
sense of responsibility in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to
victims and the community.
[12]
Further, according to s. 718.1 of the Code, the
"fundamental principle" of sentencing is that a sentence "must
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender."
[13]
Section 718.2 of the Code also dictates that, in imposing
sentence, the court must also apply a number of principles including the following:
•
A sentence should be increased or
reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances
relating to the offence or the offender;
•
A sentence should be similar to
sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances;
•
Where consecutive sentences are
imposed, the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh;
•
An offender should not be deprived
of liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the
circumstances; and,
•
All available sanctions other than
imprisonment that are reasonable in the circumstances should be considered for
all offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of aboriginal
offenders.
F.
THE MOST RELEVANT
PRECEDENTS
[14]
As stated above, it is a well settled principle of criminal
law that similar sentences should be imposed on similar offenders for similar
offences in similar circumstances.
Criminal Code
, s. 718.2 (b);
R. v. Lacasse
,
supra
at para 2.
[15]
The most definitive statement concerning the
application of the principles of sentencing to the crime of being an accessory
after the fact to an offence is found in
R. v. Wisdom
,
[1992] O.J. No.
3110 (Gen. Div.)
at paras. 27-30
, an accessory to murder case,
where Watt J. (as he then was) explains:
Accessoryship after the fact to a
crime is an offence which constitutes an interference with the administration
of justice. An offence has been committed by a principal offender, in this case
the crime of murder. It is the purpose of the accessory, as it was of this
accused, to enable, indeed to facilitate, the principal offender to escape
detection and/or punishment for his or her criminal conduct. By the means
adopted, whatever they may be, the accessory interferes with the investigation
of crime and the detection of offenders. Serious crimes may go unsolved and dangerous
criminals left at liberty only to re-offend. The resourceful accessory stifles
the investigation and deflects attention from the true principal, as much as
the suborned witness' perjury seeks to avoid successful prosecution. The due
administration of justice is defeated in the event of success, as much in the
one case as it is in the other.
Accessoryship after the fact
frustrates the legitimate investigation of crime. It is as much a part of such
investigation to clear the innocent, as it is to convict the guilty. To the
extent that accessories deflect the investigation and investigators from their
proper or true course, the attendant risks are obvious.
As it would appear to me, it is of
the utmost public importance that all who are knowingly in touch with criminals
and who might be minded, for whatever reason, to offer or furnish their
assistance, ought to be alive to and fully cognizant of the fact that should
they receive, comfort or assist them in order to enable the or a principal to
escape, then they, the accessories, themselves run a substantial risk of losing
their own liberty for a very significant period of time.
The factor or principle of
superordinate importance in cases such as at present, in my respectful view, is
that of general deterrence. The courts, whose task it is to ensure the due
administration of justice,
must devoutly set their face against and display their denunciation of any
conduct, whether during the investigation or upon the trial of alleged
offenders, that seeks to or does interfere with it. Put shortly, we shall brook
no interference, actual or attempted, with the proper investigation of crime,
as well the proper trial of alleged offenders. Those who set out with such a
purpose shall be punished, and severely.
[16]
According to Watt J., these are some of the relevant factors
or considerations in determining the appropriate sentence for an accessory:
•
the nature,
extent, and duration of the accessory's involvement
•
the presence or
absence of any coercion of or threat to the accessory or others to obtain the
accessory's participation
•
the age and
experience of the accessory
•
the nature,
extent, and duration of the relationship, if any, between the accessory and the
relevant principal
•
the nature of the
accessory's assistance; and,
•
the antecedents,
present status, and realistic prospects of the accessory
[17]
Counsel supplied several accessory cases for my
consideration. They present a varying array of fact scenarios. Some are
accessory to murder, some are obstruct justice cases and some are accessory to
manslaughter cases.
[18]
Perhaps the most similar and recent is the case of
R. v.
Johnson and Smith
,
2022 ONSC 5689
.
Johnson was convicted after trial of manslaughter and Smith was convicted after
trial of accessory after the fact to manslaughter.
[19]
Smith was a 21-year-old first offender who witnessed the
homicide committed by Mr. Johnson and then helped him dispose of evidence
including the firearm used in the homicide. She also helped Johnson change his
appearance. Kelly J. found that a notional sentence of 27 months would have
been appropriate.
[20]
My review of the caselaw leads me to conclude that the
general range of sentence for accessory after the fact to the crime of
manslaughter is extremely broad, yet for cases that are somewhat like Ms.
Mohammed’s case the range is between 18 months and 3.5 years. See too
R. v.
Nordman
,
2004 BCSC 1295
;
R. v. D.M.G
.,
[2006]
N.S.J. No. 614
;
R. v. Armstrong
,
2024 ONSC 631
;
R. v. Chouinard
,
[2005] O.J. No. 3143
;
R. v. A.J.,
2016 ONSC 7890
;
[21]
Although the principles of denunciation and deterrence remain
paramount in sentencing accessoryship cases, the fact that Ms. Mohammed is a
youthful first offender requires me to temper that paramountcy and heed the
principles of rehabilitation and restraint.
R.
v. Habib
,
2024 ONCA 830
,  at para.
31
R. v. Ali
,
2022 ONCA 736
at para.
40
;
R. v.
Armstrong
, supra
, at para.
57
;
R. v. Crawford
,
2018 ONSC 7582
at
para.
30
.
G.
THE AGGRAVATING
CIRCUMSTANCES
[22]
Ms. Mohammed’s actions, while they came after the death of Karoline
Huebner-Makurat, nonetheless extended the anguish of her husband, children, and
other loved ones.
[23]
Her assistance to the principal offender persisted for several
weeks and involved many significant steps all clearly intended to shield him
from the police, most significantly, lying to the police on more than one
occasion.
[24]
There is a marked absence of coercion on the part of the
principal offender.
H.
THE MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES
[25]
Ms. Mohammed has pleaded guilty and has expressed remorse to
the family of the deceased and to the Court. I have no doubt that it is
heartfelt and genuine.
[26]
Ms. Mohammed is a youthful first offender.
[27]
As explained in some of the letters of support filed with the
court, Ms. Mohammed’s alcoholism has contributed to a lack of judgment which
certainly played a role in her relationship with Mr. Ibrahim and the steps she
took on his behalf.
[28]
Ms. Mohammed is now cooperating in the prosecution of the
alleged principal offenders, giving full and frank testimony at their
preliminary inquiry.
I.
WHAT IS THE APPROPRIATE
NOTIONAL SENTENCE
[29]
After consideration of all the relevant circumstances and
having regard to the caselaw, I believe that the appropriate notional sentence
in this case is  two years less one day, or 729 days.
J.
CREDIT FOR TIME SERVED AND
STRICT BAIL CONDITIONS
[30]
Ms. Mohammed spent nine days in custody before being released
on bail and has now spent approximately 22 months on a very strict bail
involving house arrest with few exceptions. The caselaw makes clear that she is
entitled to some sentence deduction as a result. I will deduct  14 days from
her notional sentence per
R. v. Summers,
2014 SCC 26
, and a further 186
days per
R. v. Downes,
2006 CanLII 3957 (ON CA)
, [2006] O.J. No. 555.
[31]
Her effective net sentence is thus 529 days.
K.
IS A CONDITIONAL SENTENCE
APPROPRIATE
[32]
The parties agree that a conditional sentence is a legal and
available sentence in the circumstances.
[33]
Section 742.1 sets out the conditions allowing for the
imposition of a conditional sentence. There are five (5) prerequisites for the
imposition of a conditional sentence:
•
The
offender must be convicted of an offence that is not specifically excluded.
•
The
offender must be convicted of an offence that is not punishable by a minimum
term of imprisonment.
•
The
court must impose a sentence of imprisonment that is less than two years.
•
The
safety of the community would not be endangered by the offender serving the
sentence in the community.
•
The
conditional sentence must be consistent with the fundamental purpose and
principles of sentencing set out in ss. 718 to 718.2 of the Code.
[34]
The offence here in question is not specifically excluded
from the imposition of a conditional sentence, nor does it attract a minimum
sentence.
[35]
As I explained above, applying the principles of sentencing
to Ms. Mohammed’s circumstances and the crime she has committed, I believe that
a sentence of 529 days (less than two years) is called for. I must, however, look
at the notional sentence and be satisfied that
it too
is below two years
before I can consider a conditional sentence. See
R. v. Fice
,
2005 SCC
32
. As articulated above, I am imposing a notional sentence of 729 days, i.e. a
sentence of less than two years. A conditional sentence is thus available.
[36]
Ms. Mohammed has no history of violence and has been
well-behaved and is on a strong rehabilitative track since the commission of
the offence. I find that she presents a very low risk of re-offending, and I am
thus satisfied that service of the sentence in the community would not endanger
the safety of the community.
[37]
The final test I must apply to the circumstances of this case
poses the greatest challenge. Ms. Mohammed’s crime is a serious one and the
sentence imposed must deliver a strong message of denunciation and general deterrence.
[38]
Most often, when denunciation and general deterrence are
paramount in a serious crime, incarceration is generally called for. Yet, in Ms.
Mohammed’s case, I believe that the principle of restraint, as articulated in
s. 718.2, and in the Court of Appeal’s directions in
R. v.
Priest,
(1996),
1996 CanLII 1381 (ON CA)
, 110 C.C.C. (3d) 289 (Ont. C.A.) dictates the imposition of a
non-custodial sentence and I am satisfied that a conditional sentence would be
consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of sentencing. Even
though a conditional sentence does not involve incarceration, it can
nonetheless be sufficiently strict that it satisfies all the objectives of sentencing
in this case, including denunciation and deterrence, while also satisfying the
need to demonstrate restraint:
R. v.
Proulx
,
2000 SCC 5 (CanLII)
, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 61
at paras.
21-22
, 36, 41, 102, 127.
L.
CONCLUSION
[39]
The details of the sentence are
as follows:
•
Conditional sentence of 529 days,
the first 300 days to be under house arrest with exceptions to be addressed by
counsel, the remaining 229 days with a curfew;
•
100 hours of community service to
be performed during the conditional sentence;
•
A prohibition pursuant to s. 109
for life.
•
A DNA order will issue.
Released on June 16, 2025
Justice
Russell Silverstein
APPENDIX “A”
1
.         July
7, 2023 was a sunny day in Toronto. Karoline Huebner-Makurat, wife and mother
of two young girls, was walking on Queen Street on her way to lunch with a
friend when a bullet went into her back and through her liver, kidney and
aorta, killing her.
2
.         The
Leslieville neighbourhood, where this occurred, is a bustling part of downtown
Toronto with many shops and restaurants.
3
.         The
South Riverdale Community Health Centre is located at 955 Queen Street East.
Among other things, the Health Centre operates as a ‘harm reduction’ or
‘supervised injection site’, offering a safe place for drug users to use drugs.
4
.         Damian
Hudson, Ahmed Ibrahim and Ahmed Ali were drug dealers. In the summer of 2023,
they frequented the parkette next to the Health Centre where they would sell
drugs to drug users.
5
.         On
July 5 and 6, 2023, Hudson and Ibrahim had a text conversation that appeared to
reference an earlier in person conversation near the Health Centre about Hudson
being robbed by someone from ‘Teesdale.’ Ibrahim warned Hudson that he should
not have talked about guns in front of the workers and that “there cameras all
over the that area so you wouldn’t even go far with what your planning to do.”
Hudson responded: “I dont care about jail or cameras buddy robbed me” and “I
don't need to plan ill up it on site anywhere.” Khalila Mohammed knew that
Hudson and Ibrahim were communicating, but was not aware of the details of
their conversations.
On
July 7, 2023, Hudson and Ibrahim met up at the parkette by the Health Centre.
There is a somewhat grainy video camera from the Health Centre that shows them
chatting by a bench. Mohammed had gone inside and was not present at this
point. Suddenly, a man dressed in dark clothing runs up to Hudson and attacks
him.
6
.         Ibrahim
and the man in dark clothing (Ali) then chase Hudson west along Queen Street. The
men are then more clearly visible on other surveillance cameras. Ali pistol
whips Hudson while Ibrahim grabs his satchel.
7
.         Ibrahim
manages to take Hudson’s satchel and he then runs away west. After a brief
struggle with Hudson, Ali also runs away west. Hudson pursues them.
The
men then run past the parkette and out of camera view. A civilian standing on
the sidewalk starts filming with his cell phone. On that video, one can see
Hudson struggling with Ibrahim. Ali runs back to help Ibrahim and again strikes
Hudson in the head. The video-taker then moves to his right and a tree obscures
his view. We then hear “The other guys got a gun” and a series of gunshots.
8
.         Khalila
Mohammed only saw Hudson with a gun – she did not see what was going on with
the other two males.
9
.         Six
cartridge casings are found. Four from a .40 calibre handgun and two from a .22
calibre handgun. Based on where the casings are found, it appears that Hudson
fired two .22 bullets in a west direction and Ali fired four .40 calibre
bullets in an east direction. It appears that Hudson fired the shot that killed
Karoline Huebner-Makurat.
10
.       Khalila
Mohammed was aware shots had been fired.
11
.       Ibrahim
flees into the parkette and appears to be injured. A nurse at the Health Centre
named John Barr provided wound care to Ibrahim. Khalila Mohammed assisted. She
also provided Ibrahim new clothes because his clothes were bloody. Ibrahim
changed from a grey hoody into a red hoody. Khalila Mohammed then took Ibrahim
and “Leila” out of the Centre because her manager told her to get everyone out
and they did not want to leave on their own with police surrounding the
building. Khalila Mohamed takes him out of the Health Centre and gets him an
Uber out of the area. Khalila Mohamed testified at the Preliminary Hearing and
identified Ibrahim as the man in the grey hoody. Ibrahim also provided a
statement to the police admitting his involvement.
12
.       Hudson
was captured on video surveillance walking through the neighbourhood and
entering a Lyft ride-sharing vehicle, which took him to the home of the mother
of his child where he is easily identifiable on video surveillance.
13
.       Numerous
blood drops were also collected at the scene which contained Hudson’s DNA.
14
.       At
the time of the shooting, Khalila Mohammed was 23 years old. She worked in the
South Riverdale Community Health Centre as a harm reduction community health
worker in the supervised injection site, where she had worked for approximately
two years. Her role included monitoring the clients of the Health Centre who
had recently injected drugs to make sure that they did not need medical
intervention.
15
.       Text
messages located on Khalila Mohammed's phone show that she exchanged messages
with Hudson on July 4, 2023 (3 days before the shooting). In that exchange,
Hudson accused Khalila Mohammed of working with his “opps” – believed to be a
reference to Ibrahim and Ahmed (referred to as ‘Wiz’). Hudson threatens to kill
Khalila Mohammed if she works with his opps.
16
.       It
is clear from Khalila Mohammed’s subsequent text messages with Ibrahim that she
told Ibrahim about Hudson’s messages.
17
.       Text
messages between Khalila Mohammed and Ibrahim obtained by police establish that
the two had a close relationship that blossomed into a romance immediately
after the shooting. Prior to the shooting, Khalila Mohammed would spend
extensive periods of time in the courtyard at the Health Centre talking with
Ibrahim, whom she referred to as ‘Ben’.
18
.       Video
surveillance shows Khalila Mohammed exit the side door of the Health Centre
immediately before the shooting starts. She runs towards where the men are involved
in an altercation. It appears that Ibrahim runs away from the altercation
immediately before the shots start. At the sound of the shots, Khalila Mohammed
turns around and runs back into the side door of the Health Centre. John Barr,
the nurse, was also there.
19
.       Video
surveillance shows Ibrahim fleeing the shooting into the courtyard between the
Health Centre and a church. He returns to the side door of the Health Centre
with a sweater wrapped around his head. Khalila Mohammed, John Barr and a
female (identified as “Leila”, a drug user who could not be located by the
police) escort him into the Centre.
Video
chronology (times are video time):
12:39:45
- Khalila and John walk out of the side door of the Centre
12:39:53
- Khalila and John walk to Queen Street
12:40:04
- Leila runs up from the back alley and enters the Centre via the side door
12:40:18
- Leila exits the Centre via the front door and approaches Khalila and John on
Queen St
12:40:25
- Leila, John and Khalila walk toward the side door. Ibrahim walks up from the
back alley with a grey sweater covering his head. Khalila opens the side door
and together with John ushers Ibrahim inside. They enter in this order: Leila,
Ibrahim, Khalila then John.
20
.       John
Barr then provides medical assistance to Ibrahim. There is no video
surveillance inside the Health Centre. John testified at the Preliminary
Hearing about treating Ibrahim. Khalila Mohammed remained with Ibrahim while he
was receiving treatment. A worker at the Centre named Paula entered and told
John and Khalila, in the presence of Ibrahim, that someone had been shot. Paula
requested assistance and John left to assist.
21
.       Ibrahim
is next seen on the video surveillance being escorted out of the front door of
the Health Centre by Khalila Mohammed with Leila. He has now changed from his
grey hoody to a red hoody and has also changed his pants.
22
.       Khalila
Mohammed, Leila and Ibrahim then walk through the nearby neighbourhood
together. When they are near 27 Winnifred Avenue, Khalila Mohammed ordered an
Uber with her personal account.
23
.       Ibrahim
is visible on the video surveillance entering the Uber that Khalila Mohammed
called for him. The Uber takes Ibrahim to near where he lives on Teesdale
Place. Khalila Mohammed did not know where Ibrahim lived at this point. When
she called the Uber, Ibrahim told her the address he asked her to enter was
near where he was going.
24
.       Khalila
Mohammed did not know where Ibrahim lived. She kept offering to "meet at
his apartment", but he never told her where his apartment was. She did not
directly ask him where his apartment was.
25
.       As
part of their investigation police obtained a production order for the records
for the accounts of Ibrahim and Khalila Mohammed held by TextNow, a
communications company. Those records included the content of all text messages
sent between the parties using TextNow from July 9, 2023 to August 4, 2023.
26
.       At
the time of her arrest on August 14, 2023, police seized Khalila Mohammed’s
cellular phone. Police performed an examination of that phone pursuant to a
warrant and located text communications exchanged between Ibrahim and Khalila Mohammed
from July 11 to August 13, 2023. They are prolific texters. The messages we
have appear to be a complete record of their text communication between July 9
and August 13, 2023.
27
.       The
first text conversation between Khalila Mohammed and Ibrahim following the
shooting appears to have taken place on July 9, 2023. They have now commenced a
romantic relationship. From her messages, it is clear that Khalila Mohammed is
aware that Ibrahim was directly involved in the shooting of Karoline
Huebner-Makurat. She suggests to him that he “stay away for a while” to avoid
being arrested by police. She offers to provide him with Percocet pills. She
offers to check the news media releases regarding the shooting. She says she is
going to check surveillance footage to see if he is visible. There is no
evidence that Khalila Mohammed actually checked the surveillance footage or
that she even had access to it. She only said she would do it to calm Ibrahim.
28
.       In
that same conversation, Khalila Mohammed also updates Ibrahim about her
knowledge of the investigation as it is unfolding. She informs him that police
want to speak with her because they have located the footage that showed her
escorting him from the site following the shooting and expresses her belief
that that they had made the connection to footage of them interacting before
the shooting. She tells Ibrahim that police want to speak with her.
29
.       On
the night of July 9, 2023, the two exchange messages discussing the release of
three suspect images by police. They discuss the quality of the images. Khalila
Mohammed again tells Ibrahim to “get out of the city” and “lay low”. She
assures him she has his jeans and belt “tucked away” and that his hooded
sweatshirt is “gone”.
30
.       In
the early morning of July 10, the two discuss the public release of the cell
phone video captured by Derek Venman. She assures him that the video does not
identify him and again tells him to stay out of sight. She informs that a
detective named Chris (DC Chris Skelton – HOM) wants to talk to her on Monday.
She also cautions Ibrahim about discussing the matter over text – saying it is
“too hot”.
She
makes arrangements with Ibrahim to get Percocet pills to him.
31
.       Later
in the day on July 10, Khalila Mohammed shares with Ibrahim the information
about the shooting she received during a staff meeting. She tells him that
people were scared of him and his friends, whom they identified as “new dealers
in the area”. She tells him that the people from the site believed that “K”
(Damian Hudson, a.k.a. “Kevin”) is the one fired the shot that killed Karoline
Huebner-Makurat. It is clear from this exchange that Ibrahim is aware of
Khalila Mohammed’s past issues with Hudson. She also tells him that the police
are at the site conducting interviews.
32
.       Khalila
Mohammed also assures Ibrahim that the way the cameras at the site are
positioned, they would not have captured the shooting incident, showing an
awareness on her part of Ibrahim’s involvement in the shooting. On the evening
of July 10, 2023, Khalila Mohammed continues to check internet news sites for
updates on the case on Ibrahim’s behalf.
33
.       On
July 11, Khalila Mohammed confirms that she has met with Ibrahim’s friend to
pass along the Percocets and offers to buy him a new Nike Tech hooded
sweatshirt to replace the one that was thrown away following the shooting.
34
.       On
July 12, Khalila Mohammed informs Ibrahim that two homicide detectives (DC
Skelton and DC Turczyn) are at the Health Centre to speak with her.
35
.       On
July 12, 2023, Officers Skelton and Turczyn interviewed Khalila Mohammed on
video at the Health Centre. At the time, the police only knew that she was a
worker at the Health Centre who had witnessed part of the shooting. She was
interviewed
qua
witness like many other people. She was provided a KGB
caution and warned of the consequences of lying to or misleading the police. As
she told Ibrahim she would do in her text messages, she did not tell the police
anything about him or identify him to the police. She told the officers: “Um,
someone banged on the side door and said, I need wound care. And he was walking
up by where the bike cages are and I do wound care all the time So let him in
through the side door. And then I did wound care for him cuz the nurse who had
the to go bag, I didn't know that the lady was shot across the street mm-…”
36
.       She
was specifically asked if she knew any of the people who were outside. She
referenced that she had “seen the suspect pictures and everything”, including a
picture of the “guy in the grey hoodie [Ibrahim].” Khalila Mohammed indicated
that the guy in the grey hoodie would often try to hit on her. She said she
knew him as Ben. She said she did not know the person in the white shirt
[Hudson]. When specifically asked: “Um, the guy who came in for wound care, do
you know who he was?” “Um, no I don’t”.
37
.       Meanwhile,
as the text messages reveal, she had been discussing the fact that the Homicide
detectives wanted to speak to her with Ibrahim and had assured him she would
say she knew nothing. She was further asked if she knew how to get in touch
with Ben, who she was frequently texting and she said “I do not know.” Khalila
Mohammed clearly lied to police about her relationship and knowledge of Ben
[Ibrahim] in the course of a homicide investigation where she knew that Ben was
a suspect.
38
.       Immediately
following the interview with the Homicide detectives, Khalila Mohammed updated
Ibrahim on what the police appeared to know and what she told them.
39
.       Ibrahim
and Khalila Mohammed’s relationship continued in the weeks that followed. They
continued to communicate primarily via text message. In those messages, Khalila
Mohammed frequently talks to Ibrahim about avoiding the police and repeatedly
cautioned him about discussing the case via text message. She continued to
update him on the media reports about the shooting and information she had
received about the investigation from her co-workers. She also continued to
provide him with Percocet pills.
40
.       On
July 13 they discussed the arrest of Damian Hudson. The discussion continues
into the following day when they discuss whether Hudson might “rat” on Ibrahim.
41
.       On
July 16 Khalila Mohammed told Ibrahim to let her conduct the web searches
regarding the shooting for him “just to be safe” and chastised him for being
near his own apartment, offering instead to rent him a place through Air BnB.
42
.       The
following day, after they discuss a billboard posted regarding the case,
Khalila Mohammed assured Ibrahim him he will not be identified: “No face, no
case”.
43
.       On
July 20 Khalila Mohammed rented an Air B n B in Pickering using her account.
Ibrahim met her at the residence and the two spent the night together.
44
.       Khalila
Mohammed was arrested on August 14, 2023. She was transported to the police
station and put in touch with duty counsel. She then spoke to Homicide
Detectives. Initially, she was unaware that she had been charged as an
Accessory.
She
was advised of that and provided another opportunity to speak to counsel. She
then provided a lengthy statement to the police, essentially denying any
knowledge of Ibrahim, contrary to her text messages.
“Um,
what can you tell me about, uh, the person you provided wound care to? What's
their name?
I
don't know that now.
…
Um,
this person that you provided wound care to, you don't know their name?
We
don't. It's a completely anonymous service. We don't ask people their names if
27
they
need gauze.”
…
“Who’s
Ben? I dunno.”
45
.       She
also denied having travelled to an Air B&B with Ben, contrary to her text messages,
Air B&B records and the surveillance of Khalila Mohammed and Ibrahim at the
Air B&B.