Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj252/2025oncj252.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Cheng
, 2025 ONCJ
252
DATE:  2025·05·07
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
KIT
WAH CHENG
JUDGMENT
Evidence and Submissions
Heard: May 7, 2025.
Delivered: May 7,
2025
Ms. Nicole Cadman.................................................................................  
counsel for the Crown
Mr.  Kit Wah Cheng .....................................................................................................   defendant
KENKEL J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
Mr. Cheng was on a bail with several
conditions including a term prohibiting him from attending within 100m of the
residence of his daughter and his former partner. The Crown alleges that while
subject to that condition, Mr. Cheng attended their residence and dropped off a
cardboard box and several bags. Mr. Cheng’s daughter called the police. The
incident was captured on the home surveillance video system.
[
2
]
Mr. Cheng is charged with failing to comply
with a condition of his bail contrary to s 145(5)(a).
The Home Surveillance Video
[
3
]
Mr. Cheng’s former partner testified that
her home has a surveillance camera system that points towards the back entrance
and back yard of their home. She identified the home surveillance video showing
her backyard area on June 15, 2024 which was marked as Exhibit #2. She
confirmed the date and times displayed on her home video are generally accurate.
She testified that the video exhibit represents what was on the SIM card in her
system. She agreed with the question put by Mr. Cheng suggesting that there is
a gap in the video. She disagreed that she altered the video in any way before
it was given to the police.
[
4
]
The accused’s daughter testified that she
was home at the time of the incident. She confirmed that it happened on June
15, 2024, as recorded on the video. She was in her back yard when she noticed a
familiar figure. She walked out to look, then quickly returned inside her
residence. She saw Mr. Cheng come into her backyard carrying boxes. She called
police as she was afraid for her safety.
[
5
]
Mr. Cheng challenges the video evidence
marked as Exhibit #2 and the screenshot from a second video camera in the same
system marked as Exhibit #3. He submits that the gap shown in Exhibit 2
suggests the evidence might have been tampered with. He submits the clothing shown
in the video and photograph are inconsistent, another indication that the evidence
is fake. He submits that it would have been easy for the complainants to
falsify the dates and represent video of prior attendances when he was not
bound by the bail as having occurred when he was. Given the family breakup and
the existence of another matter before the courts, Mr. Cheng submits that both
his former partner and his daughter have a motive to fabricate evidence.
[
6
]
I find the credible evidence of Mr. Cheng’s
former partner and his daughter proves the authenticity and integrity the video
and the screen shot photograph. The record is relevant and probative of the
central issue at trial. There is no rule that requires it be excluded. The
video was admitted on that basis.
[
7
]
I agree with Mr. Cheng that the video
includes a gap prior to his appearance. I agree with Mr. Cheng that the
emergence of “deepfake” evidence and the ability to manipulate electronic
records means this court must carefully consider the weight to be given these
exhibits.
[
8
]
The gap was reasonably explained in the
evidence of Mr. Cheng’s daughter. The home surveillance system activates in
response to movement. The video captured the daughter looking to her right as
she described in her evidence, then leaving the backyard to step towards the
parking lot as she continued looking. The video showed her turn back towards
her house. The gap starts there, in the period when she was out of her yard,
away from the camera. Within the same minute the video was again activated by
movement when Mr. Cheng entered the back yard.
[
9
]
The second circumstance of concern to Mr.
Cheng was the alleged discrepancy between the clothing shown in the video
captured by camera 1 of the system, and the screenshot taken from the camera 2
video. Comparing the video and the screenshot, it’s plain that Mr. Cheng’s
clothing is exactly the same in both.
[
10
]
Finally, Mr. Cheng submits that these
exhibits could have been taken from prior lawful visits with the date altered
to put it within the period when he was prohibited from attending.
[
11
]
There’s no evidence of prior lawful visits.
Mr. Cheng’s former partner didn’t know how Mr. Cheng found out where they
lived. If there were prior lawful visits, there’s no evidence that the SIM card
described by the witness would hold such videos long enough for the date to be
altered as suggested by Mr. Cheng.
[
12
]
Mr. Cheng’s daughter testified that she
called police after she saw her father come into the back yard of her
residence. She knew he was on a condition at the time not to attend within 100m
of her home. Police attended and at their direction she uploaded a copy of the
video marked as Exhibit 2 and a screenshot from the second camera video marked
as Exhibit 3. She gave her evidence in a credible and straightforward manner.
Her evidence was logical and internally consistent. I accept her testimony regarding
the video records including the manner in which they were provided to the
police without alteration.
[
13
]
I find the Crown has proved that both
records were made on the day in question as described by Mr. Cheng’s daughter.
There’s no evidence that could reasonably diminish the weight to be given to that
evidence.
The Bail Condition
[
14
]
The Crown tendered the original Information
23-91111083 and the release dated April 29, 2024 as evidence that the accused
was subject to the bail condition specified on the date of the alleged breach.
[
15
]
The documents show that Mr. Cheng was
subject to a bail which included a condition that he not attend within 100m of
the residence of his daughter and his former partner. He was subject to that
recognizance on the date alleged.
The Breach
[
16
]
His former partner testified that she and
Mr. Cheng separated in 2017. As a result of another incident, Mr. Cheng was
subject to a bail condition not to attend at the home she shares with her
daughter.
[
17
]
On June 15, 2024, Mr. Cheng’s daughter
called the police alleging that Mr. Cheng attended the home. She directly
witnessed the alleged breach. She saw her father approach her home and she
returned inside as she feared for her safety. Her father left a box and several
bags in the backyard. Mr. Cheng’s former partner testified that the box and
bags contained some of his daughter’s childhood toys.
[
18
]
The daughter’s evidence was credible and
logical. Her testimony was consistent with her actions that day. Her evidence was
consistent with the external video record and screenshot from the second video.
Both show Mr. Cheng attended the backyard as she described. Both cameras have
direct views of Mr. Cheng and in the camera 2 screenshot he looked directly at
the camera. The credible evidence as a whole proves beyond any doubt that Mr.
Cheng attended the home of his daughter and former partner on June 15, 2024
contrary to the boundary condition of his bail that was active at that time.
Lawful Excuse
[
19
]
There’s no evidence that could provide a
lawful excuse.
Conclusion
[
20
]
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find
that the Crown has proved the charge alleged. I can find no evidence that
reasonably could leave a doubt in that regard.
Delivered:  May 7, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel