Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj427/2025oncj427.html

CITATION:
R. v. Marshall
, 2025
ONCJ 427
DATE:  August 15, 2025
COURT FILE No.: 1260-999-24-8072
ONTARIO COURT OF
JUSTICE
(Central West Region)
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
(The Region of Halton)
(Prosecution)
— and —
Owen Richard Marshall
(Defendant)
TRIAL JUDGEMENT
Before Justice of the Peace T.J. Howard
Trial heard February 20
th
, 21
st
and May 9
th
, 2025 in Burlington, Ontario
Judgement delivered July 22, 2025 in
Burlington, Ontario
Written reasons released electronically
August 15, 2025
Ms. Bhatnagar, S...................................................................................  
for the Prosecution
Mr. Paquette, D. ......................................................................    Counsel
for the Defendant
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE  T.J.
HOWARD
Introduction
[
1
]
The
defendant, Mr. Owen Richard Marshall is charged with the offence of careless
driving causing bodily harm, contrary to subsection 130(3) of the
Highway
Traffic Act
, R.S.O., c. H.8, as amended (HTA).  The prosecution alleges
that Mr. Marshall committed this offence on August 2
nd
, 2023, in the
Town of Oakville when he merged onto the Queen Elizabeth Way (QEW) highway and
collided with a motorcycle driven by Mr. Syed Pirzada, who then fell from his
motorcycle and suffered life-altering injuries.  Mr. Marshall pled not guilty
to the charge.  His trial took place on February 20
th
, February 21
st
,
and May 9
th,
2025, in Burlington, Ontario.  These are my reasons for
judgement.
[
2
]
It
is undisputed that on the morning of August 2, 2023, Mr. Marshall drove onto the
westbound QEW from northbound Third Line in Oakville.  Upon merging to the QEW
he collided with a motorcycle driven by Mr. Syed Pirzada in the westbound
lanes.  Mr. Pirzada subsequently fell from his motorcycle and was gravely hurt;
tragically sustaining permanent, life-altering injuries.  Police investigated,
which included interviewing Mr. Marshall, interviewing several witnesses, surveying
the crash scene, and expertly reconstructing the collision.  What is in dispute
is whether Mr. Marshall merged in a manner that was careless.
[
3
]
The
prosecution claims that Mr. Marshall merged onto the QEW too quickly and
dangerously, failing to observe Mr. Pirzada’s approaching motorcycle, thereby hitting
him, and causing his injuries.  Mr. Marshall claims that the available evidence
supports alternative scenarios, including that Mr. Marshall merged carefully,
and that Mr. Pirzada was driving carelessly.
[
4
]
Only
the prosecution presented evidence in this trial.  Thus, the only issue I must
resolve is whether the prosecution has proven Mr. Marshall’s guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.  Specifically, I must decide whether the prosecution has
proven the
actus reus
of the offence – that Mr. Marshall drove without
due care and attention or without reasonable consideration for other persons
using the highway in all the circumstances.  To resolve this issue, I will need
to examine what the evidence reveals about the way Mr. Marshall merged onto the
QEW and the surrounding circumstances, including Mr. Pirzada’s driving.
[
5
]
For
the reasons that follow, I conclude that the prosecution has failed to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Marshall committed the offence of careless
driving causing bodily harm.
Analysis
Relevant
Statutory Provisions and Legal Principles
Careless
Driving
[
6
]
The
two statutory provisions most relevant here are ss. 130(3) and 130(5) of the
HTA
. 
Subsection 130(3) reads as follows:
Every person is guilty of the offence of
driving carelessly who
drives
a
vehicle
or street car on a
highway
or in a specified place
without due care and attention
or
without
reasonable consideration for other persons using the highway
or specified
place and who
thereby causes bodily harm
or death to any person.
[emphasis added]
Subsection 130(5) reads as
follows:
For the purposes of subsections (1) and
(3), and without limiting the generality of subsections (1) and (3), a person
is
deemed to drive without reasonable consideration for other persons using
the highway
or specified place if he or she
drives in a manner that may
limit his or her ability to prudently adjust to changing circumstances on the
highway
or in the specified place. [emphasis added]
To make out a case
of careless driving against Mr. Marshall, the prosecution must establish the
essential elements contained in s. 130(3) underlined above.  Subsection 130(5) qualifies
the phrase “drive without reasonable consideration” without limiting what it
may entail.
[
7
]
The
offence of careless driving is a strict liability offence for which the
gravamen is “inadvertent negligence”: see
R. v. Shergill
,
[2016] O.J.
No. 1503, at paras. 12 and 26
.
[
8
]
Shergill,
supra
also clarifies that an “accident” and “momentary inattentiveness” are
both factors that
may
be sufficient to establish careless driving, but
not necessarily.  What is crucial is the context in which they occur and the
driving behavior of the defendant relative to what is expected of a reasonably
prudent driver: see
Shergill, supra
, paras. 24 and 28;
R. v.
Beauchamp
,
1952 CanLII 60 (ON CA)
, [1952] O.J. No. 495, pg. 7.
[
9
]
At
paragraph 23 of
Shergill, supra
the Court states the following regarding
accidents:
If, in the circumstances, the
only reasonable inference to
be drawn
from the fact of an accident is that the defendant was operating
his or her vehicle on a highway without due care and attention or without
reasonable consideration for other persons using the highway then the
actus
reus
has been made out. [emphasis added]
[
10
]
Importantly, in accident cases, exculpatory evidence about a
defendant’s driving and a resulting accident may give rise to reasonable
inferences other than guilt.  In
R. v. Lattimore
,
[2015] O.J. 5572
(leave to appeal refused October 13, 2015, ONCA J.A. Laforme [unreported]) at
paras. 13 to 18, the appeal judge found that the trial justice of the peace
misapprehended the evidence surrounding an accident, and the defendant’s role
therein, by failing to consider alternative scenarios supported by the evidence. 
Because these possibilities were not merely speculative, the Crown’s inability
to exclude them meant the case was not proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
11
]
Regarding momentary inattentiveness, the Court in
Shergill,
supra
states the following at paras. 28 and 29:
[28]…If, given all of the surrounding circumstances,
momentary inattentiveness by a driver
does not constitute a departure from
the due care and attention or reasonable consideration demanded of an
ordinarily prudent driver
then it cannot constitute the offence of careless
driving and is not punishable.  If the court considers that given all of the
circumstances the
degree of inattentiveness displayed by the defendant goes
beyond what one would expect of a reasonably prudent driver in such circumstances
,
then the offence has been made out.
[29] I emphasize that it is my view, incorrect to boldly
state that momentary inattentiveness cannot constitute careless driving.  The
trier of fact must conduct an analysis of the evidence in each case and must
measure the evidence of inattentiveness against the standard expected of a
reasonably prudent driver. [emphasis added]
[
12
]
Crucially, this analysis must be of the alleged driving behavior
“at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed measured against the
expectation of the conduct of a reasonably prudent driver”:
Shergill, supra
,
para. 30. Driving behavior of the defendant leading up to the alleged offence
is not determinative and should be viewed simply as one of many circumstances
surrounding the alleged offence.
[
13
]
In the case before me, Mr. Marshall’s driving behavior must be
assessed in the context of his merge onto the QEW. The
HTA
does not
specifically deal with merging onto a highway, rather, it deals generally with
safe moves and signaling at ss. 154(1)(a) and 142(1) respectively (Mr. Marshall
is not charged under these sections). Section 154(1)(a) of the
HTA
states:
Where a highway has been divided
into clearly marked lanes for traffic,
(a)  a vehicle shall not be
driven from one lane to another lane or to the shoulder or from the shoulder to
a lane unless
the driver first ascertains that it can be done safely
;
[emphasis added]
Section 142(1)
states:
The driver or operator
of a vehicle upon a highway before turning to the left or right at any
intersection or into a private road or driveway or from one lane for traffic to
another lane for traffic or to leave the roadway
shall first see that the
movement can be made in safety
, and if the operation of any other vehicle
may be affected by the movement shall give a signal plainly visible to the
driver or operator of the other vehicle of the intention to make the movement.
[emphasis added]
[
14
]
These subsections place a duty on drivers when turning or changing
lanes to
first
ensure they can do so safely.  Notably, failing to turn
or change lanes in safety is also a strict liability offence: see
R. v.
Dillman
,
2008 ONCJ 101, at para. 13
.  A driver, to turn safely, must consider
other drivers’ behaviors, including that other drivers may not be following the
rules of the road.  However, this is subject to reasonable limits. On this
issue, the Court in
Dillman, supra
at para. 19 reasoned as follows:
All of the
circumstances must be considered in determination of whether a turn was made in
safety. Where, as here, visibility of oncoming traffic is limited, it is my
view that
safety requires that the left turning driver make allowances for
the predictable shortcomings and potential negligence of drivers
who may
soon appear. While it has sometimes been said that a driver is entitled to
assume that other drivers will obey the rules of the road, I think there are
limits to such an assumption particularly where there is an onus to do
something "in safety".
In my view the safe left turner is not
entitled to assume that all other drivers will be strictly adhering to speed
limits or paying perfect attention to the road ahead
.
On the other hand
it would be an unreasonable standard of care and tantamount to imposing
absolute liability to hold that the turn was not made in safety because an
accident was caused by, for example, the gross speed or gross inattention of an
oncoming driver.
[emphasis added]
[15]
In my view, similar
reasoning applies in the scenario of highway merging.  The merging driver,
which is the driver making a move into established traffic, ought to account
for the shortcomings of drivers on the highway including, but not limited to,
speeding.  This forms a part of the “reasonable consideration for other persons
using the highway” and “prudently adjust to changing circumstances on the
highway” portions of ss. 130(3) and 130(5) respectively.  However, this duty
also
rests with drivers already on the highway, who must be considerate of merging
vehicles.  It would be unreasonable to expect drivers merging onto a highway to
anticipate gross inattention or carelessness on the part of drivers in
established traffic.  In other words, a lack of due care and attention or a
lack of reasonable consideration on the part of a driver(s) in established highway
traffic may be a factor that negates the ability of even a prudent driver to merge
onto a highway safely.
[16]
There is support for
this reasoning in the case law, where Courts have found that drivers are
entitled to anticipate safe driving behavior from other drivers at critical
moments.  For example,
in
R. v. Beauchamp
,
1952 CanLII 60 (ON CA)
,
[1953] O.R. 422
, pg. 12-13
the Ontario Court of Appeal stated:
To support a charge under s. 29(1) of The Highway Traffic Act, the
evidence must be such as to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
drove in the manner prohibited by the subsection, namely, without due care and
attention or without reasonable consideration for others. The standard of care
and skill to be applied has been long established and is not that of
perfection. It is, I think, correctly stated in Mazengarb, op cit., at pp.
176-7, as follows:
"The law does not require of any driver that he should
exhibit 'perfect nerve and presence of mind, enabling him to do the best thing
possible.' It does not expect men to be more than ordinary men.
Drivers of
vehicles cannot be required to regulate their driving as if in constant fear
that other drivers who are under observation, and apparently acting reasonably
and properly, may possibly act at a critical moment in disregard of the safety
of themselves and other users of the road.
"But the law does insist upon a reasonable amount of skill in
the handling of a vehicle which is a potential source of danger to other users
of the road. ... The question always is 'What would an ordinary prudent person
in the position of the plaintiff have done in relation to the event complained
of?'" (Pollock on Torts uses the term "average man".) [emphasis
added]
[1]
Again, it stands to
reason that some degree of imperfect driving ought to be anticipated by drivers
merging onto a highway, but merging drivers can
also
reasonably expect
that drivers in established highway traffic will act safely at moments where vehicles
are merging.
Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
[17]
This case contains
both direct and circumstantial evidence.  Proof beyond a reasonable doubt in
this case will therefore require a combination of findings from both sources.
In
R. v. Lifchus
1997 CanLII 319 (SCC)
,
[1997] 3 SCR 320 (SCC)
a “reasonable doubt” is defined
in part as: “not an imaginary or frivolous doubt.  It must not be based on
sympathy or prejudice.  Rather, it is based on reason and common sense.  It is
logically derived from the evidence or absence of evidence.”  Guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt effectively sits between absolute certainty and probable guilt:
see
R. v. Starr
,
2000 SCC 40
, para.
242
.
[18]
In cases with
circumstantial evidence, inferences must be drawn from the evidence as a whole:
see
R. v. Cinous
,
2002 SCC 29
, para.
88
.
In R
. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33
, paras.
35 and 36
the Supreme Court clarified that “inferences
consistent with innocence do not have to arise from proven facts”, but can
arise from the absence of evidence; a finding of guilt based on circumstantial
evidence can only be supported where a trier of fact is satisfied that the only
rational inference to be drawn is guilt.
[19]
Further, establishing
proof beyond a reasonable doubt in a case where credibility is determinative
requires the analytical approach set out in
W.(D.).
and
summarized in
R.
v. Doiron
,
2013 NBCA 31
, para.
26
as follows:
W.(D.)
sets out an analytical approach for reaching a verdict in a case
where credibility is determinative. It provides that, in such cases, a verdict
cannot be reached by simply choosing one version of the evidence over the
other. At all times the question is whether the prosecution has proven its case
beyond a reasonable doubt. Where an accused has testified but the evidence is
not believed, the testimony may nevertheless raise a reasonable doubt
justifying acquittal. Even if it does not, a conviction cannot be sustained
unless, on the whole of the evidence, the trier of fact is convinced of the
guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
W.(D.)
does
not subject trial judges to recite a particular mantra. So long as a trial
judge gives effect to the approach and addresses the live issues in the case, a
ground of appeal based on
W.(D.)
is bound to fail.
[20]
As counsel for Mr.
Marshall correctly submits, the application of this analytical approach is
required even in cases where the defendant has not testified, but there exists exculpatory
evidence presented through the Crown’s case:
see
R. v. Fogah
,
2018 ONCA 564 (CanLII)
,
[2018]
O.J. No. 3402
, para.
53
.  In the case before me, this exculpatory evidence
includes, but is not limited to, Mr. Marshall’s statements to police.  Thus, a
W.(D.)
analysis is required.
Positions of the Parties
The
Prosecution
[21]
The prosecution submits
that the evidence in this case is clear and supports a finding that Mr.
Marshall drove his vehicle carelessly into Mr. Pirzada’s motorcycle, hitting
him, and causing him to fall and be gravely injured.
[22]
First, the
prosecution submits that the strongest evidence comes from the sole eyewitness to
the collision, Mr. Keegan Walker, who the prosecution argues is credible and
reliable.  The prosecution argues that Mr. Walker had a good ability to observe
the driving of Mr. Marshall before the collision, the driving of Mr. Pirzada, the
collision itself, and the events following the collision.  Moreover, the
prosecution argues that Mr. Walker’s testimony aligns with the physical
evidence of the collision captured by police, which boosts his credibility and
reliability.
[23]
Second, the
prosecution submits that the evidence shows that Mr. Marshall was driving the Black
Acura TL motor vehicle that collided with Mr. Pirzada’s motorcycle.  Here the
prosecution highlights the testimony of Mr. Walker, the video evidence, witness’
observations of Mr. Marshall following the collision, and evidence summarized
in the technical collision report.
[24]
Third, the
prosecution submits that the maneuver made by Mr. Marshall, which precipitated
the collision, was careless.  The prosecution posits that three factors
contributed to this: i) that Mr. Marshall merged at the preliminary portion of
the merge lane without gathering sufficient information to confirm it was safe,
ii) that Mr. Marshall attempted to overtake the vehicle ahead of him in the
merge lane, which was unpredictable and negatively impacted road safety, and
iii) that Mr. Marshall knowingly operated a vehicle with a deficient side
mirror, which limited his visibility.
[25]
On factor one, the
prosecution highlights evidence that makes out where Mr. Marshall merged – the
initial portion of the merge lane. The prosecution argues that this early merge
forced Mr. Pirzada to attempt to stop at the last minute.  The prosecution
stresses that the merge lane is long, which afforded Mr. Marshall the
opportunity to continue in that lane for an extended period before merging; his
early merge was unnecessary.
[26]
On factor two, the
prosecution argues that Mr. Marshall attempted to merge “out of sequence” and
“overtake” the vehicle ahead of him in the merge lane.  The prosecution argues
that Mr. Pirzada could not have reasonably anticipated that Mr. Marshall would do
this, and therefore would not have made the requisite adjustments for Mr.
Marshall entering the highway.
[27]
On factor three, the
prosecution argues that the corroded side mirror on Mr. Marshall’s vehicle
exacerbated the above two factors by making it more difficult for Mr. Marshall
to see to his rear while merging.  The prosecution argues that even if Mr.
Marshall did not fully rely on this mirror – for example, by checking his blind
spot – his merge nonetheless cut closely in front of Mr. Pirzada.  In either
scenario, given the combination of all the above factors, the prosecution
argues that Mr. Marshall’s driving was careless.
The Defence
[28]
The defence argues
that none of the evidence supports that Mr. Marshall drove without due care and
attention or without reasonable consideration for other drivers.  The defence
points to inconsistencies in the evidence of the collision and surrounding circumstances. 
The defence submits that there are some reliability concerns with the evidence
of the sole eyewitness to the collision, Mr. Walker; testimony from other witnesses’
conflicts with, or creates uncertainty about, Mr. Walker’s account.
[29]
Moreover, the
defence highlights that Mr. Walker’s observations included that there was “good
room to merge” for Mr. Marshall before the collision.  The defence submits that
this observation aligns with Mr. Marshall’s evidence to police – that he
observed a gap in traffic and merged after checking that it was safe to do so.
[30]
Finally, the defence
submits that the evidence of Mr. Pirzada’s driving leading up to the collision,
including the fact that his motorcycle may have struck Mr. Marshall’s vehicle (not
the other way around) raises several unanswerable questions about how the
collision took place.  Thus, the defence argues, the prosecution has not proven
Mr. Marshall’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
The Evidence
[31]
The evidence
presented in this trial consisted of viva voce testimony, a Ministry of
Transportation video, scene photographs, EMS and medical reports, a vehicle
examination report, a technical collision investigation report, and a collision
reconstruction report.  I heard from 16 witnesses, including 7 civilian
witnesses and 9 officers.  Not all the evidence served to clarify the issues in
dispute.  Therefore, I will summarize only the most relevant portions below.
Mr. Marshall’s driving and merge onto the QEW
[32]
It is conceded by
the defence that Mr. Marshall was driving a Black Acura TL from northbound Third
Line onto the westbound QEW via the on-ramp, and at some point, collided with
the motorcycle driven by Mr. Pirzada.  Direct evidence of Mr. Marshall’s
driving prior to, and during his merge, comes from two sources: i) Mr.
Marshall’s statements to police, and ii) Mr. Walker’s observations.  No other
witness directly observed Mr. Marshall’s merge or the point of impact. 
Moreover, there is limited circumstantial evidence of Mr. Marshall’s driving
prior to, and during his merge.
[33]
Mr. Marshall’s
statements include a spontaneous utterance overheard by Officer Pinkney (one of
the first officers to arrive at the scene following the collision), two statements
at roadside to Officer Choi (the investigating officer), and a third statement
at a police station to Officer Choi.
[34]
Officer Pinkney
testified that as Mr. Marshall stood at the scene, he uttered aloud to no one
in particular “I don’t know if I hit him, I don’t know if I hit him, I don’t
know if I hit him”.  Officer Pinkney observed Mr. Marshall to be visibly shaken
up.
[35]
Some short time
later, at approximately 9:13 am, Mr. Marshall spoke to Officer Choi at the side
of the roadway.  Officer Choi testified that he cautioned Mr. Marshall about
potential charges under the
HTA
or the
Criminal Code
.
Officer
Choi recorded Mr. Marshall’s statement in his notebook using quotations as “merging
on from Third Line to QEW westbound, checked mirror and made a lane change, traffic
moving steady approximately 70 km per hour. I didn’t even know if it was me that
hit him, but saw the motorcycle wobble and fall.  I pulled over and saw that my
rear left bumper was sticking out, that’s when I thought that it must have been
me.”  Officer Choi also described Mr. Marshall as visibly shaken up.
[36]
Officer Choi
testified that he had a second interaction with Mr. Marshall at the roadside,
near Mr. Marshall’s vehicle, but he failed to take note of it.  From memory,
Officer Choi testified that he asked Mr. Marshall about the sideview mirror of
his vehicle (which was corroded), and recalled Mr. Marshall stating that he
“got the vehicle like that”.  Officer Choi also recalled Mr. Marshall
indicating that his rear bumper was dislodged, but cannot recall if Mr.
Marshall explicitly pointed this out or not.  Officer Choi could not explain
why the details of this second interaction were not in his note book.
[37]
Officer Choi further
testified that he escorted Mr. Marshall and his father to the Burlington
detachment of the OPP, arriving at approximately 10:57 am.  Officer Choi
re-cautioned Mr. Marshall for “careless driving causing bodily harm” and
“unsafe vehicle” and began an interview at 11:13 am.  During the interview, at
approximately 11:21 am, Officer Choi learned of a “technical difficulty” with
the recording equipment, which resulted in the interview not being recorded.  Mr.
Marshall asked to speak to legal counsel after being advised of his right to do
so by Officer Choi.  After speaking with legal counsel, Mr. Marshall decided
not to provide any further statements.
[38]
After the interview,
Officer Choi was forced to summarize what he recalled of Mr. Marshall’s
statement.  He wrote the following in his notes: “Merging on from the ramp to
QEW westbound at third line, check my side mirror on the driver’s side and
turned my head to check my blind spot, saw the motorcycle in the lane
approximately 1 ½ car lengths behind the middle lane, change with signal on,
the road was dry and visibility was clear”.  Officer Choi testified that this
was not verbatim, but was his effort to paraphrase what Mr. Marshall said.
[39]
In chief
examination, Mr. Keegan Walker testified that he was driving a black Volkswagen
Golf GTI westbound on the QEW approaching Third Line before the collision.  Mr.
Walker testified that he was travelling at approximately 100 km/h.  He recalled
driving in the “middle lane” before moving to the “far right lane”, whereupon
he first noticed the motorcycle approximately 100 meters ahead of him in the
same lane.  Mr. Walker testified that he had a clear line of sight to the
motorcycle, as there were no cars in between the two.
[40]
Mr. Walker testified
that he also had a clear view of the Third Line on-ramp and observed two
vehicles travelling on the ramp approaching the QEW.  Mr. Walker initially
described the first of the two vehicles as a “white car” and described the
second as a “black car”.
[41]
Mr. Walker observed
the black car merge before the white car, and interpreted this to mean that the
black car failed to see the approaching motorcycle.  Mr. Walker estimated that
“it looked from a long way off that it was going to be a crash”.  He also felt that
the black car wanted to merge “quicker” than the white car, and therefore tried
to “overtake” it.  Mr. Walker testified that the black car did not “get up to
speed” with highway traffic before merging, which forced the motorcycle to try and
stop unsuccessfully.  Mr. Walker observed the motorcycle hit the rear left side
of the black car before falling to the ground.
[42]
In cross
examination, Mr. Walker admitted that the event was traumatic to observe, and
that he believed at the time that the driver of the motorcycle might have died. 
He testified that the motorcycle was travelling at less than 100 km/h as it
approached the Third Line on-ramp.  Mr. Walker stated that the black car had
“good space to merge”, but the motorcycle was closing in.  He reiterated that
the motorcycle tried to stop but couldn’t, and moved to the left, before
hitting the rear of the black car.  He also reiterated that the motorcycle was
driving straight, not erratically.  After viewing the video (exhibit 1) Mr.
Walker was uncertain about the color of the first car on the on-ramp.  He
initially thought that it was white, but admitted it could have been gray.
[43]
Mr. Michael
Kavanaugh testified that he was also driving on the QEW in the “far right” lane
approaching the Third Line overpass when he observed “smoke” that seemingly
preceded the collision.  Mr. Kavanaugh testified that he was directly behind a
black VW Golf (appears to be Mr. Walker), but that there were approximately 4-5
vehicles between him and the motorcycle, with approximately 3 car lengths
between each vehicle.  Mr. Kavanaugh testified that this black VW Golf passed
him on his
right
shortly before the collision, and merged in front of
him just prior to the collision.
[44]
Mr. Kavanaugh also
testified that he observed the motorcycle veer to its left and strike a tractor
trailer that was travelling in the lane to the left.  Mr. Kavanaugh observed
the motorcycle strike the tire of this tractor trailer before falling to the
ground. Mr. Kavanaugh did not see what caused the motorcycle to veer, nor did
he see the point of impact between the motorcycle and Mr. Marshall’s vehicle.
[45]
The circumstantial
evidence of Mr. Marshall’s driving is largely limited to
where
he merged. 
The technical collision investigation report (exhibit 12) contains a series of photographs
of the scene taken by Officer N. Thompson of the OPP.  This series of
photographs is at Appendix “D” of the report, and shows the scene from various
vantage points following the collision.  The photographs starting at page 12/27
of Appendix “D” (labelled 101_Collission Scene_13413_E231033910_070.JPG and
following) are particularly helpful in showing where the collision generally
took place, and thus, where Mr. Marshall generally merged.  This is the area
under the Third Line overpass toward the easterly edge, which is at the
preliminary portion of the merge lane.
[46]
Further, the expert
opinion of collision reconstruction Officer T. Braun, based on his analysis, was
that the point of impact was in lane 3 under the Third Line overpass, toward
the easterly edge.  Officer Braun’s analysis relied on the physical evidence on
the roadway, as well as the video evidence (exhibit 1).  It was Officer Braun’s
opinion that at the point of impact both Mr. Marshall’s vehicle and Mr.
Pirzada’s motorcycle were in lane 3.  The video shows that at the point both
vehicles exited the westerly edge of the Third Line overpass, the collision had
already occurred.  The defence does not dispute the point of impact nor the
area Mr. Marshall is said to have merged.
[47]
Importantly, Officer
Braun testified that he was not able to conduct any analysis of Mr. Marshall’s driving
speed due to a lack of physical evidence, and due to the lack of airbag control
module in Mr. Marshall’s dated Acura TL.  Further, there was no analysis
completed regarding the relationship of Mr. Marshall’s vehicle to the “white
car” ahead of him in the merge lane, nor the relationship between Mr.
Marshall’s vehicle and the vehicles of witnesses.
[48]
It is also not disputed
by the defence that Mr. Marshall’s vehicle had a corroded driver side sideview
mirror.  Photos of this are contained in the technical collision investigation
report at page 2/27 in Appendix “D”.  Importantly, this sideview mirror was
said to be “legal” by more than one officer in this trial.  Furthermore, there
was no expert opinion evidence that this mirror “impaired” Mr. Marshalls view
(as will be discussed).  However, there was expert opinion evidence of this
potential.  Frankly, this is obvious given the extent of the corrosion to the
mirror.
Mr. Pirzada’s driving
[49]
There is evidence of
erratic driving by a motorcyclist, likely to be Mr. Pirzada, before the
collision.  There is also evidence of proper driving by Mr. Pirzada before the
collision.  Mr. Pirzada’s driving is not determinative of the issue in this
trial, but it is a relevant factor for me to consider.
[50]
Again, Mr. Walker
testified that the motorcycle involved in the collision was driving straight in
its lane just prior to the collision.  Mr. Walker was asked in chief specifically
whether the motorcycle was driving recklessly and he replied that it was not.  However,
two witnesses observed a motorcycle driving erratically shortly before the
collision.
[51]
First, Mr. Collin
Dziwak testified that he was driving westbound on the QEW approaching Third
Line in the lane second from the left (beside the HOV lane).  He observed a
motorcycle driving erratically and was “80 to 90% sure” it was the same
motorcycle that was involved in the collision.  He first noticed this motorcycle
at Trafalgar Road and believed that the driver of the motorcycle was wearing a
long sleeve black and red shirt, black pants, and a low-profile black helmet. 
Mr. Dziwak observed the motorcycle speeding up and slowing down, and at one
point veering to the left of its lane, causing a silver Lexus SUV to veer left
– out of its own lane – to avoid hitting the motorcycle.  Mr. Dziwak was not 100%
certain it was the same motorcycle.
[52]
Second, Ms. Lauren
Mondell testified in chief examination that she was driving westbound on the
QEW in the “third lane” when she observed a motorcycle in front of her, continually
swaying in and out of their lane.  She recalls being so alarmed by the
motorcycle’s driving that – despite being alone in her car – she stated aloud,
“oh my gosh this guy’s going to get into an accident”.  She then testified as
follows: “I kind of hung back, because I was nervous, like I didn’t want to
pass him, because he was kind of going in and out at one point, like he almost
hit the back of another car.  And then sure enough, right after Third Line exit...I
didn’t see the actual collision, but I saw everything flying through the air.”
[53]
Ms. Mundell
testified that she believed the items seen flying though the air were from the
same motorcycle she observed driving erratically.  She believed this because
the jacket observed on the driver of both motorcycles looked the same to her; a
black jacket with a logo on the back.
[54]
In cross
examination, Ms. Mundell clarified that she first noticed the motorcycle
driving erratically at Trafalgar Road.  The erratic driving was what drew her
attention.  She explained that the type of driving she observed from the
motorcycle was the type of driving she would expect from someone who was
intoxicated; the motorcycle was continuously drifting between lanes.  Ms.
Mundell decided not to pass the motorcycle, instead staying behind it, because
she feared it might hit her.  She agreed with defence counsel’s characterization
of the motorcycle’s erratic driving as “consistent and persistent”, and further
agreed that the very outcome she feared came to pass, almost immediately
afterward.  Ms. Mundell testified that she lost sight of the motorcycle just
before the collision, but only for a brief time.  It was Ms. Mundell’s belief,
based on where she first saw the motorcycle, the distance travelled, and their speed,
that the motorcycles were one and the same.
The Collision
[55]
Direct evidence of
the collision comes from Mr. Walker.  The remaining evidence is circumstantial,
and includes photographic evidence, video evidence, physical evidence, expert opinion
evidence and witness testimony.
[56]
Again, Mr. Walker
testified that he observed the motorcycle strike the rear left side of Mr.
Marshall’s vehicle.  He then observed the motorcycle fall to the roadway and
the driver tumble.  Before it struck Mr. Marshall’s vehicle, Mr. Walker
observed the motorcycle try to slow down or stop unsuccessfully. Notably, Mr.
Walker did not mention anything about a tractor trailer, nor about the driver
of the motorcycle hitting his head on a tire.
[57]
The analysis from
the expert collision reconstructionist, Officer T. Braun of the OPP, which
considered much of the same evidence heard in this trial, culminated with the
following conclusions (see exhibit 13, pg. 23):
This collision occurred
when the rear left corner of the Acura came into contact with the front wheel of
the Kawasaki.  The Kawasaki fell to the road and started to slide on its left
side.  The rider separated from the motorcycle as it slid on the road.  Based
on my analysis of the physical and video evidence, I was unable to determine
the specific lane movements of either vehicle as they approached the area of
impact, other than that both vehicles were travelling westbound.  When the
collision occurred both vehicles were in lane 3.  As the result of this
collision the rider of the Kawasaki suffered serious life-threatening injuries.
[58]
As outlined above, Officer
Braun testified that no speed analysis was possible, nor was there an ability
for him to determine the pre-collision movements of the involved vehicles.  Thus,
Officer Braun’s analysis captured mainly what took place after the point of
impact, not before.  Similarly, the bulk of the evidence from the sources
listed above provide information solely about the circumstances following the
point of impact.
[59]
Crucially, Mr.
Pirzada did not testify (understandably based on his injuries).  Thus, there
was no direct evidence from Mr. Pirzada about his driving before the collision,
the driving of Mr. Marshall before the collision, or the circumstances
surrounding the collision.
Factual Findings
[60]
I make the following
findings of fact:
i)
Mr. Marshall merged
onto the QEW westbound from Third Line at the preliminary portion of the merge
lane;
ii)
Mr. Pirzada was
driving erratically shortly before the collision;
iii)
The front of Mr.
Pirzada’s motorcycle struck the rear left side of Mr. Marshall’s vehicle, after
Mr. Marshall had merged into lane 3, while both vehicles were in lane 3 (lane
immediately left of the merge lane)
I will address these findings in turn.
i)
Mr.
Marshall merged onto the QEW westbound from Third Line at the preliminary
portion of the merge lane
[61]
The evidence is
clear that Mr. Marshall merged onto the QEW at the preliminary portion of the merge
lane that follows the Third Line on-ramp.  Specifically, the portion of the
merge lane under the Third Line overpass.
[62]
The totality of
evidence (particularly the evidence summarized above at para. 44-45) shows that
Mr. Marshall moved from the merge lane to lane 3 while under the Third Line
overpass and then contacted Mr. Pirzada’s motorcycle.
[63]
As stated, the
prosecution submits that Mr. Marshall’s merge at this location prevented him
from gathering sufficient information about established traffic to merge
safely.  The prosecution also submits that Mr. Marshall’s merge was “out of
sequence” and was completed quickly to “overtake” the vehicle ahead of him.
[64]
Respectfully, I do
not accept these submissions.  While I agree that Mr. Marshall
may
have
benefitted from remaining in the merge lane for a longer period, the relevant
question is whether his merge at that point was safe.  This depends on the
surrounding circumstances.  The point where Mr. Marshall merged was marked by a
dashed line; it was beyond the “bullnose”, which is marked with a solid line. 
Thus, drivers entering the QEW at this location are permitted to merge at this
point.  Furthermore, it was established in evidence that there was a view of
the highway from the Third Line on-ramp (and vice versa), which would have
allowed Mr. Marshall and other drivers to gather some information about
established traffic before merging.
[65]
Critically, Mr.
Marshall provided evidence in his statement to Officer Choi at the police
station that he
did
gather information about traffic on the highway
before merging, by checking his sideview mirror and his blind-spot, while
signalling his lane change.  In fact, Mr. Marshall stated that he saw the
motorcycle before merging; he testified that it was in the “middle lane” about
1.5 car lengths back.  That Mr. Marshall took these steps – the steps expected
of prudent drivers – before merging onto the QEW is exculpatory.  Of course, how,
and why he then collided with Mr. Pirzada’s motorcycle remains an open
question.
[66]
To explain Mr.
Marshall’s merge and the subsequent collision, the prosecution relies heavily on
the testimony of Mr. Walker.  If Mr. Walker’s testimony is both credible and
reliable; if he was accurate about the relative positions of the involved
vehicles, their speed, and Mr. Marshall’s driving behavior, it is likely that
Mr. Marshall’s driving was careless.  However, I agree with the defence’s
submission that there exist some reliability concerns with Mr. Walker’s
account.
[67]
First, aspects of Mr.
Walker’s testimony were internally inconsistent, at least in their descriptions. 
He testified that there was “good space to merge” for Mr. Marshall (which corroborates
Mr. Marshall’s account), yet he described that the motorcyclist had to take immediate
evasive action to slow or stop.  These two descriptions are in conflict.
[68]
Second, Mr. Walker
testified that he was approximately 100 meters behind the motorcycle with a
clear line of sight.  However, this conflicts with the testimony of Mr.
Kavanaugh, who described that there were approximately 4-5 vehicles between him
and the motorcycle, while a black VW Golf was directly in front of him.  Mr.
Kavanaugh also testified that shortly before merging in front of him, this
black VW Golf passed him on the right.  This conflicts with Mr. Walker’s
testimony about his positions on the highway and his line of sight.  The
prosecution was unable to rectify these inconsistencies.  In fact, even the
prosecution was “confused” about how the black VW Golf could have passed Mr. Kavanaugh
on the
right
before the collision.  Further, the prosecution did not establish
the relative positions of witnesses’ vehicles on the QEW before the collision. 
In fairness, this would have been difficult, as the testimony of these
witnesses about their positions relative to the collision created a confused
picture.  After hearing all the evidence, I was not able to confidently place these
vehicles in space before the collision.
[69]
Turning to the
prosecution’s submission that Mr. Marshall merged “out of sequence” to
“overtake” the vehicle ahead of him.  This is based on Mr. Walker’s
interpretation of what he saw.  Mr. Walker’s
opinion
was that Mr.
Marshall tried to pass the vehicle ahead of him.  This version is not supported
by the evidence of Mr. Marshall; Mr. Marshall did not state to police that he
was attempting to overtake the vehicle ahead of him.  Further, as stated above,
there is no evidence from Officer Braun about the speed or movements of Mr.
Marshall’s vehicle before the collision, nor the speed or movements of the
“white car” ahead of him.
[70]
Moreover, the
prosecution submits no authority of the need for drivers merging onto a highway
to do so “in sequence” to be safe.  Indeed, I do not think this is the
prosecution’s claim.  Thus, I do not accept that Mr. Marshall was obligated to
allow the vehicle ahead of him to merge first.  This
may
have been
beneficial in the circumstances, but is not necessary, even for a prudent
driver.  The onus lies with the prosecution to show that it was imprudent and
unsafe for Mr. Marshall to have merged before the vehicle ahead of him in all
the circumstances.  In my view, they have not done so.
[71]
Finally, I also
cannot accept the prosecution’s submission that Mr. Marshall’s sideview mirror
impaired his view and contributed to his overall inattention.  As mentioned, it
is obvious that Mr. Marshall’s sideview mirror offered a restricted view to the
rear, due to the extent of its corrosion.  However, evidence is lacking that
the mirror
actually
impaired his view.  There was also no evidence that
a sidemirror in this condition is prohibited; it was described by more than one
police officer as “legal”.  Therefore, the only finding I can confidently make
with respect to Mr. Marshall’s driving before the collision is that he merged
at the preliminary portion of the merge lane.
ii)
Mr.
Pirzada was driving erratically shortly before the collision
[72]
There is conflicting
evidence about Mr. Pirzada’s driving before the collision.  However, in my
view, Mr. Walker’s account is mired by the reliability concerns noted above,
which raise doubts about the accuracy of his observations.  Conversely, the
accounts of Mr. Dziwak and Ms. Mundell are reliable, and corroborate one
another.  Of course, it is possible that Mr. Pirzada was driving erratically leading
up to the Third Line overpass, and was then driving properly at the point of
impact.  However, to make such a finding, I would need to rely solely on the
testimony of Mr. Walker, as he was the only witness claiming to have seen Mr.
Pirzada’s driving immediately before the collision.  I cannot do so for the
reasons already stated.
[73]
Both Mr. Dziwak and
Ms. Mundell saw a motorcycle driving erratically at Trafalgar Road heading
westbound on the QEW.  Both testified that the motorcycle was swerving within,
and outside of its lane.  Both testified that this swerving impacted other
drivers, including forcing other drivers to take evasive action.  Ms. Mundell
observed this motorcycle almost hit the rear end of another vehicle.  While Mr.
Dziwak was 80% to 90% sure that the motorcycle he observed was involved in the
collision, Ms. Mundell was all but 100% sure.  This evidence was compelling,
and raised vital questions about whether Mr. Pirzada was driving in a reckless manner
immediately before the collision, which would have prevented Mr. Marshall (or
any prudent driver in his position) from merging safely.
iii)
The
front of Mr. Pirzada’s motorcycle struck the rear left side of Mr. Marshall’s
vehicle, after Mr. Marshall had merged into lane 3, while both vehicles were in
lane 3 (lane immediately left of the merge lane)
[74]
For this finding, I
rely almost exclusively on the conclusions of expert collision
reconstructionist Officer Braun.  Officer Braun’s conclusions (outlined above
at para. 57) were based on his review of all available evidence, save and
except the testimony at trial.  His conclusions are both credible and
reliable.  Officer Braun added, in cross examination, that Mr. Marshall could
have been the one to strike Mr. Pirzada, or Mr. Pirzada could have been the one
to strike Mr. Marshall; the physical evidence and analyses do not reveal which
of these two scenarios occurred.
[75]
Importantly, both
vehicles were fully in lane 3 when contact occurred.  In other words, Mr.
Marshall had completed his merge into lane 3 before the point of impact.  The
point within the lane where contact occurred was toward the “top” of the lane;
the southern portion, near lane 2.  Beyond this, the evidence in totality
reveals little about how this collision unfolded and I can make no further
findings about it.
Legal Findings
[76]
This case requires
the analytical approach outlined in
W.(D.).
There is exculpatory
evidence that arose through the Crown’s case, which must be assessed and weighed
against the evidence that favors the Crown’s theory.  At the same time, I must
answer two important questions: i) given there was an accident in this case,
are there reasonable inferences that can be drawn from this fact, other than
Mr. Marshall was driving carelessly? and ii) does the evidence as a whole, including
a lack of evidence, support that Mr. Marshall’s driving fell below the standard
of an ordinarily prudent driver?
[77]
First, in my view,
there is an alternative reasonable inference that can be drawn from the facts
surrounding this collision.  Namely, that Mr. Pirzada was driving erratically
immediately before the collision, and caused or contributed to the collision.
[78]
The evidence from
Mr. Marshall’s statements, and the observations of Mr. Dziwak and Ms. Mundell
support this alternative inference.  Mr. Marshall stated that he saw Mr.
Pirzada’s motorcycle before merging and merged, nonetheless.  It stands to
reason, that Mr. Marshall would have taken steps to avoid a collision if one
were foreseeable.  It was clear that the collision was not foreseeable to Mr.
Marshall, as evidenced by his shock following the collision and lack of
certainty about whether he struck Mr. Pirzada.
[79]
Further, Mr. Pirzada
had an equal obligation to be considerate of Mr. Marshall’s merging vehicle,
and to drive safely at this critical moment.  Importantly, it was reasonable
for Mr. Marshall to anticipate safe driving from Mr. Pirzada at this critical
moment as
outlined in
Beauchamp
, supra.
If Mr. Pirzada was driving erratically
at this critical moment, in the fashion described by Mr. Dziwak and Ms. Mundell,
his driving goes well beyond the “imperfect” driving described in
Dillman,
supra
, that Mr. Marshall needed to account for.  The lack of testimony from
Mr. Pirzada on this point leaves open questions about his driving.  That Mr.
Pirzada may have been driving erratically, and may have made it difficult for
Mr. Marshall to merge safely in all the circumstances, is not a speculative
scenario; it is based on evidence.  Thus, the prosecution needed to exclude this
possibility.  In this case, they have failed to do so sufficiently.
[80]
Second, in my view, the
totality of evidence does not prove that Mr. Marshall’s driving departed from
what is expected of an ordinarily prudent driver in all the circumstances. 
Again, his evidence was that he checked his sideview mirror, turned his head to
check his blind spot, and signalled his turn, before merging into a gap in
traffic.  These are the precise steps that a prudent driver should take before
merging.  The prosecution was unable to sufficiently call into question the
credibility or reliability of Mr. Marshall’s evidence.  At the same time, the
prosecution was unable to rectify the inconsistencies in Mr. Walker’s testimony. 
Together, this raises doubt about the prosecution’s theory.
Conclusions
[81]
It is tragic that
Mr. Pirzada was so seriously injured in this collision.  It is also unfortunate
that the witnesses in this case, including Mr. Marshall experienced such a traumatic
event.  This was a difficult case for all parties involved, and a difficult
case to make findings on.  After considering the totality of the evidence, I
find there exists reasonable doubt about whether Mr. Marshall drove carelessly
in all the circumstances.  Thus, I must dismiss the charge against him.
________________________
Howard, T.J., Justice of the Peace
[1]
see also
R. v. Globocki
,
[1991] O.J. No. 214
, para. 61
;
R.
v. Lattimore
,
[2015] O.J. No. 5572
, para. 10
)