Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj401/2025oncj401.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Flight
, 2025 ONCJ 401
DATE: 
2025 07 29
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto 4815 998 23 48119022
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
ROSS FLIGHT
Before
Justice David Rose
Heard
on January 29, July 10, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on July 29, 2025
V. Gallegos........................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
C. Hurley, B. Daley ...............................................   counsel
for the accused Ross Flight
Rose J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Flight pleaded guilty before me to Accessing
Child Pornography and Possessing Child Pornography on January 5, 2023.  These
are the reasons for sentence.
The facts
[
2
]
An Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) was filed on
January 29 when Mr. Flight entered his plea.  In it Mr. Flight admitted to uploading
an image of  child sexual exploitation material to an image hosting service on
January 5, 2023.  It was of a girl between 8 and 12 years old in an erotic
position.  It met the definition of child pornography.  That uploading was
detected by the authorities in the US.  That in turn lead the Toronto police to
obtain a Production Order for the IP address of the user, and then a search
warrant for Mr. Flight’s address in Toronto.  When it was executed the police
found electronic devices which, when examined forensically, contained some 3046
unique images and 27 unique videos of child pornography.  The material fit all
categories of child pornography on the SAP (Sentencing Advisory Panel) scale. 
In other words they ranged from mere nudity of children with no sexual activity
all the way up to and including imagery with sadism involving children.
[
3
]
A representative sample was entered into
evidence by Det Hall of TPS.  She showed the Court 10 still images and 5 videos
seized from Mr. Flight.   They were mostly quite exploitive, depicting acts of
sexual humiliation. In one of the videos the child performing oral sex on the
man smiles as if she enjoys herself. In another an infant, apparently asleep in
diapers is being penetrated.  Another video shows a pre-pubescent girl being
penetrated.  From this I find that the material has a child who was groomed and
will surely suffer from the long lasting consequences.  Common sense tells me
that the infant must have been drugged or incapacitated in some way in order to
sleep through the assault.
[
4
]
The Crown seeks 2.5 years in jail, s. 161 Order,
SOIRA for life and DNA.  Defence does not oppose the s. 161 order, but opposes
the lifetime SOIRA Order.
Mr. Flight
[
5
]
A PSR and Risk Assessment of Mr. Flight was
filed at sentencing.  He is now 81 years old, has a graduate degree in
education and spent his career teaching at the high school level. He retired in
1999.  He has been in a stable marriage since 1968. He and his wife have 3
adopted children.  He enjoys spending time at his vacation property and
boating. In short, he has lived a pro-social, if not enviable, life for all of
his adulthood.
[
6
]
Mr. Fight has various health challenges:  He
wears a pacemaker, has Type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, coronary artery
disease, and hypertension.  He has a history of prostate cancer,
osteoarthritis, and various skin cancers. The letter of his physician Dr.
Shepherd confirms this.  He takes some 10 medications daily, and requires
intermittent blood glucose monitoring for his diabetes.
[
7
]
Mr. Flight filed letters of support from his
wife and his friend Ms. Hill.  As regards Ms. Hill, her understanding of the
case is inconsistent with the ASF, and I would reduce the weight of it
accordingly.  Nonetheless she confirms that Mr. Flight has otherwise lead a
pro-social life up to now.
[
8
]
The report of Dr. Stirpe and PSR shows insight
by Mr. Flight.  Specific deterrence is therefore not an element which requires
incarceration.  In the words of Dr. Stirpe, in the absence of a history of
sexual offences, viewing child sexual exploitation material is generally
associated with a low risk for future sexual offending. As she put it,
Mr. Flight has
no history of contact sexual offenses. In the absence of such a history, the
viewing of child sexual exploitation material (CSEM) is generally associated
with a low risk for future sexual offending. In cases where the convictions
pertain solely to accessing or possessing CSEM—certain protective factors may
be present that mitigate the risk of contact offending. These factors can
include high levels of empathy, strong self regulation, stable familial and
social relationships, and limited access to children. Mr. Flight has led a
prosocial life and therefore does not meet diagnostic criteria for antisocial
personality disorder, further reducing the likelihood of acting on deviant
sexual interests. Additionally, he is over 80 years old and has no prior record
of antisocial behavior, both of which are relevant considerations in assessing
risk.
Mr. Flight acknowledges
that his behavior was illegal and harmful. He did not minimize his actions,
instead describing them as fundamentally unacceptable and highly regrettable.
[
9
]
In coming to this conclusion Dr. Stirpe reviewed
the case file, interviews with Mr. Flight and the results of several actuarial tests
on him.
[
10
]
I would find that the sheer number of
significant ailments facing Mr. Flight make jail time more difficult.  There is
no evidence that the authorities cannot provide adequate medical care, but with
that said, jail time will be more difficult as an octogenarian inmate who
requires intensive monitoring and care in the jail setting.
[
11
]
Based on the forgoing I find the aggravating
factors in this case to be:
-the volume of
unique child sexual exploitation  images, which is over 3000;
-the gruesome
imagery in the sample videos.  The child who appears to enjoy her exploitation
will inevitably suffer significant psychological effects once she later
understands what happened to her.  The infant who was asleep while she was
being assaulted was likely drugged or incapacitated.  Gruesome, dreadful, and
vile are all proper adjectives for that sequence.
-because of
those two factors s. 718.01 is engaged;
-Mr. Flight had
uploaded child exploitation material to a hosting service on January 5, 2023. 
He therefore was not just a consumer of child pornography but a trader as well.
I have no hesitation in finding that he bears significant responsibility for
these offences.
[
12
]
There are several mitigating factors:
-Mr. Flight
pleaded guilty, and has accepted responsibility;
-Mr. Flight is
82 years old. It is therefore mitigating that he has lead a pro-social life
until now.  It is also mitigating that incarceration for a man of his age will
necessarily be more difficult. Elderly offenders tend to receive mitigation
because of age, see
R. v. R.(A.)
1994 CanLII 4524 (MB CA)
, [1994] 4 W.W.R. 620 (Man. C.A.), see
Love, Kelly, Doron, “
Age and Ageism in Sentencing Practises: Outcomes from a
Case Law Review”
(2012), 16 Can. Crim. L.R. 253.
-he has a
supportive partner;
-He is at a
low risk to re-offend;
-he suffers
from several serious health challenges.
[
13
]
For these reasons I find that the principle
concern in this sentencing is denunciation and deterrence.  It involves the
graphic exploitation of young children.  Mr. Flight was a consumer and trader
in child pornography.  His moral culpability is high.  Rehabilitation is also a
consideration but of lesser weight.
[
14
]
To repeat, denunciation and deterrence are principle
factors in this sentencing.  I would begin with the Supreme Court’s ruling in
R.
v. Friesen
2020 SCC 9
. Notably, the Court began its judgement with the
following:
5      Third, we send a strong
message that sexual offences against children are violent crimes that
wrongfully exploit children's vulnerability and cause profound harm to
children, families, and communities. Sentences for these crimes must increase.
Courts must impose sentences that are proportional to the gravity of sexual
offences against children and the degree of responsibility of the offender, as
informed by Parliament's sentencing initiatives and by society's deepened
understanding of the wrongfulness and harmfulness of sexual violence against
children. Sentences must accurately reflect the wrongfulness of sexual
violence against children and the far-reaching and ongoing harm that it causes
to children, families, and society at large.
[
15
]
While
Friesen
was itself a case about a
physical sexual assault against a 4 year old child, the Court was clear that
the new emphasis on proportionality must apply to cases involving child
pornography, see
Friesen
at par.
48
.  Clear as well is that the age of the
victim is a significant aggravating factor, where the victim(s) are younger
children, see
Friesen
at par.
134
, see also
R. v. Jenkins
2021
ONSC 2963
(Kelly J.)
[
16
]
I also take considerable guidance from the Ontario
Court of Appeal’s recent ruling
R. v. Pike and Scott
2024 ONCA 608
. In
that decision the Court conveniently summarized the list of aggravating and
mitigating factors for child pornography sentencing cases and, more importantly,
how sentencing courts should weigh them:
i.
The size of the collection is not determinative
and should be considered together with the number of real child victims, the
degree of organization, and the ratio of videos to still images; (para 167)
ii.
The seriousness of the collection’s nature turns
on the depicted activity’s degree of harmfulness and wrongfulness; (para 168)
iii.
Whether the collection depicts real children;
(para 169)
iv.
The duration, frequency, collaboration with
other offenders, planning, organization, sophistication, and participation in
the CP subculture are additional aggravating factors; (para 170)
v.
The absence of aggravating factors like the actual
production and distribution of CP, the depiction of very young children, or
payment to acquire CP is not mitigating; (para 171)
vi.
Good character, employment, and stigma are less
significant factors in sentencing people who possess CP and cannot function as
disguised class discrimination; (para 172) and
vii.
Courts assessing remorse and insight should
focus on whether people who possess CP recognize and express remorse for
wronging and harming real children. Conversely, these factors are entitled to
less weight if the people being sentenced continue to engage in distorted
thinking and minimize or excuse their actions as harmless fantasies. (para 173)
[
17
]
The Court in
Pike
& Scott
went on to identify
(at paras. 177 – 178) a sentencing range for possession of child pornography.
At the upper end is 5 years.  The Court declined to fix a lower end of the
range.
[
18
]
Pike & Scott
provided the Court of Appeal with an opportunity to clarify its prior ruling in
R. v. M.M.
2022 ONCA 441
.  In that decision the Court held that
“Conditional Sentences for sexual offences against children will only rarely be
appropriate”(at par. 16). In
Pike
& Scott
the Court did not distance
itself from those comments, but rather expanded on them, saying:
181      But in my respectful
view,
M.M.
did not and could not have
intended to depart from
R. v.
Proulx
by creating an offence-specific
presumption against conditional sentences. Rather, it used the
"exceptional circumstances" term to convey that, since
R. v.
Proulx
, Parliament has increased maximum
sentences and prioritized denunciation and deterrence for sexual offences
against children and, further, that the courts' understanding of the
harmfulness and wrongfulness of these offences has deepened:
Friesen
, at paras.
109-110
;
see
M.M.
, at paras.
13-15
.
Thus, while there
is no presumption against conditional sentences, these post-
R. v.
Proulx
changes require more compelling
personal circumstances, mitigating factors, and/or the absence of aggravating
factors, to justify a conditional sentence than might have been the case
when
R. v.
Proulx
was decided more than two decades
ago
.
Emphasis
added
[
19
]
In this case the Crown seeks a penitentiary
sentence of 2.5 years, and the defence argues for a sentencing of less than 2
years.  Although this is a close call I would find that a custodial sentence of
less than 2 years is appropriate to meet the sentencing objectives identified
above.  Foremost in that decision is Mr. Flight’s age, his health, and the fact
that this will be his first conviction, let alone period of incarceration.  A
penitentiary sentence will add nothing to a provincial custodial sentence.
[
20
]
The pivotal issue then becomes is a conditional sentence
appropriate?  Having found that Mr. Flight should be incarcerated for less then
2 years the first part of the test in s. 742.1 is satisfied.  I am also
satisfied that Mr. Flight would not “endanger the safety of the community” as
the second part of the test in s. 742.1 (a).  The evidence is clear that he
poses a low risk to re-offend.  There is no evidence to the contrary.  The real
question to be decided is whether serving a sentence in the community would “…be
consistent with the fundamental principles of sentencing set out in sections
718 to 718.2”, per s. 742.1(a).
[
21
]
On considerable reflection I find that a
conditional sentence would simply not meet the sentencing objectives outlined
above. A conditional sentence would be disproportionate to these offences.   The
collection is too large, the material too vile and Mr. Flight’s responsibility
too great to impose a conditional sentence.  His ailments are many and they are
serious but I have no evidence which supports a finding that the provincial
jail setting cannot adequately meet his medical needs.
[
22
]
Balancing the various factors, I find that a 15
month custodial sentence will adequately meet the sentencing objectives.  This
case could easily have attracted a reformatory sentence close to the maximum,
but Mr. Flight’s age and health issues call for some restraint.
[
23
]
The order for Forfeiture and Disposition will
go, as will the DNA Order as primary designated offences.  There will be a s.
161 Order for 10 years on terms outlined in the Crown’s draft Order.
[
24
]
As regards the SOIRA Order Mr. Flight has been
convicted of two offences under s. 163.1 which carries a 10 year maximum
penalty.  A 20 year SOIRA Order is the minimum period under s. 490.013 (2)(b).   The
Crown seeks a lifetime SOIRA Order under s. 490.013(3) because Mr. Flight has
been convicted of two s. 163.1 offences.  I am not satisfied that s.
490.013(3)(b) applies.  The evidence of Dr. Stirpe is uncontradicted that Mr.
Flight is at a low risk to re-offend.  There is, therefore, no evidence that he
“…presents an increased risk of re-offending by committing a crime of a sexual
nature”, as is required in s. 490.013(3)(b).  This limb of the Crown’s argument
fails.  A SOIRA Order for 20 years will go, under s. 490.013(2)(b).
[
25
]
Both Mr. Hurley and Ms. Gallegos were organized
and focussed throughout this proceeding and I am grateful for their assistance.
Released:  July 29, 2025
Signed:
Justice Rose