Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj342/2025oncj342.html

CITATION:
R. v. Ceesay
, 2025 ONCJ 342
COURT
FILE No.:  23-47106975
DATE: 
May 15, 2025
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS
   MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
   AND  —
ABDOULIE CEESAY
Before Justice Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for Judgment
Ms. Claire Sweeney.........................................................................................  
for the Crown
Ms. K. Ponte................................................................ for
the defendant, Abdoulie Ceesay
Fergus ODonnell J.:
Abdoulie
     Ceesay is charged with criminal harassment in relation to Eunice Terry
     Mwara, his one-time girlfriend.  The allegation is that the harassment
     took the form of repeated communication over a period of about the last
     week of November, 2023, starting with Mr. Ceesay attending twice at Ms.
     Mwara’s last known address and ending on 1 December, 2023, when Mr. Ceesay
     attended the apartment building of Ms. Mwara’s sister and her
     brother-in-law Munashe and tried to speak with her there.  There were
     miscellaneous alleged electronic communications or attempts at
     communication over that period.
I
     heard from Ms. Mwara, her brother-in-law Munashe, a property manager from
     Munashe’s apartment building, the arresting officer and Mr. Ceesay.  There
     was also a body of text messages, bank records, buzzer records and lobby
     video put before the court during the course of the trial.
What
     I am about to say is very well-known to all of the professionals in this
     case:  the lawyers, the court staff and so on.  It is in a sense
     the wallpaper of the criminal justice system; it is central to our daily
     working lives and we both understand its nuances and take those nuances as
     unshakeable reference points.
For
     others, however, those nuances are less clear.  I refer here to many
     members of the public with no or limited experience with criminal courts,
     including many defendants, complainants and witnesses.  It is
     important that those nuances be addressed up front.
The
     first point is that Mr. Ceesay is presumed innocent from the moment the
     charges were laid up until at least the point where I pronounce judgment.
The
     second point is that there is no burden on Mr. Ceesay to prove his
     innocence.  We take that as a given.
The
     third point is that the only power that can change or overcome that
     presumption of innocence is if the Crown can prove that Mr. Ceesay is
     guilty of the charge against him.  That burden lies entirely on the
     Crown, throughout every criminal trial.
The
     fourth point is that the Crown's burden is not light.  The Crown does
     not just have to prove it is more likely that Mr. Ceesay is guilty than
     that he is innocent, or, put otherwise, that the evidence makes it 50.1
     per cent likely that he is guilty.  Instead the Crown must prove his
     guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, a standard that we do not assign a
     numerical figure to, but which is very, very high indeed.  The standard is
     that high because as a society we believe fundamentally that it is far
     better if some guilty people are acquitted than it would be if innocent
     people were convicted.  A criminal conviction is not a trivial matter.
In
     this case, Mr. Ceesay has testified.  If I accept his denial of the
     charge as being truthful, then I must acquit him.  Even if I am
     unsure of his denial, if his evidence creates a reasonable doubt, then I
     must acquit him.  Even if his own evidence does not create a
     reasonable doubt, that is not the end of the matter and I must still ask
     if the Crown's evidence is strong enough to prove their case beyond a
     reasonable doubt—because the burden of proof is always on the Crown.
There
     is a final point that needs to be clear.  It is sometimes assumed
     that a judge's job is to decide “what happened” in a given incident. 
     That is not strictly speaking correct.  There will be some trials,
     indeed many trials, where the judge does not, even at the end of the
     trial, know for certain “what happened”.  The more precise
     description of the trial judge's role is that he or she must determine
     whether the Crown has proved their version of what happened beyond a
     reasonable doubt.  A trial judge may feel strongly that the Crown's
     argument is true, but if it is not proved true to that very high standard,
     any lesser belief is irrelevant.
I
     do not propose to go through all of the evidence including the buzzer
     details, lobby surveillance, call and text messages in exacting detail
     because such a recitation serves no purpose unless it is essential to
     explaining the outcome in the case.  By way of summary, however, Ms. Mwara
     and Mr. Ceesay were in a fairly long-term relationship.  While they were
     on a trip to Montreal, they were both arrested, in May, 2023, and he was
     detained in custody, but she was released on bail, with a condition not to
     have any contact with him.  At this point, he gave her his debit card so
     that she would be able to buy a train ticket home to Hamilton from
     Montreal.  She said that she had often held onto his debit card for him in
     the past and that other than her travel home and some licensing fees she
     had not used it during his prolonged incarceration in Montreal.  These
     charges stem from a  period of about a week immediately after Mr. Ceesay
     was himself released from jail in Montreal in late November and returned
     to Hamilton, during which time Ms. Mwara alleges that he criminally
     harassed her by attending twice at her residence, by contacting her
     repeatedly (but not always successfully) by telephone and social media and
     texts and by attending at her sister’s and brother-in-law’s residence
     while she was there one evening, seeking to speak with her.  The Crown
     also alleges as evidence of the criminal harassment case that Mr. Ceesay’s
     car had been outside that apartment building earlier that evening and that
     Mr. Ceesay was arrested by the police nearby at the end of the night,
     after fleeing from his car parked just across the road.
It goes without saying that a criminal trial is to be determined on the
     basis of all of the relevant evidence adduced during the trial.  It is an
     error to parse and separate every individual piece of evidence in
     isolation from the other pieces.  That being said, I would make the
     following observations about some of the strands of evidence because while
     proof beyond a reasonable doubt can be comprised of many, many strands,
     some strands have so little value that they are lighter than air:
One
      piece of evidence I would rate as having zero value is the suggestion
      that Mr. Ceesay’s car was seen outside Ms. Mwara’s sister’s apartment
      building at some point earlier in the evening before he attended in the
      lobby and buzzed up.  This evidence comes from Ms. Mwara’s
      brother-in-law, Munashe, who said he thought he had seen a car like Mr.
      Ceesay’s outside when he returned from work.  The first frailty in this
      is that Munashe had nothing beyond a general conception of what kind of
      car Mr. Ceesay owned, namely that it was a silver or grey Mercedes and
      maybe a particular style, although he was vague on that.  While that
      might have been a noteworthy piece of evidence in 1975 when such cars
      were much more rare than nowadays, without intending any disrespect to
      the Mercedes marque, silver and grey Mercedes are nowadays a dime a
      dozen; they are omnipresent and the evidence demonstrated that Munashe
      and Ms. Mwara’s sister lived in a building that by itself had at least
      twenty-one floors and was in a densely populated area.  Connecting that
      “sighting” to Mr. Ceesay, when Mr. Ceesay had not himself been seen
      anywhere around the area or the car at that particular time would be
      nothing but sheer speculation.
Keeping
      with the Mercedes for the time being, Constable Kelly said that he and
      his partner had found that car, with Mr. Ceesay inside, outside Munashe’s
      apartment building, where Ms. Mwara was staying later the  night of 1
      December hours after Mr. Ceesay had attended the building lobby and
      buzzed up to try to speak to Ms. Mwara.  He testified that Mr. Ceesay
      fled on foot almost exactly coincident with Constable Kelly’s partner
      stepping out of their cruiser to approach the Mercedes and I accept his
      evidence unreservedly.  The Crown says this behaviour is consistent with
      Mr. Ceesay demonstrating consciousness of guilt, i.e. that he fled the
      police because he knew he had committed an offence, namely the criminal
      harassment.  The strength of consciousness of guilt inferences based on
      flight will necessarily vary from case to case, based on all of the
      available information and triers of fact are understandably warned by the
      Supreme Court of the need to be cautious in going down that road because
      people can flee for many reasons, often for reasons that have nothing to
      do with their guilt of the offence before the court.  In this case, Mr.
      Ceesay testified that he fled because of previous trauma with the
      authorities.  He agreed in cross-examination that he did not always run
      when in the presence of the police, but he did always, “get very
      uncomfortable whenever I see them”, not because the police are bad, but
      because of his own history.  That “history” involved Mr. Ceesay, as a
      journalist in The Gambia in 2015, being arrested for sedition for having
      texted his friends some material unflattering to the government, which
      material was already circulating on the internet.  Mr. Ceesay said he was
      kept in custody for almost a year, during which time he was tortured
      almost daily resulting in liver enlargement and Post-Traumatic-Stress-Disorder. 
      Mr. Ceesay’s affect was noticeably different on both occasions when he
      discussed this.  In addition, his narrative did not rely solely on his
      own words, or on any theatrical skills on his part; to the contrary,
      Exhibit 9 on the trial was nothing less than an Amnesty International
      “Urgent Action” report calling on Amnesty members to pressure the
      government of The Gambia for Mr. Ceesay’s humane treatment and release.  Very,
      very few persons claiming to have been the victim of official torture can
      come to court with Amnesty International in their corner to back up their
      claim of previous police abuse, but Mr. Ceesay did. I stress that this is
      in no way a negative reflection on the Hamilton Police Service, only a
      material piece of background concerning Mr. Ceesay.  I would say that
      while the evidence of Mr. Ceesay’s flight is not lighter than air, it is
      in the circumstances not of much more substance than that.
Part
      of Ms. Mwara’s evidence of repeated communication on Mr. Ceesay’s part
      was her contention that a number of unanswered calls (shown in part of
      Exhibit 2) were in fact calls from Mr. Ceesay.  This contention struck me
      as speculative and of little to no weight in relation to those particular
      calls originating from Mr. Ceesay.  This, in turn, reduces the extent of
      provable contact by him during the relevant week.
Both
     Ms. Mwara and Mr. Ceesay testified.  It was drawn out of Ms. Mwara in
     cross-examination that her repeated communications with Mr. Ceesay while
     he was in jail in Montreal were all breaches of her release order, or put
     alternatively her promise to the court that she would have no contact with
     him.  I think it was fair for Ms. Ponte to point to that as one factor to
     be considered in assessing Ms. Mwara’s reliability.  At the same time, Mr.
     Ceesay’s substantial record for disobeying various court records justifies
     Ms. Sweeney’s submission that sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.
Much
     of the Crown’s case is predicated on various linch-pins, each dependent on
     Ms. Mwara:
That
      she had broken up with Mr. Ceesay by telephone during October and made it
      clear that it was over between them.  There is no documentary or
      independent evidence of this break-up.  Mr. Ceesay has denied there was a
      break-up and the contents of some of his communications to Ms. Mwara are
      consistent with the break-up being news to him as of 1 December and the
      days before.  Ironically, the Crown’s best evidence of Mr. Ceesay first
      hearing that Ms. Mwara did not want to see him came from Mr. Ceesay’s own
      evidence when he said that the occupant of Ms. Mwara’s last residence
      told him on his second visit, as late as 28 November, that Ms. Mwara did
      not want to see him. For example, when told by Munashe that Ms. Mwara did
      not want to speak with him, Mr. Ceesay stressed that it was him at the
      buzzer, as if he feared they thought someone else was calling up and
      asked “What’s going on?” and “Are you serious?”  In a text around 9 p.m.
      on 1 December he had expressed his confusion:  “whoa, did you say you
      don’t want to see me? Lol”.  This would have been soon after Munashe had
      told Mr. Ceesay that on the intercom.
Ms.
      Mwara contended that Mr. Ceesay had used the pretext of needing his debit
      card from her on previous occasions, before the time of this offence. 
      This assertion was not apparently made during the course of the
      investigation, only during her evidence at trial.  However, the reasons
      Mr. Ceesay gave for needing his bank card are inherently plausible:  he
      was just out of jail after a long-ish period in custody, he had lost his
      apartment during that period, he was couch-surfing, he was wearing the
      same clothes day after day, he needed his bank card to buy things, to
      arrange for an apartment and to get some cars on the road.  As it was his
      debit card, not hers or a shared account, as she had been entrusted with
      it both for her benefit and his at the time of his incarceration and as
      he was impecunious, it seems entirely reasonable for him to want his card
      back, and promptly. It is Ms. Mwara’s business if she intended to break
      up with Mr. Ceesay, but if she is holding his only bank card, he is
      entitled to make efforts to retrieve it as he was the lawful owner. The
      Crown may have a valid point that he could alternatively have gone to the
      bank for a replacement card, but the fact that a person chooses one of
      two equally valid options over the other does not undermine their
      credibility.  Indeed, as it turned out, when Mr. Ceesay disclosed the
      missing card to his bank and the fact that he had shared his PIN number
      with Ms. Mwara it did not end well for him, as the bank shut down his
      account.  It also seems to me that Mr. Ceesay offered various
      alternatives for him to retrieve the card without contact with Ms. Mwara,
      such as by her leaving it at her workplace for him to pick it up or for her
      to send it in an Uber on the night of 1 December (after he attended her
      sister’s apartment lobby) to his former apartment building where he could
      wait for the Uber.
Ms.
      Mwara disclosed in her evidence that she was afraid of Mr. Ceesay because
      of two previous instances of violence by him towards her, one where he
      pulled her hair during an argument and another where he broke her mobile
      phone.  I do not know one way or the other if those allegations are true;
      I do know that Mr. Ceesay says they are not.  However, it is clear on the
      record that when the 911 operator asked about any previous domestic violence,
      Ms. Mwara said there had been none.  She justified that by saying that
      her sister and brother-in-law were present and she did not want to
      disclose that history to them, which is not necessarily implausible but
      also not necessarily convincing.  She also failed to disclose those
      allegations during a risk inventory done by the police.  The only
      evidence of reasonable fear other than from Ms. Mwara was from her
      brother-in-law Munashe, but by the end of his evidence it was clear that
      what initially presented as a concern for safety was more accurately
      described as a desire to avoid any “drama” if Mr. Ceesay came up to the
      apartment.
It
      was contended by the Crown that Ms. Mwara’s credibility was enhanced by
      her acceptance under cross-examination of the fact that her repeated
      contact with Mr. Ceesay while in custody was a breach of her court
      order.  I do not see how a person admitting an undeniable truth enhances
      credibility.
There
      is a discrepancy in the evidence about how often Mr. Ceesay buzzed up to Munashe’s
      and Ms. Mwara’s sister’s apartment on 1 December.  Mr. Ceesay says it was
      only twice.  Munashe says there were multiple buzzes that he did not
      answer, which Mr. Ceesay denies.  There is no buzzer activity log for a
      period of time when Mr. Ceesay is near the buzzer (the log only begins
      around 8 p.m. for some reason, whereas the lobby video starts slightly
      earlier).  The Crown says Mr. Ceesay’s hand gestures in the area of the
      buzzer panel (but a bit out of the line of sight of the camera) are consistent
      with Mr. Ceesay buzzing repeatedly.  Mr. Ceesay says it was just him
      repeatedly searching the panel to find the relevant entry for Ms. Mwara’s
      sister and her husband Munashe.  The problem in this scenario is that
      both explanations are equally plausible.  That is a problem for the Crown
      because it is the Crown who bears the burden of proof.  The evidence
      before the court does not give me any rational basis to choose between
      Munashe’s version of there having been multiple buzzes that he ignored
      and Mr. Ceesay’s assertion that he only buzzed twice, namely two times
      that he spoke with Munashe.  Munashe may well be the more reliable, but I
      do not have a basis to choose between them (Even if Munashe is right, the
      existence of some additional buzzes by Mr. Ceesay that were ignored by
      Munashe does not tip the scales in relation to proving the elements of
      the offence).
I
     have gone through these elements of the evidence to demonstrate the
     overall flavour of the case before me.  Ultimately, I must look at the conduct
     Mr. Ceesay is alleged to have engaged in, the extent to which I am
     confident each of those allegations has been made out, the context in
     which he acted including the time frame, his knowledge of Ms. Mwara’s
     wishes, his situation having come out of jail recently, her being in most
     recent possession of his debit card, the importance of the debit card to
     him in the circumstances and so on.
This
     must all be assessed against the elements of the criminal harassment
     charge laid against Mr. Ceesay, namely:
264
(1)
No person
shall, without lawful authority and knowing that another person is harassed or
recklessly as to whether the other person is harassed, engage in conduct
referred to in subsection (2) that causes that other person reasonably, in all
the circumstances, to fear for their safety or the safety of anyone known to
them.
(2)
The conduct mentioned in subsection (1) consists of
(b)
repeatedly
communicating with, either directly or indirectly, the other person or anyone
known to them;
This
     offence requires the Crown to prove that:
Mr.
      Ceesay repeatedly communicated with Ms. Mwara;
He
      did so without lawful authority;
He
      did so with knowledge that she was harassed (or recklessly or wilfully
      blindly to that fact);
His
      conduct caused Ms. Mwara to fear for her safety or the safety of others;
And
      that any such fear on Ms. Mwara’s part was reasonable.
I
     said earlier that it is not my job to determine every nook and cranny of
     what happened, but rather to determine whether or not the Crown has proved
     its case beyond a reasonable doubt on all of the evidence.  By way of
     example here, I cannot say one way or the other if Mr. Ceesay was violent
     towards Ms. Mwara in the past.  I do not have a reason on this record to
     accept her allegation or to reject his denial (or vice versa). This is a
     significant element towards the proof of reasonable fear. Likewise I
     cannot say one way or the other if she had or had not broken up with him
     in October.  If she had, that would be a piece of evidence on the Crown’s
     side of the ledger.  I can accept that Mr. Ceesay was told on 28 November
     that Ms. Mwara did not want to see him, but mere limited persistence in
     trying to verify that does not necessarily make out a criminal offence. 
     Section 264 cannot be interpreted to convert every heartbroken or confused
     forsaken lover, who doesn’t take the first “no” at face value (in this
     case a second-hand “no” via a resident of Ms. Mwara’s former home) into
     being the bearer of a serious criminal record; it is of narrower scope
     than that.  (I accept, of course, that depending on the facts “repeated”
     communication could be as few as two instances).  In this case, the number
     of instances of proved communication is not great.
Unless
     the evidence of prior assaultive behaviour by Mr. Ceesay is made out,
     there is nothing in the proved limited communication that would make Ms.
     Mwara’s professed fear reasonable.  If I were confident that those
     previous assaultive incidents were made out, it would be a different
     matter, but I cannot in good conscience reject Mr. Ceesay’s denials.
[1]
This is a classic “he said/she said” with virtually no independent
     evidence to resolve the conflicts.  In the context of Mr. Ceesay’s recent
     release, his need for the debit card, etc. as mentioned earlier, there is
     nothing patently unreasonable about how he conducted himself in the week
     after his release from custody.  He made inquiries at different places and
     by different means over a reasonably short period of time and offered
     various non-contact alternatives for recovery of his debit card that would
     honour Ms. Mwara’s desire to be done with him, however recently that
     desire had come to his attention.  Although it was not argued before me, I
     would think that whatever other weaknesses there are in the Crown’s case,
     there is also a live question of whether Mr. Ceesay is protected by the
     requirement that his communications be “without lawful authority”.  I
     would suspect that his desire to retrieve his property (the debit card),
     which he needed urgently, from a person who, to his knowledge is
     overholding it would constitute “lawful authority” for him to communicate
     with her.(Ms. Mwara said at trial that she had no idea where it had gone
     but she was the last known holder and there is no suggestion that she had
     told Mr. Ceesay that she no longer knew where it was)
In
     applying the W.D.
[2]
decision of the Supreme Court
     of Canada, I must consider whether or not I believe a defendant’s
     evidence, whether or not it creates reasonable doubt and also whether or
     not, quite apart from those two questions, the Crown has proved its case
     beyond a reasonable doubt.  There is no magic in whether one answers all
     of the W.D. questions or only some of them, depending on the case. 
     Ultimately the only two people who know the full truth of the ins and outs
     of their relationship are Ms. Mwara and Mr. Ceesay.  I shall therefore
     answer only the last of the W.D. questions by saying that given the
     frailties on the issue of Mr. Ceesay’s knowledge that Ms. Mwara was
     harassed and on the issue of the reasonableness of Ms. Mwara’s fear, the
     Crown has failed to prove the charge beyond a reasonable doubt.  As I said
     earlier, there is probably also a failure on the issue of lawful
     authority, but by this point that conclusion is surplusage.
In
     the result, the Crown has not proved the charge beyond a reasonable doubt
     and I find Mr. Ceesay not guilty.
Delivered
orally:  15 May, 2025
[1]
Clearly,
one potential basis for rejecting a defendant’s evidence is the path set out by
Doherty J.A.
in
R. v. J.J.R.D.
,
2006 CanLII 40088
(ONCA)
, as follows:  “
An outright
rejection of an accused’s evidence based on a considered and reasoned
acceptance beyond a reasonable doubt of the truth of conflicting credible
evidence is as much an explanation for the rejection of an accused’s evidence
as is a rejection based on a problem identified with the way the accused
testified or the substance of the accused’s evidence.”  To put it another way,
our criminal law does not have a corroboration requirement for complainants’
evidence.  However, there will be many, many cases in which a trier of fact
will not be comfortable, after a reasoned analysis of all of the evidence, in
following the
J.J.R.D.
path to conviction.  Having considered all of the
evidence before me, this is one such case.
[2]
1994
CanLII 76 (SCC)