Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj442/2025oncj442.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. O’Kieffe
, 2025 ONCJ 442
DATE: 
August 27, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:  998 24 21002639
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
ALPHA JAWANZA O’KIEFFE
Before
Justice Robert S. Gee
Heard
on June 16, 18 and 19, 2025, July 8 and 24, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on August 27, 2025
Derek Zuraw......................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Kevin McGilly........................  
counsel for the Public Prosecution Service of Canada
Daniel Brodsky............................................................................... counsel
for the Accused
Gee J.:
[
1
]
On September 5, 2024, at approximately 4:00 am, the
Brantford Police executed a search warrant at 197 Sheridan Street, in the City
of Brantford. Located during the search was 216.9 grams of p-flourfentanyl,
with a street value of $43,380.00, and 183.2 grams of cocaine with a street
value of $18,320.00. Also found were three firearms, a Mossburg Shotgun, a
Savage bolt action rifle, and a Ruger LCS 9mm handgun, which at the time was
loaded with a round in the chamber.
[
2
]
At the time the search warrant was executed,
there were 8 people in the house. Seven of them were released unconditionally
after they were identified. The eighth person was the accused, Alpha O’Kieffe. He
was the only person charged and now faces two counts of CDSA 5(2) for the drugs
found and a number of firearm related offences as a result of the three guns
located in the residence.
[
3
]
Many of the issues normally at play in a case
such as this, were helpfully admitted by the defence. For instance, issues such
as the nature and continuity of the drugs found, that whoever possessed them
did so for the purpose of trafficking, that guns located met the definition for
a firearm, were all admitted. The focus of the trial then boiled down to
whether the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt the accused possessed
the drugs and firearms.
[
4
]
In addition to the admissions, the evidence came
from the testimony of eleven other witnesses, all called by the Crown and all of
whom were police officers involved in the execution of the warrant. Given the
admissions made and the only issue at play, the examination of these witnesses
by all counsel was focussed. The credibility and reliability of the witnesses’
testimony was not challenged. It was what could be made of the entirety of the
evidence that informed the position of the parties.
[
5
]
The residence had three bedrooms and eight rooms
in total. When the police entered, the accused was located in the bathroom, not
far from the main entrance and just off the kitchen. The door to the bathroom
was locked. The shower was running and when police entered the bathroom, the
accused was fully clothed, and wet from the shower. In the bathroom in a closet
was a black satchel that contained the handgun. Another brown Louis Vuitton
satchel also in the closet, held the cocaine. A guitar case, containing the two
long guns, was found in the bedroom the police allege was the accused’s. A
conair bag containing the p-flourfentanyl was also located in this bedroom.
[
6
]
A photo book was filed that showed the state of
the residence when the search warrant was executed. The house was very messy
and cluttered. Not to the level of a hoarder but well on its way to that
status. Police said evidence of drug use and drug paraphernalia was found in
almost every area. One female was located in the bedroom the police allege was
the accused’s. Another couple were in one of the other bedrooms, and the
remaining four persons were located in the common areas of the house.
[
7
]
The Crown bears the burden of proof in the case;
the defence need not prove anything.  There is no direct evidence of Mr. O’Kieffe’s
knowledge or control of the drugs or firearms in the residence.  The Crown’s
theory of possession rests wholly on circumstantial reasoning.
[
8
]
The Supreme Court of Canada reviewed the approach to cases which rely on
circumstantial evidence in R. v. Villaroman,
2016 SCC 33
.  A very helpful the summary
of that judgment is found in R. v. Gill,
2017 ONSC 3558
, a decision of Justice Michal Fairburn, while she
was at the time on the Superior Court of Justice.  Paragraphs 9 through 13
of Gill, are particularly helpful when approaching such a case. In these
paragraphs Justice Fairburn summarized the approach as follows:
[9]
I agree that this case
is an almost purely circumstantial one, particularly as it relates to the
issues of contention. In R. v. Villaroman.
2016 SCC 33
, Cromwell J.
reviewed the correct approach to circumstantial evidence and the inference
drawing process. Where one or more element of an offence relies largely or
exclusively on circumstantial evidence, “an inference of guilt drawn from
circumstantial evidence should be the only reasonable inference that such
evidence permits”: Villaroman,
at para.
30
. Staying
focussed on the question of whether circumstantial evidence admits of other
reasonable alternative inferences, ensures that the trier of fact does not
“fill in the blanks” or “jump to conclusions” too quickly: Villaroman
,
paras.
29-30
.
[10]
While previous cases speak in terms of other “rational” inferences,
the unanimous Villaroman court settled upon the term
“reasonable”: see,
R. v.
Griffin,
2009 SCC 28
, at para.
33
, Villaroman,
at paras. 32-34. As Cromwell J. noted in Villaroman
,
while
“reasonable” and “rational” inferences carry the same meaning, and it is not in
error to speak in terms of “rational inferences”, the use of the term
“reasonable” guards against any confusion that may arise from the use of
“reasonable doubt” and “rational inference”.
[11]
Inferences consistent with innocence do not have to arise from
proven facts: Villaroman
,
at para.
35
. As Fish J.
observed in R. v. Khela,
2009 SCC 4
, at para.
58
, the defence
does not have to “‘prove’ certain facts in order for the jury to draw an
inference of innocence from them”. To make this a requirement for finding
alternative rational inferences would be to reverse the burden of proof.
Ultimately, the court must consider the “range of reasonable inferences that
can be drawn” from the circumstantial evidence. As in Villaroman,
at
para.
35
, “[i]f there are reasonable inferences other than guilt, the Crown’s
evidence does not meet the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.”
[12]
A theory alternative to guilt is not “speculative” simply because
there is no affirmative evidence supporting the theory. A “theory alternative
to guilt” can arise from a lack of evidence: Villaroman,
at
para.
36
. Gaps in the evidence can result in inferences other than guilt, but
they must be “reasonable given the evidence and the absence of evidence,
assessed logically, and in light of human experience and common sense”: Villaroman
,
at
paras.
36-38
.
[13]
Reasonable possibilities and theories inconsistent with guilt must
be considered, but this does not require the Crown to “negative every possible
conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent
with the innocence of the accused”: Villaroman
,
at para.
37
,
adopting R. v. Bagshaw
,
1971 CanLII 13
(SCC)
, [1972] S.C.R. 2, at p. 8. Other reasonable
inferences must find support in logic and experience and not rest on
speculation. As noted by Cromwell J., at para. 38, the “basic question” is
whether the circumstantial evidence, “viewed logically and in light of human
experience, is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than that
the accused is guilty”.
[
9
]
Mr. Zuraw for the Crown and Mr. McGilly for the
Public Prosecution Service submit the only reasonable inference on the evidence
when viewed as a whole, is that Mr. O’Kieffe possessed both the drugs and the
firearms. They point out he was found in the bathroom near the two satchels one
which contained the cocaine and the other the handgun. Additionally,
approximately 6 minutes before the warrant was executed, an officer surveilling
the house in preparation for the entry, saw a person he believed was Mr.
O’Kieffe, come from the garage and enter the house wearing a dark satchel,
similar to the one found in the bathroom that contained the handgun. As well, Mr.
O’Kieffe was fully clothed and soaking wet inside the locked bathroom when
police entered, which is argued to be highly suspicious. This suspicious
behaviour it's argued, demonstrates an intention on Mr. O’Kieffe’s behalf to
buy time to hide the drugs and gun or to as much as possible, disassociate
himself from them.
[
10
]
A cell phone was also located in the bathroom
with the accused which when analyzed, revealed it had been used by Mr. O’Kieffe
and had multiple messages on it where he claimed to live at the residence
searched and, as well pictures saved on it of him in the garage of the
residence.
[
11
]
It is also argued the bedroom where the long
guns and the p-flourfentanyl was found was associated to the accused. In that
room male clothing was located and as well, a notebook with handwriting on the
front that said “Alphaman” and which inside, is said to contain a debt list.
[
12
]
Mr. McGilly made two other arguments he says I
should consider as circumstantial evidence Mr. O’Kieffe possessed the guns and
drugs. These are that Mr. O’Kieffe was under surveillance by the police for
drug trafficking and that he was named as the target in the search warrant. I
find these two factors have no relevance to the analysis and I have not
considered them. These arguments are just a veiled way of saying in the opinion
of the police, Mr. O’Kieffe possessed the items in question and is guilty of
the offences charged. It is obvious this is what the police believe or else
they wouldn't have charged him, and this trial wouldn't be taking place. To
rely on them as factors tending to prove guilt though would be improper. It
would usurp the function of the court to decide the case based on the
admissible evidence and would water down the Crown obligation to prove guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
13
]
The defence points out there are other factors
to consider, and the factors referred to by the Crown are not what they appear
at first blush. In relation to the accused presence and appearance in the
bathroom, this could have been a result of how the police executed the warrant.
An explosive, distraction type device was used at the time the police
forcefully breached the door. This would be frightening for anyone at 4:00 am
and may have caused him to fall or jump into the running shower as a result.
[
14
]
The officer who observed the person he thought
was Mr. O’Kieffe wearing a satchel shortly before entering the residence
couldn't say for certain it was one of the ones located in the bathroom and
couldn't say for certain its colour, only that it was dark.
[
15
]
None of the items Mr. O’Kieffe is alleged to be
possessing, either guns or drugs were out in the open or in plain view. The
phone found in the bathroom had messages and other items on it that demonstrated
it was used by other persons as well and its use was not exclusive to the
accused.
[
16
]
Further, Mr. O’Kieffe’s precise connection to
the residence is unclear. There was no evidence he possessed keys to the
residence. There was no mail or other identity documents that indicated he was
living there. Multiple pills bottles were located but the police never looked
at the labels to see whose name was on them. The male clothing in the bedroom
was not checked for size to see if it fit Mr. O’Kieffe, there was no evidence
he was seen wearing any of the clothing during the time the residence was under
surveillance and there was no evidence any of the police checked for the
presence of female clothing.
[
17
]
The defence also points out the notebook titled
“Alphaman” also had hand drawn pictures of flowers in it and appeared to be
written in female handwriting as much as that can be assessed. More importantly
though, throughout the notebook Mr. O’Kieffe is referred to in the third
person, implying it wasn’t written by him.
[
18
]
When police entered, 7 other people were in the
residence. Aside from their names, nothing is known about them as they were all
released unconditionally. Since the appearance of drug activity and drug
paraphernalia was found in practically every room of the house, it is
reasonable to presume these persons were likely involved in the drug lifestyle.
Since they were released, their phones weren’t seized and analyzed for
evidentiary value, they weren’t interviewed or in any other way investigated, so
their involvement with the guns and drugs found in the house or their
connection to the residence cannot now be assessed.
[
19
]
It is also pointed out that no forensic evidence
such as DNA or fingerprints were located on the guns that could link them to
Mr. O’Kieffe and that given where the drugs and guns were found, they were
accessible to all persons in the house.
[
20
]
Possession, for criminal liability purposes, is
defined in
section 4(3)
of the
Criminal Code
.  A party may be in personal,
joint, or constructive possession of an item.  As already noted, Mr. O’Kieffe
was not in personal possession of the drugs or firearms.  The Court of Appeal
for Ontario discussed constructive and joint possession in R v. Pham
2005 CanLII 44671 (ON CA)
, [2005] O.J
No. 5127, at paragraphs
16-18
as follows:
[16]
In
order to constitute joint possession pursuant to section 4(3)(b) of the
Code
there
must be knowledge, consent, and a measure of control on the part of the person
deemed to be in possession.  See
R
.
v
. Terrence,
1983 CanLII 51 (SCC)
, [1983] 1 S.C.R.
357 (S.C.C.);
R
.
v
. Williams (1998),
1998 CanLII 2557 (ON CA)
, 40 O.R. (3d) 301
(C.A.);
R
.
v
.
Barreau
1991 CanLII 241 (BC CA)
, 19 W.A.C. 290 (B.C.C.A.) and Re Chambers and the Queen (1985),
1985 CanLII 169 (ON CA)
, 20 C.C.C. (3d) 440 (Ont. C.A.).
[17]
The
element of knowledge is dealt with by Watt J. in the case of
R
.
v
.
Sparling,
[1988] O.J. No. 107 (Ont. H.C.) at p. 6
:
There is no direct evidence of
the applicant’s knowledge of the presence of narcotics in the
residence.  It is not essential that there be such evidence for as
with any other issue of fact in a criminal proceeding, it may be established by
circumstantial evidence.  In combination, the finding of narcotics in
plain view in the common areas of the residence, the presence of a scale in a
bedroom apparently occupied by the applicant, and; the applicants apparent
occupation of the premises may serve to found an inference of the requisite
knowledge.
The court of appeal decision
in
R
.
v
.
Sparling,
[1988] O.J. No. 1877
upheld the above passage as being sufficient
evidence to infer knowledge.
[18]
The
onus is on the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt, all of the essential
elements of the offence of possession.  This can be accomplished by
direct evidence or may be inferred from circumstantial
evidence.  In Re Chambers and the Queen, supra at 448,
Martin J.A. noted that the court may draw “appropriate inferences from evidence
that a prohibited drug is found in a room under the control of an accused and
where there is also evidence from which an inference may properly be drawn that
the accused was aware of the presence of the drug.”
[
21
]
In assessing the totality of the evidence in
this case, and considering the submissions made by counsel, the arguments made
by the Crown are compelling and provide a strong case for criminal possession. The
most compelling aspect of the Crown case comes from the fact Mr. O’Kieffe was
seen wearing a satchel similar to the one found minutes later in the bathroom. Having
said that however, I am not satisfied the Crown have met their high burden of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt. I reach this conclusion for the following
reasons.
[
22
]
There is just too much left unknown in this case
to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt the only reasonable inference is Mr.
O’Kieffe possessed the guns and drugs. His status at the house and connection
to it was still somewhat unclear in the end. It is unclear whether he was an
owner, tenant, trusted guest or just an occasional visitor. The points made by
the defence that detract from the factors pointed to by the Crown to support an
inference of guilt are all valid. When looked at individually and more importantly,
cumulatively, they significantly lessen the strength of the inference the Crown
asks me to draw.
[
23
]
As noted earlier, the pictures filed show a
house that was very messy and cluttered. Almost every surface in the common
areas and bedrooms had dishes, food, personal items, take out coffee cups, and
other items covering them. There was also clothing strewn about and on the
floors of the bedrooms. The beds were unmade and looked like they were slept in
regularly. There were multiple bicycles in the house and as noted evidence of
drug activity everywhere. This implies this was a house that at the time the
warrant was executed was being lived in or used by multiple people. The
presence of 7 others at the time confirms this.
[
24
]
Returning to the admonition in Villaroman not to
fill in gaps or jump to conclusions too quickly and recalling that a reasonable
doubt can arise from the lack of evidence  and ultimately getting back to
Justice Cromwell’s basic question in Villaroman, the circumstantial evidence in
this case is reasonably capable of supporting an alternative inference, that
the guns and drugs could have been placed as they were by someone else, either
one of the persons found in the house that night or someone else, without Mr.
O’Kieffe’s knowledge.
[
25
]
The Crown has presented a superficially
compelling case, like noted especially since the accused was seen wearing a
satchel similar to one of the ones in the bathroom just before the warrant was
executed, it may be that was one of the satchels found, but I still harbour a
doubt. The Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt the presence of smoke but
has not proven that smoke is from a fire. There are too many loose ends and
unknown pieces. This lack of evidence I find leaves me with a doubt.
[
26
]
As a result, this doubt means a finding of not
guilty will be made and the charges against Mr. O’Kieffe are dismissed.
Released:  August 27, 2025
Signed:
Justice Robert S. Gee