Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj405/2025oncj405.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R.
v. Y.S.T.,
2025 ONCJ 405
DATE:  2025·07·29
COURT
FILE No.: 4810-998-24-48129134
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY  THE  KING
—  AND  —
Y.S.T.
Before
  Justice David Porter
Heard
  on July 21, 2025
Ruling
  on Motion for Directions Released on July 29, 2025
S. Dosanjh  ……….………………………………………………………………………  
  for the Crown
Maria Rosa Muia …………………………………………………………………...… 
  for the Applicant
Porter J:
[
1
]
The Applicant is charged with the sexual assault of the
complainant, his former spouse.
[
2
]
As summarized in the motion materials, the Applicant and the
complainant met through an online platform in July 2015, they moved in together
in August 2015 and were married in March 2016.  They have been married for
approximately eight years and have two children.
[
3
]
The complainant alleges that the Applicant assaulted and
sexually assaulted her during the course of their marriage.
[
4
]
In April 2016, the complainant became pregnant. The
complainant alleges that sometime between April 1, 2016 and January 9, 2017 the
Applicant began to force the complainant to have anal intercourse with him
without her consent.  The complaint alleges that the sexual incidents occurred
approximately 2 to 3 times per month from April 2016 until the relationship
ended in April 2024.
[
5
]
The Applicant seeks to rely on text messages sent on 15 days
between June 2, 2023 and May 16, 2024 on WhatsApp between the Applicant and the
complainant.
[
6
]
The text messages were provided under seal to the court but
not to the Crown.  The Crown has acknowledged that the motion materials contain
sufficient information about the content of the messages that the Crown was
able to make submissions on whether the messages constituted “records” under
section 278.1
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
7
]
It was agreed with counsel that the application heard on July
21, while originally framed as an application under s. 278.92, would be treated
by the court as a motion for directions, pursuant to the decision of the
Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. J.J.
,
2022 SCC 28
, for a determination
by the court of whether the WhatsApp text messages at issue constitute 
“records” under section 278.1, in which case the provisions of section 278.92 -
278.94 would govern the procedure for the determination of the admissibility of
these records in this trial.
[
8
]
It is agreed by the Crown and defence that, if the court
concludes that the text messages at issue are not “records”, as defined in
section 278.1, then sections 278.92 - 278.94 do not apply, and the
admissibility of the records in the trial is properly determined on a
case-by-case basis as the trial proceeds.
The Law on the Meaning of “Records” Under s. 278.1
[
9
]
Under s. 278.1, there are 2 categories of records; enumerated
records and non-enumerated records.
[
10
]
It is clear from my review of the messages that they are not
enumerated records and so the issue becomes whether they fall into the category
of non-enumerated records for which the complainant would have a reasonable
expectation of privacy.
[
11
]
Record is defined in s. 278.1 as follows:
“278.1 For the
purposes of sections 278.2 to
278.92
, “
record”
means any
form of record that contains personal information for which there is a
reasonable expectation of privacy and includes medical, psychiatric,
therapeutic, counselling, education, employment, child welfare, adoption and
social services records, personal journals and diaries, and records containing
personal information the production or disclosure of which is protected by any
other Act of Parliament or a provincial legislature, but does not include
records made by persons responsible for the investigation or prosecution of the
offence.”
[
12
]
In
R. v. J.J
.,
2022 SCC 28
, the Supreme Court of
Canada has provided the following extensive and detailed guidance on the
determination of whether a document is a non-enumerated record under s. 278.1
for which a complainant would have a reasonable expectation of privacy at paras
38 - 72 of its decision:
“(a)
Two Groups of
Records
[38]
The
definition of “record” creates two distinct groups: (1) records that fall
within the enumerated categories (“enumerated records”); and (2) records that
do not fall within the enumerated categories but otherwise contain personal
information for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy (“non-enumerated
records”).
. . . . .
(b)
Identifying
Non-Enumerated Records
[42]
Ultimately,
we conclude that a non-enumerated record will only be captured by
s. 278.1
, in
the context of the record screening regime, if the record contains information
of an intimate or highly personal nature that is integral to the complainant’s
overall physical, psychological or emotional well-being.  Such information will
have implications for the complainant’s dignity.  As we will explain, this
threshold is informed by interpreting the text and scheme of the record
screening regime.  We then provide a framework for assessing whether a piece of
evidence qualifies as a non-enumerated record that must be vetted under the
record screening regime.
(i)
Text
and Scheme of the Record Screening Regime
[43]
The text and scheme of the record screening regime reveal
Parliament’s intention to narrow the scope of records.  Parliament deliberately
limited the regime to “personal information for which there is a reasonable
expectation of privacy”.  Both elements of this phrase – “personal information”
and “reasonable expectation of privacy” – serve to delimit the scope of records
and shed light on the nature of the privacy interests at issue, as do the
factors set out in s. 278.92(3).
1.
Personal
Information
[44]
The term “personal information” invokes the concept of informational privacy.
Informational privacy protects the ability to control the dissemination of
intimate and personal details about oneself that go to one’s “biographical
core” (
R. v. Plant
,
1993 CanLII 70 (SCC)
, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 281,
at p. 293; see also
R. v. Cole
,
2012 SCC 53
, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 34, at
paras.
45-48
).  As this Court held in
R.
v. Dyment
,
1988 CanLII 10 (SCC)
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417,
informational privacy is “based on the notion of the dignity and integrity of
the individual” (p. 429).
[45]
Complainants
have privacy interests in highly sensitive information about themselves, the
disclosure of which can impact on their dignity.  As this Court has observed in
the past, the “dissemination of highly sensitive personal information” can
result “not just in discomfort or embarrassment, but in an affront to the
affected person’s dignity” (
Sherman Estate v. Donovan
,
2021 SCC 25
, [2021] 2 S.C.R. 75,
at
para.
7
).  To reach the level of an impact on
dignity, an intrusion on informational privacy must “transcen[d] personal
inconvenience by reason of the highly sensitive nature of the information that
might be revealed” (
Sherman Estate
, at para.
75
; see also para. 73).
2.  Reasonable Expectation
of Privacy
....
[47]
In
particular, two principles from the s. 8 jurisprudence are instructive in
determining whether complainants have a reasonable expectation of privacy
under
s. 278.1
,
as it applies to the record screening regime: (1) the person claiming a privacy
right must have a subjective expectation of privacy that is objectively
reasonable in the circumstances (
R. v. Edwards
,
1996 CanLII 255 (SCC)
, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 128,
at para.
45
; see also
Jarvis
, at
paras. 35‑43); and (2) a reasonable expectation of privacy only
engages legally recognized privacy interests (
Mills
, at para. 99).  Both
of these principles establish that the privacy interests at issue must meet a
high threshold.
[48]
However,
we do not adopt the content-neutral approach from the s. 8 jurisprudence.  Under
s. 8, a content-neutral approach ensures that an accused may still have a
reasonable expectation of privacy regardless of the legal or illegal nature of
the items sought (
R. v. Spencer
,
2014 SCC 43
, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 212, at
para.
36
;
R. v. Wong
,
1990 CanLII 56 (SCC)
, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 36,
at pp. 49-50).  Section 8 protects against unreasonable state search
and seizure, therefore, the state is not permitted to engage in
ex post
facto
reasoning to justify unconstitutional searches.  This rationale
does not apply in the present context as state search and seizure is not at
issue.
....
3.
Factors
in Section 278.92(3)
[51]
The
factors outlined in s. 278.92(3) shed light on the interests implicated by
the record screening regime, reinforcing our conclusion that Parliament
intended to safeguard highly personal information related to complainant
dignity.  These factors include:
(a)
the interests of
justice, including the right of the accused to make a full answer and defence;
(b)
society’s interest
in encouraging the reporting of sexual assault offences;
(c)
society’s interest
in encouraging the obtaining of treatment by complainants of sexual offences;
(d)
whether there is a
reasonable prospect that the evidence will assist in arriving at a just
determination in the case;
(e)
the
need to remove from the fact-finding process any discriminatory belief or bias;
(f)
the
risk that the evidence may unduly arouse sentiments of prejudice, sympathy or
hostility in the jury;
(g)
the
potential prejudice to the complainant’s personal dignity and right of privacy;
(h)
the
right of the complainant and of every individual to personal security and to
the full protection and benefit of the law; and
(i)
any
other factor that the judge, provincial court judge or justice considers
relevant.
[52]
A
complainant’s privacy interests in the information contained in a record are
meant to be assessed against these competing factors.  If the information in a
record does not engage the factors designed to protect the complainant’s
personal dignity and privacy interests, or does so only marginally, this would
be a clear indication that the document is not a record at all.
[53]
In
our view,
s. 278.1
presupposes
that a certain level of privacy must be engaged; namely, this provision
concerns only records that could cause “potential prejudice to the
complainant’s personal dignity”.  These factors suggest that the scheme is not
intended to catch more mundane information, even if such information is
communicated privately.  Moreover, given the accused’s right to make full
answer and defence, mere discomfort associated with lesser intrusions of
privacy will generally be tolerated. In this context, a complainant’s privacy
in open court “will be at serious risk only where the sensitivity of the
information strikes at the subject’s more intimate self” (
Sherman Estate
,
at para.
74
).
(ii)
Framework to Apply
[54]
In light
of Parliament’s intent, the relevant jurisprudence and the statutory scheme, a
non-enumerated record will fall within the definition of
s. 278.1
if
it contains information of an intimate and highly personal nature that is
integral to the complainant’s overall physical, psychological or emotional
well-being.  Such information will have implications for the complainant’s
dignity.  As previously stated, this interpretation is specific to the record
screening regime.  To determine whether a record contains such information, a
presiding judge should consider both the content and context of the record.
....
(iv)
Summary of the Analytical
Process
[68]
Having
defined the scope of “records”, we will now provide an outline of the
analytical process that should be applied by a court to determine if evidence
constitutes a “record”.
[69]
The presiding judge should first determine if the proposed
evidence contains information that falls under s. 276.  If the evidence
falls under both
ss. 276
and
278.1
, as stated
above, the judge should assess the evidence as
s. 276
evidence.
[70]
If the proposed evidence does not fall under
s. 276
, the
judge should then determine whether it is a “record” under
s. 278.1
.  If
the evidence does not come within one of the enumerated categories, the inquiry
should focus on whether it contains personal information for which there is a
reasonable expectation of privacy.  Where the evidence is found to be an
enumerated or non-enumerated record, the record screening regime is engaged.
[71]
A non-enumerated record will be caught by the
record screening regime if it contains information of an intimate and highly
personal nature that is integral to the complainant’s overall physical,
psychological or emotional well-being.  Such information will have implications
for the complainant’s dignity.  This assessment considers the content and
context of the record.  Electronic communications are subject to this analysis
like all forms of records.  In addition, records of an explicit sexual nature
not covered by s. 276 because they concern the subject matter of the
charge will often attract a reasonable expectation of privacy and fall under
the record screening regime.
[72]
When it is unclear whether the evidence is a “record”,
counsel should err on the side of caution and initiate Stage One of the record
screening process.  To be clear, under the record screening regime, the accused
will be in possession or control of the evidence at issue, and they will know
the context in which the evidence arose.  For this reason, the accused will be
well equipped to discern whether the evidence is a “record” and to make
submissions on this point, if need be.
Motion For Directions
[
13
]
In
J.J.
, supra
, the court states that a motion for
directions may be brought to determine if documents are “records” and therefore
subject to the ss. 278.92-.94 regime for the determination of admissibility.
[
14
]
The Court states at paras.103-105:
“In light of the
uncertainty regarding the scope of records, some defence counsel have on
occasion brought a motion for directions before engaging in the procedure under
ss. 278.92 to 278.94, to determine whether the particular evidence comes
within the definition of a “record” under s. 278.1.  Motions for
directions are not explicitly contemplated by the statutory language of the
record screening regime: they are purely a discretionary exercise of the
presiding judge’s trial management power.
[104]
The test
we have articulated for interpreting s. 278.1 is designed to assist
counsel and judges in reducing the need for motions for directions.  However,
in cases where the accused does bring a motion for directions, the presiding
judge must decide whether the proposed evidence is a “record”.  Where, in the
opinion of the judge, the evidence is clearly a “record”, the judge should deal
with the matter summarily and order the accused to proceed with a private
record application.  Equally, where the judge is uncertain whether the proposed
evidence is a “record”, they should instruct the accused to proceed with an
application.  Only if the judge is clearly satisfied that the proposed evidence
does not constitute a “record” should they direct that the accused need not
bring an application.”
Analysis of the WhatsApp Messages at Issue in
This Motion
[
15
]
The documents at issue in this case are WhatsApp
communications between the complainant and the Applicant.  They are generally
initiated by the complainant and contain responses from the Applicant.
[
16
]
It is clear from the content of the messages that they
communicated criticisms of the Applicant’s character and conduct, by his wife,
in the context of significant marital discord.
[
17
]
None of the communications contain explicit sexual content.  In
particular, no sexual conduct of the complainant is referred to.  There are no
sexual images.
[
18
]
In several instances, the complainant is alleging former and
current infidelity by the Applicant, her husband.  She also makes complaints
about his excessive attentiveness to his own family, his lack of attention to
the complainant and their children, his prioritization of his family over his
wife and children, his failure to spend enough time at home, and that the
Applicant is a liar who hides his income from the complainant.
[
19
]
Particularly in the messages in the April – May 2024
timeframe, the Applicant’s conduct is criticized using religious and Biblical
references.
[
20
]
It is also clear in this timeframe that the Applicant and the
complainant separate, and on April 15, 2024 the Applicant refers to the fact
that they are getting divorced.  References are made by the complainant to the
Applicant being required to pay child support and spousal support.
[
21
]
In my opinion, the text messages are non-enumerated records
within section 278.1 which do not attract a reasonable expectation of privacy.  They
do not contain communications or information from the complainant analogous to
highly sensitive matters such as the complainant’s medical or psychiatric care,
counselling records, personal journals or diaries. They are made by the
complainant in the context of a deteriorating marriage and, in essence, are
complaints about the accused’s conduct and character with little information
about the complainant beyond her complaints about her husband.
[
22
]
The public use of these communications in a trial could not
cause “potential prejudice to the complainant’s personal dignity”.  Her
expressed attitude towards her husband does not reveal information striking at
the complainant’s “more intimate self”.
[
23
]
The complaints expressed by the complainant did not contain
“information of an intimate and highly personal nature that is integral to the
complainant’s overall physical, psychological, or emotional well-being.”  They
are made in the context of a deteriorating marriage which resulted in the
accused saying on April 15, 2024 that they are getting divorced.
[
24
]
I have carefully considered whether the use of religious
concepts and texts by the complainant made what are otherwise mundane attacks
on the character and conduct of the accused, integral to the dignity of the
complainant, as a result of their reference to religious concepts and Biblical
references.
[
25
]
I accept defence counsel’s submission that the mere
identification of a religious affiliation is not an inherently private matter
in the context of a court proceeding in which witnesses are routinely asked
whether, when testifying, they wish to swear an oath on a Holy Book, and, if
so, which Holy Book, or whether they wish to testify pursuant to an
affirmation.
[
26
]
In addition, I agree with the Crown’s fair acknowledgement
during oral submissions, that in the absence of an expression of serious
personal private harm, or suffering, by the complainant, of a religious nature,
the mere use of religious concepts to attack the character and conduct of the
accused does not render these communications “information of an intimate and
highly personal nature integral to the complainant’s psychological or emotional
well-being.”  In my opinion, nothing in the messages from the complainant
contains any serious deeply personal religious expressions of harm or suffering
by the complainant such that her dignity and privacy would be harmed by their
public use in a trial.
[
27
]
In conclusion, as these WhatsApp messages are not enumerated
or non-enumerated “records” within
section 278.1
of the
Criminal Code
,
they are not subject to the procedural scheme for the determination of their
admissibility in
sections 278.92
-
278.94
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
28
]
I therefore do not need to, and do not now, determine their relevance
or admissibility.  Like other evidence, their relevance and admissibility will
be determined on a case-by-case basis in the course of the trial in light of
the evidence heard, and the issues that arise, in the trial.
Date: July 29, 2025                                                  ______________________________                                          
                                                                        Justice
David Porter