Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj672/2025oncj672.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
CITATION:
R. v. M.R.,
2025 ONCJ 672
DATE: December 16, 2025
COURT
FILE No:  20-1420-00
O N T A R I O   C O U R T   OF   J U S T I
C E
B E T W E E N:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
-AND-
M.R.
­­­­­­
­­­­­­­­­­­
Before Justice M. G. March
Submissions heard on October 24, 2025
Reasons for Sentence released on December 16, 2025
Teresa James.………………...…………….……………………………….Crown
Counsel
Marni Munsterman…………………………………………………...….Counsel
for M.R.
March, M.G., J. :
Introduction
:
1
.
On May 16, 2025, I found M.R. guilty following a ten-day trial of
the offence of
touching for a sexual
purpose N.B., a person under the age of 16 years, directly with a part of his
body, to wit, his finger, on or about October 25, 2020 contrary to
section 151
of the
Criminal Code of
Canada
(“the
Code
”). 
I acquitted him on a charge of administering on the same date an overpowering
drug to N.B. with intent to enable or assist himself to commit an indictable
offence contrary to
s. 246
(b) of the
Code
.
2
.
M.R. also pleaded guilty at the outset of his trial on June 6,
2022 to the offence of
distributing
cannabis on or about October 24, 2020 to minors, N.B. and A.R., contrary to
section 9(1)(a)(ii) of the
Cannabis Act
. He was content to await
sentencing for this offence until the conclusion of his trial on his charges
under the
Code
.
3
.
N.B. is M.R.’s stepdaughter.  A.R. is M.R.’s biological daughter. 
Both girls were 14 years old and living with M.R. at the time he committed the
offences, while he was still a serving member of the Canadian Armed Forces
(“CAF”) stationed at Garrison Petawawa.
Circumstances of the Offences:
4
.
The underlying facts of this case are set out in
detail at
R. v. M.R.,
2025 ONCJ 274
.
5
.
In short, I found regarding the sexual touching offence that:
a)
late in the evening of October 25, 2020, N.B.,
A.R. and M.R. were watching movies while sitting on the couch in the living
room of his private married quarters (“PMQ”),
b)
A.R. went to bed,
c)
N.B. and M.R. stayed up,
d)
N.B. was sitting on M.R.’s stomach, as was her
habit since she was a child,
e)
M.R. tried to slide N.B. toward his crotch area,
f)
N.B. resisted his attempt to do so,
g)
M.R. reached under her thigh and tried to loosen
the drawstring of her shorts unsuccessfully,
h)
M.R. then slid his hand into the leg of N.B.’s
shorts and fondled her vagina with his hand over top of her underwear,
i)
next M.R. slid one or two of his fingers
underneath her underwear and digitally penetrated N.B.’s vagina,
j)
as M.R. was sexually touching N.B., he was
occasionally asking her if she was okay with it, to which N.B. repeatedly
responded she did not know,
k)
N.B. was either under the influence of marijuana
at the time or in shock at what was happening, such that she felt numb in her
vaginal area,
l)
N.B. was at a loss to know how to respond or to
seek assistance for herself,
m)
N.B. was texting her ex-boyfriend Z., his friend
I., and others at or about the time the sexual touching was taking place,
n)
M.R. pulled her down to lay next to him and took
her phone away from her momentarily,
o)
N.B. pleaded for its return; M.R. eventually
relented,
p)
M.R. then asked her if she wished to play video
games or watch a movie,
q)
N.B., in response, told him she wanted to go to
bed, and did so,
r)
M.R. checked on N.B. while she was in bed asking
for her assistance to log out of an app he had left open on his phone,
s)
N.B. obliged,
t)
N.B. resolved that night to report the incident
at school the next day and did so,
u)
N.B. provided a statement to police about what
had occurred and attended at the Pembroke Regional Hospital for a Sexual
Assault Examination Kit,
v)
N.B. handed over the underwear she was wearing
the previous night and submitted to a vaginal swab sought by Ms. Valiquette, a
Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner,
w)
a cut out of the crotch area of N.B.’s underwear
and the vaginal swab taken from her, after forensic analysis done by the Centre
of Forensic Sciences (“CFS”), revealed M.R.’s DNA profile in both,
x)
no scientific method existed for determining the
exact type of bodily fluid or substance transferring from M.R. to leave a DNA
deposit by him on N.B.’s clothing or in her vagina,
y)
the CFS expert calculated the probability that
someone other than M.R. could have deposited the DNA found on N.B.’s underwear
was one in one trillion, and
z)
the CFS expert calculated the probability that
someone other than M.R., or a member of his patrilineage, could have deposited
the DNA in her vagina was one in two thousand.
6
.
Regarding the distribution of marijuana to minors, M.R. admitted
to an occasion where he gave “gummies” to N.B. and A.R. when they were 14 years
of age on or about October 24, 2020.
Circumstances of the Offender:
7
.
M.R. is a single, 42-year-old man, who, until now,
had no criminal record. He is presently unemployed after he was, as he put it,
“kicked out of the military for refusing a direct order to get the Covid 19
vaccine”.
8
.
Prior thereto, he enjoyed a career in the CAF for some 14 years. 
He achieved the highest rank of corporal. He was a member of the “combat arms
artillery”. During his tenure, he participated in a nine-month tour of duty in
Afghanistan as a “gun driver”.
9
.
Following his time overseas, he stated he was “hard on the booze
for three or four years”. He experienced blackouts, but he did not have large
memory gaps. Now he drinks rarely, maybe once a year.
10
.
Regarding other illegal drug use, M.R. has tried “mushrooms,
weed, acid, MDMA and cocaine”.  This period of experimentation occurred during
his college years, and when he first joined the military. The last time he used
any such drugs was 20 years ago.
11
.
In respect of marijuana consumption, he says that he uses it when
he feels anxious. He will then take a puff of weed. He still uses it once to
twice weekly, but “it is definitely less than before”.
12
.
According to a Sexual Behaviours Report (“the Report”) prepared
under authority of section 21 of the
Mental Health Act
by Dr. Sanjiv
Gulati, a forensic psychiatrist with the Royal Ottawa Hospital (“ROH”), M.R. now
lives in the countryside outside the Greater Toronto Area.  He sleeps in the
woods, but has access to an empty cabin when the weather is cold.
13
.
He described his decision to pursue this lifestyle because it may
be “a rebellious thing”. His dismissal from the CAF “kind of jaded [him] with
people, the government, and organizations”.
14
.
His ideal situation at the moment is having a cabin with his
chickens. He has eight of them. In exchange for permission to stay where he does,
he maintains the gardens on the property and its lawns, so they do not become
overgrown. He lamented that it was difficult for him to keep his appointments with
Dr. Gulati to have the Report prepared because he needed to find someone to care
for his chickens while he was away.
15
.
M.R. understood that he was sent for an evaluation by this Court.
He did not believe that he had any sexual problems. He maintained his innocence
that he never touched his stepdaughter, N.B.  When interviewed by Dr. Gulati,
he said, “I deny all aspects of the offence”.
16
.
He asserted that there has never been any sexual interaction
between N.B. and him. He had been in her life since she was eight years old. He
did not touch her sexually on the night in question nor any other time. Her
account of what she did to him was “completely false”. He could not understand
why she would lie about something so serious.
17
.
He did not know how any of his DNA could have been found on her
underwear or inside her vagina. He ventured that it could have happened by
their dirty clothes sitting in a laundry pile together.
18
.
He stated that he had no sexual interest in children or anyone
underage.
19
.
M.R. has three biological children from two previous
relationships ranging in ages between 14 and 21.
20
.
In terms of education, M.R. completed high school in French.
Thereafter, he attended a Police Foundations course at Boreal College in
Sudbury. He finished one year of the two-year program before leaving it.
21
.
M.R. commented that he attended special education classes throughout
the course of his schooling because he had “a hard time learning new things”.
22
.
Regarding any psychiatric history, M.R. reported to Dr. Gulati
that he had none. M.R. added that when he returned from overseas, he was
required to see a psychologist, but it was “easy to lie to them”. He surmised
that he thought a lot of things were normal after coming back from Afghanistan,
but now, he has come to understand from conversations with others that what he
thought was normal was not. For example, he would become “super anxious” when he
heard a phone ring. In Afghanistan, a phone ringing signified he had to go into
action and shoot.
23
.
To this day, when he hears a phone ring, he feels the need to run
somewhere, but there is nowhere to run. He intends to see someone through
Veterans Affairs for treatment of this condition, but he has not done so yet.
24
.
M.R. agreed to undergo a full assessment at the Sexual Behaviours
Clinic (“SBC”) of the ROH. The assessment included:
a)
an ‘in person’ sexual behaviours interview,
b)
a biopsychosocial interview,
c)
a battery of biochemical laboratory tests,
d)
a series of self-reported psychological
questionnaires, and
e)
phallometric testing.
25
.
During the sexual behaviours interview, M.R.
explained that he had not had sexual intercourse in the three years prior to
the assessment. Previously, he had been involved in “swinging” with other
couples on the military base. He would go with other couples to have “threesomes”.
He estimated that he engaged in ten or so of those, as well as roughly ten instances
of “cuckolding” (an activity in which an intimate partner finds him or herself turned
on by watching the other partner engage in sexual acts with a third party).
26
.
M.R. told Dr. Gulati that he masturbates
approximately once per week.  The last occasion upon which he did so was two
weeks prior to being assessed for purposes of the Report.  When he masturbates,
M.R. thinks of “girls on girls” and “girls with big boobs”.
27
.
However, M.R. explained that his masturbatory
habits have undergone a recent change.  He shared with Dr. Gulati the
following:
“About a month ago, I decided to
start a spiritual journey. There is this idea that you keep your animalistic
urges inside of you. If you resist your biological need to reproduce, then your
body is happier and you have more endorphins so you are more aware and at one
with yourself. So as a result, I have been trying to abstain from masturbation
and sex as a way to become more one with myself.
Prior to this, I masturbated daily,
but it never caused much issues in my life. My one partner was mad because we
did not have sex as often because I was masturbating. But I did not know she
was mad about it until way after we broke up. That was [A.B., N.B.’s mother].
28
.
M.R. added that he looks at pornography each
time he masturbates “just to get the job done”. The ideal age of the female
models he views are between 30 and 50. He reported that he masturbates 100% of
the time when he is looking at pornography.
29
.
He refused any form of blood work being done at the ROH laboratory
for analysis of his biochemistry. He offered that he does not trust anyone
after Covid 19.
30
.
During self-reported psychological testing, Dr. Gulati observed
that M.R.’s level of anger expression was average as compared to the general
population.
31
.
He had no apparent substance abuse issues.
32
.
He endorsed five of 36 listed statements entertained by sexual
offenders against adult women. They were:
a)
women usually want sex no matter how they can
get it,
b)
women often falsely accuse men of rape,
c)
generally, rape is not planned - a lot of times
it just happens,
d)
if a woman goes to the home of a man on the
first date, she probably wants to have sex with him, and
e)
many women have a secret desired to be forced
into having sex.
33
.
M.R. adopted only one of the 38 listed
statements endorsed by men who have sexually abused children.  It was:
a)
a lot of times
sexual
assaults on children are not planned . . . they just happen.
34
.
On the scales of motor and non-planning impulsiveness,
a measure of the tendency to act without thinking, and to engage in behaviours
such as conducting oneself in a manner without consideration of consequences and
without adequate planning, M.R. scored in the elevated range.
35
.
When subjected to phallometric testing, M.R. responded past the
significance threshold to videos depicting a heterosexual couple, a lesbian
couple and one of children playing in a pool. He did not respond past the
significance threshold to a homosexual video. His responses, as interpreted by
Dr. Gulati, demonstrated that M.R. is capable of showing sexual arousal to
videos depicting consensual sexual activities between men and women, and
nonsexual videos of children.
36
.
He also responded past the significance threshold to an image of
two adult females and one younger male child in nonsexual slides.
37
.
While listening to audio recordings of consensual sexual activity
between an adult heterosexual couple and a sexual assault of an adult woman,
M.R. responded past the significance threshold. His response was more
significant to the sexual assault of the adult woman than to the consenting
adult heterosexual couple. He did not respond significantly to the nonsexual
physical assault of an adult woman. Dr. Gulati concluded that he showed more of
a preference for a sexual assault scenario. This resulted in a “positive Rape
Index”.
38
.
Further, M.R. responded past the significant threshold to a
“child initiated” scenario for both same-sex and opposite sex, audio scenarios.
He also responded more significantly to the less physically coercive sexual
scenarios with both a male and female child than to those depicting adult
consenting scenarios. In essence, he was responding more significantly to the
child materials. He was thus found to have both a “Same Sex Pedophile Index” and
an “Opposite Sex Pedophile Index”.
39
.
Using the most widely accepted actuarial tool nevertheless, the
Static-99R, designed to assess the risk of sexual recidivism among adult male
sex offenders, M.R. was assessed as being in the “Low” category. His “-1” score
meant that amongst Canadian sexual offenders, 5.7% scored lower than he did,
whereas 86.4% scored higher. Statistically, this translated to a 1.6% risk of
sexual recidivism in a five-year follow-up and a 2.5% risk in a ten-year
follow-up.
40
.
During his mental status examination, Dr. Gulati found that he
was mainly “pleasant, calm and polite”. M.R. described himself as usually being
in a good mood. At times however, Dr. Gulati noted that he demonstrated
“scattered thinking” and would lose track of his thought process when
recounting the offence details. He displayed no evidence of a “current thought
disorder, delusions, bizarre thoughts, or suicidal or homicidal thoughts”. Nor
did he entertain any “current perceptual disturbances like delusions or
hallucinations”.
41
.
Ultimately, Dr. Gulati was able to reach a diagnosis of “no major
mental disorder”. Nor could the doctor find that M.R. met the criteria for
finding a “pedophilic disorder”. However, Dr. Gulati emphasized that, in light
of the Positive Pedophile Index on M.R.’s phallometric results and the finding
of guilt made by this Court, he remained concerned about M.R.’s future risk
towards children.
42
.
Dr. Gulati recommended by way of conclusion that if the Court
were to determine M.R. should receive a penitentiary sentence of two years or greater,
M.R. should serve his time at the Bath Institution in Kingston. M.R. could
receive at that facility treatment as a sexual offender. He would also be able
to participate in group and individual psychotherapy to open up to and
addresses his risk of sexual re-offence.
Crown’s Position on
Sentence:
43
.
Crown counsel seeks a period of incarceration of four to four and
a half years of imprisonment for M.R.
44
.
Under the
Sex Offender Information Registration Act
(“
SOIRA
”),
the Crown points out that M.R. will be subjected to a 20-year, mandatory period
of compliance.
45
.
He will also be obligated to provide a sample of his DNA pursuant
to
section 487.051
of the
Code
, since sexual touching is a primary
designated offence.
46
.
By authority of
section 109
of the
Code
, the court must in
addition impose a 10-year weapons’ prohibition.
47
.
Lastly, the Crown seeks a section 161 Order for a period of 20
years, but allowing for an exception under sub-subsection (d), to permit M.R.
to have use of the Internet and other digital networks.
48
.
Crown counsel raised her concern that M.R.’s claim he did not
know he was convicted speaks loudly to his lack of acknowledgement of any sexual
problem he may have to address in order to rehabilitate himself.
49
.
Denunciation and deterrence are the salient sentencing principles
to be taken into account by the Court for the offence of sexual touching. Indeed,
sections 718.01 of the
Code
mandates this Court to give primary
consideration to the objectives of denunciation and deterrence in sentencing
M.R.  Those objectives can only be fulfilled through the imposition of a term
of imprisonment.
50
.
Section 718.2(a)(ii), (ii.1), (iii) and (iii.1) all have
application as well, given the circumstances of the offence committed by M.R.  He
abused a member of his family, his stepdaughter. He committed the offence
against her when she was under the age of 18. He violated his position of trust
in doing so. N.B. suffered a significant impact as a result of the crime in
light of her youth and her other personal circumstances at the time it was
carried out.
51
.
The Crown drew my attention to paragraphs 88 to 89 and 114 of the
decision by the Supreme Court of Canada (“SCC”) in
R. v. Friesen,
2020 SCC
9 (CanLII)
. There the SCC reminded sentencing judges that offenders such as M.R.
ae highly morally blameworthy. They ought to appreciate the profound harm their
conduct can cause upon a child.
52
.
In effect, M.R. treated his stepdaughter as an experimental, sex
object. A proportionate sentence given the gravity of the offence he
perpetrated and his degree of responsibility for it requires a substantial term
of imprisonment to be imposed. A message of general deterrence must be sent to
Canadian
society. Mid to single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences committed against
children are normal. Such sentences may be imposed even when there is only a
single instance of sexual abuse involving a single victim, as it was in this
case.
53
.
When considered in this light, denunciation and general
deterrence take on enormous dimensions.
54
.
Crown counsel also referred me to
R. v. W.S
.,
2024 ONSC
554
, where Gomery J., as she then was, provided a helpful
review
of recent decisions and the principles of sentencing at play in cases such as
this one, which establish a range of between nine
months
and five and a half
years for sexual offences perpetrated against
child family members, or other juvenile, vulnerable victims.
55
.
The Crown also argued that there was a marked lack of mitigating
factors in M.R.’s case, whereas there was an abundance of aggravating features,
amongst them:
a)
his complete lack of acknowledgement for having
wronged N.B. in any way,
b)
the results of his phallometric testing, which
revealed a “Positive Pedophilic Index” for both opposite and same sex children,
c)
his gross abuse of trust in taking sexual
liberties with his stepdaughter in the manner he did, and
d)
his bad judgment in allowing access to and
administering drugs to minors living under his roof, his daughters, N.B and A.R
.
56
.
Crown counsel conceded at the end of her submissions that the
position she was taking on sentence was perhaps at the higher end of the range.
Defence Position
on Sentence
:
57
.
Defence counsel readily acknowledged that the only appropriate
sentence to be imposed for M.R. would be one of incarceration. She suggested a
range of two to three years of imprisonment in the post-
Friesen
era.
58
.
The defence did not take issue with any of the ancillary orders
sought by the Crown, except with respect to the duration of the section 161 Order.
Defence counsel suggested that it should rather be of a five to ten year
duration. There should also be an exception to allow contact between M.R. and
all three of his biological daughters pursuant to any family court order made
upon his release from custody.
59
.
Lastly, defence counsel asked for a waiver of the victim fine
surcharge arguing that the imposition of any monetary fine upon M.R. upon his
release would cause him undue hardship.
60
.
By way of mitigating factors, the defence emphasized that M.R. is
a first-time offender.  The restraint principle applies even in the absence of
youth, given he is now 42 years of age.  At the time of commission of the
offences, he was 37. Up to that point in time, he was
a
law-abiding individual.
61
.
Notwithstanding his refusal to take the Covid 19 vaccine, he
served his country as a member of the CAF for 14 years including a nine-month
tour of duty in Afghanistan.
62
.
Regarding the offence he committed, it was a single instance of
sexual touching of relatively short duration.
63
.
M.R. did not oppose the preparation of the Report. He cannot
therefore be characterized as treatment averse.
64
.
Defence counsel queried whether M.R. suffered from cognitive
issues. Throughout school, he needed extra help through the assistance of a
special teacher. More recently, he appears to have acquired the irrational
tendency to want to spring into action at the sound of a telephone ring. His
chosen lifestyle of isolation is somewhat worrisome.
65
.
The defence also urged upon the Court not to lose sight of the
fact that M.R.’s projected risk of recidivism was “Low” as determined by Dr.
Gulati.
66
.
Defence counsel reminded the Court that M.R.’s absence of
remorse, as manifested by his insistence that he is an innocent man wrongfully
convicted, is to be treated as the absence of a mitigating, not an aggravating
factor.
67
.
The defence also cited a handful of cases during her submissions,
some of which I will refer to in greater detail
below.
68
.
In sum, the defence emphasized to the Court how the tariff for sexual
touching has dramatically increased since
Friesen
was
decided, but nevertheless, sentencing must be individually tailored to arrive
at a fit disposition for each specific offender.
Analysis
:
69
.
In coming to a determination of what is most appropriate for M.R.,
I am dutybound to apply all relevant principles of sentencing statutorily
recognized within
sections 718
to
718.3
of the
Code
.  I agree with the
defence that sentencing is always a unique, individualized exercise.  No two
cases are completely alike.  Nor are any two offenders completely the same.
70
.
M.R.’s sentence must take into account the circumstances of the
offences he committed, as well as his personal circumstances.
71
.
Most importantly, the punishment I impose must be proportionate
to the seriousness of his offences and the degree of his responsibility for them.
72
.
The majority for the SCC in
R. v. Lacasse
,
2015 SCC 64
underscored
the primary function to be performed by an appellate court in reviewing the
appropriateness of dispositions chosen by sentencing judges as follows:
“[P]roportionality
is the cardinal principle that must guide appellate courts in considering the
fitness of a sentence imposed on an offender. The more serious the crime and
its consequences, or the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility, the
heavier the sentence will be. In other words, the severity of a sentence
depends not only on the seriousness of the crime’s consequences, but also on
the moral blameworthiness of the offender. Determining a proportionate sentence
is a delicate task.”
Denunciation and Deterrence:
73
.
In my view, the principles of denunciation and deterrence are
paramount when one sentences an offender for the sexual touching of a child.
74
.
The message must be delivered to M.R. and others like him that if
one takes the risk of engaging in this conduct and the inherent breach of trust
that accompanies a crime of this nature, one can expect to go to jail.  People
like M.R. ought to learn from the punishment meted out to him what their fate
will be, should they do as he did.
Separation from Society:
75
.
Offenders must be separated from society
where necessary.
Clearly, incarceration must always be the penal sanction of last resort.
76
.
To my mind, it will only be in extremely rare and exceptional
cases where jail can be avoided by the sexual abuser of a child.
Rehabilitation:
77
.
M.R. is approaching middle age.  I do not consider him to be
steadfastly set in his way.  His distrust of authority and chosen lifestyle
speaks to what I can only describe charitably as ‘distorted thinking’.  My hope
is that he will approach treatment which can be offered to him institutionally
with a less suspicious, open mind.
78
.
His current lack of insight into the issues which need to be
addressed (i.e. the Positive Pedophile Index) does not bode well for his
rehabilitation and reintegration into society.  I take Crown counsel’s point on
this subject; however, I do not consider M.R. to be ‘a lost cause’.
Promotion of a Sense of Responsibility and
Acknowledgement of Harm:
79
.
As aforementioned, a sentence crafted to promote a sense of
responsibility within him when he maintains his innocence is a difficult task. 
Of course, to say he was wrongfully convicted is his right. I will not punish him
any more or any less for doing so.   I am nevertheless deeply concerned about
his amenability to rehabilitation.
80
.
The sentence I settle upon must reflect the severe psychological
harm his conduct visited upon his stepdaughter, N.B., and her mother, his ex-common
law partner, A.B.
81
.
Succinctly, N.B. described the ordeal she was put through in her
Victim Impact Statement (“VIS”), and the person who caused it as “something and
someone who forever changed the course of my life”.   She was “a little girl .
. . still figuring out life”.  M.R.’s conduct “ripped her heart in ways nobody
else can”.
82
.
She immediately suffered the indignity of being “questioned by
teachers and staff” and “interrogated by [her] own friends” leading to
“rumours” of “allegedly having sex with [her] stepdad”.  She stopped going to
school altogether as a result.  Her ability to find employment has been
affected to this day.
83
.
She then felt isolated.  Her mental health worsened.  She had flashbacks
and began hitting and cutting herself.  Fortunately, she has been able to put
this practice of self-harm behind her.
84
.
As she explained it, M.R. was “someone [she] looked up to . . .
not just as a father, but someone who’s supposed to serve and protect”, and
“someone who would walk her down the aisle one day”.
85
.
N.B. wishes he “could understand the damage [he’s] done”.  She
doubts she can “ever trust another man again”.  She was left with “ruined
relations with friends, family and partners” because of what he did to her.
86
.
A.B., the mother of N.B. and M.R.’s former partner in her VIS described
how her daughter, his victim, is now “overwhelmed with fear, anxiety, anger, hate,
blame and a loss of trust in others”. A.B. states that N.B. has been left with
“emotional scars that may never fully heal”, while A.B. herself lives with her
“own constant sense of guilt, anger and helplessness”.
87
.
M.R.’s crime, A.B. points out, has also affected
the two younger girls who M.R. and A.B. share.  As A.B. explained, the girls “may
not know the full truth, but they know enough to understand that their father
did something terribly wrong to their sister”.
88
.
A.B. commented that “the damage he has caused has
made it nearly impossible for [her] to believe that anyone could ever truly be
safe to be let into [their] lives again”.  A.B. bemoans the fact that her
daughters “no longer have a father figure”. She described this as “a
wound” that will not heal.  They are “all
victims of his betrayal”.
89
.
Sadly, I am not certain that M.R. will ever be
able to acknowledge the harm he has visited not only on N.B., but A.B. and his
own two younger daughters as well.
Aggravating and Mitigating
Circumstances:
90
.
I find the following features of the offences committed by M.R. to
be aggravating:
a)
the sexual touching of his stepdaughter was an
egregious breach of trust,
b)
the offence was committed upon a member of his
family, N.B., who found herself particularly vulnerable and eager to restore a
relationship with the only father figure she had ever known,
c)
N.B. was a young person only 14 years of age at
the time,
d)
the offence left a lasting impact upon N.B., and
she may remain scarred by it her entire life, and
e)
M.R.’s decision to provide any type of
intoxicant to his 14-year-old daughters was an extremely poor exercise of
judgement on his part to say the least.
91
.
The mitigating factors
are:
a)
M.R. is a first offender, and
b)
he is somewhat amenable to treatment given his willingness
to cooperate with Dr. Gulati and to subject himself to almost all forms of
testing for purposes of preparation of the Report.
Parity:
92
.
Section 718.2
(b) of the
Code
provides:
“A sentence should be similar to
sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances.”
The Case Law:
93
.
Crown and defence counsel drew my attention to several
authorities attempting to assist the Court in identifying the appropriate range
for the sentence which ought to be imposed upon M.R.
94
.
Below I will refer to the case law which I find to
be particularly helpful to my task of arriving at a proper sentence for him.
95
.
I would note firstly that any pre-
Friesen
cases
are of limited to no value.
Friesen
signaled
a cataclysmic change in how sentencing
judges are to treat sexual offences committed by adults upon children. For far
too long, the legal consequence of sexually abusing a minor was alarmingly
lenient. Indeed, defence counsel referred me to the decision of
R. v.
Habinski
,
2015 ONCJ 509
, where just five years before
Friesen
was
decided, Harris J. imposed a sentence of 60 days and three years of probation,
where the adult offender had touched the breasts of a 15-year-old girl he had
employed, and whose pants he later pulled down in order to touch the lips of
her vagina.
Times have certainly
changed since then.
96
.
I agree with Crown counsel that Gomery J., as she
then was when she wrote the Reasons for Sentence in
W.S
., settled upon
an appropriate new range for the offence of sexual touching. Depending on the
circumstances of the case and the moral blameworthiness of the offender, her
review of the cases led her to conclude that sentences can now vary between
nine months and five and a half years.
97
.
A case relied upon by the defence,
R. v. J.W.W
.,
2025 BCSC 849
, involved facts where an offender was convicted of sexually touching
a victim almost 30 years ago when she was between the ages of five and ten
years old. The offender masturbated himself to the point of ejaculation on three
occasions.  He then rubbed semen on her back. There was also one incident of him
having taken her hand and used it to masturbate him.  Milman J. sentenced the
offender to 30 months imprisonment.
98
.
J.W.W
. is readily distinguishable
on the basis that it was an historical case.  Any attempt by a sentencing judge
to impose meaningful punishment is often difficult in a historical context. The
person the offender was three decades ago is rarely the man he is at present.
Indeed, Milman
J. considered
it to be an “important mitigating factor” that the “offending conduct occurred
decades ago”. He had led an otherwise “productive life”. He had been “caring
and generous to many others”. That is not this case.
99
.
Almost all the delay in M.R.’s case between the
offence date and now was attributable to his difficulties in retaining counsel,
changing counsel, and retaining an expert to assist in his defence. M.R. is
still very much of the same quality and character at 42, his present age, as he
was at 37, when he committed his crime.
100
.
In
R. v. P.H
.,
2024 ONCJ 155
, my colleague, Kim J., was dealing
with an offender who had sexually touched a child between the ages of three and
four on four separate occasions. The touching involved digital penetration and
contact with the external area of the victim’s vagina. On one occasion, the
victim felt pain when the offender scratched the inside of her vagina.
101
.
Kim J., upon his review of the cases, settled upon a range between 18
and 36 months of imprisonment. Ultimately, he imposed two years less a day
imprisonment to be followed by two years of probation. His decision, it
appears, was compelled by a desire to mete out an extended period of supervision
for the offender. At paragraph 51 he wrote, “ . . . a penitentiary term beyond two
years would preclude my ability to impose a probation order, which could
adequately address the protection concerns expressed by the victim and her
mother”.
102
.
Another case provided
by
the defence for my consideration,
R. v. S.P.W
.,
2021 NSPC 24
, involved
the biological father on multiple occasions during access visits having his
daughter between the ages of four and six years
old touch his penis, masturbate him to the
point of ejaculation and taste the semen. The sentencing judge imposed a 56-month
penitentiary term. However, Tax J.
emphasized the mitigating effect of the guilty plea and the genuine remorse
demonstrated by the offender.
103
.
On the contrary, M.R. put the Crown to the strict proof of its case
against him beyond a reasonable doubt. He will not be punished for this of
course, but this does indeed constitute an absence of a mitigating factor.
Additionally, there has been no expression of remorse beyond his
acknowledgement that giving cannabis edibles to his 14-year-old daughters was
bad judgement on his part.
104
.
The decision of my colleague, Richardson J., in
R. v. T.A
.,
2022, ONCJ 528
, was quite factually divergent from the case before me. It is of
little value as a result. It involved over the clothes touching of the breast and
vaginal areas of a step-granddaughter, when she was just nine or ten years
of age, by the step-grandfather, who, at the
time of sentencing, was 70 years old. It did not involve digital penetration as
in M.R.’s case. Additionally, unlike M.R., T.A. pleaded guilty and was
genuinely remorseful for what he had done. Notwithstanding, Richardson J. imposed
a sentence of two years less a day and three years of probation.
105
.
Closest on its facts to M.R.’s case is
R. v. J.D
.,
2023, ONSC
1088
.  The Court of Appeal for Ontario upheld the sentence of three years
imprisonment imposed at first instance for a 42-year-old offender, who sexually
assaulted his wife’s 18-year-old niece by touching her breasts and digitally
penetrating her vagina without her consent (see
R. v. J.D
.
,
2024 ONCA
286
).
106
.
The offender lacked any criminal history and was generally of good
character. His marriage broke down in the wake of the offence he committed.
There were also immigration consequences which would flow from the fact of his
conviction and
the
quantum of the sentence imposed.
107
.
The sentencing judge, Conlan J. pointed out at paragraphs 29 and 30
that:
[29]  
              The aggravating
factors, however, are plentiful and serious. The moral blameworthiness of this
offender is high.  Rehabilitation and the principle of restraint are
important, especially for this first-offender, but denunciation and general
deterrence are paramount here, in my opinion.
[30]  
              This was a
gross abuse of trust committed by J.D. against, effectively, his niece and a
young woman he knew was vulnerable. This sexual assault was varied, including
both the fondling of the victim’s breast and the digital penetration of her
vagina, and it was not momentary but rather lasted several minutes in its
totality. The digital penetration was committed against a helpless person,
barely an adult, and it started while she was asleep. This crime has had a
devastating effect on the victim, moving her from what was already a fragile
and mentally unstable place to one where she feels completely worthless and
amounting to nothing.
108
.
The above commentary is particularly apposite in M.R.’s case, except
for any immigration consequence, which, of course, as a Canadian citizen, would
not apply to him.
A
Fit Sentence for M.R. in the Circumstances of the Offences He Committed and His
Personal
Circumstances:
109
.
Although denunciation and deterrence are the sentencing principles of
greatest importance, I must exercise restraint in deciding upon the appropriate
length of imprisonment for M.R.  Only incarceration can serve to address the
high level of moral blameworthiness which attached to the crime he committed. 
However, I do not believe M.R. is incorrigible.  He can be rehabilitated.
110
.
I find that M.R., as a sexual offender, is not an anomaly.  Any man who
is found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of a heinous act such as this, involving
the digital penetration of a 14-year-old stepdaughter, is unlikely to change
his tune at the sentencing stage.  Pride stands in the way of acknowledgement. 
 No one wants to wear the label of child molester or pedophile.  Unfortunately
for M.R., the evidence overwhelmingly pointed to the fact that he is.
111
.
That said, he remains a first offender. He has been assessed as a low
risk to reoffend by Dr. Gulati.  M.R. can be treated institutionally notwithstanding
he may forever maintain his innocence, which is his right, and which must never
be regarded as aggravating.
112
.
As stated by Holowka J. recently in
R. v. Devin Langlois,
2024
ONSC 4500
at para.
49
:
It is well-recognized that where an
offender has never served a period of incarceration, the shortest
sentence
possible ought to be imposed:
R. v. Hoang
, 2024 OCNA 361 at para.
78. See also
R. v. Borde
(2003),
2003 CanLII 4187 (ON CA)
,
63 O.R. (3d) 417
at para
36
.
113
.
I note as well the decision of the Court of Appeal for Ontario,
Hoang
,
one of the cases referred to by Holowka J. above, involved a 38 year old, first time
offender.  M.R. was similarly aged at 37 when he committed the offence for
which he is about to be sentenced.
Conclusion
:
114
.
Upon assessment of all relevant provisions of the
Code
, I find
that I must jail M.R. for a period of three years for the
s. 151
offence.  It
is as low as I can go under the circumstances and yet respect all relevant
principles of sentencing.
115
.
There will be a 30-day period of imprisonment to be served
concurrently for the offence of distributing cannabis to a minor contrary to s.
9(1)(a)(ii) of the
Cannabis Act
.
116
.
By
way of ancillary orders, M.R. shall be required:
a)
to
provide
a sample of his
DNA to the authorities under
section 487.051
of the
Code
,
b)
to comply with all applicable provision of
SOIRA
for a period of
20 years,
c)
to refrain
from
possessing a
weapon for a period of ten years pursuant to
s. 109
of the
Code
, and
d)
under
s. 161
of the
Code
, for a period of 20 years,
not
to:
(i)
attend at a public park or public
swimming area where persons under the age of 16 years are present or can
reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre, schoolground,
playground or community centre,
(ii)
be within two kilometres of any dwelling-house
where N.B. ordinarily resides or attends school or work,
(iii)
seek or obtain any employment,
whether or not the employment is remunerated, or become or be a volunteer in a
capacity, that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards
persons under the age of 16 years, and
(iv)
have
any contact — including communicating by any means — with
a person who is under the age of 16 years, unless it is in accordance with a
family court order made after today’s date to permit M.R. to have parenting
time with his biological children, assuming on the evidence put before the
family court, such contact with his biological children is deemed appropriate
.
117
.
Lastly, I will waive the imposition of any victim fine surcharge for
M.R.  I find it would cause him undue hardship to have to pay even a modest
fine, given the amount of time he will serve prior to the likelihood of him
being paroled.
DATED:  December 16, 2025
________________________________
March, M.G., J.