Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj433/2025oncj433.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. J.B.
, 2025 ONCJ 433
DATE: 
2025 08 25
COURT
FILE No.:  Hamilton 24-47103169
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING (Respondent)
— AND
—
J.B.
(Applicant)
Ruling
on Privilege
Before
Justice Davin M.K. Garg
Heard
June 26 and July 24, 2025
Ruling
delivered August 19, 2025
Reasons
released August 25, 2025
Carolyn Leblanc.................................................................... counsel
for the applicant J.B.
Raymond Woloshyn-Chick
....................................... counsel
for the respondent Crown
GARG J.:
Overview
[
1
]
The applicant and the complainant were married
for many years. Their relationship was marked by turbulence and disagreements.
Despite these challenges, the pair remained committed to working through their
issues and sought help from a couples’ therapist. They explored a range of
topics during these sessions, including the applicant’s alleged sexual assault
of the complainant—an event that forms the basis of the current criminal
charges.
[
2
]
The question before me is whether the State
should have access to the admissions made by the applicant to the therapist
during the counselling. Specifically, does case-by-case privilege shield the
communications from being used by the prosecution?
[
3
]
I recognize a privilege in this case. The
communications between the applicant and the therapist were confidential. That
confidence is essential to the therapist-client relationship and the
effectiveness of couples’ counselling. The power to speak freely enables the
kind of open dialogue that supports meaningful therapeutic progress. The hope
of healing rests in words spoken without fear of self-incrimination. I conclude
that the crucial truth-seeking function of a criminal trial does not justify
breaching the confidentiality in this case.
General legal principles
[
4
]
The law does not recognize a class privilege for therapist-client
communications:
R. v. McClure
,
2001 SCC 14
at para.
29
. Rather,
the applicant must convince the court to recognize a privilege in this case.
The court can recognize a case-by-case privilege if four criteria are met:
[1]
1)
The
communications must originate in a confidence that they will not be disclosed.
2)
This element of
confidentiality must be essential to the full and satisfactory maintenance of
the relation between the parties.
3)
The relation
must be one which in the opinion of the community ought to be sedulously
fostered.
4)
The injury that
would inure to the relation by the disclosure of the communications must be
greater than the benefit thereby gained for the correct disposal of litigation.
[
5
]
Traditional categories of privilege (e.g., solicitor-client privilege)
are absolute and necessarily run the risk of occasional injustice by excluding
relevant information from a criminal trial. Case-by-case privilege is
different. The court must consider the risk of injustice before recognizing a
privilege. “[I]f the court considering a claim for privilege determines that a
particular document or class of documents must be produced to get at the truth
and prevent an unjust verdict, it must permit production to the extent required
to avoid that result”:
M. (A.) v. Ryan
,
1997 CanLII 403 (SCC)
, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 157 at para.
33
.
The Court recognized that this case-by-case approach does not offer the public
any guarantees that communications with their therapists will remain
confidential: para. 35.
[
6
]
While I must conduct an analysis specific to the circumstances before
me, the general approach in the common law has been to recognize a privilege in
communications with a marriage counsellor:
Duits v. Duits
,
2006 CanLII 14407
(Ont. Sup. Ct.) at para.
20
; see also
R. v. R.S.
(1985),
1985 CanLII 3575 (ON CA)
, 19 C.C.C. (3d) 115 (Ont. C.A.) at 133.
Analysis
[
7
]
I find that the criteria have been met to
recognize a privilege in this case.
(1) The communications originated in a
confidence of non-disclosure
[
8
]
I start with the general proposition that
individuals who consult a therapist likely expect their communications to
remain confidential. A major reason for attending counselling is the
opportunity to share intimate details about one’s life with a trusted
professional.
[
9
]
The evidence in this case permits me to draw an
inference that the applicant’s communications originated in a confidence
that they would not be disclosed. The applicant and the complainant met with
Karen Zicari, who is a mental health practitioner and a registered
psychotherapist.
[2]
She is certified by the Canadian Professional Counsellors Association and the
International Association of Trauma Professionals.
[
10
]
The evidence on confidentiality is rooted in the Professional
Practice Standards of the College of Registered Psychotherapists of Ontario.
[3]
On the subject of confidentiality, Standard 3.1.1 reads: “Registrants do not
collect, use, or disclose information about a client without the informed
consent of the client or their authorized representative, except as permitted
or required by law”.
[4]
Standard 3.1.2 adds: “Registrants familiarize themselves and comply with
relevant privacy laws”. There is no suggestion that the applicant consented to
the disclosure of his communications.
[
11
]
The evidentiary support on this issue was limited. Counsel
appeared to rely on an assumption that the “therapist” designation alone would
suffice to establish that the communications were made in confidence. However,
as emphasized in
L.S. v. B.S.
,
2022 ONSC 5796
at paras.
137-139
, the
claim of confidentiality requires evidentiary grounding. Direct testimony from
the applicant or the therapist would have provided a firmer foundation.
[
12
]
Nevertheless, based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied
that the communications originated in a confidence of
non-disclosure. While the Crown challenged whether Ms. Zicari was
working as a psychotherapist in her specific dealings with the applicant, I
rely on the applicant’s affidavit in which he described working on their
relationship through “therapy” and regularly discussing issues with their
“couples therapist”. I add that I do not see a meaningful distinction between
“therapist” and “psychotherapist”—the terms were used interchangeably in this
case.
[
13
]
The complainant’s presence during the
counselling sessions did not undermine the applicant’s expectation of
confidence. Her presence is not equivalent to a third party attending a meeting
between a lawyer and their client. Rather, the applicant and the complainant
were jointly participating in couples counselling. It is expected that both
would be present as the therapist helped to facilitate their communication; see
R.S.
at 131.
(2) Confidentiality is essential to the maintenance of the
relationship
[
14
]
I am satisfied that confidentiality is
essential to the full and satisfactory maintenance of the therapist-client
relationship, including in the context of marriage counselling. Without it, the
therapeutic process risks becoming superficial and ineffective. Ms.
Zicari’s description of her practice underscores this point. She describes her
work as “personal” and aimed at addressing the “challenges at hand”. Her goal
is for clients “to feel safe, genuinely cared about”, and to know that they
have her “full support”. She “works with couples to shift from destructive
patterns to connecting experiences”, striving to create a space “that is safe
and joyful”.
[
15
]
The effectiveness of marriage counselling
depends on the clients’ ability to speak freely, without fear that their words
might later be used against them in a legal proceeding. Clients might withhold
important perspectives if they are worried about the risks of
self-incrimination. Ms. Zicari’s work focuses on rebuilding “communication,
trust, or intimacy”. These pillars of a healthy relationship cannot be
meaningfully addressed unless clients are encouraged to be honest and
vulnerable throughout the process. Indeed, the complainant’s statement outlines
the role that the counselling played in the pair’s reconciliation efforts.
[5]
“We kind of took some time to,
kind of build trust and get used to each other. We started going to therapy
together. … We were trying to work on the relationship”.
(3) The relationship ought to be sedulously
fostered
[
16
]
The relationship between a couples’ therapist
and their clients should be carefully protected and supported. I rely on how
Turnbull J. described the importance of couples’ counselling in
Duits
at para.
48
:
Marriage counselling for the
purpose of exploring reconciliation is encouraged and statutorily privileged in
divorce proceedings. … In our court system in Ontario, there has been major
systemic change to over the past ten to fifteen years to encourage mediation,
collaborative family law mediation, case conferences, settlement conferences,
pre-trial management conferences, pre-trial conferences, and mid trial
settlement conferences. These processes are aimed at allowing the parties
to work out their differences themselves. The costs, stress, emotional
damage and waste of time of much litigation can thereby be avoided. It is
this court’s view that the sanctity of such social and judicial processes
should be recognized in most cases.
[
17
]
Healthy relationships form the quiet
architecture of a well-functioning society. The qualities found within these
connections, like communication, trust, and conflict resolution, help
strengthen families and communities alike. This is especially true when
children are involved, as in this case, where the applicant and complainant are
raising three children. While written in a different context, the words of
Tulloch C.J. in
R. v. Habib
,
2024 ONCA 830
at para.
46
apply here: “Our
society depends on families to raise and nurture children, transmit knowledge,
skills, and values from generation to generation, and provide love, care,
emotional, economic, and social support to their members … interfering with
this foundational social institution, even for just reasons, can endanger
community safety and society’s well-being”. In the protected setting of couples’
counselling, healing is not only personal but also a public good; see also
R.
v. Pabani
,
1994 CanLII 8723 (ON CA)
, [1994] O.J. No. 541 (C.A.) at para.
12
.
[6]
(4) The
interests served by protecting the communications outweigh the costs
[
18
]
The role of confidential couples’ counselling to
building healthy relationships is not the only relevant consideration. The
final criterion considers the importance of giving the Crown an opportunity to
prove that the applicant committed a sexual assault against the complainant.
Specifically, I must consider whether the interests served by protecting the
communications with the therapist are outweighed by the interests of pursuing
the truth and reaching a just verdict at trial:
Ryan
at para.
29
.
This criterion “does most of the work” in the analysis. “Having established the
value to the public of the relationship in question, the court must weigh
against its protection any countervailing public interest such as the
investigation of a particular crime”:
R. v. National Post
,
2010 SCC 16
at para.
58
.
[
19
]
If there were any risk that protecting the communications would
shield the alleged sexual assault from the court’s purview, then I would have
little difficulty rejecting the privilege claim. Recognizing a privilege in
that instance would promote an injustice and undermine Parliament’s legislative
efforts to encourage the reporting and fair litigation of sexual assault
charges; see also
Ryan
at para.
30
.
[
20
]
Cognizant of this context, I am satisfied that recognizing a
privilege would not undermine the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial.
[
21
]
First, the complainant is available and expected to give evidence
about the alleged sexual assault. Although she was asleep when the alleged
sexual touching began, she said in her police statement that she woke up and
observed the applicant’s actions. She then immediately confronted him, and he
is said to have admitted further details.
[7]
The complainant will have a voice at this trial, which distinguishes this case
from
Pabani
, relied on by the Crown. The courts there declined to
recognize a privilege over communications made during marital reconciliation.
But the charge in that case was murder, and with the victim thus unavailable to
testify, a finding of privilege would have stripped the trial of crucial
evidence on animus and motive (para. 9).
[
22
]
Second, the applicant has already admitted to touching the
complainant in a sexual manner while she slept, in an affidavit that he filed
in a separate pre-trial application. That admission suggests there will likely
be little dispute regarding the
actus reus
of the alleged offence.
Should the applicant offer a conflicting account at trial, the Crown could use
the affidavit to impeach his credibility: see
R. v. H.P.
,
2022 ONCA 419
at paras.
38-39
, 50. The availability of the affidavit limits the applicant’s
ability to present a materially different account from what he disclosed to the
therapist, without risking damage to his credibility.
[
23
]
The applicant’s affidavit is not a
perfect substitute for adducing his admissions to the therapist. The Crown
identified other passages in the therapist’s notes that it considers relevant.
The Crown might have also sought to introduce the admissions during its
case-in-chief. Shielding the communications with the therapist will deprive the
court of some relevant evidence. However, it will not come close to gutting the
Crown’s case or subverting its opportunity to challenge the applicant’s
defence. Recognizing a privilege is not akin to the case of
R. c. N.S.
,
2024 QCCA 876
, where excluding the accused’s admissions to the psychiatrist
prevented the Crown from proving its case (para. 10).
[8]
[
24
]
Nothing in the record suggests that anything said by the
applicant would have required the therapist to proactively disclose his
admissions to the authorities, unlike in cases of suspected child abuse:
R.S.
at 134. In those cases, legislatures have imposed mandatory reporting
obligations, reflecting a public policy judgment that the protection of
children must take precedence over confidentiality. No such obligation applies
here, which may reflect a different public policy—one that respects the
autonomy of adult complainants to decide whether and when to report. That fact,
in conjunction with the circumstances outlined above, convinces me that the
laudable societal goal of effectively prosecuting sexual assault allegations is
not undermined by recognizing a privilege in this case.
Conclusion
[
25
]
The application is granted. The communications
between the applicant and the therapist are privileged. This privilege extends
to the notes of the session on February 22, 2024, that purports to
summarize the applicant’s discussions of the alleged sexual assault, among
other topics.
Released: 
August 25, 2025
Signed: Justice Davin M.K. Garg
[1]
The criteria make up what is known as the “Wigmore test”.
[2]
See Exhibit 5.
[3]
The standards were tendered into evidence on this application.
[4]
“Registrants” refers to the psychotherapists.
[5]
The complainant’s statement to police on March 2, 2024, was included in the
evidence on this application.
[6]
“[I]n matrimonial disputes, the state is more interested in reconciliation than
divorce and the rule as to privilege tends to promote the prospects of
reconciliation”.
[7]
The applicant is presumed innocent and the complainant’s statement is unlikely
to become evidence at the trial. I only use the statement in my evaluation of
the privilege claim, on the consent of the parties.
[8]
The Québec Court of Appeal nonetheless upheld the privilege, even though it
prevented the Crown from proving very serious charges of arson (paras. 32-33).