Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj124/2025oncj124.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Rooney
, 2025 ONCJ 124
DATE: 
February 21, 2025
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
IAN ROONEY
Before
Justice Berg
Released
on February 21, 2025
JUDGEMENT
T. Radcliffe........................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
E. Granger, H. Drennan...........................................................................   
for the defendant
Berg J.:
[
1
]
It is alleged that between September 15 and 16, 2022, Ian Rooney
unlawfully caused the death of Yu Kun Xie thereby committing a manslaughter
contrary to
s. 236
Criminal Code
.
He has pleaded not guilty and elected
to have his trial at the Ontario Court of Justice.
[
2
]
The Crown alleges that in dealing with aggressive behaviour by Ms. Xie
that evening, his response was disproportionate to her actions and therefore
does not qualify as self-defence and that one of his actions, a blow to the
face, caused the brain bled that led to her death. Furthermore, it is the
position of the Crown that subsequent to this assault on Ms. Xie by Mr. Rooney,
he decided to not get her any medical help for approximately five hours. The
Crown notes in its written submissions that “[b]oth the strike and the failure
to get help qualify as significant contributing causes of her death.” The Crown
submits, therefore, that the
path to conviction for
manslaughter is two-fold: unlawful act and criminal negligence.
[
3
]
As I will explain at length, I disagree and will be dismissing the
charge against Mr. Rooney. Moreover, I find that the evidence before me does
not support a conviction for any lesser included offence.
The Evidence
[
4
]
I will be reviewing the evidence at this trial not in the order in which
it was called. For the sake of coherence, I will refer to the witnesses in an
order that makes better narrative sense.
[
5
]
Ms. Xie’s daughter, Lucy Zhao told the Court that her mother was born in
1944 and that her first language was Mandarin. Her mother had come to Canada in
1995 and could carry on a basic conversation in English. She died at
approximately 1:00 p.m. on September 17, 2022 at the Ottawa Civic Hospital.
Prior to her death, her daughter would see her weekly. She had been physically
healthy for her age. Ms. Zhao had never known her mother to pretend that she
had been injured. She had noticed her mother display some short-term memory
deficits at least a year before her death. For example, she would forget where
she had left her house keys. However, she was not aware of any diagnosis. She
had never seen her mother get aggressive or violent. She had never known her
mother to have problems with dizziness, circulation, or balance. She had never
seen her slip or fall. She last saw her mother a few days before her death and
did not observe her to have any physical injuries.
[
6
]
She testified that she knew Ian Rooney and identified him in the
courtroom. She had first met him some six to eight months prior to the death
and had seen him at least three times. She believed that he and her mother were
more than friends and believed that they saw each other often. However, she
noted that her mother did not tell her much about her private life. She had
learned of Mr. Rooney’s presence in her mother’s life a couple of years prior
but was aware that they had known each other for a lot longer than that.
[
7
]
It was her evidence that her mother never told her that she had gone to
the Queensway-Carleton Hospital for abdominal pains. It had been Mr. Rooney who
had had to inform her of that a couple of days prior to her death.
[
8
]
On September 15, she received several communications from Mr. Rooney.
The first was at 2:40 p.m. when she received a text message from him asking
about her mother’s Social Insurance Number as they were going to call Revenue
Canada about her income assessment. Then Ms. Zhao and Mr. Rooney had a
telephone conversation a bit later in the day on that topic.
[
9
]
There were then two calls, the first at 9:20 p.m. and the second three
minutes later. During the first call, Mr. Rooney sounded very angry. He told Ms.
Zhao that her mother had accused him of taking $500 and then scratched him
whereupon he had punched her. He noted that she now had a black eye. He told
Ms. Zhao that he had spent the whole afternoon trying to help her make phone
calls. He wanted Ms. Zhao to come and take her mother home as he did not wish
her to ever come to his residence again. The call then was disconnected. Then
at 9:23 p.m., her phone rang again. This time she heard only her mother’s voice
saying words to the effect of “I am going home by bus.” Her mother did not
sound as if she was close to the phone. Then the call disconnected again.
[
10
]
During
cross-examination, Ms. Zhao agreed her mother had accused Mr. Rooney of taking
money on another occasion or occasions prior to that day. As well, she allowed
that there had been at least one earlier occurrence where her mother had called
her while arguing with the accused and she, Ms. Zhao, had spoken to him.
[
11
]
Mr.
Granger explored her evidence about the ‘punch’. He suggested that the more
general word ‘hit’ had been used by his client during that conversation. Ms.
Zhao was adamant in court that the word ‘punch’ had been used by Mr. Rooney.
She accepted, however, that when questioned by the police in the days after her
mother was taken to hospital, she had told them “I think its punch” but
explained that she was certain he had used “punch’ but when speaking to the
police had not been paying close attention to the way she was expressing
herself. I note that while Ms. Zhao is presently convinced that the word used
was ‘punched’, her response to the officer was as a result of the specific
question “Did he say ‘punch’ or ‘hit’ or what?” Her response to that question is
indicative of less than 100% certainty. Furthermore, I note that the evidence
of the fire captain (see below) was that Mr. Rooney used the word ‘slap’ when
speaking to him.
[
12
]
Various
video clips and photos were adduced through the testimony of Sergeant Joanne
Pilotte, the lead homicide investigator assigned to the case once Ms. Xie had
died. I will refer to this corpus of material only as necessary. For example, the
sergeant testified to video clips that document the routes taken by Ms. Xie and
Mr. Rooney at first independently and then together from his residence to hers.
Ms. Zhao was shown these depictions of her mother in transit. It was her
opinion that her mother appeared to be saying “Leave me alone” to Mr. Rooney.
Ms. Zhao testified that from these images, it seemed that her mother was in
pain. She remarked that her mother kept pointing at her chest and was grimacing
a lot. She had not seen her mother do this before. Comparing her mother in a
video from the morning and one from the evening, she testified that her mother
appeared to be in pain.
[
13
]
With
the exception of the reliability issue to which I have just referred a few
moments ago, I find that Ms. Zhao was both credible and reliable.
[
14
]
Ryley
MacWilliams was one of the other passengers caught by the video camera on the
bus taken by Ms. Xie and the accused. He was seated very close to them. He
assumed that they were strangers to each other because they had been apart
prior to boarding. The woman did not seem to welcome the man’s attention. He
did not hear what the two people were saying. He had been concerned that the
woman did not want to be touched by the man and, as well, that he appeared to
be trying to put something into her bag. I find that this witness was both
reliable and credible.
[
15
]
Several
communications on September 16, 2022 between Mr. Rooney and 911 were adduced
through the testimony of Sergeant Pilote. I will here summarize those calls. The
first communication is a 911 call placed by Mr. Rooney at 00:30 hrs. He advises
the Emergency Services operator that he is calling about “an elderly woman in
distress”, “She’s in real trouble here” and provides the address of Ms. Xie’s
apartment. He further explains that “she is going into some convulsions or
something” which he then describes as “some kind of minor seizure.” When asked
what happened to cause this, he states “She fell down.” He then describes her
as possibly having some trouble breathing and notes that “her whole stomach is
twitching.”
[
16
]
Less
than six minutes later, Mr. Rooney calls 911 again and cancels the ambulance
that had been dispatched. He sounds much calmer. He explains “She woke up,
she’s gone to sleep now. She’s sleeping.” However, approximately twenty-five
minutes later, he contacts 911 again and attempts to have an ambulance
dispatched again. While waiting to be transferred to the ambulance dispatcher,
he is recorded talking seemingly to Ms. Xie “Wake up. Come on. Wake up. Wake up”
and perhaps more but the recording is not very clear at that point. The
ambulance dispatcher then comes on the line.   With the utmost of respect to
911 operators who perform a difficult job, the operator who took this call
could perhaps benefit from some training on the use of appropriate tones of
voice and sensitivity in dealing with distraught callers. Mr. Rooney gets
frustrated and angry with this operator and terminates the call. He calls back
seconds later and asks to be connected to the ambulance dispatcher but as that
is being done is recorded saying to himself “Nope. Fuck, no. I’m not calling.
I’m not calling, sir.” and hangs up. When 911 contacts him again under a minute
later, he quickly dismisses them indicating that an ambulance is not needed.
[
17
]
Mr.
Rooney then calls back a little over an hour later. He explains that he is
concerned because of an unresponsive person “she’s still breathing fine, but
she won’t wake up. She’s unconscious.” However, he then describes her breathing
as “semi-normally” and notes that she is gurgling and snoring. Emergency
Services arrive minutes later.
[
18
]
Also
adduced through Sergeant Pilote were the reports of a civilian analyst in the
Homicide Unit. Said analyst reviewed the data extracted from Mr. Rooney’s
cellular telephone and computer as well as Ms. Zhao’s cell phone. These devices
had been seized by the police after Mr. Rooney’s arrest. From the analyst’s
report it is clear that during the time period that Mr. Rooney had the various
communications with 911, he was also conducting online searches in an attempt
to understand what was occurring with Ms. Xie; for example: “normal sleeping
pulse rate for elderly woman”, “suffering patient snoring, unresponsive to
awakening”, and “First aid for someone who is unresponsive and breathing.”
[
19
]
Captain
Daniel Leblanc of the Ottawa Fire Service and his crew were dispatched to Unit
208 at 865 Gladstone at around 12:30 a.m. on September 16, 2022 for a medical
call. However, as they were on their way there, they received word from
dispatch that they were not required and so returned to their station. Then, at
approximately 2:12 a.m., he and his crew were dispatched to that address again
and were on the road at 2:14 a.m. The information on that second call was that
the patient was vital signs absent. As the fire hall is situated very close to
the address, they were on scene in approximately three minutes. They were met
at the door by Mr. Rooney who advised them that he had made the 911 call.
Captain Leblanc testified that Mr. Rooney was “calm, nothing out of the
ordinary.” As they went inside the building, the captain asked a few questions
about the patient. Mr. Rooney explained that he was taking care of her but did
not live there. He mentioned dementia and that she had been aggressive with him
over the last couple of days and that he had had to use physical force to
defend himself. Specifically, he told Mr. Leblanc that he had had to slap her
in the face a couple of times.
[
20
]
When
they entered the apartment, Mr. Leblanc observed Ms. Xie in the bedroom lying
on her left side on the bed. She was breathing but not otherwise moving. There
was a small pool of a rosy-ish coloured liquid on the floor by the bed; he
believed it to be saliva. His crew then went into the room to assess her. He
continued to talk to Mr. Rooney who showed him some bruising on his right arm
shoulder area as well as a cut with dried blood on the front of his right hip
below the pant line. He specified that the shoulder injury had possibly been
caused by a bite from Ms. Xie. Mr. Rooney repeated multiple times that he was
taking care of Ms. Xie and the issue of dementia and aggressiveness was
mentioned.
[
21
]
The
paramedics then arrived. Two of them went to deal with the patient while the
supervisor stayed in the hallway. She asked Mr. Rooney the same types of
questions that the captain had put to him. Then, Mr. Rooney tried to show her
the injuries that he had shown Mr. Leblanc. At that moment, Mr. Leblanc turned
to see what his crew were doing but heard the supervisor say “Don’t expose
yourself to me.” He described what occurred next. Mr. Rooney became angry
towards the reaction of the supervisor and “At that point, the situation
escalated as far as, as the reaction from both sides, so that’s when I tried to
defuse the situation and remove the male person and kind of talk to him on the
side a little bit more.” He then observed the supervisor ask one of her
colleagues to call a ‘10-2’, a code with which Mr. Leblanc was not familiar.
[
22
]
The
captain testified that during his interactions with the accused, he noticed
that he did not like being called ‘sir’. He preferred to be called ‘Ian’ and so
Mr. Leblanc switched to using his name. During cross-examination, when asked by
Ms. Drennan, Mr. Leblanc stated that he had not felt that the accused was
exposing himself when he had moved his clothing to show the injury to his
groin. Mr. Leblanc had no recollection of the accused having sworn at the
paramedic supervisor.
[
23
]
Mr.
Leblanc assisted the paramedics in getting Ms. Xie into the elevator. He then
returned to the apartment. He noticed that Mr. Rooney was no longer open to
discussing what had happened. He and his crew then left the scene at 2:40 a.m.
to return to the fire station.
[
24
]
I
heard the evidence of a second firefighter: Stephen Kitchen. He recounted being
dispatched along with Capitan LeBlanc and recalled that there had been an
earlier cancelled call to that address. He testified to arriving on scene,
gathering the medical gear and then following the captain into the building.
They were met by a man in the lobby who took them to the apartment. Mr. Kitchen
recalled the man as indicating that his wife had dementia and he had hit her
when she came after him trying to hit and bite him. He testified that he
believed that the man had indicated that the patient was not breathing. Mr.
Kitchen was not certain of the exact wording of any of the utterances made by
Mr. Rooney.
[
25
]
Mr.
Kitchen and another firefighter went into the room were Ms. Xie was lying on
her side. They rolled her over and determined that she was breathing and had a
pulse but was unconscious. There was blood on the sheets and some facial
trauma. The paramedics arrived and took over the patient care. The firefighters
then assisted in loading Ms. Xie onto the gurney and taking her out of the
building. I find both Captain Leblanc and Mr. Kitchen to have been credible and
reliable witnesses.
[
26
]
Rebekah
Spratt is an Advanced Care Paramedic with the Ottawa Paramedic Service. She was
dispatched to the Gladstone Avenue address shortly after 2:00 a.m. for a
potential cardiac arrest. When she arrived on scene, a fire truck was already
there as was a transport ambulance with two paramedics who were unloading their
equipment. The three paramedics then went to the main doors of the building but
discovered that they were locked. They then arranged for a fire fighter to come
downstairs. However, it was Mr. Rooney who did so after four or five minutes
saying words to the effect of “She’s breathing okay but I can’t wake her up.”
He was asked how he knew the patient and responded that he had been her partner
for twenty-six years. Ms. Spratt testified that he was very calm at this point.
[
27
]
The
paramedics entered the building and used the elevator to go to the second
floor; there was no room in the elevator for Mr. Rooney. Once on the second
floor, they moved towards Apartment 208. The door to the unit was open and they
saw a firefighter standing in the hallway and received some information from
him. Ms. Spratt continued to talk to him while the other two paramedics went
further into the apartment to assess the patient. Mr. Rooney then came into hallway
and placed himself between her and the firefighter. She again asked about his
relationship to the patient and was told that he was her partner. Based on
information that she had just received from the firefighter, she asked Mr.
Rooney whether it was true that paramedics had been dispatched to this location
earlier in the evening. He responded that they had not attended but he
confirmed that he had made the call and then called back to cancel it. She then
asked him if it was true that he had struck the patient and he responded “Of
course I hit her. She attacked me.” He then pulled down his pants to try to
show her the extent of his injuries. She did not see anything as she turned her
head and asked him to pull his pants up. Mr. Rooney then used his left hand to
hide his genitals, pulled his pants further down, and yelled that he was not
exposing himself to her. She once again told him to pull up his pants and tried
to take a step back but could not go far due to the narrowness of the hallway.
Mr. Rooney then stepped towards her continuing to yell while pointing a finger
in her face. She asked the other paramedics to call for police back-up and told
her colleagues that she could not assist them at that time because Mr. Rooney
was being aggressive. It was her evidence that Mr. Rooney then stated “You
fucking bitch. I’m not being aggressive.” He also yelled at her when he
seemingly figured out that the police had been called. Finally, the firefighter
got in between Mr. Rooney and her.
[
28
]
Ms.
Spratt testified to certain other utterances made by the accused. At some point
during their interaction, he stated that after the first 911 call was
cancelled, he thought she was faking so he put her to bed. In regard to the
last 911 call that he made, he told Ms. Spratt “I couldn’t wake her up. I
thought she was dead.” Both of these utterances, she testified, were made early
in the conversation before he became upset. During cross-examination, I learned
that at the time that he stated “Of course I hit her etc.”, he also told Ms.
Spratt “Ever since she’s had that booster, she’s been acting crazy.” Also
during cross-examination, Ms. Spratt agreed that it was possible that Mr.
Rooney’s response “Of course I hit her. She attacked me” may have actually been
“She attacked me so I slapped her.”
[
29
]
Ms.
Spratt then went to where the other paramedics were dealing with Ms. Xie. If I
have understood her correctly, it was her evidence she was the first person to
roll Ms. Xie off her side. She observed that the patient had “very significant
facial trauma”: significant bruising to her left eye, swollen mouth and lips
with dried blood inside the mouth and also inside the left ear. She displayed
no pupillary reflex. I note that during cross-examination, she agreed that she
had not observed any bleeding from the patient’s eyes, ears, or nose. She asked
her colleagues about Ms. Xie’s other vital signs which were apparently within
normal limits. Then, it was decided to move the patient into the ambulance for
further assessments or treatment. There, they noticed other injuries including
some bleeding to the back of Ms. Xie’s head and bruising and a possible
deformity to the left side of her chest. They then transported her to the
Ottawa Civic Hospital.
[
30
]
I
find that I must be very careful when considering Ms. Spratt’s evidence. Her
reaction to Mr. Rooney seems very odd. He was complaining of an injury. She is
a paramedic. He was not attempting to expose himself to her in a sexual manner.
She is obviously familiar with the human body as the treatment of injuries is
her profession. Moreover, her testimony about the nature of her interaction
with Mr. Rooney is not supported to any significant extent by the evidence of
the other witnesses who were present. I further note that rather than providing
a dispassionate and professional account of Ms. Xie’s injuries, there was the
following exchange in chief:
Q. Do you recall
yourself making any observations with respect to the patient’s condition?
A. Once we rolled
her over – they had saved that until I came in – we rolled her over, and the
visual impact of the patient, I actually said, “Holy shit.”
She then described bruising and swelling to the face and
some dried blood. Ms. Spratt, according to her own evidence, has been a
paramedic for a quarter of a century and is an advanced care paramedic. I think
it fair to infer that she had seen significantly worse trauma to the human body
than what she observed at that point in Ms. Xie’s apartment. Her narrative
commentary was inappropriate.
[
31
]
The
next witness was Paramedic Alexandre Adani. He testified that he and his
partner were dispatched at 2:11 a.m. to the Gladstone address about a possible
cardiac arrest. They arrived on scene a little less than eight minutes later
and Mr. Adani saw a fire truck parked in front of the address. They began to
unload their gear and that was when he saw Ms. Spratt arrive. The doors were
locked but eventually Mr. Rooney came and let them in advising in effect that
he was the one who had dialed 911. He described Mr. Rooney as being calm. The
three paramedics then took the elevator to the second floor, Mr. Rooney
indicating that he would meet them there.
[
32
]
Once
at the apartment, Mr. Adani and his partner immediately went to the room where
Ms. Xie was on a bed. She was lying on her right side and appeared to have
significant injuries and trauma to her face specifically bruising and swelling
around her eyes, over her cheekbones and above her upper lip. There was liquid
coming from her mouth and pooling on the mattress.
[
33
]
At
some point, Ms. Spratt asked him to contact dispatch to have police attend the
scene. Mr. Adani did so and also decided to remove Ms. Xie from the apartment
to continue the assessment. He testified that he did so because he thought that
he had heard some yelling on scene and “there was a concern for our safety,
being the three paramedics and firefighters on scene, and there was some
concern about the safety of our patient.” It was his evidence that he contacted
dispatch twice, the second time on a higher priority. He provided no
explanation as to why he did this.
[
34
]
During
cross-examination, Mr. Granger asked this witness about the “yelling” that he
had heard. The voices were in the hallway of the apartment. He was unable to
say whether the voices had an angry or nervous tone.
[
35
]
The
paramedics moved Ms. Xie down to their ambulance and there continued their
assessment. Mr. Adani observed that she had some bruising under her left
breast. Ms. Xie remained unconscious throughout the time she was in Mr. Adani’s
presence. Based on his assessment, Mr. Adani determined that her situation was
life-threatening and transported her to the Ottawa Civic Hospital at 2:43 a.m.
arriving there three minutes later.
[
36
]
Acting
Staff Sergeant Jim O’Connell-Smith of the Ottawa Police Service was on duty
during the early hours of September 16, 2022. At 2:29 a.m., he was dispatched
to Unit 208 at 865 Gladstone Avenue to assist paramedics on a call. He was
advised that the paramedics had a patient who was not displaying any vital
signs, that she had possibly been assaulted, and they were dealing with an
aggressive male. It was Mr. O’Connell-Smith’s understanding that two other police
officers were also being dispatched to that address at that time. He arrived on
scene at 2:34 a.m. and observed that the other two officers, Constables
Vanderheiden and Munroe, were already there and were in the front lobby talking
to a paramedic. He also saw a female patient, Yu Kun Xie, being loaded into an
ambulance. Staff Sergeant O’Connell-Smith instructed Constable Munroe to follow
the ambulance to the Ottawa Civic Hospital. He spoke as well to Mr.
Vanderheiden and received some information from him including the concerns of
the paramedics about the state of Ms. Xie and the behaviour of the male. That
male was Mr. Rooney.
[
37
]
Mr.
O’Connell-Smith and Mr. Vanderheiden then took the elevator to the second
floor. As soon as the doors opened, the two men were confronted by Mr. Rooney.
They did not know who he was or how he was related to the incident they were
investigating. He demanded to know to where Ms. Xie was being taken and how she
was doing. He then stated words “It was done in self-defence” or words very
close to those. The staff sergeant observed Constable Vanderheiden ask Mr.
Rooney to stop talking and place him under arrest for aggravated assault. This
was just outside of the elevator doors. The constable then read out the rights
to counsel, cautions, and the s. 524 warning. During the process of the arrest,
Mr. Rooney then stated “She attacked me and it was in self-defence” or, once
again, words very close to those. Mr. O’Connell-Smith described Mr. Rooney as
becoming more confrontational with the officers during this process. Once Mr.
Rooney had been arrested, he instructed Constable Vanderheiden and another
constable to transport him to the central police station. He himself then drove
to the hospital.
[
38
]
Mr.
O’Connell-Smith arrived at the Ottawa Civic at approximately 2:53 a.m. Medical
personal were still attending to Ms. Xie. At 3:30 a.m., he was advised by a
doctor that the injuries sustained by her would be fatal and that she would
likely die in the next couple of days. Recognizing that Mr. Rooney’s legal
jeopardy had just changed, the staff sergeant contacted Constable Vanderheiden
at the police station and told him to caution Mr. Rooney that the charges were
being upgraded to murder. Mr. O’Connell-Smith then returned to 865 Gladstone at
3:49 a.m. and assisted in the investigation on scene.
[
39
]
Constable
Tyler Vanderheiden testified that he too responded to the radio dispatch of
2:29 a.m. and headed to the Gladstone address. He understood that he was being
sent there to assist the paramedics in a suspicious situation with a person
whose vital signs were absent. He arrived there at 2:32 or 2:33 a.m. and
observed that both fire and ambulance services were already there. As he was
entering into the lobby of this building, he saw the paramedics coming out with
Ms. Xie. He had a brief conversation with one of them and learned that she felt
that Ms. Xie had been badly assaulted and that when they asked Mr. Rooney what
had happened he had become defensive and argumentative and a fire fighter had
had to intervene. Mr. Vanderheiden then looked quickly at the patient on the gurney
as she was being moved out and observed that her lips were swollen and her left
eye was swollen shut.
[
40
]
Constable
Vanderheiden then got into the elevator along with Staff Sergeant O’Connell-Smith
who had just arrived. When the elevator doors opened on the second floor, Mr.
Rooney was right in front of them asking where Ms. Xie was being taken.  Immediately
after this conversation, the constable cautioned the accused to ensure that he
would not say things that could be used in court against him. Mr. Vanderheiden
at that point decided to arrest Mr. Rooney for aggravated assault, did so and
read all the rights and cautions. This arrest was at 2:36 a.m. as was the
reading out of the rights to counsel,
etc.
Mr. Rooney indicated his
understanding of the rights and primary and secondary cautions. However, the
officer testified that he became very agitated when the s. 524 warning was read
out, pulling away from the officers and yelling and screaming.
[
41
]
The
three men then used the elevator to return to the ground floor and Mr. Rooney
was transported to the police station. He was then paraded before the cellblock
sergeant, searched, and a voice mail was left for counsel of choice. While Mr.
Rooney was being searched, Constable Vanderheiden noticed small cuts on the
prisoner’s hands. As a result, he arranged to have a forensic identification
officer attend to take photos of those wounds. That officer came and took
custody of Mr. Rooney in order to document the wounds and Mr. Vanderheiden left
their presence. He returned after receiving a phone call from Staff Sergeant
O’Connell-Smith who told him about the change in Mr. Rooney’s jeopardy and told
him to inform Mr. Rooney of this development and read out the rights to counsel
again but this time in the context of a murder charge. This was at 3:32 a.m. At
4:17 a.m., he was asked whether he wished to try to call his lawyer again;
counsel had still not responded to the voice mail left by Mr. Vanderheiden. He opted
to wait. He was then housed in a cell. At 9:50 a.m., a phone call was made by
police to Mr. Granger, the law partner of the counsel of choice. Mr. Rooney and
Mr. Granger spoke until 10:23 a.m. I find that both Mr. Vanderheiden and Mr.
O’Connell-Smith were reliable and credible.
[
42
]
Detective
Marie-Josée Séguin began her shift at 6:00 a.m. on the morning of September 16
and was assigned to the case of Mr. Rooney that had come in overnight. I have
no concerns about the credibility or reliability of Det. Séguin. She began to
review the material that was in the file and then contacted Constable Munro who
was at the hospital at 6:36 a.m. to get an update on the status of Ms. Xie. The
detective was advised that while she still alive, it was not likely that she would
survive her injuries. It was unknown, however, how long she would remain alive.
Ms. Séguin was further advised that next-of-kin was expected to be at the
hospital at 7:00 a.m. She then continued with her investigation. She received a
phone call at approximately 9:30 a.m. from medical staff at the hospital
reiterating that Ms. Xie would not survive her injuries.
[
43
]
At
10:22 a.m., she was notified that Mr. Granger was calling. She spoke to him and
confirmed that his client would be held for show cause and that the charge was
still aggravated assault but that it might change if Ms. Xie died. Then at
11:26 a.m., she was notified by another detective that the medical staff had
advised him that Ms. Xie would die once she was unplugged from life support.
[1]
[
44
]
One
hour after receiving this last bit of information, at 12:26 p.m., Detective
Séguin began an interview with Mr. Rooney. She was aware that he had been
arrested for aggravated assault but had later been cautioned for murder. She
cautioned him again but this time for aggravated assault, attempt murder, and
murder. Mr. Radcliffe has chosen to lead the statement that Mr. Rooney provided
during that interview as part of the Crown case.
[
45
]
He
explained that he and Ms. Xie had been in a relationship for fifteen years. He
explained how they had met when he was 42 and she was 62 years old. They never
married and do not seem to have set up a household but would alternate between
their individual residences. He described the relationship as having
difficulties due to her dementia the main symptom of which was “extreme memory
loss”. Mr. Rooney told the detective that he and the daughter had exchanged
texts on the issue of Ms. Xie’s dementia. He also stated that she had attacked
him on prior occasions but he would immobilize her without hurting her. He told
the detective that he had sustained some injuries from these attacks. He had
not reported these aggressions to the police but had told Ms. Xie’s daughter
about this behaviour in text messages.
[
46
]
He
described an incident two weeks earlier when she complained of chest pain and
insisted on going to hospital. They went to Queensway Carleton Hospital by
ambulance. By the time they got to see the doctor, she was holding her chest
and rocking back and forth. The doctor did all types of tests but it seems that
there was nothing seriously wrong and that she was exaggerating. During other earlier
incidents when she was attacking him, she would claim he was breaking her arm or
wrist when he was restraining her so he would let go and she would then immediately
attack him again. That is why he had thought she was crying wolf, he explained,
when he had cancelled the ambulance calls.
[
47
]
With
respect to the incident that had led to Ms. Xie’s hospitalization, he told
Detective Séguin that “my recollection isn’t that clear of what happened.” He
recounted how the day before (
i.e.,
September 15) he and Ms. Xie had
been at his home. He had been helping her trying to get a record of her income
from the Canada Revenue Agency to maintain her rent subsidy. She then went to
take a bath. He was in another room. She accused him at one point of having
made a key to her apartment. At some point he thought he heard her slip and
fall “a little bit” in the bath. He asked and she confirmed that she was Okay. Ms.
Xie then came out of the bathroom.
[
48
]
They
sat on the couch and he gave her a cup of tea. She then threw it at him; it was
hot but not scalding. He tried to immobilize her, but she fought back by
scratching and kicking and biting. As well, she tried to damage some of his
property. He had difficulty controlling her and she was hurting him. She tried
to use a chair to hit him. At one point, she grabbed his groin area. He
described this action as “… she grabbed me by the balls. She basically just
ripped my balls off.” Mr. Rooney stated that he would release her but she would
then attack him again. He recounted to Detective Séguin that at one point
during the struggle, he put his knee to her midriff/stomach area to immobilize
her.
[
49
]
He
admitted to slapping her in the mouth during this struggle and thereby causing
the bleeding: “I think it was like a backhand, like a swipe where I just, ‘Please
get away.’ I had to get her away from me” and “I should have found some other
option to get away, but I was still being held. I had to break her grip. I had
to get her away. I had to use some force.” He added, “So I smacked her harder
than I should have but I smacked her to kind of wake her up and try to snap her
out of it. And “I believe that probably when she fell, when she hit her head,
when she hit her other eye.” However, he denied having punched her in the eye and
having told Ms. Xie’s daughter that he had done so. He did not know what had caused
the injury to her eye.
[
50
]
After
he slapped her, she fell down and he moved away from her. He began to clean up
the room. She seemed calmer and then left the house. Prior to leaving, Ms. Xie
claimed that he had injured her in that body area and he was worried about
that. He had followed her after she left his dwelling because he was concerned
about that injury: “And I was worried that I would go to her place and see her
on the floor or knock on the door and see her dying or something, and I had to,
somebody had to check on her.”
[
51
]
He
recounted how he had left his house to follow Ms. Xie and eventually caught up
with her. They eventually got off a bus and walked around for a while. She told
Mr. Rooney that she wanted to go see her daughter, however, they went to Ms.
Xie’s apartment. Mr. Rooney told the detective that he did not want Ms. Xie to
go to hospital or call police. He stated “My main fear when her lip was split,
I thought oh my god, you know, something’s going to happen. Like I’m going to
be charged for being the aggressor when in fact, no, I was attacked first.”
[
52
]
Once
at her apartment, Ms. Xie told him to leave because she needed to lie down. He
responded that he would not leave until he was sure that she was okay. He asked
her whether she wanted to go to hospital and she responded “Maybe. I don’t feel
well.” He monitored her and she seemed to get worse and he tried to wake her
up. He thought she might be faking. He explained that he canceled the ambulance
because he was afraid that they would both get in a lot of trouble if she was
faking it. He called again because she seemed to be getting worse. He stated “My
memory isn’t great. I checked her about three times. The first time I checked
her, she looked terrible but she was still just snoring. I looked up on the
computer. I checked her pulse rate. I looked up on the computer. I said “What’s
the regular pulse rate for somebody sleeping?” I checked the pulse rate on her
neck; it was normal. So I decided to cancel the hospital call. Something along
those lines. I am not sure the exact sequence of events of time. Something like
that happened.”
[
53
]
A
series of photographs depicting injuries to Mr. Rooney were adduced through the
detective. In no particular order, one observes redness to the knuckles of Mr.
Rooney’s left hand, abrasions and scratches to his left hand, thumb, wrist, and
forearm, similar injuries to his right shoulder, ribs, inner elbow, and biceps
and both sides of his upper stomach, on his right lower stomach, to his left
shoulder and triceps, both sides of his lower back and a significant cut to the
top of his right buttock, to his right upper outer leg, his right knee, his
left leg above the knee and on the hamstring, a series of three parallel
scratches where his right leg and body meet, in other words, very close to his
genitals (it seems that these wounds bled sufficiently to cause staining
through to the outside of his underwear), as well as bruising to the top of both
feet.
[
54
]
Dr.
Charis Kepron was qualified to testify at this trial as an expert in forensic
pathology, the nature and cause of injuries, and cause and mechanism of death. It
is the doctor’s opinion that Ms. Xie’s cause of death was complications of
blunt force head injury. She explained that as a result of an impact or impacts
to her head, Ms. Xie suffered a subdural hematoma which is bleeding that occurs
on the surface of the brain between the that organ and the skull, in other
words in the subdural space. Sufficient blood accumulated there to put pressure
on her brain. That pressure forced the brain to begin to squeeze out mainly
through the hole at the base of the skull where the brainstem connects with the
spinal cord in a process called herniation. As this was going on, the pressure
from this process also caused the brain to swell. Ultimately, death resulted from
this mechanism caused by blunt force trauma.
[
55
]
Mr.
Radcliffe questioned Dr. Kepron on whether herniation and swelling will cause
death.
A.  Not
inevitably, but in many cases, yes.  So there certainly are situations where
people can survive a head injury like this, but typically when there is – when
the pressure is sufficient that there is significant herniation of the brain,
the prognosis is very poor at that point and the majority of people will not
survive that, especially without any sort of intervention.
Typically,
if people are going to survive an injury like this, there will have been some
sort of neurosurgical intervention to relieve the pressure on the brain.
Q.  Is there any
value to timely intervention?
A.  Yes, I would
say in general, yes, the sooner the better, but timely treatment is not a
guarantee of survival.
[
56
]
Dr.
Kepron described the recent injuries that she noted during the course of the
autopsy:
-
bruise
around the left eye and a smaller bruise on the right upper eyelid;
-
bruising
to the inside of both lips and the inside of the left cheek; the inside of the
lower lip had a laceration;
-
a
small bruise on the outside of the right cheek by the mouth;
-
a
small laceration inside the left nostril;
-
on
the lower left surface of the jaw, there were two bruises;
-
three
areas of bruising on the chest, the largest being on the left side;
-
a
scrape or abrasion on the left side of the back and a bruise on the lower right
side of the back;
-
a
number of bruises on the arms and legs. With respect to the arms, the bruises
were on the upper arm, forearm, and wrist;
-
three
fractured ribs on the left side in line with the armpit; the doctor testified
that CPR had not been utilized on Ms. Xie; she opined that these fractures
could have been caused by her having been hit by something, or her having
fallen on a hard surface, or her having been squeezed; due to the lack of
significant bruising to the skin over this area, it was her opinion that the
fractures had been caused by some form of compression, however, she did allow
that an alternative explanation could have been a fall onto a flat surface;
-
bruising,
not visible externally, to the middle of the back of the head;
-
bruising
to a muscle in the area of the left temple;
-
with
respect to the internal cranium, subdural hemorrhage, brain swelling, and
herniation of the brain;
[
57
]
Dr.
Kepron opined that the foregoing injuries could have been sustained as a result
of something striking Ms. Xie’s face or a fall onto an unyielding surface. When
asked about how many blows could have caused the injuries, she was unable to
say as one blow could theoretically cause more than one injury and, furthermore,
some of the injuries could have been caused when she was being moved by medical
or paramedical staff (
e.g.
the bruises to the upper arms). However, it
was her opinion that with respect to the bruising to the head, that to the back
of the head and that to the right eye would have each been separate impacts
from the blow or blows that caused the other facial bruising. She testified
that “it would seem that there would be at least three impacts to the head.”
She could not say as much with respect to the rest of the body.
[
58
]
Mr.
Radcliffe questioned Dr. Kepron about whether the subdural hemorrhage could
have been caused by a single slap to Ms. Xie’s face. She answered that it was
possible but that a significant amount of force would have been required. In
regard to the fractured ribs, she testified that they could have been caused by
a person weighing between 175 and 200 lbs. kneeling on Ms. Xie’s chest. It was
also her opinion that a person, having been slapped across the face and thereby
sustaining a subdural hemorrhage, would have been able to travel the distances
that Ms. Xie did during a lucid interval. Dr. Kepron defined a “lucid interval”
as the period of time during which the individual who has sustained a traumatic
injury that has caused bleeding inside the skull is still awake and alert and
can interact until the symptoms of the injury manifest themselves and they
ultimately lose consciousness. During cross-examination, the doctor agreed that
if instead of a slap, the subdural hemorrhage had been caused by a fall onto a
hard unyielding surface, the person still would have been able to travel as Ms.
Xie did. She also agreed that if the hemorrhage had been caused thirty minutes
earlier, it would probably not have changed her answer.
[
59
]
It
is important to note that during cross-examination, Dr. Kepron testified that
she was unable to say which impact or impacts caused the subdural hemorrhage in
this case: the impact that caused the subdural bruise to the back of the head
or one of the impacts to the face. However, she agreed that a fall with the
head hitting the ground is a more common cause for this type of injury and that
it would be unusual to see a subdural hemorrhage resulting from a punch or slap
to the face in individuals with normal brains. That being said, it was also her
evidence that as a result of Alzheimer’s disease, Ms. Xie’s brain was more
vulnerable to that type of injury. But at the end of the day, she agreed with
two defence suggestions. First of all, that a slip and fall with the head
striking the ground could account for the acute subdural hemorrhage seen in
this case. Secondly, that the likelihood of this injury would be increased if
the individual had Alzheimer’s disease.
[
60
]
The
Crown asked Dr. Kepron about what symptoms would typically become visible to an
observer at the end of the lucid period. She responded that it would depend on
where the injury to the brain is located, however, typically, there would be
vomiting, unsteadiness, stumbling, falling, complaints of pain, slurring of
speech, and other speech difficulties, seizures, and then drowsiness and
finally a loss of consciousness. However, not every symptom is present in every
case.
[
61
]
Dr.
Kepron also testified about the findings of one of her colleagues who had
performed a much closer examination of Ms. Xie’s brain. That pathologist
confirmed Dr. Kepron’s opinion about the injuries to the brain and noted that
they had been sustained less than 48 hours prior to death. The colleague also
found signs of two neurodegenerative conditions: Alzheimer’s disease and
changes to the blood vessels within the brain. Dr. Kepron agreed that the
changes to the brain due to Alzheimer’s disease were of sufficient severity to
produce clinical symptoms of dementia including cognitive impairment. However, the
neuropathological examination could not determine what specific symptoms that
Ms. Xie may have experienced. She testified that memory lapses are the most
common early symptoms and as the disease progresses, one would expect to see
behavioural change such as disinhibition, aggression, and loss of the ability
to reason. She agreed that the degree of cognitive impairment for someone with
Alzheimer’s disease is often worse if they also have a cerebrovascular disease.
Dr. Kepron noted that the presence of these neurodegenerative conditions would
have contributed to an overall worse prognosis for Ms. Xie’s ability to survive
the head injury.
[
62
]
At
the end of the examination in chief, the doctor was asked “At what point in the
lucid interval is medical intervention most helpful?” Her response was as
follows:
The answer is
always going to be the sooner the better, so the sooner after the head injury
occurs and the bleeding starts, the more likely you are to have a favourable
outcome. The longer you wait, then the poorer the prognosis. But, you know, the
exact point of – you know, what is the point of no return, so to speak, is
going to be variable from patient to patient and from head injury to head
injury.
Dr. Kepron testified that subdural hemorrhages are not
inevitably fatal. While she was initially not in a position to agree with the suggestion
that there is a high mortality rate associated with this type of injury
generally speaking, she did agree that where it occurred along with complications
of bleeding into the brain stem (as in the present case), the prognosis becomes
very poor.
[
63
]
The
doctor testified during cross-examination that she had learned from the medical
records that the neurosurgery team that had been consulted about Ms. Xie had
opted not to do surgery as they felt her injury was not survivable at the time
they were asked to assess her. Based on the information that she had in this
case, she could not say whether even timely medical intervention would have
saved Ms. Xie’s life. Mr. Granger asked her about this.
Q. Now, in terms of
the timing of medical intervention, I think you told us earlier it’s difficult
to say with any degree of certainty what, what impact, if any, the timing of
medical intervention in this case had.
A. Correct.
Q. So you’d be
speculating to suggest that, with medical intervention any earlier, the outcome
would’ve been different.
A. Correct.
Q. And playing into
that combination of Ms. Xie’s age, her underlying dementia and underlying
cerebrovascular disease, those factors all would have made her prognosis worse,
even with earlier medical intervention.
A. Yes, I think
that’s fair.
[
64
]
During
cross-examination, Dr. Kepron was asked about the sub-scalp bruise on the back
of Ms. Xie’s head. She agreed that one of the potential causes of that injury
could have been a fall resulting in Ms. Xie’s head striking a firm unyielding
surface. She agreed, upon being shown a photograph of the bathtub at Mr.
Rooney’s apartment, that that would present such a surface. She further agreed
that that this injury to the back of Ms. Xie’s head could have been caused by
her having slipped and striking her head on the bathtub. The resulting bruise
would not have been visible on the surface of her skin.
[
65
]
Mr.
Rooney testified in his own defence. He testified that he had met Ms. Xie
through outings to a casino sixteen years ago. They become lovers and
companions over that time period. However, due to Ms. Xie’s desire for secrecy,
he had only met Ms. Xie’s daughter about two years prior to the incident before
the court and only perhaps three times. He recounted that while he and Ms. Xie
maintained their separate households, by the time of her death, they were
spending almost every night together as well as during the day.
[
66
]
According
to Mr. Rooney, Ms. Xie, in the last years of her life, had begun to display
mental difficulties. She could become unresponsive, she would ask the same
question repeatedly, but she would recover fairly quickly. She had become
paranoid about her money. He was concerned as well, about another change in her
personality; she was becoming increasingly violent and would slap him very hard
on his body and had also bitten him.
[
67
]
Mr.
Rooney testified in chief about an incident that occurred during the last month
of Ms. Xie’s life. Despite the fact that the incident was not directly related
to the allegations of September 15-16, 2022, Mr. Rooney’s position at trial is
it informed his cancelling of the 911 calls he had made. I have already made
reference to this incident when discussing Mr. Rooney’s statement that was
adduced by Crown.
[
68
]
At
some point during the month prior to her death, Mr. Rooney accompanied Ms. Xie
to the Queensway-Carleton Hospital as she was transported by ambulance to the
Emergency Department.
and we went into the Emergency room and we were waiting
there. And I believe that she wanted to get through the line quicker so what she did was she like convulsed on it. She kind of slid off her seat onto the floor and convulsed a bit on the floor like with her legs.
And then an attendant nurse came over in concern and said, “Is everything okay here?” and had her re-seat, and questioned her a little bit, and eventually decided to give her a – just an antacid, which is known as a “pink lady,” which is a mixture of – it’s a mixture of that Pepto-Bismol with the freezing agent they use in Chloraseptic, that throat spray. So that’s known as a “pink lady,” and they gave her that.
And I believe they bumped us up through.  We got really quickly into the doctor – into the Emergency room with the doctor, and I believe that that was a result of her - kind of her, her dramatics or – but - so we got into the doctor,
and he ascertained that the pink lady had worked and that her  pain was gone, which she admitted.
And he seemed ups... - ups... – the doctor seemed quite upset at that point.  He seemed not quite upset but
he seemed a bit – a bit nonplussed - like, you know, “Okay, you took an ambulance.”
…
Okay. Well, she mentioned that, “Oh, but by the way, I have a side pain I’d like you to look at,” and then that’s when he became upset and he said, “You, you took an ambulance here for heartburn. Heartburn.” And he said, “If you have any other issues, you take that up with your family
doctor.” But he, he seemed like urgent – “Like, come on, get out, get moving,” kind of thing; you know, “we’ve got more important things.”
I note here that it was the evidence of Ms. Zhao that Mr. Rooney had mentioned this incident to her a few days prior to her mother’s death.
[
69
]
Turning
to the events of September 15, 2022, Mr. Rooney testified that they were still
close. However, due to her declining mental condition, he felt that the
relationship had become one more of him being immersed in helping her than one
of mutual affection. They spent the day together and then went to his home,
arriving there after dark. Ms. Xie went to take a bath. Mr. Rooney was making
some herbal tea when he heard a loud thump and assumed that she had fallen down
again. A few seconds later, there were a couple of further thumps. It was his
evidence that her had heard her fall before at her apartment and elsewhere without
sustaining any serious injuries and noted that she had been falling frequently
over the last couple of years. This time, he went and checked on her in the
bathroom and asked if she was okay. He testified that she had an enraged look
on her face and stated “Give me back the key to my apartment.” He responded
that he did not have a key and asked why she thought he did. She then accused
him of putting medication into her “things”. He then tried to hug her but she
let out a scream and bit his shoulder so he left the bathroom and went back to
preparing the tea hoping that it would calm her down.
[
70
]
She
eventually came out of the bathroom and he gave her the tea as she sat on the
couch. He turned away from her and then felt her throw the tea onto his back
and heard the cup fall to the ground. He went and got a mop and started to
clean up the mess. However, Ms. Xie was still very upset and came towards him
screaming. He grabbed her wrists to prevent her from scratching or biting him
and placed her back onto the couch. She kept on screaming despite him asking
her to calm down. So he “very gently” put his hand over her mouth and said
“Quiet. Quiet” and as he did so she bit the tip of his finger. He described the
bite as so hard that if he had not pulled his hand away she would have bitten
it off. As one of her hands was now free, she started grabbing at him and ended
up grabbing his scrotum and squeezing. Mr. Rooney picked up a pillow and used
it to push her back onto the couch and she then let go but soon grabbed him in
the same place again and also came at him scratching and biting and pulling at
a lanyard key he had around his neck.
[
71
]
Mr.
Rooney attempted to control her but ultimately could not. She continued
fighting and screaming. Eventually, he hit at her with the back of his hand and
struck her in the mouth albeit ‘not with maximum force”. He was then able to
get away from her. She stopped screaming but may have hit her head against “the
fridge or, or, or a chair or something.” He described her as just sitting
there. He walked away from her and then returned and told her to leave his
home. He also told her that he was going to call her daughter. She then got
ready and left. He was worried that Ms. Xie might fall down again somewhere or
take the wrong bus. So he called Lucy Zhao, the daughter, hoping that she might
be able to help.
[
72
]
Mr.
Granger asked him about what occurred during that telephone conversation.
Q. Now, you
mentioned a call with Lucy. And you
heard Lucy testify in this trial and tell us that - she says you told
her: Take your mother home.  She scratched me.  I punched her.  She has a black
eye and I don’t ever want her to come to my place anymore. What, what do you
say about those, those comments?
A. That’s not – that’s not accurate.  I believe I called her and I, I said that she had attacked me, that I had hit her, and that, as far as I was concerned, we had to do something about the situation, you know, before we got together again, if we ever got together again.  I was pretty well saying that I was at my wits’ end, kind of thing. Like I had tried everything.
Q.  Did you punch Yu Kun at any point that night?
A. No.
He denied having observed Ms. Xie with a black eye while
she was still at his home and that he had mentioned it during the telephone
call to Ms. Zhao. He did allow that he had seen Ms. Xie with a black eye when
they were at her apartment later that evening.
[
73
]
Due
to his concerns for Ms. Xie, he decided to try and catch up with her. He
finally did at a transit hub and boarded a bus with her. That bus could take
them to either Ms. Xie’s place or the nearby home of Ms. Zhao. Mr. Rooney
recalled that they got off at a stop closer to the latter and they started
walking towards it. He testified that he was in search of help. He was also
apprehensive because he wanted to be sure that Ms. Zhao heard both sides of the
story, not just her mother’s. However, according to Mr. Rooney, Ms. Zhao
ultimately seemed to decide that she did not wish to go to her daughter’s place
and walked towards her own dwelling. The two of them went in.
[
74
]
Once
inside, she soon asked again that Mr. Rooney return her key and grabbed at the
lanyard and began pulling him around, screaming and scratching him. He
attempted to pull away and as she was holding on, she was pulled forward and fell
down. She then got up and lay down on the bed. She would not answer any of the
questions he was putting to her such as “Do you want me to go?’ He testified
that at that point he did not know what to do. He considered calling the Royal
Ottawa Hospital or another psychiatric facility. In the end, he called 911
because he felt that she was not acting normally and was not answering his
questions.
[
75
]
During
this 911 call, he explained what he had observed  and was told to take her
downstairs and wait. He then tried to convince her to come with him but she
seemed resistant to the idea. Mr. Granger asked him what he meant.
Just
seems like angry body language, like kind of, “Leave me alone,” muttering in
Chinese. And so I decided to call back.  I’m torn; I think maybe she’s gonna be
okay after all.  It seems like more of the – more of the usual, the usual
things that we’ve gone through, and I’m hoping that maybe some rest will calm
her down to the point where we can resume discussing where to go forward from
there.
Q. And you say you decide to call back 911. What, what happens there?
A. I called back to 911.  I say that things seem to be okay for now, basically.  Those aren’t the exact words but....
[
76
]
After
this second 911 call, Mr. Rooney described himself as having been stuck in the
same situation. Nothing changed. Thus, he came to the conclusion that he would
have to call 911 a third time. He did so. Mr. Granger asked him the reason. He
responded “Because I want to make sure that I could leave there safely, and
knowing that she’s okay, hoping – hope, hope - hoping for a resolution to the
situation.” His recollection was that the 911 operator advised him that the
paramedics would have difficulty entering the building because there was no
ring number for the apartment.
[
77
]
His
lawyer then asked him about the fourth call he placed to 911. He explained
Again, I, I believe that I – I believe that I called and cancelled.  Nothing seemed to be really changing.  She seemed to be asleep, snoring.  And I had thoughts in my head that there was gonna be difficulties with her - getting her downstairs, getting her to cooperate, or maybe
being attacked again or some - anything, anything of that nature.
[
78
]
Mr.
Rooney “eventually” checked on Ms. Xie and was still worried. He used Google to
try to find some information on his own to see if her pulse rate was normal and
whether she was breathing normally. He looked in on her again and noticed that
she looked pale. As a result, he decided to call 911 a fifth time. He went
downstairs to let the firefighters in and the paramedics arrived afterwards. He
testified about the interaction that he had with Ms. Spratt.
I
was hoping she would rush in and check on Yu Kun, but she seemed more concerned
with, you know, questioning me as to what, what was going on, to find out more
about Yu Kun – I guess to find out more about Yu Kun’s condition.  So I
basically – I said, “Well, we had a fight earlier.”  And she looked at me with
reproach.  And I said, “But, you know, she attacked me.”  And I showed her all
of – all the injuries on my body.
Q.  What - generally speaking, what areas of your body do you show her?
A.  I showed her my front, my back, my arms, my, my wrists, my hands - there was scars everywhere - on my legs. I tried to show her a groin injury where she had scratched me, and she took offence to that.
Q.  How did she take offence to that?
A.  “Do not expose yourself to me.”
Q.  Were you trying to expose yourself to her?
A.  No.  I was trying to show her a scratch beside my underwear, and I thought that because she was a trained medical professional that you know, she’d seen basically it all, so it really didn’t cross my mind that this was a – this was any different for her.
Q.
And you heard her say that - she says that you said to her, “You fucking bitch,
I’m not being aggressive.” What do you say about that?
A.  I, I don’t remember saying that.  And I had no reason to be angry with her, really.  I mean – so I can’t
imagine myself going to the point of using profanity at her when she was just there trying to sort things out. So I don’t believe that that even happened. I don’t believe that I used profanity.
[
79
]
Mr.
Granger took Mr. Rooney through the photographs of his injuries taken at the
police station when he was arrested. It was his evidence that the various
wounds visible in those photographs were all sustained when he was defending
himself from Ms. Xie on the night in question.
[
80
]
Mr.
Radcliffe cross-examined Mr. Rooney at length on the 911 calls he made that
night. The accused agreed with the Crown’s suggestions that he had made those
calls because he wanted to help Ms. Xie. He agreed that he was trying to be
accurate when he described the situation to the 911 operators. Mr. Radcliffe
then went over some of the details of those calls. He began by asking whether
the accused had told a 911 operator that Ms. Xie was having some kind of minor
seizure. Mr. Rooney responded “I forget”, an odd response in the circumstances.
He was then taken to a transcript of that call and then conceded that he had
said those words and that they accurately reflected what he was observing at
the time. He further agreed that he told an operator that she was having
trouble breathing, possibly heart problems, and that her whole stomach was
twitching.
[
81
]
The
Crown’s questions then turned to Mr. Rooney’s Google searches. It was Mr.
Rooney’s position that Ms. Xie’s condition remained static until the very end
when he noticed her becoming pale.
[
82
]
At
one point during the cross-examination, Mr. Radcliffe made the suggestion that
certain things about which Mr. Rooney had testified were things that he had not
mentioned to the police when he had been interviewed after his arrest. Mr.
Radcliffe went further and suggested that these new things “are merely
inventions and are not actually true.” Mr. Rooney disagreed with the
suggestion. Mr. Radcliffe then listed several such topics, for example: that
911 had told him to bring Ms. Xie downstairs. He maintained that he had indeed
heard the thumps which he insisted were the sounds of Ms. Xie having fallen.
Mr. Radcliffe took him to the transcript of his interview with the police where
it was clear that he had not been as certain at that time that she had actually
fallen: “I thought I heard her slip and fall a little bit in the bath.” He
agreed as well that he had not mentioned that the sounds were ‘loud’.
[
83
]
Mr.
Rooney had testified that when he went into the bathroom to check on Ms. Xie
after he had heard the thump, he had asked her if she was okay but she had not
answered. When Mr. Radcliffe questioned him about what he had told the police
in his statement on this point, his answer lacked any credibility. Mr. Rooney
was clearly flailing around trying to account for the inconsistency.
Q.  I’m going to suggest to you, sir, that she did answer you and she said she was okay.
A.  Yeah, see, my condition at that time was much, much worse than today.  Like I had not slept in about three days. I agree that I said that, that she, she said that
she’s okay. But for her - a lot of our – because she’s Chinese, a lot of our – it’s hard to explain it, but a lot of it is non-verbal communication, it’s, it’s like if she – I say,
“Are you okay?” And she doesn’t do anything or she doesn’t - she doesn’t – I don’t know, she doesn’t – she’s not adamant about being un-okay. I may have interpreted it that way, that she didn’t answer me, okay, she must be okay...
Q.  Sir, I’m going to suggest to you....
A. ...but I probably mis-phrased it there by
saying that she had - she said that she was okay. I believe she did not say that she was okay. I don’t think she answered me.
Q.  Are you suggesting to the Court, sir, that your memory, almost two years after the fact of that incident,
is better today than it was...
A.
Yes.
Q.  ...the day after the incident?
A.  Yes.  Yes.  I was in bad, bad, bad condition that night.
Q.  You said you hadn’t slept for three days, is that right?
A.  Yes, I didn’t have my pain medication.  I didn’t have my sleep medication and everything.  And the conditions of the – of the actual incarceration, et cetera, exacerbating everything.  And the shock that I had been through, the trauma, everything, all of them combined, I’m not in the optimum medical condition or, or....
Q.  So, is it your evidence, sir, that you had been in police custody for three days, approximately, prior to this interview?
A.
Okay, I would agree with that, if that’s on
your records. My – I don’t have good det... – I’m not a
details man, but I – approximately, yes.  Yes.
Q.  So approximately three days in police custody.
A.  Yes.
Q.  And is that why you hadn’t slept?
A.  Yes.
Q.  If I were to suggest to you, sir, that this interview that we’re referring to, the 98-pager, happened on Friday, September 16
th
, which was merely a few hours after, I’ll
say - approximately let’s say 12 hours, just for....
A.
Okay.
Q.  Where do the three days of no sleep come from, Mr. Rooney?
A.
Well, that’s not exclusively the police
incarceration period, maybe I had – I have sleep problems
at home.  But, again, I would – I would add in the trauma that I had been
through as exacerbating my ability to concentrate and to just having the energy
to, to recall clearly and, you know, enunciate clearly everything exactly.
Q.
Is that the end of your answer, sir?
A.
Yeah.
[
84
]
Mr.
Rooney had testified that the attack by Ms. Xie had commenced in the bathroom
with the bite to the shoulder. Mr. Radcliffe pointed out to him that in his
September 16, 2022 statement to the police, he had stated that her attack had
occurred when she was sitting on the couch and had thrown a cup of tea at him.
Q.  I suggest to you, sir, there’s absolutely no indication to the police officer in this interview that you gave on September 16
th
, so within hours of the incident, of any commencement of the attack occurring in the bathroom. Do you  agree with me or not?
A.  (Pause)  I’m not sure.  I would have to – you mean the very beginning of the inter... – from the very beginning of the interview with Séguin?
Q.  I’ll ask my
question a different way, sir, if it’s - if it’s troublesome for you. Do you
believe there’s any indication in the interview with Séguin about the
so-called attack starting in the bathroom?
A. I can’t
recall. I can’t recall it. I’d have
to
look at the beginning of the interview with Séguin and see where we went
through it.
I have reviewed the statement in question and have found
no such reference.
[
85
]
There
were other such inconsistencies put to him by the Crown. As well, and as we
have already seen, Mr. Rooney took the position that his memory at trial of the
events of roughly two years earlier was better than it had been a few hours
after his arrest and that this would explain any apparent inconsistencies. This
flies in the face of logic and human experience.
[
86
]
Despite
taking the position that his memory at trial was superior to that immediately
following the events, I heard the following.
Q.  You’ve also said to us today, sir, that she may have hit her head against the fridge or a chair or something. Do you recall saying that to us today?
A. Yes.
Q.  I’m going to suggest to you that she hit her head after falling as a result of your strike.  Do you agree with that?
A.
That’s – everything happened so quickly. She
was pulling on a thing around my waist – I mean around my
neck. She was pulling at my waist. There was a pillow involved at one point,
where I was blocking and kind of pushing her off but, for the life of me - and
I swear, I can’t photographically or filmat... – filmatographly [
sic
]
sequentially recreate that in mind, what happened.
Q.
I’m going to suggest to you, sir, what happened is she fell off the couch after
you struck her.  She didn’t hit the fridge; she didn’t hit a chair.
A.  No, she would’ve been on her feet at that
time.
[
87
]
In
his statement to the police, Mr. Rooney had mentioned kneeling on Ms. Xie’s chest.
He agreed with Mr. Radcliffe’s suggestion that he had not mentioned it during
his examination in chief.
[
88
]
Mr.
Rooney had testified in chief to being attacked a second time that evening by
Ms. Xie, this time at her apartment. However, he agreed with the Crown’s
suggestion that he had never mentioned this second attack to anyone before his
testimony. He also agreed that it was a “new memory, that is, from your
perspective, clearer today than it was within 12 hours of the event.”
[
89
]
He
testified during cross examination that it had been Ms. Xie who had decided to
not go to her daughter’s place. He had wanted to do so because he was at his
wit’s end. However, he agreed with Mr. Radcliffe that he could have called Ms.
Zhao again at any point after her mother attacked him but that he had not. He
disagreed that he had dissuaded Ms. Xie from going to the nearby Civic Hospital
as they were walking. He then agreed only in part with the Crown’s suggestion
that his actions after Ms. Xie had left his home had been principally motivated
by his fear of being charged for having assaulted her and that that had been
his main fear stating “Not my main – not my main fear.  I mean,
definitely, definitely that is in, in the back of my mind that I will be charged as the attacker.” Mr. Radcliffe then pointed out that hours after his arrest, he had told the police that it had indeed been his main fear and asked whether that had been the case? Mr. Rooney responded, after a pause, “Not really.”
[
90
]
Mr.
Radcliffe continued along this line of questioning. He had Mr. Rooney agree
that he had told the investigating officer “Next thing I know, split lip, oh,
my God, the police are going to be here.  I’m, I’m, I’m public enemy number
one, basically.  Right?” and “I didn’t want her to go to the hospital or
whatever ... I didn’t want her ... I didn’t want her to call the police or
anything like this.” Mr. Rooney then explained to the Court
And I would qualify that with it wasn’t that simple because it would open up a whole – a whole thing
where I would have to identify Yu Kun as the aggressor and she would have to be - possibly suffer some consequences for that or – so this was – it wasn’t purely – I would agree [
sic
] with your – I would disagree with your statement that it was purely selfish.
Mr. Radcliffe then took him to another part of his
statement to the police where he had said
And then, ... I thought, ‘No, this is going to get... cause me a lot of trouble. It’s going to get us both in, in her ... if she’s faking ..., it’s going to [be a] waste [of] time ... So, I ... I cancelled the ambulance...
leading Mr. Rooney to testify
Okay, I could rephrase that.  It’s – this is going to get us both in a lot of trouble was really what I was trying to say but, under the duress, under the circumstances, you know, my, my diction isn’t perfect, but that was what I was trying to get out.
And
Well, it would cause me trouble if she got in trouble.  It would cause both of us – it would – it would cause - you know, anyway, you get the point.
[
91
]
Mr.
Rooney maintained that he had been defending himself and that Ms. Xie had been
the aggressor. It was also his evidence that he had not lied to the 911
operators when he had cancelled the ambulances and that those cancellations had
not been due to his self interest. He denied having struck Ms. Xie “harder than
[he] should have” and that he consciously and intentionally withheld help from
her. He explained, somewhat bizarrely,
I mean, if I had known, obviously I would have gotten help immediately, but she had faked incidences in the past and I wasn’t convinced of the serious [
sic
] of – seriousness of the situation. And my mood at that time was exacerbated by just some of the things that I was experiencing. I was experiencing disconnected calls myself.
[
92
]
Mr.
Radcliffe asked Mr. Rooney about why he had not obtained help for Ms. Xie when
Ms. Xie was pointing to her ribs and chest during the bus ride to her home. Mr.
Rooney explained that she had not used words to express pain as he would have
expected and thus there was no urgency. Plus, she had faked things “very
similar in the past, just a week prior.” He then stated, “I hadn’t made a hard and
fast
decision. I mean, I was
still watching her on the bus, I was – if it got any worse.”
[
93
]
Mr.
Rooney has a short and dated criminal record. In 1995, the passing of sentence
was suspended and he was placed on probation for a period of eighteen months for
one count of common assault. Then, in 2003, he received another suspended
sentence and two years of probation for one count of indecent act. Finally, in
2010, his sentence for one count of mischief was, in light of seven days of
pre-trial custody, another suspended sentence and eighteen months of probation.
[
94
]
I
am of the view that Mr. Rooney is an unreliable historian. It is unclear to me
whether this is due to issues of testimonial capacity, credibility, or both.
Part of the problem in determining whether the issue is merely one of
credibility is that Mr. Rooney clearly has some psychological and/or
neurological problems. During the course of this multiday trial, he has sat
with his eyes usually closed tightly, and his shoulders frequently hunched
over. There were times when he wore earplugs in court. When he testified, his
mannerisms were odd. Part of the cause of these behaviours was doubtless due to
the stress of facing the present charge and taking the stand in his own
defence. But it is obvious that there was more at play here than a reaction to
an uncomfortable situation.
[
95
]
The
only evidence before me as to why he so presents comes from Mr. Rooney himself.
He was born in England and came to Canada in 1968. He completed Grade 12 and then
worked for temporary employment agencies. He explained that he then went on
disability (
i.e.,
ODSP) in 1992. However, his explanation for why he did
so is very far from clear:
Q.  Why did you go on Disability?
A.  I was having so many difficulties in life. was having trouble finding work, I was having trouble learning, and I was at wits’ end. I thought that there was something wrong with me so I, I decided to go on Disability.
Q.  And was there ever any particular diagnosis of anything wrong with you?
A.
Yeah, anti-depression [
sic
] and - sorry, I was on anti-depressants. I
was on [
sic
] depression and also, I had a series of accidents. I had
nerve damage in my body...
Q.  And you’re hold....
A.  ...which is affecting my – everything, my whole, whole life, my sleep, my physical abilities to work physically.
He explained that he had sustained nerve damage to the
left side of his body and was wearing some sort of a brace on his left wrist
while testifying. It will be noted that there was not a real answer to the
question of diagnosis. Moreover, the manner in which he presented in court was seemingly
indicative of more than nerve damage and/or depression. Indeed, after his
arrest, he explained to Detective Seguin that he was “neurologically damaged”
due to alcohol poisoning, concussions, and some sort of choke-out game played
as a child. However, Mr. Rooney’s laptop was seized and searched by the police
as part of this investigation. Results stemming from that search were adduced
by the Crown. Someone used that computer for some reason to search out topics
related to anger and autism.
[
96
]
At
the end of the day, I have no real understanding of why Mr. Rooney presents as
he does. As a result, and as I have already indicated, I am unable to determine
whether he is not credible or unreliable. However, it is clear that I must
treat his evidence with caution.
[
97
]
Further
to the testimony of the foregoing witnesses and the exhibits entered through
them, a significant number of admissions were made.
i.
At the time of these allegations, Mr. Rooney had been residing at 26
Winthrop Private since 2017.
ii.
At the time of these allegations, Ms. Xie had been residing at Unit 208
– 865 Gladstone Avenue since 2005.
iii.
Mr. Rooney was arrested by Constable Vanderheiden on September 16, 2022
at approximately 2:36 a.m. at 865 Gladstone and is the accused before the court
in this matter.
iv.
Mr. Rooney made the statements attributed to him in the 911 calls.
v.
The audio recordings of Mr. Rooney with 911 and Paramedics during those
calls are accurate, authentic, and admissible.
vi.
The statements of Mr. Rooney during those calls were voluntary.
vii.
All the video recordings from OC Transpo and private sources are
accurate, authentic, and admissible.
viii.
Ms. Xie died at the Civic Hospital on September 17, 2022 at
approximately 1:05 p.m.
ix.
Following her death, her body remained subject to proper continuity
until the autopsy performed by Dr. Kepron.
x.
All photos filed as exhibits accurately depict their subjects and are
authentic.
xi.
Nothing was disturbed inside 26 Winthrop Private between the final
departure of Ms. Xie and Mr. Rooney on September 15, 2022 and the execution of
the search warrant on September 16, 2022.
xii.
During the execution of this warrant, police seized the laptop referred
to in Exhibit 18.
xiii.
Nothing was disturbed inside 208-865 Gladstone Ave. between the
departure of Ms. Xie with paramedics on September 16, 2022 and the execution of
the search warrant later that day.
xiv.
All items seized by police have remained subject to proper continuity
throughout their detention by police.
xv.
The digital evidence report prepared by Det. Jonathan Gardiner attached
to these admissions is accurate and admitted on consent. This is a 26 page
report dated September 16, 2022 regarding “Lucy’s iPhone.”
xvi.
The four photographs 22-247451_2214_IMG_2637-40 of Ms. Xie attached to
these admissions were taken at the Civic Hospital on September 16, 2022 at
approximately 9:00 a.m.
xvii.
The
fourteen photographs 22-247451_1922_IMG_4041-54 of Ms. Xie attached to these
admissions were taken at the morgue on the afternoon of September 17, 2022.
xviii.
On
September 16, 2022, swabs were taken from under Ms. Xie’s right hand
fingernails at the Civic Hospital. On September 19, 2022, clippings were taken
of her fingernails during the postmortem examination. Testing of these items
resulted in DNA from Ms. Xie plus one male. Mr. Rooney cannot be excluded as
the source of a male profile from a swab of her right hand fingernails and from
a swab of the underside of her right hand fingernail clippings. The STR DNA
results are estimated to be greater than one trillion times more likely if that
male profile originates from Mr. Rooney than if it originates from an unknown
person unrelated to him.
xix.
The DNA testing referred to in the above paragraph is the only DNA
testing completed in association with this investigation.
xx.
Neuropathologist Dr. Leslie Hamilton undertook a post-mortem
neuropathological examination of Ms. Xie’s brain. Her observations included the
following:
a.
There were
neuropathological changes to the brain consistent with Alzheimer’s Disease.
These changes were in evolution from an intermediate to high level; and
b.
There was
evidence of cerebrovascular disease in the brain, specifically mild-moderate
atherosclerosis and mild-moderate arteriolosclerosis.
xxi.
Prior to determining that Ms. Xie was not a candidate for neurosurgical
intervention, a CT scan was conducted on her brain on September 16, 2022
between 3:21 and 3:36 a.m.
xxii.
From
at least 3:36 a.m. on September 16, 2022 onwards, the injury that she had
suffered was not survivable.
xxiii.
Mr.
Rooney’s cell phone was seized incident to arrest. The contents of the phone
were searched pursuant to search warrant. The search period was from August 16
to September 16, 2022 inclusive. Exhibit 13 includes all text messages between
Mr. Rooney’s cell phone and a cell phone with phone number 613 983 5012 (which
has been identified as belonging to Lucy Zhao) that were seized during the
execution of this search warrant.
xxiv.
No
forensic analysis was undertaken in relation to any fixed red staining located
by members of the Ottawa Police Service during searches at 26 Winthrop Private
or 865 Gladstone Avenue.
[
98
]
Exhibit
13, to which I have just referred, is a corpus of texts between Mr. Rooney and
Ms. Zhao. I will here only refer to those which are relevant to the various
issues before me. In a text to Ms. Zhao dated August 20, 2022, Mr. Rooney
refers to what he believes are “micro seizures” that her mother has been
having. On September 10, he mentions Ms. Xie’s “cognitive decline.” That same
day, Ms. Zhao responds and commiserates “I am sorry to hear that [the
situation] is awful.”
The Law
[
99
]
As
the defence has called evidence in this matter, I must analyze the corpus of
evidence before me within the well-known general framework established by the
Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. W.D.,
[1991] SCR 742 at para. 28:
- if I believe the
accused’s evidence, he must be acquitted;
- if I do not believe
his evidence but it raises a reasonable doubt, he must be acquitted;
-if I do not believe
his evidence and it does not raise a reasonable doubt, the remaining evidence
that is believed must establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
100
]
As the Crown
case against Mr. Rooney with respect to the allegation of unlawful act
manslaughter is based largely on circumstantial evidence, I must be mindful of the
manner in which this type of evidence is to be considered. Cromwell J., for the
unanimous Supreme Court of Canada, stated the following in
R. v. Villaroman,
2016 SCC 33
at paragraphs
40-42
:
[40] The
first is from an old Australian case,
Martin v. Osborne
(1936),
55 C.L.R. 367 (H.C.)
, at p. 375
:
In the inculpation of an accused person the evidentiary
circumstances must bear no other
reasonable
explanation. This
means that, according to the common course of human affairs, the degree of
probability that the occurrence of the facts proved would be accompanied by the
occurrence of the fact to be proved is so high that the contrary cannot
reasonably be supposed.
[41] While
this language is not appropriate for a jury instruction, I find the idea
expressed in this passage — that to justify a conviction, the circumstantial
evidence, assessed in light of human experience, should be such that it
excludes any other reasonable alternative — a helpful way of describing the
line between plausible theories and speculation.
[42] The
second is from
R. v. Dipnarine
, [cite omitted]
The court stated
that “[c]ircumstantial evidence does not have to totally exclude other
conceivable inferences”; that the trier of fact should not act on alternative
interpretations of the circumstances that it considers to be unreasonable; and
that alternative inferences must be reasonable, not just possible.
[
101
]
The sections of
the
Criminal Code
defining the offence of manslaughter are as follows:
222
(1)
A person commits homicide when, directly or
indirectly, by any means, he causes the death of a human being.
. . .
(4)
Culpable homicide is murder or manslaughter or infanticide.
(5)
A person commits culpable homicide when he causes the death
of a human being,
(a)
by means of an unlawful act;
(b)
by criminal negligence;
…
234
Culpable homicide that is not murder or infanticide is manslaughter.
[
102
]
With respect to
unlawful act manslaughter, the Crown is required to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt as
actus reus
that the accused committed an unlawful act and that
said act caused the death of the victim. The
mens rea
to be proven to
that same standard is objective foreseeability of the risk of bodily harm that
is neither trivial nor transitory, coupled with the fault element for the
predicate offence (summarized in
R. v. Javanmardi,
2019 SCC 54
at paras.
25-26, and 31). There is no requirement that the unlawful act alone have been
the cause of the person’s death (
R. v. Maybin,
2012 SCC 24
).
[
103
]
I turn now to
manslaughter by criminal negligence. The Supreme Court decision in
Javanmardi
(at paras.
19-20
) reviews the elements that the Crown must prove. With respect
to the
actus reus,
it must be shown to the requisite standard that the
accused undertook an act or omitted to do anything that it was their legal duty
to do. It must also be shown that the act or omission caused the person’s
death. The
mens rea
of Criminal negligence manslaughter will be
established where the Crown has proven that the act or omission “shows wanton
or reckless disregard for the lives or safety of other persons” (
s. 219(1)
Criminal
Code
). The terms ‘wanton’ and ‘reckless’ in this context have been
explained by
Hill J.
in
R. v. Menezes,
2002 CanLII 49654 (ON SC)
,
[2002] O.J. No. 551
at para
72
(cited with favour by the Ontario Court of
Appeal in
R. v. J.L.,
2006 CanLII 805
at para.
19
):
The term wanton means
“heedlessly”, “ungoverned” and “undisciplined” or an “unrestrained disregard
for the consequences”.  The word “reckless” means “heedless of
consequences, headlong, irresponsible.” [citations omitted].
The Supreme Court has held that this requires the Crown
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s conduct constituted a
marked and substantial departure from the conduct of a reasonable person in the
accused’s circumstances (see
Javanmardi
at paras.
21-23
).
[
104
]
I turn now to
the element of causation. The Ontario Court of Appeal discussed this issue at
paragraphs 21ff. in
R. v. Kippax.
21
] To determine
whether a person can be held responsible for causing a particular result, in
this case death or bodily harm, we must determine whether the person caused
that result not only in fact but also in law:
…
[22] Factual causation
involves an inquiry about how the victim died or suffered bodily harm, in a
medical, mechanical or physical sense, and an accused’s contribution to that
result:
…
[23] Factual causation
involves a determination of whether A caused B. The answer to the question of
whether A caused B is resolved in a criminal case by the evidence of witnesses,
those who testify about facts and others who offer relevant opinions:
..
.
The factual determination of whether A caused B has nothing to do with
intention, foresight or risk:
..
.
[24] To prove factual
causation, the Crown does not have prove that an accused’s conduct was either
the direct or predominant contributing cause of the prohibited consequence,
whether death or bodily harm. It is no defence for an accused to say that the
conduct of another was a greater or more substantial cause of the death or
injuries. The Crown need only prove that an accused’s conduct was a significant
contributing cause of the death or injuries or, said another way, that the
accused’s conduct was “at least a contributing cause…outside the
de
minimis
range”:
…
…
[26] Legal causation, on the
other hand, has to do with whether an accused should be held responsible in law
for a prohibited consequence of his or her conduct, for example, death or
bodily harm:
…
In legal causation, the inquiry is directed at the
question of whether an accused should be held criminally responsible for the
consequences that occurred:
..
. In the analysis of legal causation
in negligence-based offences, like dangerous driving, reasonable foreseeability
of harm is a relevant consideration:
…
…
[28] It is well-established
that independent, voluntary human intervention in events started by an accused
may break the chain of causation:
…
A new event may result in an
accused’s conduct not being a significant contributing cause of a prohibited
consequence. But legal responsibility for an event will remain and the chain of
causation will not be broken where an accused intentionally produced the
outcome, recklessly brought it about, or if the ordinarily circumspect person
would have seen it as a likely consequence of his or her own conduct:
…
[citations omitted]
[
105
]
More recently,
in
R. v. Romano,
2017 ONCA 837
, the Ontario Court of Appeal returned to
this issue. It dealt with legal causation at paragraph 29.
The legal causation inquiry recognizes that there are cases
where the factual causation test is facially met, but where the accused should
not be held criminally responsible because circumstances affect the level of
moral fault or blameworthiness of the accused, making it inappropriate to treat
his contribution to the consequence as “significant.” As the Supreme Court of
Canada explained
in
Maybin
,
at para.
16
, “[l]egal causation … is [therefore] a narrowing concept which
funnels a wider range of factual causes into those which are sufficiently
connected to a harm to warrant legal responsibility.” It enables some cases
where the factual causation test is technically satisfied to be removed from
the net of criminal liability because moral blame should not be imputed to the
accused. In effect, circumstances can impel recognition that the act of the
accused should not be imputed as a significant contributing cause:
… [citations omitted]
[
106
]
As Mr. Rooney’s
position is that Ms. Xie attacked him and he acted in self—defence, I am
required to analyze his actions through the lens of
s. 34
Criminal Code
.
34 (1)
A person is not guilty of an offence if
(a)
they
believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another
person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person;
(b)
the
act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or
protecting themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and
(c)
the
act committed is reasonable in the circumstances.
(2)
In
determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the
court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other
parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:
(a)
the
nature of the force or threat;
(b)
the
extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other
means available to respond to the potential use of force;
(c)
the
person’s role in the incident;
(d)
whether
any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon;
(e)
the
size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;
(f)
the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the
parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the
nature of that force or threat;
(f.1)
any
history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident;
(g)
the
nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of
force; and
(h)
whether
the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person
knew was lawful.
[
107
]
The Supreme
Court of Canada reviewed this section in
R. v. Khill,
2021 SCC 37
. At
paragraph 51, Martin J. (for the majority) remarked “
[t]he
three inquiries under s. 34(1), set out above, can usefully be conceptualized
as (1) the catalyst; (2) the motive; and (3) the response …”
[
108
]
The catalyst refers to “the accused’s state of mind and the
perception of events that led them to act” (at paragraph 52). However, Martin
J. stressed, at paragraph 53, that the accused’s belief must also be
objectively reasonable.
[
109
]
The inquiry into
motive is where the court considers the accused’s purpose in committing the act
that constitutes the alleged offence. Were they acting to defend or protect
themselves or others? (see at paragraph 59).
[
110
]
The final
inquiry is that into the response itself. The Supreme Court explained at
paragraph 64 that
[t]hrough s. 34(2), Parliament has also expressly
structured how a decision maker ought to determine whether an act of
self-defence was reasonable in the circumstances. As the language of the
provision dictates, the starting point is that reasonableness will be measured
according to “the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and
the act”. This standard both casts a wide net of inquiry covering how the act
happened and what role each person played and modifies the objective standard
to take into account certain characteristics of the accused — including size,
age, gender, and physical capabilities (s. 34(2)(e)). Also added into the
equation are certain experiences of the accused, including the relationship and
history of violence between the parties (s. 34(2)(f) and (f.1)).
Analysis
[
111
]
I have already
indicated that I find that Mr. Rooney was a witness about whose evidence I must
be very cautious. Given the level of my concerns about his credibility and /or reliability,
I am of the view that there are many parts of his evidence that I can accept
only where there is some independent corroboration to be found in the
evidentiary record. Keeping this in mind, I turn first to the issue of unlawful
act manslaughter where it is the Crown position that Mr. Rooney was not acting
in self-defence but if he was so acting, his response to Ms. Xie’s assault was
excessive.
[
112
]
I will start by
indicating that I am unable to accept Mr. Rooney’s version of the events given
the problems with his evidence. However, his evidence, combined with certain
other elements in the evidentiary record leave me with a reasonable doubt that
the following could have occurred: that Ms. Xie threw a cup of tea at him and had
then attacked him. He, as a result, had taken steps to immobilize her in order
to defend himself and in the course of doing so, Ms. Xie had sustained some or
all of the injuries noted by Dr. Kepron. It is to be remembered that a response
in self-defence is not required to be measured to a nicety. I have a reasonable
doubt that Mr. Rooney had difficulty in controlling Ms. Xie and that her
actions caused him severe pain. I do not see the one slap and the use of his
body weight to keep her down as unreasonable. I am cognizant of the differences
in age, size, and strength between Ms. Xie and Mr. Rooney. However, and as I
will discuss, the evidence independent of Mr. Rooney’s testimony supports the
possibility that she was aggressive at the time and would have been difficult
to control.
[
113
]
The Crown
submits that Ms. Xie would have been justified in injuring Mr. Rooney as she
did in order to defend herself from an attack by Mr. Rooney. While this may be
true, there is nothing inherent in the injuries sustained by the accused that leads
me to believe that she inflicted them in legitimate self-defence rather than as
part of her attack on him. As well, The extent of Mr. Rooney’s injuries
indicate that the fight was far from one-sided.
[
114
]
It was the
evidence of Mr. Rooney that Ms. Xie had, in the last years of her life, begun
to display problems with cognition. This is supported by the evidence of Ms.
Zhao who had noted these problems. It was the further evidence of the accused
that, in the period leading up to her death, Ms. Xie had begun to display aggressive
behaviours. This was not corroborated by her daughter, however, it was his
evidence that he had told Ms. Zhao about this in texts. The texts that were
adduced as evidence do not refer to violent behaviour but do mention “micro
seizures” and “cognitive decline”. Furthermore, Ms. Zhao allowed during
cross-examination that there had been an occurrence when the accused and her
mother had been arguing and Ms. Xie had called her and she had spoken with Mr.
Rooney. Also relevant here is the call that Ms. Zhao testified that she had
received on September 15, 2022 when Mr. Rooney complained that Ms. Xie had
accused him of stealing $500 and had then scratched him.
[
115
]
Then there is
the evidence of Dr. Kepron relevant to this point: Ms. Xie’s brain showed signs
of both Alzheimer’s disease and a cerebrovascular disease. The doctor testified
that the changes to the brain that resulted were sufficiently severe to produce
clinical symptoms of dementia. While the doctor could not testify to what
specific symptoms Ms. Xie would have displayed as a result of the observed
changes to her brain, Dr. Kepron would have expected to see manifestations of
disinhibition, aggression, and an inability to reason as the disease
progressed.
[
116
]
Thus, I find
that Mr. Rooney’s evidence is corroborated to an extent that I find myself,
while not believing him, left in a state of reasonable doubt that Ms. Xie
assaulted him and that she sustained her injuries as a result of his reasonable
efforts to defend himself. I am unable to determine exactly at what point the
fatal injury was sustained, however, given my conclusion, I need not examine
the issue of whether it occurred as a result of a slip in the bath. Moreover, given
my conclusion, I prefer to deal with the issue of causation as part of my
analysis of the alternative Crown theory.
[
117
]
I turn now to that
second Crown theory: manslaughter by criminal negligence. The Crown submits
that the criminal failure to seek assistance for Ms. Xie commenced immediately
after he assaulted her at his home. However, I have already dismissed the
Crown’s theory of an assault by Mr. Rooney. Moreover, Ms. Xie was able to leave
the house and head off to her own home during the lucid period. While she had
sustained the fatal injury while at Mr. Rooney’s dwelling, its existence would
not have been apparent to anyone at that point and during the lucid period.
Furthermore, none of the other injuries sustained by Ms. Xie required immediate
medical attention as was evidenced by her ability to travel to her own home.
[
118
]
That situation
changed after Mr. Rooney and Ms. Xie arrive at her place. At some point, Mr.
Rooney became concerned enough about Ms. Xie’s state that he called 911 more
than once. Mr. Rooney has explained that he cancelled the emergency calls due
to a belief that she was faking and that she would get into trouble once that
was discovered by the paramedics. I do not believe him and that makes little
sense. The normal and safe thing for him to have done in the circumstances
would be to allow the paramedics to examine her. The defence has conceded that
he owed Ms. Xie a duty of care (
s. 215(1)
(b)
Criminal Code
). I find that
Mr. Rooney, despite his concern and affection for Ms. Xie, was motivated to
cancel the emergency calls due to a concern that he would get into trouble for
having injured her and was reckless as to the consequences. In these
circumstances, this constitutes a marked and substantial departure from the
conduct of a reasonable person.
[
119
]
Where the Crown
case fails is on the issue of causation. Dr. Kepron’s evidence on this point is
central:
Q. So you’d be
speculating to suggest that, with medical intervention any earlier, the outcome
would’ve been different.
A. Correct.
I cannot find, based on this evidence, that the Crown
has proven to the required standard that Mr. Rooney’s negligence contributed to
Ms. Xie’s death.
[
120
]
The fact
scenario in the present case is akin to that dealt with by the Ontario Court of
Justice (General Division) in
R. v. Smith,
[1997] O.J. NO. 4721
. Mr.
Smith was charged with criminal negligence causing death, failure to provide
the necessaries of life, and assault. The deceased was his infant son. The
Crown theory was that Mr. Smith delayed taking the baby for medical assistance
because he was afraid that he would be found responsible for having mistreated
him. He eventually did seek medical help but only when the baby’s medical
condition became desperate (see at paragraph 32).
[
121
]
Two medical
experts testified at that trial. Neither could say whether earlier medical
intervention would have saved the life of the child. Justice Lederman dealt
with this issue at paragraphs 63-64 of his decision.
63
The
Crown is required to prove the elements of the offence beyond a reasonable
doubt. In this case, part of the actus reus of criminal negligence causing
death is that the accused caused the death of Latrell within the meaning of
Smithers, supra. The indictment charges that the accused's criminally negligent
act was failing to secure medical treatment for Latrell. The evidence of Dr.
Ferris is that there is no basis to conclude that earlier medical intervention
could have saved this infant. Dr. Smith's testimony on this issue is equivocal.
At best, he could only say that, as a general rule, earlier medical treatment
means there is a greater likelihood a child in peril will survive.
64
Based
on the medical evidence one can only speculate that the delay in bringing
Latrell in to the Scarborough medical clinic was a contributing cause beyond
the de minimus level. … Second, Dr. Smith was unable to determine the point of
irreversibility when medical attention would not have been of any value.
Accordingly, the evidence adduced does not amount to proof beyond a reasonable
doubt that the accused's failure to secure immediate medical attention for his
son was a contributing cause of his son's death. Accordingly, on this ground
alone, the Crown has not proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt to establish
criminal negligence causing death.
[
122
]
Mr. Rooney’s
actions in cancelling the 911 calls were selfish and reprehensible. However,
they were not criminal as the Crown has not proven any causal link beyond the
de
minimis
level to those actions and the death of Ms. Xie.
[
123
]
The charge
against Mr. Rooney is dismissed.
Released: February 21, 2025
Signed:
Justice Berg
[1]
Detective Séguin was advised on September 17 at 1:50 p.m. that
Ms. Xie had passed away.