Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj681/2025oncj681.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. I-B.(W.),
2025 ONCJ 681
DATE: 
2025 12 19
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region 998 23 47104966
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
I-B.(W.)
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on May 16, June 2, 26, 27 & August 22, & November 10, 2025
Reasons
for Decision on Gardiner Hearing released on December 19, 2025
Mr. B. Sosa........................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Mr. B. Monk...................................................................................... counsel
for the accused
De Filippis,
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
This decision includes disturbing descriptions
of child sexual abuse.
[
2
]
The defendant was charged with Sexual Assault,
Sexual Interference, and Sexual Exploitation, involving one victim, between
January 1, 2018, and August 20, 2023, at the City of Hamilton and elsewhere in
the country.
[
3
]
The allegations cover a five-year period.  The
final event, on August 20, 2023, was surreptitiously video recorded by the victim. 
The defendant pled guilty to the three charges, on a limited basis.
Specifically, the defendant admits the following: The victim was born in 2007.
In August 2023, the victim lived with her mother and the defendant in Hamilton. 
The defendant is her stepfather. The defendant has two children from a previous
relationship, W.V. and S.V.  In early August 2023, the victim told these stepsiblings
that their father had been touching her, including sexual intercourse.  The
three teenagers discussed the matter, and the victim decided to record the next
encounter with the defendant.  On August 20, 2023, the victim set her desktop
computer to face her bed and secretly filmed the sexual assault that occurred
that day. Two days later, her stepbrother, W.V. took the video record to the
police and reported the sexual abuse by his father.
[
4
]
At the time of this video recorded event, the victim
was 15 years old. The record is 29 minutes and four seconds in length. It shows
the following:
The victim sits
on the bed and stares at the camera.  Two minutes later, the defendant enters
the victim’s bedroom, without a shirt.  He removes his pants, revealing his
penis and lays on his back and begins to masturbate.  The defendant moves his
arms to his groin area in what appears to be a signal to the victim.  The victim
is next seen wearing only a top.  She sits on the defendant’s erect penis with
her back to him and facing the camera. The victim bounces on the defendant’s
penis with her arms folded. The victim switches position and gets on her hands
and knees while the defendant stands and penetrates her vaginally from behind. 
This continues for twenty-six minutes and thirty-nine seconds as the defendant
becomes more aggressive in the penetration and then slows down.  The victim has
her face buried in the mattress for this period.  The victim pushes the
defendant’s left arm away from her lower back, stands up, and walks away.  No
words are spoken during the entire incident.
[
5
]
The defendant acknowledges the accuracy of the
video record.  He admits that the sexual abuse began within the preceding
year.  He denies any sexual abuse in the preceding four years.  In accordance
with his plea and admissions, I found the defendant guilty of the three charges
in the one-year period up to August 20, 2023.  A “Gardiner Hearing” was held to
determine if the defendant is guilty of sexual abuse in the four years between
2018 and 2022.  At this hearing, the, victim her mother, and defendant
testified.
THE VICTIM’S EVIDENCE
[
6
]
The victim is now 17 years old.  Her interview
with the police about this matter, conducted when she was 15 years old, was
video recorded.  It is about 80 minutes in length.  That video was played in Court
and adopted by the victim as truthful and accurate.  The victim’s statements,
include the following:
Her mother met
the defendant in Honduras when the victim was about eight years old.  He visited
from Canada. They spent a night in a hotel room, with two beds.  During the
night, the defendant left the bed shared with the victim’s mother and went to the
victim’s bed.  He rubbed his fingers down her lower back.  Her memory of this
incident is unclear.
Within two
years, her mother had married the defendant, and they joined him in Alberta.  The
defendant’s place of employment was a great distance from the matrimonial
home.  He was away for weeks at a time and would come home for two days at a
time.  This is when “he would do it”….He just asked me to come to his room. He,
like, touched me and he will try to put his penis in my vagina.  But he was,
like careful, with it.  He, like he didn’t, like want to hurt me.  Like he
didn’t want to, like, penetrate and hurt me.  He just wanted to take it slow”. 
However, the defendant did not penetrate her until they later moved to
Hamilton. The victim noted that her mother worked at a hotel while they were in
Alberta but added, “I don’t know where my mom was, to be honest, in this whole
situation”.
In Hamilton,
the family moved to the basement apartment of a house.  The defendant’s two
children from another relationship lived in the area and stayed at the basement
apartment on weekends.  The defendant initially did not have a job. The
victim’s mother had two jobs.  This apartment is where the defendant first
inserted his penis in the victim’s vagina:  “Like, we just kept doing it, to be
honest.  And then he tries to convince me to do for, I don’t know how to say
this, not vagina, more like the other type…Like, the back door, okay….my ass…I
really didn’t want to do it but he just kept bugging me about it, so I was
like, ‘Sure’.  And he tried to but it really hurt….at the point, that I end up
crying”….And then he keep asking me to do it.  And then sometimes, I said, no
so, then I said yes.  But it always hurt.  He was trying to get in but he
couldn’t.  But it always hurts so bad” .
These events
in Hamilton occurred once or twice a week, in the morning, mainly on weekends, sometimes,
in the defendant’s bedroom but, more often, in the victim’s bedroom.  The victim’s
mother left for work at 7 AM, and on weekends, her stepbrother left for work as
early as 5 AM.  The defendant would say “come on, let’s do it” or “Vaminous” in
Spanish.  The victim took her own clothes off: “I don’t want him to touch me so
I take my own clothes off.  Until the process of doing it, I don’t like,
kissing him, or like, he always try to, like grab my boobs.  I always, like,
try not to looking at him because I’m just really disgusted at what I’m doing”
The victim
told her step siblings about the abuse, and they urged her to get proof and to
report it.  This concerned her: “I’m scared.  He is important to my mom, and he
is the one, like, my mom doesn’t know any English.  So, without him, we are
like, financially not good.  My mom works two jobs.  And, she doesn’t get good
pay.”  When the defendant told her they were going to “do it” the next day, she
decided to video record the event: “I didn’t sleep the day before of it”.
The defendant penetrated
her vagina from behind but “couldn’t finish”: “normally…it’s mostly on my back.
He just comes on my back and that, and I clean it up after.  And that’s it”
[
7
]
In addition to adoption of this prior statement,
the victim testified that in Alberta, it “first started with oral…it was…disgusting
because it produced milk…come, ejaculate”.  She said that “sometimes he would
put his penis in my chest area and try to come [but] half the time he never came”. 
The “oral happened more than once, just a guess, maybe 6 or 7 times” and “in
Hamilton – three times, maybe”.
[
8
]
On day before the secret video was taken, the
defendant told her they would be doing it “normal”.  Normal, meant vaginal
intercourse and “from behind” that meant anal. The victim testified that the video
record represents incidents of normal sex, including the length of time.
[
9
]
The victim was challenged about her account of
sexual abuse before 2022.  She rejected the suggestion that it began about one
year before the events surreptitiously recorded on video.   The victim agreed
that her mother was in the hotel room when she claims the defendant touched her
in Honduras. She also agreed that after they moved to Alberta, the defendant
was away from home for weeks at a time, returning for a few days at a time.  Yet,
in her adopted statement to the police she said the abuse happened once or
twice a week in Alberta.  The victim said the defendant would touch her when
her mother was working at the hotel or taking English lessons but added that on
one occasion her mother was at home when the defendant “touched” her in her
bedroom. She conceded that in her statement to police she said her mother was
never home when the abuse occurred in Alberta.
[
10
]
The victim insisted that when the family moved
to Hamilton from Alberta in 2020, the “sex just continued” but a few months
passed before it progressed to penetration.  She was unable to recall specific
dates and explained “I tried to block this out”.  The victim testified that the
defendant repeatedly asked for anal sex and tried to do so five or six times
and then added she cannot recall how many times this happened.  He never succeeded
in penetrating her anus.
THE DEFENCE EVIDENCE
[
11
]
The defendant was born in Honduras and is a
Canadian citizen. He testified that he met the victim’s mother in 2010 in
Honduras.  They began dating in 2013 and were married in 2015.   In 2018, the
victim and her mother joined the defendant in Alberta.  The defendant worked for
a fracking company. A long distance away from the family home.  His work
schedule was 15 days on and six days off.  He returned to the family home for
those six days.
[
12
]
The defendant testified he did not
inappropriately touch the victim in Honduras.  On one occasion, she stayed with
him and the victim’s mother in a hotel room. They were never alone.  The victim
was in one bed and the defendant and her mother in another. He said that there
was no sexual misconduct in Alberta.
[
13
]
The family moved to Hamilton in late 2020.  The
defendant’s two children, from a prior relationship, lived in that city.  In January
2021, he began work as a delivery driver, beginning at 5:30 am and ending at 7
or 8 pm.  He was initially assisted in this job by the victim’s mother until
she found a job of her own. The defendant testified that the first time he had
sexual activity with the victim was in November 2022.  She was 15 years old.   Their
home at this time was a basement apartment with three bedrooms, one for the
victim, another for the defendant and her mother, and a third that was used as
an office.  The incident happened in the office.
[
14
]
The defendant described what happened n the office
as follows:  He was sitting at his computer when the victim came into the room
and embraced him: “She put one arm around me and touched the lower part of my body
with the other arm…. she was kneeling in front of me and embraced me…I can’t
say if she did it intentionally, but it excited me”.  The defendant put his
arms around the victim and as the victim was leaving the defendant said, “what
do you want to do, do you want to do it”.  She said, “yes and started taking
her clothes off and we did it”.  Nobody was home at the time.   The defendant
testified that, “after I had done it, I felt very bad because I felt I was
failing her and my wife and my family….in the next months we did it twice, once
in January and once in March [2023].
[
15
]
The defendant gave a confusing account of how
many times he had sexual activity with the victim between November 2022 and his
arrest in August 2023.  He said some months there was no activity.  The
activity included “vaginal sex”.  He testified that sometimes he instigated it
and at other times the victim did so.  It always occurred on weekends when his
wife was not present.  When asked how he felt about this, the defendant
replied, “I can’t deny that at the moment if felt good and I can’t deny that
after I felt bad…I asked for her forgiveness…It was all my fault because I was
the adult, and I did not exercise self control”.
[
16
]
In cross-examination, the defendant confirmed
that he was the primary income earner for the family and was a father figure to
the victim. He sexually abused his stepdaughter in the family home eight or
nine times over a nine-month period.  Vaginal penetration occurred on the
fourth occasion.  He was able to hide this activity from other family members.    The
defendant agreed that he never used a condom but added that he “ejaculated
outside, in my hand”.  He denied doing so on the victim’s back.
[
17
]
The defendant insisted the sexual abuse began in
November 2022.  He did not touch her inappropriately in Honduras or Alberta. 
There was no oral sex or attempt at anal penetration.  He repeated that this
happened because he was aroused by the victim embracing him.  He denied he was aroused
by the victim before this date. He conceded that when he became aroused in
November 2022, his response was to ask his stepdaughter if she wanted to have
sex. With respect to the last, video recorded incident, the defendant denied he
had told the victim the day before that they would be having sex.  He said, she
asked him to do so that morning.  The defendant said, “already had the camera
set up and that is why she approached him to do it”.
[
18
]
The victim’s mother confirmed the testimony
given by the defendant about when they met and married and the places they
lived in Canada. She said that on the one occasion that the victim shared a
hotel room with them in Honduras she never saw the defendant touch her
daughter.  Referencing her work and school schedules, along with the schedules
of the defendant and victim, she insisted that the defendant was never home alone
with her daughter in Alberta or later, in Hamilton.  She added that she never
saw him touch the victim inappropriately.
[
19
]
In cross-examination, the following exchange
occurred:
Q: When you
were working at the hotel [in Alberta], was [the victim] ever left alone with [the
defendant]?
A: No.
Q: You know
there is a video of him forcing penetration on your daughter?
A: I heard
about that.
Q: Do you
accept that is what it captures?
A: Truly, I
can’t say anything about the video because I haven’t seen it.
Q: You must
know he has pled guilty and said it is him on the video?
A: OK
Q: Do you
accept your husband sexually abused your daughter?
A: I know he
pleaded guilty, but I haven’t seen the video …[pause]…I accept it happened
because there is a video.
Q: It’s hard
to accept it happened and you didn’t know.
A: Exactly.
SUBMISSIONS
[
20
]
The Crown submits that the victim knew that it
would take more than her word to prove what the defendant had done to her. She took measures to ensure proof of the offences and stop the
abuse.   Counsel argues that her narrative makes logical sense – a gradual
evolution, over several years, from touching in Honduras, to attempted vaginal
intercourse in Alberta to full intercourse in Hamilton.   Moreover, her description
of the events is convincing; how, in Alberta the defendant told her to take it
in her vagina and he would do it slow and how, later, he tried to engage in
anal sex that “always hurt so bad”.  Counsel also points to the “disturbing
amount of familiarity and routine as captured on video”.
[
21
]
The Crown notes that the defendant’s version of
events – that the abuse began in his office in Hamilton when she knelt before
him and embraced him was never put to the victim.  Counsel suggests this shows “he
made this up on the spot when he took the witness stand”.  The Crown argues
there is a “massive inconsistency” between the defendant’s trial testimony and
prior statement to the police with respect to this incident.  At trial he
denied he vaginally penetrated the victim.  He told the police otherwise.
[
22
]
The Crown suggests that the evidence given by
the victim’s mother does not assist in determining the issues. The activities
were clandestine, and it is not surprising she saw nothing.  In this regard, counsel
added that her testimony that the defendant was never alone with the victim
cannot be believed.
[
23
]
The Defence agrees that the demeanour of the
parties as captured on the video is important; it is “almost nonchalance and
casual and clearly shows this is something that was done before”.  However, “this
does not defeat the defendant’s testimony about the length of time” that they
occurred.   Counsel agrees he did not put the initial incident, as described by
the defendant, to the victim, but he did challenge her that the abuse did not
begin before the move to Hamilton.  As such, the “rule in Browne and Dunn” is
not violated.
[
24
]
Defence counsel submits that on the evidence of
the defendant and the victim’s mother it was not possible for the defendant and
victim to be alone before the move to Hamilton.  Counsel notes that the
defendant admits to serious criminality and high blameworthiness and argues
that this shows he is being honest about the nature and length of time the
abuse occurred.  Moreover, this is “a W.D. case” and any doubt must be resolved
in favour of the defendant.
ANALYSIS
[
25
]
The defendant admits that events secretly
captured on video in August 2023 began with sexual abuse in November 2022.  He
does not admit doing so in the four years before that.  The Crown must prove the
expanded allegations.  In this regard, I note that probable guilt is not
the criminal law standard of proof – it is closer to certainty.  A reasonable
doubt is a doubt based on reason and common sense which must be logically based
on the evidence or lack of evidence (
R. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33
(CanLII)
).  If such a doubt exists, the Crown has not discharged its burden of
proof. In applying this standard, I can accept some, part, or none of what a
witness states.  The testimony of a witness is assessed based on the person’s
sincerity and accuracy.
[
26
]
I am satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt that
the defendant is guilty of the offences set as charged in the three counts. 
The victim’s description of what happened in Honduras is not referenced in
those counts and, in any event, her testimony on point is not clear.  However,
I am confident of her testimony with respect to the sexual activity in Alberta
and Hamilton.  I reject the contrary testimony given by the defendant.  In
addition, I have no confidence in the testimony by the victim’s mother.
[
27
]
The victim provided a consistent and coherent
account of being groomed from a young age; it began with inappropriate touching
and progressed over the years to oral sex, attempts at vaginal sex, full vaginal
penetration, and attempts at anal sex.  This testimony withstood
cross-examination and was not undermined by other evidence. The victim’s
account was not a general one.  In assessing credibility and reliability
details matter. In talking about the oral sex, she noted “it produced milk” and
that “it tasted awful”.  In her account of the defendant’s first attempts at
vaginal penetration, she recalled that the defendant “went slowly” so as not to
hurt her.   When he asked for anal sex, she sometimes said no and at other
times said yes, but “it always hurt so bad”. She noted that on many occasions,
the defendant was unable to “finish” and that he ejaculated on her back.  On
these occasions, she had to clean it off. The decision to surreptitiously
record the final event, was not taken easily because the victim knew the
defendant was important to her mother and both depended on him financially.  I
am confident these and other details are not lies and do not reflect mistaken
memory.
[
28
]
The secretly recorded video confirms the
victim’s account.  Within a few minutes the parties prepared for sexual
activity.  Sexual intercourse, in various positions, occurred for just over 21
minutes.  The facial expressions and overall demeanour of the parties leaves no
doubt that this was just another day – one with a long history, longer than
nine months.
[
29
]
There is only one way to make sense of
defendant’s description of what occurred in November 2022.  On the day in
question the victim came to his home office, knelt and touched him.  This
aroused him and his response was to ask, “do you want to do it”. The victim
agreed and took her clothes off and they “did it”. This may well have happened,
but the account can only be believed if the parties had a history of sexual
activity. To assert, as the defendant does, that this spontaneously occurred
for the first time defies belief. Moreover, the defendant’s account of this
incident is inconsistent.
[
30
]
The defendant testified that he and the victim
did not have sexual intercourse on this first occasion.  Vaginal penetration
came later.  That is in sharp contrast to his statement to the police.  He told
the police that “After I had done it, I felt very bad, very bad”. When asked
how often this had happened between November 2022 and August 2023, he replied
that after January 2023 “this was committed in every month…. just normal sex…vaginal
sex”.  This inconsistency is almost certainly explained by the fact the
defendant fabricated his account when he took the stand.  This may also explain
why his lawyer, unaware of what was coming, did not put the details to the
victim.
[
31
]
The victim’s mother is unable or unwilling to
accept the extent of the defendant’s misconduct.  This is evident from the
questions and answers reproduced above.  In fact, it appears that she only
accepts that the final act occurred because she has been told it was captured
on video.  Against this background, I cannot accept the evidence of the
victim’s mother that her husband and daughter were never alone.  On the
defendant’s evidence that is obviously not the case after November 2022.  In
any event, it is impossible to believe they were never alone in the previous
four years.  In this regard, I note that the defendant testified that while in
Alberta he was home for six days at a time, every few weeks.
RESULT
[
32
]
The defendant admits sexually abusing the victim
over a nine-month period, when she was 15 years old.  I am satisfied that it
transpired over a period of five years, as described by the victim, when she
was between the ages of 10 and 15.  With the benefit of submissions from
counsel the defendant will be sentenced accordingly.
ADDENDUM
[
33
]
This decision, without this addendum, was sent
to counsel on September 10, 2025, in advance of the return date of November 10,
2025, so that the parties could prepare for a sentence hearing on that date
with full knowledge of my findings at this Gardiner Hearing.  The decision was
to be formally filed on the record on this date.  When the matter returned to
court, Defence counsel advised that he had not noticed receipt of these reasons
and was not prepared to proceed. At the request of Defence counsel, his submissions
with respect to sentence will be received on December 19, 2025.
[
34
]
On November 10, 2025, the Crown also pointed to
two errors in my reasons. In paragraph 21, I noted the submission by the Crown
with respect to “a massive inconsistency between the defendant’s trial
testimony and prior statement to the police”.  In paragraph 30, I noted my
finding that the defendant’s testimony on a certain point “is in sharp contrast
to his statement to the police”.
[
35
]
A prior statement by the defendant to the police
was not in evidence at this trial.  Indeed, I am advised by the parties that
the defendant did not provide a statement to the police.  I reviewed my trial
notes with counsel.  There are numerous references in those notes, during
cross-examination of the defendant, and in submissions, to transcript pages.
These are references to a transcript of the defendant’s testimony at this trial,
dated June 27, 2025.  When I later prepared my reasons, I mistakenly identified
this trial transcript as a transcript of a prior statement to police. Apart
from this error, paragraphs 21 and 30 of these reasons are valid. The parties
agree that rather than correct those paragraphs to remove the references to a
prior statement, and substitute it to references to the trial transcript, it
would be preferable to leave my original reasons as I drafted them and add this
explanatory note.
[
36
]
These reasons will be filed on the record on
December 19, 2025, when sentence submissions will be completed.
Released:  December 19, 2025
Signed:
Justice J. De Filippis