Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj277/2025oncj277.html

CITATION:
R. v. Brar
, 2025 ONCJ 277
DATE: April 25, 2025
Information No: 23-61101423-00
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
v.
RAVINDER BRAR
R U L I N G
BEFORE THE HONOURABLE, JUSTICE B.E. PUGSLEY
on April 25, 2025, at ORANGEVILLE, Ontario
APPEARANCES
S. Khan                   Counsel
for the Provincial Crown
C. Melo                          Counsel
for Ravinder Brar
Pugsley, J.
(Orally):
Ravinder
Brar faces two drink drive related counts.  Counsel and the court agree that
two days are required for his trial.  Currently, his trial is scheduled to
commence on June 23rd, 2025, for day one, and October 7, 2025, for day two.
The
defendant's information was sworn on September 28th, 2023.  On its face, this
matter exceeds the guidelines set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Regina
v. Jordan
.
In
this court, the trial should complete within 18 months under
Jordan.
Here, if the trial ends as scheduled, the total time is more than 24 months.
The
defendant has applied for a stay of proceeding based upon a breach of his right
to a trial within a reasonable time, guaranteed by
paragraph 11(b)
of the
Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
.
In
their clear and effective facta, Crown and Defence have set out their
respective views of how the 24 months, here, should be characterized.  I am grateful
for their clarity.
On
its face, the matter would seem clear, 24 months is greater than 18 months set
out in
Jordan
. Parties correctly, however, recognize that the assessment
here is not that simple.
Mr.
Brar had a two-day trial scheduled for December 30 and 31, 2024.  That is
within, roughly, 15 months and two weeks of the swearing of the information
here. In other words, within the
Jordan
parameters. About a month before
his trial, he discharged his counsel and asked for his trial to be adjourned.
On
November 14, 2024, the presiding justice, the local Administrative Judge,
Justice Schwarzl, removed Mr. Brar's then counsel from the record and
considered Mr. Brar's request to adjourn his upcoming trial.  That request was
granted given Mr. Brar's express waiver of delay until his next trial date. 
His former counsel, present at the time, confirmed that he had advised Mr. Brar
on the consequences of such a waiver before it was made.
The
Applicant concedes the waiver but also notes that when new counsel acted to set
a new trial date, very few dates were offered by the trial coordinator, and of
those dates, the Crown was not available for some of the earlier dates.  In the
end, June 23rd, 2025 and October 7, 2025, were scheduled together with today
for the 11(b) Application.
There is no doubt that the waiver of delay made on
November 14, 2024, was made clearly and by an informed decision by Mr. Brar to
waive his time to trial right.  Mr. Brar could have had his trial on December
30th and 31st, 2024.  By his request to adjourn that trial, those
Jordan
compliant dates were given up by Mr. Brar and assigned to other deserving
litigants.
The Applicant is therefore left alleging an overall
delay of roughly 16 months when defence 11(b) express or implied waivers are
considered.
The Applicant submits that an 11(b) stay is,
nonetheless, still appropriate under the residual discretion set out in
Jordan
,
to stay a case where it falls below the
Jordan
guidelines.
It is submitted that the defendant was diligent and this
was a simple drink drive offence, with other
Charter
aspects perhaps,
and 16 months delay in and of itself should cause a stay under
section 24
of
the
Charter
in the discrete circumstances of this case.  And notably,
because the Orangeville Court is clearly under-resourced.
The Crown submits that on their characterization of each
appearance the delay may be as low as 14 months once delay attributable to the
defence, they argue, is removed.
On either submission, I am faced with a net delay after
admitted defence delay, below the
Jordan
guidelines for the Ontario
Court of Justice.
Case law on stays that are below the limit, set out in
Jordan
by the Supreme Court of Canada, are widely varied based on the facts of each
case.  From my perspective and experience, successful defence stay applications
have been rare and have been based on facts far different from those here.  In
the past, such cases have engaged extreme and continued diligence by the
defendant in pursuing an early trial date, complicated by delayed and sometimes
grossly delayed vital disclosure.
Further, it is increasingly unusual to describe a
two-day drink drive trial as one that is a simple case.  A simple Over 80 case,
in the early days of the
Charter
, would often take less than a day. 
Now, virtually all drink drive cases engage labyrinthine and esoteric
Charter
arguments as a matter of routine, and two-day trials have become normalized.
The original trial dates here, expressly given up by the
defendant, were just over 15 months from the date when the information is
laid.  A couple of weeks less than the 16 months I am now urged to find to be
Charter
non-compliant.
There was no suggestion in the context of that previous trial
scheduling journey, that 15.5 month delay, on these facts, represented a
section 11
(b) breach.  I recognize that different counsel may have different
views on what might lead to a sub-
Jordan
11(b) breach, but observe that
11(b) applications that are below the
Jordan
limit are very rare and
unusual.
In this case, on its face, 24 months is a long 11(b)
delay and warrants examination by this court.  At the time when today was set
aside to hear the 11(b) application, perhaps the full clarity of the defendant's
express waiver on November 14, 2024 was not known, at least until the
transcript was received.
In the face of that clear and informed waiver, the 24
month delay starts to come into focus.  Mr. Brar was about to have his trial
within the
Jordan
guidelines.  He and his lawyer parted ways and he
asked to adjourn the trial.  The price of doing so was a wide-based 11(b)
waiver.
I agree that an adjournment with such an 11(b) waiver is
not thereafter a licence to forget about 11(b) and
Jordan
thereafter. 
The difficulty, however, is that by seeking an adjournment on such terms, so
close to trial, the defendant essentially required the Crown, the police, the
witnesses, and the court to start from scratch.  Staff absences, Crown
absences, police leave dates, judicial holidays and the like, all reared their
heads again.  The pot of dates carefully explored when the first two trial
dates were set, was emptied and refilled numerous times in the interim.  All of
which were caused by the defendant's decision to give up his original trial
dates.  It ill behooves the defendant to now say, sure, I have created the
delay, but that very delay is so egregious that my trial should never take
place at all.
I have explored the historical path that 11(b)
litigation has travelled in the past, in other cases I have decided, and I will
not impose on counsel by doing so again today.  Suffice to say, that I
practiced during the
Askov
era, and argued as counsel, and applied as a
Judge, the pre-
Jordan
11(b) regime, where each individual appearance and
date, and every word was parsed by the Crown and Defence, to try and allocate
delay between the parties and the court.
Jordan
, in my view, was
designed to expressly end that often lengthy practice.  Eighteen months was set
as the limit.  And while the door was left open a crack, to consider cases that
fell under the 18 months limit, such cases were expected to be rare.
In effect, the court wanted to provide a bright line,
cut-off time, to stop the old
Morin
style assessment, which wasted so
much time in the courts.
This case is not a rare case where a stay should be
provided based on an admitted delay falling short of the
Jordan
18 month
deadline.
A defendant who expressly gave up his
Jordan
compliant trial dates can hardly be said to have acted diligently to push
forward his trial.  The right to a trial within a reasonable time is Mr. Brar's
right to stand by or to waive, as Mr. Brar indeed believes is best.
In this case, he unequivocally waived that right, and he
forced the system to revamp the trial date process to fit him back in with the
multitude of other deserving litigants as best the parties and the court
could.  This, I find, is the opposite of the sort of diligence that can cause
that rare circumstance where a stay below the
Jordan
bright line should
be granted.
In this case, the issue of good, adequate or poor
systemic resources in Orangeville is not really applicable.  The first trial
date was well within
Jordan,
and given the waiver, so was the second
trial date, given that the court had to reinsert Mr. Brar back into the trial
date stream.
I therefore find no section 11(b) breach here and in the
result, in spite of the able and focused submissions of counsel, this
application is dismissed.
Form 3
Electronic
Certificate of Transcript
(Subsection 5(2))
Evidence Act
I,
Barbara Thompson
, certify that this document
is a true and
accurate transcript of the recording of,
Rex v. Ravinder Brar
,
in the Ontario Court of Justice,
10 Louisa Street, Orangeville, Ontario
,
taken from Recording No:
0611 102 20250425 092921 6 PUGSLEB
, which has
been certified in Form 1.
­­
May 16, 2025
Barbara
Thompson, A.C.T.
(Date)
Electronic Signature of Authorized Person
A.C.T.
#6014683207, Ontario, Canada.