Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj288/2025oncj288.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1, 172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011,
279.02, 279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence
referred to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under
any of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Delisle
, 2025 ONCJ 288
DATE: 
2025 05 28
COURT
FILE No.:  Chatham-Kent 22-16100367
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
PATRICK DELISLE
Before
Justice R. B. Horton
Heard
on May 1, 2 and 5, 2025
Reasons
for Decision on Application of Offender released on May 28, 2025
J. Boonstra........................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
C. Rudnicki......................................................... counsel
for the Offender, Patrick Delisle
HORTON J.:
[
1
]
On September 28, 2023, I found Patrick Delisle
(“Delisle”) guilty of three counts of sexual assault and three counts of sexual
interference following a four-day trial.  The matter was then adjourned for
sentencing.
[
2
]
Prior to sentencing Delisle discharged his Trial
Counsel and retained new counsel.
[
3
]
New counsel investigated the verdict and advised
the court of the intention to bring forward a post verdict application to
reopen the trial or alternatively, to have a mistrial declared as a result of
the perception that Delisle had received ineffective assistance from Trial
Counsel.
[
4
]
Within the Application, as filed, Delisle
advances three grounds supporting the relief claimed,
(i)
Trial Counsel failed to advise Mr. Delisle of
his mode of election.  If Mr. Delisle had known that he had the choice to elect
to be tried in the Superior Court of Justice by a jury of his peers, with the
benefit of a preliminary hearing, to explore the Complainant’s evidence, that
is what he would have chosen;
(ii)
Trial Counsel failed to advise Mr. Delisle that
he had a choice about whether to testify.  Mr. Delisle believed that the choice
belongs to the Trial Counsel, not him.  Had Mr. Delisle understood that only he
could choose whether to testify, he would have elected to take the witness
stand in his defence; and
(iii)
Trial Counsel failed to competently investigate
the evidence of Skylynn Rivers, who would’ve testified that the Complainant
admitted to fabricating the allegations against Mr. Delisle.
[
5
]
Mr. Delisle seeks to have this Court set aside
his conviction and declare a mistrial.  He asked that the matter return to this
Court and to be permitted to elect to proceed to trial in the Superior Court of
Justice before a judge and jury, with the preliminary hearing.
[
6
]
The court received and reviewed the following in
advance of these proceedings:
(i)
Application Record of the Applicant, Delisle;
and
(ii)
Factum of the Applicant.
[
7
]
No materials were filed by the Crown in
response.
[
8
]
By way of background, this Application has taken
significant time to reach the stage of argument, it is noted that,
(i)
Mr. Delisle was charged, July 6, 2021, with two offences,
sexual assault and sexual interference, against the Complainant and several
months later with 5 significant additional charges;
(ii)
Mr. Delisle was found guilty following trial on
September 28, 2023 of three counts of sexual assault and three counts of sexual
interference;
(iii)
The Crown Pretrial in this matter was conducted
October 5, 2021;
(iv)
The Judicial Pretrial was conducted October 28,
2021;
(v)
The trial dates were initially fixed for April
21,2022 and May 17, 2022.  No accused election had yet been recorded and the
trial set form indicated that Mr. Delisle would make his election on the
following appearance date;
(vi)
Trial Counsel attended court absent the Accused
on November 24, 2021, and January 5, 2022.  No election was made and on the
latter date the matter was adjourned directly to the first date of trial;
(vii)
The initial trial dates were vacated as the
accused was charged with additional offences following a second statement
provided by the Complainant to the police;
(viii)
A further judicial pretrial was conducted June 7, 2022, and Trial
Counsel submitted a new trial scheduling form which erroneously indicated that
Mr. Delisle had entered an election to be tried by the Ontario Court of
Justice;
(ix)
New trial dates were set for January 20 and
February 17, 2023;
(x)
The confirmation hearing was conducted December
14, 2022.  Trial Counsel appeared on behalf of the Accused pursuant to a designation
filed.  On this date Trial Counsel elected the Ontario Court of Justice on
behalf of Mr. Delisle and in his absence;
(xi)
On the first day of trial, January 20, 2023, Mr.
Delisle was arraigned with no mention of the Accused’s election;
(xii)
The trial proceeded over four days, Mr. Delisle
was found guilty of three counts of sexual assault and three counts of sexual
interference.  The decision was rendered September 28, 2023.  Approximately 19
months have now passed;
(xiii)
Following the decision at trial proceedings were adjourned to August
8, 2023 for sentencing.  This date was then adjourned to September 28, 2022,
for sentencing;
(xiv)
On the return date of September 28, 2023, with Trial Counsel
attending, a presentence report was ordered.  The matter was adjourned to
October 12, 2023, for sentencing;
(xv)
On October 12, 2023.  Sentencing was again adjourned;
(xvi)
On January 2, 2024, and Trial Counsel was formally removed as
counsel of record at the request of Mr. Delisle ;
(xvii)
On January 5, 2024, new Defence Counsel, Mr. Rudnicki, contacted the
Assigned Crown to speak of issues of concern;
(xviii)
On January 18, 2024, Mr. Rudnicki confirmed with the Crown that he
was retained to bring a post-conviction application to reopen the case and
asked to speak to the Assigned Crown.  The Assigned Crown did not respond;
(xix)
On January 22, 2024, Mr. Rudnicki appeared on behalf of Mr. Delisle
and then followed up in writing with the Assigned Crown. Again, no reply was
received;
(xx)
On February 8, 2024, Counsel for Mr. Delisle wrote to Trial Counsel
requesting the trial file.  Trial Counsel responded the same date;
(xxi)
On February 9, 2024, Counsel wrote again to the Assigned Crown
regarding potential ineffective counsel claims.  The Assigned Crown and Defence
Counsel spoke February 13, 2024;
(xxii)
On February 15, 2024, this matter was again adjourned to allow Counsel
the opportunity to investigate the ineffective counsel issue.  The Crown agreed
to the adjournment with an 11(b) waiver being provided;
(xxiii)
Trial transcripts were received March 12, 2024;
(xxiv)
Defence Counsel wrote to the Assigned Crown March 13, 2024,
confirming that an ineffective counsel claim would be advanced.  No response
was received from the Assigned Crown;
(xxv)
On March 14, 2024, the parties attended Court and the matter was adjourned
to set a date for the pending application;
(xxvi)
On March 26, 2024, Defence Counsel wrote to the Assigned Crown. No
response was forthcoming;
(xxvii)
On
April 8, 2024, the Application Record was served on all parties and filed with
the Court;
(xxviii)
On April
18, 2024.  The Trial Coordinator at Chatham requested the estimated time from
the Crown Attorney’s office to allow dates to be set;
(xxix)
On May 1, 2024, the Assigned Crown responded to the trial
coordinator;
(xxx)
On May 13, 2024, dates were set for the hearing of the Application
of December 3, 4 and 5, 2024;
(xxxi)
On September 16, 2024, this matter again returned to Court and the
Crown advised that responding materials would be filed by mid October 2024;
(xxxii)
On
October 22, 2024, Defence Counsel inquired in writing as to the status of responding
material is these had not yet been served and filed.  No reply was received
from the Crown’s Office;
(xxxiii)
On
November 1, 2024, Defence Counsel wrote again, requesting responding material
be served.  No reply was received;
(xxxiv)
Again, on
November 11, 2024 and December 2, 2024, defence counsel wrote, requesting
responding materials be provided.  Again, no responses were received;
(xxxv)
On
December 2, 2024, the Crown’s Office telephoned the Court and Defence Counsel,
advising that the Assigned Crown was ill and unable to attend the scheduled
Application Hearing date of December 3, 2024;
(xxxvi)
The first
date of hearing, December 3, 2024, was adjourned, and counsel was referred to Trial
Coordination to obtain new dates.  The matter returned to court December 5, 2024,
for an update as to whether the application could commence.  The Application
was unable to proceed on that date and Defence Counsel advised of their
intention to bring an application for delay pursuant to section 11(b) of the
Charter
.
(xxxvii)
On December 11, 2024, Trial Coordination
attempted to follow up with the Assigned Crown as to new date setting;
(xxxviii)
On December 20, 2024, the Assigned Crown
responded that any proposed dates would be acceptable to the Crown;
(xxxix)
On
January 13, 2025, dates were set for the 11(b) Application;
(xl)
On January 15, 2025, dates of May 1, 2 and 5,
2025, were set for the reopening\mistrial application.  These being the
earliest dates available to all parties and the court;
(xli)
In March 2025 the Application for Delay was
scheduled for argument.  On this date the Application was adjourned as the
presiding Judge deemed it appropriate to be heard by myself, as the Trial
Judge.
(xlii)
Defence Counsel then confirmed in writing to the Crown Attorney’s
office, that they would require the Crown’s response material on or before
April 11, 2025, or would require a further adjournment;
(xliii)
On April 28, 2025, Defence Counsel confirmed with the court having
not received responding materials from the Crown’s Office and, in accordance
with earlier correspondence, would be seeking an adjournment, though were
prepared to proceed with the 11(b) argument.  This court confirmed that the
request for adjournment would be heard on the first date of the scheduled
hearing, May 1, 2025;
(xliv)
No response was provided from the Crown in regard to the failure to
serve and file responding materials, most notably the required Form 2 Reply.
[
9
]
The above recitation, of the somewhat tortured
timeline, is necessary for appreciation of the manner this matter proceeded .
[
10
]
On May 1, 2025, the Assigned Crown confirmed their
responding material had not been filed and that the Crown never intended to
file materials, a fact not voiced to Defence Counsel or this court previously,
and in fact at odds with the Crown’s previously noted intention to file their
Response.  In the seemingly new view of the Crown, their position had been made
clear in past communications.  The Court rejected this, noting that the court
had no means of appreciating the Crown’s position on the issues at hand. 
Defence Counsel also raised this lack of appreciation and a corresponding
inability to properly prepare for the application, including required review
with his client.
[
11
]
At the request of the Court, the Assigned Crown
undertook to file a Form 2 Reply later that day and proceedings were adjourned
to May 2, 2025, for argument.
[
12
]
Further, the Court, following submissions,
determined that the 11(b) Application would not proceed until the completion of
the substantive Application.  The Court noted that this Application was an
integral consideration of any delay issues and voiced concern that the relief
claimed if unreasonable delay was found in a post verdict would not lend itself
to a stay of proceedings but rather to the sentence to be imposed.
[
13
]
The Assigned Crown served the necessary Form 2
and Defence Counsel immediately reviewed same and communicated to the Court and
the Crown that Mr. Delisle would only be proceeding with the ineffective
counsel argument regarding his election of mode of trial.
[
14
]
I reflect, as a case management function, the
significant reduction in time required for the Application resulting from this
decision; a decision made possible only because of the Crown, providing their
position in writing.  Clearly, this benefit could have been known and acted
upon much earlier with the Crown, having produced its formal position earlier
and without court intervention.
[
15
]
I note further, the Crown’s much earlier
position taken with Defence Counsel of their unwillingness to discuss the
Application in advance of requiring the Defence to perfect its Application.
[
16
]
On May 2, 2025, the Application proceeded. 
Counsel for Mr. Delisle confirmed the withdrawal of the two grounds and that
they would be proceeding only in regard to the mode of trial.
[
17
]
The Court confirmed that on this basis.  The
ineffective counsel argument would be determined solely on the issue of whether
Trial Counsel had failed to allow Mr. Delisle to elect his mode of trial.  This
integral election is a specific right of an accused person and one which cannot
be overridden by any other person, including an accused’s own counsel. 
Counsel’s role being to inform and advise the accused person of the
ramifications of such an election.  If, a finding is made of the Accused’s
right to elect his or her mode of trial being denied, this is a significant
procedural error, and the issue then would shift to what remedy exists to
resolve this failure.  Counsel were in agreement that reopening of the trial
would not be an available option, and that the only viable remedy would be one
of a mistrial being declared.
[
18
]
The Court also noted at this early stage, having
heard no submissions, that whether the offender would or would not have elected
differently is of no consequence to the determination to be made by the Court.
It is solely a determination of whether the accused was denied his right to
enter an informed election of his choice.
ISSUE
[
19
]
The issue to be determined is:
(i)
Has the Applicant met the legal test of
procedural unfairness flowing from the ineffective assistance of Trial Counsel?
POSITION OF PARTIES
[
20
]
The Applicant submits he has met the required
test and that this court should grant a mistrial.
[
21
]
The Crown submits that the legal test in
relation to ineffective counsel has not been satisfied by the Applicant and
that this Court should dismiss the Application, maintain the finding of guilt
and the Offender should proceed to sentencing.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
[
22
]
In a trial by judge alone, the trial judge has
discretion to re-open the case after conviction of the accused.  In
R. v.
Kippax
[2011] O.J. No. 5494,
2011 ONCA 766
at para.
62
,
“a trial judge
is not
functus officio
until he or she has imposed sentence or otherwise
disposed of the case.  It follows that of trial judge who has made a finding of
guilt on disputed facts has the authority to vacate this adjudication of guilt
at any time before the imposition of sentence or other final disposition.  This
authority to vacate an adjudication of guilt, should be exercised only in exceptional
circumstances, and in the clearest of cases.”
[
23
]
In a re-opening application which alleges
procedural unfairness, as in this case flowing from the ineffective assistance
of Trial Counsel, the Applicant bears the burden of establishing,
(i)
that counsel’s acts or omissions constituted
incompetence (commonly referred to as the “performance component”) and,
(ii)
that a miscarriage of justice resulted (the
“prejudice component”).
[See
R. v. White
[2022] SCC 7 at para.
7.]
[
24
]
While prejudice from ineffective counsel can
amount to a miscarriage of justice by either undermining the appearance of a
fair trial (trial fairness branch), such as is alleged here, the failure of Trial
Counsel to provide effective advice on a fundamental decision of a trial, the
decision of the accused to elect his mode of trial, or by undermining the
reliability of the verdict, such as failing to address relevant defence
evidence.  This application is restricted to the former.
[
25
]
In the case before this court, the Applicant
alleges that Trial Counsel’s failure to provide proper advice about his right
to elect the mode of his trial deprived him of his right to fundamentally
control his defence.  Mr. Delisle submits that, had he been advised, or in fact
told at all, of his right, he would have proceeded by judge and jury with the
preliminary hearing.
[
26
]
If the Application succeeds on the grounds
noted, the only appropriate remedy is a mistrial.  A mistrial is to be
declared, generally, where there has been “some kind of related event that puts
trial fairness at risk”. See
R. v. Arabia
,
2008 ONCA 565
.
[
27
]
It is well established that legal counsel has
broad discretion in the strategies incorporated in defending their client. 
However, some decisions are so fundamental to the right to control one’s own defence,
that only the accused themselves can make them.  These fundamental decisions
include, but are not to be limited to,
(i)
how to plead;
(ii)
whether to waive a trial by jury, the mode; and
(iii)
whether to testify.
[
28
]
These fundamental rights cannot be waived, or
the accused deprived of his specific rights, by Trial Counsel or anyone else. 
See
R. v. Stark
[2017] ONCA 148, paras. 16, 17].
[
29
]
In
Stark
, the Court of Appeal concluded
that,
“the exercise
of the right to choose the mode of trial is integral to the court’s jurisdiction
over an accused and is essential to the fairness of the proceedings.”
[
30
]
The applicable test in this case, on a balance
of probabilities, is whether, firstly, did Trial Counsel fail to give competent
advice about the right of Mr. Delisle to elect the mode of trial, and secondly,
had Mr. Delisle had this benefit of such advice would he have chosen
differently?
[
31
]
The waiver of an accused’s rights, such as that
here, must be clear, unequivocal, and made with his full knowledge of the right,
and the effect that waiver will have on those rights.  The issue then becomes,
did Trial Counsel’s waiver of Mr. Delisle’s right to elect his mode of trial
meet this standard.
EVIDENCE
Testimony of Patrick Delisle
[
32
]
Defence counsel called as their sole witness Mr.
Delisle.
[
33
]
Mr. Delisle testified to the following relevant
details:
(i)
In regard to the election as to mode of trial,
Mr. Delisle denies that Trial Counsel advised him of this right whatsoever;
(ii)
This was Mr. Delisle’s first involvement in the
criminal justice system;
(iii)
Mr. Delisle only learned of this right to elect
to proceed either in the Ontario Court of Justice by judge alone, the Superior
Court of Justice with judge alone, or with judge and jury, and to have a right
to a preliminary hearing, through his current counsel in December 2023;
(iv)
Mr. Delisle denies the statement of his Trial
Counsel contained within his sworn affidavit that he reviewed the decision of
mode of trial with Mr. Delisle at their initial consultation, August 30, 2021. 
Mr. Delisle recalled the meeting in London, Ontario, and stated that this
meeting lasted approximately 25 minutes and that this consultation involved a
discussion of disclosure, a review of various statement provided to police, and
that he advised he was innocent and would not negotiate, requiring a trial;
(v)
Mr. Delisle denied that Trial Counsel ever
advised him of his right to choose either this court or the Superior Court of
Justice, and that Trial Counsel did not provide any opinions or recommendations
in this regard;
(vi)
Mr. Delisle denied that he demanded the earliest
trial date due to his living in a trailer and his concern of the coming winter
months. He acknowledged he wished to see the matter resolved as quickly as
possible;
(vii)
Mr. Delisle confirmed he had two further consultations
with his Trial Counsel, December 2021, and March 2024. He testified that the
choice of mode of trial was never raised at either of these meetings;
(viii)
Between March 2022, and January 2024, he denied any further
consultations with Trial Counsel;
(ix)
In April 2022 additional charges were laid,
requiring the initial trial dates to be vacated, Trial Counsel did not discuss
the mode of election following these new charges;
(x)
The transcript of the court appearance December
14, 2022, was filed.  Within this, it is noted that Trial Counsel is appearing
in the absence of Mr. Delisle.  The court notes no election having been entered
to which Trial Counsel states,
“the
election is the Ontario Court of Justice.  Please, your honour.  We are waving
reading.”
(xi)
Mr. Delisle confirms he was neither present,
consulted by Trial Counsel in advance, or advised after this court appearance
of what had occurred.
(xii)
Email communications between Mr. Delisle and Trial
Counsel’s office was produced, dated December 5, 2022, in which it is noted,
Mr. Delisle: good
afternoon Cassandra, just wondering if there is any news.  I’m aware of a court
appearance.  A couple weeks ago and I haven’t heard anything.
Cassandra Friesen,
legal Assistant to Trial Counsel: hi Pat.  The last appearance was a
confirmation hearing.  The trial was confirmed for January 20 and February 17
.
(xiii)
Mr. Delisle confirmed he communicated in this manner at least once
per month to get updates from Trial Counsel.
(xiv)
A further email communication was filed, reflecting again Mr. Delisle
checking for updates with counsel, and the only response, again being from Ms.
Friesen, that the confirmation hearing was conducted and nothing further had
occurred.
[
34
]
Mr. Delisle was cross examined in detail.  He
was challenged on his evidence that he did not recall everything discussed with
his Trial Counsel, and that failing to recall something was not the same as it
having not occurred.  He agreed to this notion in general.
[
35
]
Mr. Delisle acknowledged that he took no notes
in his meetings with counsel and did not prepare notes following such meetings.
[
36
]
When questioned as to his position that his
counsel did not tell him or discuss a specific issue with him, Crown counsel
suggested that it could be that he simply does not recall and that does that
this does not equate to it not having been discussed, Mr. Delisle disagreed
fully.
[
37
]
While Mr. Delisle agreed that navigating the
criminal justice system for the first time involved a great deal of new
information which he was unfamiliar with, he strongly disagreed that this could
result in his not remembering some of the details.
[
38
]
The Crown’s questioning as noted, largely
surrounded Mr. Delisle’s ability to recall all details from the past.  Mr. Delisle
testified that when it comes to such extreme circumstances, being in this case very
serious criminal charges, he remembers the communications he had with his counsel.
[
39
]
Mr. Delisle confirmed in cross-examination that
he was aware of jury trials in criminal matters but had no knowledge of the
different levels of court.  Crown counsel suggested that Mr. Delisle, was aware
of jury trials and noted within Mr. Delisle’s own statement within his
affidavit, affirmed April 4, 2024, at paragraph 9, stated that he would have
wanted a jury trial believing “that 12 ordinary people would not convict me on
L.D.’s evidence”.
[
40
]
The Crown suggested that Mr. Delisle himself could
have raise the issue of jury trials with his Trial Counsel.  I must state here
that it is difficult to support this suggestion as it certainly overlooks the
obligation of legal counsel to review and provide advice and opinion on such an
intricate and vital step within the criminal process.  While I accept the
notion that perhaps an accused would make such an inquiry, I am unable to
accept that any shift in responsibility to the accused to having initially
introduced this topic is appropriate or in some manner deflects from Trial
Counsels obligation.
[
41
]
Following the additional charges being laid, and
the initial trial dates being vacated Mr. Delisle testified he had a “very
short” call with his Trial Counsel.  He testified that no discussions occurred
regarding the steps to be taken, or whether any changes in strategy were necessary.
[
42
]
Mr. Delisle was cross-examined as to the topics
of discussion with his Trial Counsel.  He confirmed those consultations
involved reviewing disclosure, the statements of various family members and his
innocence.  When questioned further, some minor points were challenged, such as
his having discussed the allegations in detail, to which Mr. Delisle agreed,
though, making it apparent he viewed that as part of the review of disclosure.
[
43
]
The Crown placed significant emphasis on the issue
of Mr. Delisle’s memory and throughout cross-examination sought to impeach Mr. Delisle
as to specific details he was unable to recall.  Mr. Delisle was unshaken and
while some suggested topics were discussed with counsel, which were not
included in the items discussed at the first consultation Mr. Delisle addressed
these discrepancies, testifying that they were discussed at later meetings.
[
44
]
While Mr. Delisle acknowledged he wanted the
criminal charges to be dealt with as early as possible, he denied the
suggestion that he stated he wanted the trial as quick as possible.
Testimony of Mr. Nick Cake, Trial
Counsel for P. Delisle
[
45
]
The Crown called as their sole witness, Trial Counsel,
Mr. Nick Cake.
[
46
]
Mr. Cake swore to an affidavit dated September
13, 2024, as prepared with his legal counsel through the Lawyer’s Professional
Indemnity Corporation.
[
47
]
Mr. Cake’s evidence was as follows:
(i)
Mr. Cake was called to the Bar of Ontario in
2011 and has practiced only criminal law since this time, initially with the
Crown’s Office and then as a sole practitioner from 2020 forward;
(ii)
In 2021 he was contacted by Mr. Delisle due to significant
allegations and charges against him relating to his son.  Initially this
contact occurred by telephone, retainer arrangements were established, and an
initial consultation was scheduled August 30, 2021;
(iii)
On August 30, 2021, the initial consultation
between Mr. Cake and Mr. Delisle occurred.  Mr. Cake described this meeting as
a substantial meeting of one hour in duration between 4 PM and 5 PM.  He
confirmed that they discussed the current disclosure received, reviewed the
allegations and that he would have inquired as to his client’s position.  Mr. Cake
noted that he would have discussed issues regarding the Complainant’s mental
health, family living situation and gender issues.  He described that it was at
this meeting that he and his client developed a “plan of attack”;
(iv)
Mr. Cake testified that at this initial meeting he
canvassed Mr. Delisle’s options including how he wished the matter to proceed;
(v)
Mr. Cake advised that it is his common practice
to send out disclosure in advance of the consultation to allow his client to
review and prepare for their meeting. He could not confirm whether this had
actually occurred as it was his office manager that was responsible for that
process;
(vi)
Mr. Cake testified that, at this first meeting,
a great deal of information was gathered regarding the Complainant’s
background, Mr. Delisle’s living arrange­ments, any animus the Complainant may
have held towards the Accused, mental health concerns and whether there were
any possible interactions between the Accused and Complainant that could have
resulted in a misunderstanding and so forth;
(vii)
Mr. Cake testified as to the importance placed by
Mr. Delisle on proceeding as quickly as possible due to his living in a trailer
and concerns over heat in the winter months. It is this which led to his opinion
being expressed to Mr. Delisle that a trial in the Ontario Court of Justice
being the most expeditious;
(viii)
Mr. Cake stated that it was at this time that Mr. Delisle made his decision
and provided his instructions to proceed in the Ontario Court of Justice;
(ix)
During examination, the Crown inquired as to
whether more discussions regarding how to proceed followed between Trial
Counsel and Mr. Delisle.  Mr. Cake confirmed no further discussion occurred as,
“we were still on path and wanted to get things done quickly.”  Mr. Cake
expanded on this by testifying that with the additional allegations it only
meant that there “would be more questions asked” and that the new charges “did
not change my opinion of where things should be (OCJ).”;
(x)
Mr. Cake confirmed the statement of Brice Rivers
was not reviewed with his client until after the first meeting as it was not
received until much later, the statement having been dated January 5, 2022. 
Mr. Delisle having testified that he believed he had reviewed this statement at
his initial meeting August 30, 2021;
(xi)
Mr. Cake confirmed that he had filed a Designation
of Counsel allowing him to proceed in Court in the absence of his client upon
having received his client’s instructions;
(xii)
Mr. Cake testified he acted upon his client’s
instruction when attending on his behalf;
(xiii)
Mr. Cake confirmed ultimately attending in the absence of his client
on December 14, 2022, and placing the election as to mode of trial on the
record. This being 16 months after the initial client consultation, and several
months after the second series of charges were laid. Further, it was confirmed
by Mr. Cake that the trial dates had already been set through the trial setting
process in advance of his placing the election on the Court Record;
(xiv)
Mr. Cake was adamant that he took this step as a result of his
client’s specific instructions received on August 30, 2021, and that those
instructions had not changed in the months that followed;
(xv)
Mr. Cake testified that at no point had the mode of trial been
revisited, including following the significant additional charges being laid;
(xvi)
In cross-examination Mr. Cake confirmed that between August 30, 2021
and December 14, 2022, the issue of mode of trial was never reviewed;
(xvii)
Mr. Cake confirmed he never sought or received written instructions
from Mr. Delisle;
(xviii)
In cross-examination, Mr. Cake confirmed he prepared three separate
memorandums. Each prepared following having met with Mr. Delisle, August 30,
2021, December 3, 2021, and March 22, 2022.  He outlined that these memorandums
are prepared in e-mail form and forwarded to his office manager.  Typically,
they are prepared after the meeting. The purpose he agreed was to record advise
and opinions given;
(xix)
Mr. Cake acknowledged in cross-examination that these memorandums
did not include the conversations he previously indicated in his examination in
chief had occurred, most notably surrounding the election, as to mode of trial;
(xx)
Mr. Cake confirmed that the only area not covered by the memorandum
was in fact the election issue;
(xxi)
Mr. Cake was challenged as to the actual elapsed time of the initial
consultation of August 30, 2021, given the significant areas of discussion he
testified occurred.  Though he previously indicated that this meeting was one
hour in duration, from 4 PM to 5 PM, the memo prepared, post meeting, was
forwarded to his office manager at 4:29 PM. Mr. Cake could not explain this
discrepancy other than to proffer that the meeting had commenced earlier;
(xxii)
Mr. Cake disagreed with the suggestion by counsel that with such a
brief meeting all of the issues allegedly canvassed in the first meeting could
not have been covered let alone in any detail;
(xxiii)
Mr. Cake confirmed in cross-examination that he,
(i)
Did not review the issue of mode of election
again with Mr. Delisle following their initial consultation on August 30, 2021;
(ii)
Did not revisit this issue following the second
set of charges being laid April 2022, which significantly expanded the
allegations adding child luring, digital and anal penetration;
(iii)
That Mr. Delisle’s jeopardy increased
significantly as a result of these additional charges;
(iv)
That he attended and entered the election of Mr.
Delisle, in his absence, and pursuant to the Designation of Counsel filed with
the court;
(v)
That he did so on the basis of instructions
received August 30, 2021;
ANALYSIS
[
48
]
Defence counsel submits, on behalf of the Applicant,
correctly, that the issue for determination is whether Trial Counsel’s election
on behalf of Mr. Delisle reflected Mr. Delisle’s informed choice.  If this
issue is addressed in the affirmative, these proceedings will move forward to
sentencing.  If this is not the case, Counsel submits that a mistrial due to
Mr. Delisle’s s. 536
CCC
rights not being met.
[
49
]
Defence, at the commencement of submissions
argued that a determination of the initial steps taken by Trial Counsel, or
whether he provided Mr. Delisle with the ability to make any informed election,
is unnecessary as Trial Counsel acknowledged during his testimony that he did
not revisit the mode of trial issue with Mr. Delisle following the second set
of charges being laid, April 21, 2022, approximately eight months following the
initial consultation between Trial Counsel and Mr. Delisle of August 30, 2021. 
They further submit that it is simply incorrect that these steps were not
necessary as noted by Trial Counsel as his previous instructions had not
changed.  I agree with this fully, particularly with the significant change in
jeopardy for Mr. Delisle.
[
50
]
Counsel for Mr. Delisle submits, in light of
this failure, Mr. Delisle was denied his right to make an informed election and
as a result the Application before this court should succeed.
[
51
]
The Crown does not concede this, notwithstanding
Trial Counsel acknowledging Mr. Delisle’s jeopardy changed with the addition of
these additional charges.  The Crown argues that the instructions of Mr. Delisle
did not change, and that Mr. Delisle had received the requisite advice at the
August 30, 2021, consultation.  They submit that this turns on the credibility
and reliability of the two witnesses.
[
52
]
The onus rests with Mr. Delisle to establish, on
a balance of probabilities, that he received ineffective assistance from Trial
Counsel, which justifies the relief sought of a mistrial.  To do so, he must
satisfy the test set out in R. v. G.C. [2018] ONCA 392 in which the Court of
Appeal at paragraph three states,
“the decision
whether to grant a mistrial is a matter that lies within the discretion of the
trial judge, who must assess whether there is a real danger that trial fairness
has been compromised.” [
R. v. Khan
,
2001 SCC 86
, [2001] 3 SCR 823 at
para.
79]
.
[
53
]
I am conscious that the remedy of a mistrial is
a remedy of last resort, to be assessed based on whether such is necessary to
avoid miscarriages of justice.
[
54
]
The assessment of a claim for ineffective
counsel at trial must be undertaken with a starting presumption of competence
of counsel, and not by utilizing the benefits of hindsight.
[
55
]
There can be no question that an accused’s right
to elect mode of trial is enumerated within s. 536
C.C.C. and
is a
fundamental right that neither counsel nor others may take away from an
accused.  When counsel is representing an accused at trial the accused is
entitled to be adequately advised by his or her counsel.
[
56
]
Parliament enshrined the right of an accused
charged with specified serious crimes, the right to choose the mode of trial. 
Section 11 (f) of the
Charter Of Rights And Freedoms
guarantees a right
to be tried by jury for such offences.  Such an election is the right of an
accused and is essential to the fairness of the proceeding. [
R. v. Stark
2017 ONCA 148 (CanLII)
, [2017] ONCA 148, 35 C.R. (7
th
) 455.]
[
57
]
Lauwers, J.A, in
R. v. Stark
at paragraph
20
states,
“if an accused
receives no advice from counsel as to his options, or the advantages and
disadvantages of the respective options, then the accused has effectively been
denied his right to choose his mode of trial under s. 536 CCC.  The miscarriage
of justice lies in proceeding against the accused without allowing him to make
an informed election, and the accused need not establish further prejudice. 
What the accused might or might not have done had he been aware of his options
is not relevant.”
[
58
]
Counsel, and Mr. Delisle had their first of
three consultations August 30, 2021.  There are competing accounts of this
meeting.  Mr. Delisle testified that during this 25-minute meeting disclosure
was reviewed, as were all statements, including all of his children, and his
former partners that his position of proceeding to trial was indicated Trial
Counsel acknowledges these and notes further family history and details
regarding the Complainant were also discussed the noted this to be a one-hour
consultation.  Trial Counsel testified that he would have reviewed with Mr. Delisle
his options and how he wished to proceed.
[
59
]
In relation to this latter issue of Mr. Delisle’s
options, Trial Counsel testified that he had explained that a trial could occur
in the Ontario Court of Justice, by judge alone, the Superior Court of Justice
by judge alone or by judge and jury and with the possibility of a preliminary
hearing.  Counsel indicated that they discussed timelines, the desire of Mr. Delisle
to have the trial as quickly as possible due to housing issues and that he
provided his opinion to Mr. Delisle that a trial in the Ontario Court of
Justice was the manner in which to proceed.  Trial Counsel testified on this
basis, and understanding is Mr. Delisle who made the decision to have the trial
this Court.
[
60
]
Mr. Delisle’s testimony is in opposition.  He
stated he not only did not decide this issue but was not informed of this right
at all.
[
61
]
Trial Counsel prepared a memorandum following
the August 30, 2021, consultation.  It is noteworthy, this memorandum was
prepared at 4:29 PM, August 30, 2021.  The evidence establishes that the
meeting therefore was, at its greatest, 29 minutes in duration.
[
62
]
The memorandum confirms much of the noted
content of the meeting, including the denials of Mr. Delisle to all
allegations, the review of a number of statements provided to police, though it
was later established in the evidence that a statement of Mr. Delisle’s son,
Brice, was not included in this, differing from the recollection of Mr. Delisle. 
The allegations were reviewed, the family dynamics, and Mr. Delisle’s living
arrangements were also discussed.
[
63
]
Within this detailed memorandum there is no
indication of the right of Mr. Delisle to elect his mode of trial on the
opinions of Counsel on this issue.
[
64
]
Both Trial Counsel, and Mr. Delisle confirmed
that, apart from the three consultations in person, there was little contact or
communication directly between counsel and client.  Rather, Mr. Delisle
indicated counsel’s office manager.  Additionally, Trial Counsel confirmed that
it was also this employee who would arrange all disclosure requests with the
Crown and as a result Trial Counsel could only state that he “believed” this
disclosure was received and forwarded to his client.
[
65
]
In reviewing specific email inquiries made by
Mr. Delisle to his counsel.  It was the employee who corresponded with Mr. Delisle. 
On December 5, 2022.  Mr. Delisle wrote to Ms. Friesen (also known as Ms.
Brumuell),
“Good afternoon,
Cassandra, just wondering if there’s anything new.  I’m aware there was a court
appearance.  A couple weeks ago and haven’t heard anything.”
In response, Ms. Friesen
responded,
“Hi Pat, the last
appearance was a confirmation hearing.  The trial was confirmed for January 20
and February 17.”
[
66
]
Mr. Delisle was not advised of the pending return
date of December 14, 2022, the following week.  It was on this date that Trial
Counsel, in the absence of his client, made the election on his behalf of the
Ontario Court of Justice. At no time did any communication reference the need
for an election to be made or seek confirmation of such.  Likewise, there was
no reporting of this significant step having occurred.
[
67
]
Corroborating Mr. Delisle’s testimony that he
was never advised of his right to elect mode of trial, are the later
memorandums prepared by Trial Counsel, December 3, 2021, and March 22, 2022. 
Again, these documents purport to document the content of Trial Counsel’s
meeting with client.  While including much detail surrounding discussions
relating to whether the Crown application to utilize CCTV, issues of hearsay
and why the children’s aid Society records were not being sought.  There is no
mention of discussions as to the mode of trial or opinions or advice provided
on this issue by Trial Counsel.
[
68
]
In short, it is the case that the only area of
discussion not captured within the memorandums is the sole issue before this
Court, the election of mode of trial.  It is not incumbent on counsel to keep
detailed records of all that is discussed between client and counsel, but it is
to be emphasized that this issue is a significant obligation for counsel. 
Therefore, the lack of this notation, given the other areas recorded certainly
must be considered in this case, though not determinative on its own.
[
69
]
As stated previously, this court starts with the
presumption that Trial Counsel was competent in the manner in which he advised
his client, and the opinions expressed, I find on the evidence taken in
totality, I am not convinced on a balance of probabilities that the issue was
canvassed in a meaningful manner so as to be assured Mr. Delisle’s informed
election was made by Mr. Delisle.  While I appreciate that Trial Counsel’s
“usual practice” may include such an important step in the trial process, I
cannot find any support of this having occurred in this particular circumstance.
[
70
]
Turning to the period following the second set
of charges being laid on April 21, 2022, it is these new charges that required
the initial trial dates of April 21 and May 17, 2022, to be vacated.
[
71
]
These new charges, in total five significant
counts, greatly changed the prejudice and jeopardy of Mr. Delisle.
[
72
]
Trial Counsel, in his testimony was asked whether,
as a result of these new charges, anything changed, and he responded simply
noting that “more charges existed.”.  In cross-examination when questioned of
whether this resulted in more discussions how to proceed.  He responded,
“No.  We
were still on the path and wanted to get things done quickly
.”
Further testimony continued,
Q; With the
additional allegations, how did they, or further statements, factor into your
assessment?
A: (they)
meant would be more questions asked (but) did not change my opinion of where
things should be, the O.C.J
.
[
73
]
Trial Counsel confirmed in his testimony that he
attended Court on December 14
th
, 2022, on the strength of his
designation as counsel, and placed Mr. Delisle’s election on the record.
[
74
]
He further confirmed no election had been
entered in advance of this date, Crown counsel continued the examination as
follows,
Q: Why did
you make that election?
A: Because
that was my instructions that is what I received from Mr. Delisle.
Q: Did that
instruction ever waiver or change?
A: No.
Q: At any
point was that decision ever revisited?
A: No.
[
75
]
During cross-examination, Trial Counsel confirmed
that his instructions as to the mode of trial were received during the initial
client consultation of August 30, 2021, and that no other discussion regarding
mode of trial occurred prior to his placing his client election on the record
many months later.
[
76
]
On this issue Cross-examination continued as
follows,
Q: The new
information was laid on the eve of trial?
A: Yes.
Q: Agree
that was a significant increase in Mr. Delisle’s jeopardy?
A: Yes.
Q: After
these new charges you did not revisit the motive trial?
A:Correct.
Q: You made
the election on December 14, 2022, on instructions from the first consultation?
A:Correct
.
[
77
]
The election as to the mode of trial rests with
the accused person alone.  Counsel has the obligation to advise on this issue. 
It must follow that, where there is a significant change, such as in the
circumstances with multiple new and significant charges being laid, and the
accused person’s jeopardy increased, that a review of such a fundamental right
must occur, regardless of prior decisions or understandings.
[
78
]
Trial Counsel was forthright in stating this did
not occur.  He did not seek to revisit the issue of mode of trial despite the
significance of the new charges.  He continued to act on instructions provided
August 30, 2021, some 16 months earlier, in the absence of his client.
[
79
]
The Crown submits that whether the advice
regarding the mode of trial was provided on August 30, 2021, must be determined
on the credibility and reliability of the witnesses.  I do not accept that this
ends the issue of the manner in which Trial Counsel made the election many
months later.  The acknowledgement by Trial Counsel that this issue was neither
revisited nor reviewed following such a change in Mr. Delisle’s jeopardy is
significantly troubling.  The submission that instructions did not change finds
little merit as Trial Counsel had an obligation to his client to review these
fundamental rights after such a change in his client’s jeopardy.  These were
not simply changes in the number of counts that would result in “more
questions” as characterized by Trial Counsel.
[
80
]
I find that Mr. Delisle did not receive proper
advice or that he was properly informed of his right, and his right alone, to
determine his mode trial either on August 30, 2021.  I further find that,
notwithstanding this, Trial Counsel did not remedy this, following the second
set of charges being laid.  The existence of either of these situations, or
both, as I have determined prejudiced the rights of Mr. Delisle to make his
decision regarding the mode of his trial, a fundamental right in the conduct of
his trial.
[
81
]
I further find that, as a result of Mr.
Delisle’s testimony which was not challenged, that with proper advice he would
have elected trial by judge and jury.  I accept his evidence as set forth
within his affidavit sworn April 4, 2024, at paragraph 9,
“I would want
a jury trial because I do not believe that 12 ordinary people would convict me
on L.D.’s evidence.  I would want a preliminary inquiry because I understand
that that is an opportunity to test the Crown’s evidence in a safe environment,
where guilt or innocence is not an issue.”
[
82
]
I find that as a result fairness of the trial
process has been undermined.  The only available remedy to address this, and
avoid a possible miscarriage of justice, is that the requested relief of a
mistrial be granted and as a result the previous finding of guilt is vacated. 
I make this order and direct that the matter be returned to the Trial Coordinator
for a new trial to be scheduled.
[
83
]
Matter adjourned to June 30, 2025, Courtroom 301
at 10:00 a.m. to be spoken to.
Released:  May
28, 2025
Signed: Justice R. B. Horton