Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj278/2025oncj278.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Ravichandran
, 2025 ONCJ 278
DATE:  2025 05 20
COURT FILE No.:  Toronto
23-48113613
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
THARSIGAN
RAVICHANDRAN
Before Justice Patrice F. Band
Reasons released: May 20, 2025
Ms. S.
Park ................................................................................................ counsel
for the Crown
Mr. S.
Sutharsan............................................ .…. counsel for the
Accused, Mr. Ravichandran
BAND
J.:
I.
Background and
Issues
[
1
]
On the evening
of June 9, 2023, Srikanth Sriskantharasa was stabbed during a dispute between
two groups of men in a park in Scarborough. At the hospital, Mr. Sriskantharasa
gave a very vague description of the male who stabbed him. About a month later,
a photo line-up was presented to him. It was based on a description given by
another witness.
[1]
Mr. Sriskantharasa identified Tharsigan Ravichandran, a stranger to him, as the
stabber. As a result, Mr. Ravichandran was charged with assault with a weapon
and assault causing bodily harm. Another male, Prasoth Poologarasa, was charged
with assault causing bodily harm. On behalf of the Crown, Ms. Park proceeded
summarily. At the outset of the trial, she decided to stay the prosecution
against Mr. Poologarasa.
[
2
]
The issue at Mr.
Ravichandran’s trial was whether the Crown had proved beyond a reasonable doubt
that he was the person who stabbed Mr. Sriskantharasa. That question depended
entirely on the credibility and reliability of the Crown and defence’s civilian
witnesses. Mr. Ravichandran chose not to testify.
[
3
]
For reasons
that I will explain, after a thorough review of the testimony of the evidence,
I have found that none of the civilian witnesses (with the exception of Jackson
Ravichandran
[2]
)
were credible. Most if not all of them gave testimony that was internally
inconsistent and that conflicted with other evidence. This was about core
issues in the trial: the description and identity of the stabber, and the role
others might have played in the altercation. Several displayed disinterest in the
prosecution and a seemingly feigned forgetfulness.
[
4
]
Most of them were
also unreliable either because of their consumption of alcohol or the (real or
claimed) effects of the passage of time. What is more, most of them had a
motive to lie to protect themselves, another, or both. Also, the way in which
the photo line-up was conducted with Mr. Sriskantharasa affected the
reliability of his identification of Mr. Ravichandran. Oddly, although of less
importance, the Crown’s case does not disclose a motive for the stabbing; Mr.
Sriskantharasa was unable (or unwilling) to point to any. If anything, Mr.
Sriskantharasa and his friend Thilaxsan Rasanayakam had a motive to confront or
harm Mr. Poologarasa who, according to some, had made unwelcome advances toward
Mr. Rasanayakam’s girlfriend Thebini Thavakumar days before the incident.
[
5
]
This record
cannot possibly support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
II. A Brief Summary of the
Event
[
6
]
There were a
significant number of involved parties in this case or what led to it, not all
of whom testified. While it is not completely clear from the evidence of those
who did, as some (incredibly) denied knowing each other at all, it is apparent
that they were broken up into two camps, roughly speaking. On one side, there were
Mr. Sriskantharasa, Mr. Rasanayakam, Ms. Thavakumar and Rebecca and Jackson
Ravichandran. On the other, Mr. Poologarasa,
Sathayaseelan
Rajadurai
and Mr. Ravichandran. All of them were at the park at the time of
the incident except for Jackson Ravichandran, who arrived after Mr.
Sriskantharasa was stabbed.
[
7
]
It is useful to
identify them and describe their connections to each other.
Mr. Sriskantharasa’s camp
[
8
]
Mr.
Sriskantharasa is the victim of the stabbing. Based on the totality of the
evidence, he was friends with Mr. Rasanayakam, Ms. Thavakumar and Ms.
Ravichandran. He was also friends Jackson Ravichandran.
[
9
]
Ms. Thavakumar
was Mr. Rasanayakam’s girlfriend. She was also friends with Ms. Ravichandran.
[
10
]
Mr.
Sriskantharasa knew Mr. Poologarasa and Mr. Rajadurai from before. Mr.
Ravichandran was a stranger to him.
Mr. Poologarasan’s camp
[
11
]
Mr.
Poologarasan was at the park with Mr. Rajadurai and the accused. They had been working
together that day.
[
12
]
According to Mr.
Rajadurai, Mr. Poologarasa was also friends with Mr. Sriskantharasa and Mr.
Rasanayakam.
The conflicting narratives
[
13
]
Mr.
Sriskantharasa’s account is that he came to the park and had two-to-three beers
with Mr. Rasanayakam, Ms. Thavakumar and Ms. Ravichandran. Mr. Poologarasa, Mr.
Rajadurai and Mr. Ravichandran were socializing together, not far away, but Mr.
Sriskantharasa had no interaction with them. At one point, Mr. Rasanayakam, Ms.
Thavakumar and Ms. Ravichandran left Mr. Sriskantharasa to go to the washroom.
At that time, Mr.  Poologarasa, Mr. Rajadurai and Mr. Ravichandran came to him.
Mr. Ravichandran stood directly in front of him and stabbed him as the other
two held him from either side, or tried to. Mr. Sriskantharasa was adamant that
no words had been exchanged prior to the attack, and that he had no idea why he
had been stabbed. He insisted that he had been stabbed before the Mr.
Rasanayakam and the two women returned from the washroom. His three male opponents
fled after he was stabbed.
[
14
]
As for the
other group, there is some evidence that Mr. Rasanayakam and, by association Mr.
Sriskantharasa, had a problem with the advances Mr. Poologarasa had made toward
Ms. Thavakumar some days prior. This led one or both of them to confront them. Mr.
Rajadurai   testified that Mr. Sriskantharasa went to retrieve a folding chair
from the trunk of Mr. Rasanayakam’s car and swung it at them like a baseball
bat. Mr. Rasanayakam, for his part, yelled that he was “going to shoot” as he went
to his trunk. Mr. Rajadurai left the scene at that point and Mr. Poologarasa
and Mr. Ravichandran ran closely behind him. He did not see the stabbing.
III. The Problems with the Witness’s Testimony
Mr. Sriskantharasa
[
15
]
There is no
doubt that Mr. Sriskantharasa was stabbed and that this has had a serious and
unfortunate impact on his health and wellbeing. However, his account of who
stabbed him and why was neither credible nor reliable.
[
16
]
First, for
reasons known only to him, he denied the apparently benign fact that he had
gone to the park specifically to see Rebecca Jackson, while he had told the
police just that. Early in his testimony, he denied even knowing Mr.
Rasanayakam and Ms. Thavakumar. That evolved to mere
beliefs
(“I think”)
that they were at the park and that Ms. Thavakumar was Mr. Rasanayakam’s
girlfriend. It is obvious that he was being dishonest. First, he knew Mr.
Rasanayakam as a friend. Mr. Rasanayakam and Ms. Thavakumar said so. He also
knew Ms. Thavakumar, through Mr. Rasanayakam. Also, several of the witnesses said
that Mr. Rasanayakam was present. Based on all the evidence, it is apparent
that Mr. Sriskantharasa was attempting to create distance between his friend Mr.
Rasanayakam and the incident. I surmise that this is because he understood that
Mr. Rasanayakam (and he) had a motive to confront Mr. Poologarasa, even though
he denied any knowledge of Mr. Poologarasa’s earlier advances toward Ms.
Thavakumar.
[
17
]
Mr.
Sriskantharasa was evasive about how much alcohol he had consumed and the
impact it had on him. It began with two beers. Then two-to-three. However, he
also testified that he drinks beer daily. When asked how many, he said that on
the day before court, he had drunk eight “tall boys.” This appeared to be by
way of example. He added that he did not lose consciousness on the day of the
stabbing, and that 10-15 bottles would not make him feel high. For what it is
worth, Mr. Rajadurai testified that Mr. Sriskantharasa and Mr. Rasanayakam were
very intoxicated from drinking and smoking marihuana. I find it likely that Mr.
Sriskantharasa drank much more than two or three beers in the park and that this
had an impact on his ability to recall the events.
[
18
]
Mr.
Sriskantharasa had told police that all three of the men had knives. At trial,
he maintained that only the stranger had a knife. When confronted, he said that
he assumed that if one man stabbed him, the others must have had knives too.
This was a flimsy explanation.
[
19
]
Mr.
Sriskantharasa’s denial that there had been any exchange at all between the
groups before the stabbing was not credible. First, the way he described it as
a random attack just when his friends had gone to the washroom is implausible.
It was a busy park and there was still plenty of natural light. More
importantly, all the other witnesses testified that words of some nature had
been exchanged. Even Mr. Rasanayakam allowed that the group had come to say bye
to “us,” which he explained meant Mr. Sriskantharasa. (He explained that he had
told the police “us” only because he was standing next to his friend.) He also
testified that he had heard Mr. Poologarasa tell Mr. Sriskantharasa that he
“wants his [Mr. Poologarasa’s] name to be heard in Scarborough.” According to Ms.
Thavakumar, the men were yelling as she was returning from the washroom.
[
20
]
Importantly,
Jackson Ravichandran testified that Mr. Sriskantharasa had phoned him twice to
ask him to come to the park to help him. In the first call, he told him he had
an issue and had gotten into a fight. Jackson declined, thinking his friend was
joking. Five to six minutes later, Mr. Sriskantharasa called again, but this
time he was screaming. This evidence undermined Mr. Sriskantharasa’s
explanation that the attack had come out of the blue and had not been preceded
by any interactions with members of the other group.
Mr. Rajadurai
[
21
]
Mr. Rajadurai’s
evidence was neither credible nor reliable. He testified that he had forgotten
“most of the stuff” surrounding the incident. For instance, he had forgotten
that Mr. Rasanayakam had started the incident when he went to his car and said
that he was “going to shoot.” His memory was “refreshed” from his police
statement on this point. That was a very surprising thing to forget. Based on
all the evidence, I did not accept his testimony that he had left when the
incident started (before the stabbing) because he was on probation. This is
hard to believe, particularly since he explained that Mr. Poologarasa and Mr.
Ravichandran were only 10-20 feet behind him when he arrived at his apartment
building. Like the others, Mr. Rajadurai appeared to be protecting someone.
Mr. Rasanayakam
[
22
]
Mr. Rasanayakam’s
evidence was not credible or reliable. He explained that his memory was “not
the greatest.” He testified that the male believed to be Tharsigan Ravichandran
stabbed his friend. For reasons known only to him, he was the only person who
described him as a black male with a beard, wearing a yellow jacket whose face
was half covered with some sort of white cloth.
[3]
He explained that he had gone home to use the washroom and returned to see the
fight happening from 100 metres away. In contrast, he told police that he had stayed
with Mr. Sriskantharasa as the women went to the washroom. His explanations for
the inconsistency – they did not ask him; he is entitled to his “privilege” and
“privacy” in relation to his use of the washroom – were contrived. It was clear
to me that his intent was to put distance between himself and the events that
led to the stabbing.
[
23
]
He was also
evasive about having seen Mr. Poologarasa and Mr. Ravichandran two days prior
to the incident and about having had a conversation with Mr. Ravichandran at
the park on the evening of the incident. He ended up having to acknowledge (in
cross-examination) that Mr. Ravichandran’s Tamil was bad, but denied that this
was proof that he had had an interaction with him directly. He denied that Ms. Thavakumar
had told him about Mr. Poologarasa’s earlier advances. Later, when confronted
with the fact that he had told police about it, he shrugged it off as a non-issue.
He identified Mr. Ravichandran as the stabber, and his evidence can also be
read to eliminate Mr. Poologarasa and Mr. Rajadurai as the perpetrator, but his
evidence was completely unreliable, and I reject it.
Ms. Thavakumar
[1]
It appeared to
me that Ms. Thavakumar’s intent was to protect her boyfriend, Mr. Rasanayakam. She
explained that Ms. Ravichandran had gotten involved in the dispute and had been
pushed to the ground by one of the males. She went to her aid and for that
reason was unable to say whether Mr. Rasanayakam was there or not.
[2]
She testified
that Mr. Ravichandran, whom she knew from high school, had a nose ring. Her
description of what happened during the event suggested that it was Mr.
Poologarasa who had stood in front of Mr. Sriskantharasa. He was moving like he
had a weapon in his hand, as if he was going to stab someone. Credible or not,
her evidence did not support the Crown’s case.
The description(s) and
identification of the stabber
[3]
At trial, Mr.
Sriskantharasa testified that he had described the stabber to police as being
lean,
about 5’8”, 30 years of age, with a nose ring, long black hair, no facial hair,
no glasses, wearing and a black hoodie
. He could not describe the hair any
better because of the hoodie. Cross-examination revealed that his description
to police had been no more than this:
average weight, shorter than six feet
tall, long hair in a ponytail
. This description is generic in the extreme, perhaps
because Mr. Sriskantharasa did not know Mr. Ravichandran and, according to him,
had only a brief opportunity to observe him. Or perhaps for other reasons known
only to him. It was only the  description that he gave at trial that the Crown
relied on in her submissions.
[4]
The photo line-up
procedure took place about six weeks after the incident and was videotaped. Mr.
Ravichandran’s photo was the fifth in the line-up. Mr. Sriskantharasa looked at
the first five photographs at length. He explained that he selected those
photographs because they depicted who he “thought would be involved in this on
average.” He told the officer that he picked the photo of Mr. Ravichandran
because of his skin colour, the shape of his ears and the shape of his nose. He
had not described any of those features to police earlier (and it is hard to
know how he could have seen the shape of Mr. Ravichandran’s ears, given the hoodie).
Ultimately, of the four or five photos he focused on, he chose the person “who
most resembled” the stabber.
[5]
Aside from
these concerns, the procedure itself was problematic. When Mr. Sriskantharasa was
considering Mr. Ravichandran’s photo, he told the officer that he “somewhat
recognized” the person depicted in it, but was not 100%; as a result, he asked
if he should say “yes” or “no”? Rather than reminding him that the person of
interest may not be in the package, or that he should not guess and was under
no obligation to choose any photo, the officer replied, “it’s either yes or no,
you can’t have any doubt.” I am concerned that, in the context of this case,
the officer’s reply could very well have made Mr. Sriskantharasa choose the
photo despite the clear doubts he had expressed about it.
[6]
Setting aside
the problematic evolution of Mr. Sriskantharasa’s description of the stabber from
the date of the incident to trial, his identification of Mr. Ravichandran during
the line-up – a stranger to him in a traumatic incident that, according to him,
happened very quickly – was unreliable. As such, it could not imbue the
description he provided at trial with any real probative value, much less his
pre-trial description.
[7]
I acknowledge
that the recommendations emanating from the
Sophonow
inquiry are not
legal requirements for photo line-ups, and that a failure to strictly adhere to
them does not necessarily invalidate the procedure adopted in a given case.
However, as I have attempted to explain, the identification problems in this
case go well beyond that legal issue.
[8]
It must also be
noted that the descriptions given by other witnesses were inconsistent. Mr.
Rajadurai described Mr. Ravichandran as brown-skinned and “probably wearing a
black sweater.” He said nothing about a nose ring. Mr. Rasanayakam described
him as black-skinned, wearing a white head and face covering and a yellow
jacket. He mentioned a nose ring but also added a black beard. Ms. Thavakumar
described him as light-skinned.
[9]
Based on the
totality of the evidence and, admittedly, some reading between the lines, I
find that it is most likely if not certain that Mr. Ravichandran was present
during the incident; however, the Crown has not come close to proving that he
was the person who stabbed Mr. Sriskantharasa. The only way the Crown could do
so would be by process of elimination or, as she described it, the use of
deductive logic. That can be a legitimate approach in a case where the evidence
is credible, reliable, detailed and consistent.
[10]
In this case,
the evidence is none of those things.
III. Conclusion
[11]
For these
reasons, Mr. Ravichandran is entitled to be found not guilty on both counts.
Released: 
May 20, 2025
Justice Patrice
F. Band
[1]
Sathayaseelan Rajadurai.
[2]
He and his sister Rebecca,
discussed below, are not related to the accused Mr. Ravichandran.
[3]
Officer Lupson testified that Mr. Rajadurai
had told him that Mr. Ravichandran was wearing a white, yellow and black jacket
as a head covering; however, Mr. Rajadurai did not testify about a head
covering or jacket.