Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj344/2025oncj344.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Jonni
, 2025 ONCJ 344
DATE: 
2025 06 10
COURT
FILE No.:  Brampton 31110803
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
RICHARD
JONNI
Before
Justice Paul F. Monahan
Heard
on May 15, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on June 10, 2025
P. Mehta................................................................................................ counsel
for the Crown
Y. Obouhov.................................................................................... counsel
for the defendant
MONAHAN J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
The defendant Richard Jonni was charged with impaired
driving contrary to
section 320.14(1)
(a) of the
Criminal Code
and having
equal to or more than 80 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood within two hours of
operating a motor vehicle contrary to section 320.14(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code
.
The alleged offence date is September 21, 2023.
[
2
]
At the outset of trial, the Crown sought
arraignment on the offence of equal to or over 80 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of
blood and did not seek arraignment on the impaired driving count. Accordingly,
the case proceeded only on the equal to or over 80 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of
blood count and not the impaired count. The defendant pled not guilty.
[
3
]
The Crown and the defence agreed that the only
issues in the case were (i) whether there was a violation of section 10(b) of
the
Charter
as concerns the “paralegal issue”; and (ii) if there was
section 10(b) violation whether the evidence of the breath samples should be
excluded. In particular, the defence admitted, among other things, that the
breath readings were accurate.
Overview of the evidence
[
4
]
The trial and the
Charter
application
were heard on a blended basis on consent. The Crown called two witnesses:
Officer G. Brar, the arresting officer; and Officer L. Al-Jamal, the breath
technician.
[
5
]
By way of overview, the police received a radio
call on September 21, 2023 that there was a vehicle stopped in the roadway on
Mavis Road in the City of Mississauga. When police arrived, Mr. Jonni was found
asleep or unconscious in the driver’s seat of the vehicle. The vehicle was
running. The fire department had to use a device to break the window in order
to get the defendant out of the motor vehicle. The defendant was arrested for
impaired driving. He later provided two truncated breath samples of 190 and 170
mg of alcohol in 100 mL of blood.
Was there a section 10 (b) violation - the
“paralegal” issue?
[
6
]
When Mr. Jonni was first arrested and given his
rights to counsel he said he wanted to speak to a lawyer whose first name was
“John”. He had no last name for John and the request essentially ended there.
[
7
]
Mr. Jonni called his mother from the roadside
using the Apple software “Siri”. He did so to see if she had a lawyer. She did
have a lawyer, Mr. Y. Obouhov, but Mr. Jonni did not initially want to speak to
him. Mr. Obouhov did apparently telephone the police station but did not speak
with Mr. Jonni.
[
8
]
Mr. Jonni had a person named Danny Castellarin
who Mr. Jonni thought might be a lawyer. Officer Brar found a number for Mr. Castellarin
on LinkedIn and she called and left a message for him. After leaving a message
for Mr. Castellarin, Officer Brar determined from his online profile that he
was an accountant, not a lawyer. Officer Brar also checked the Law Society of
Ontario website and confirmed that Mr. Castellarin was not a lawyer. This was
explained to Mr. Jonni and Mr. Castellarin was not pursued further.
[
9
]
Mr. Jonni then changed his mind and said that he
wanted to speak to the lawyer his mother had recommended namely Mr. Obouhov. This
led Officer Brar to call and leave messages for Mr. Obouhov at 10:19 AM, 10:20
AM and 10:49 AM. Officer Brar learned that Mr. Obouhov was conducting a trial
and could not speak to Mr. Jonni and this was conveyed to Mr. Jonni.
[
10
]
The mother of Mr. Jonni arrived at the police
station and provided a phone number for Ann Marie Rampersad who was said to be
a paralegal working for Mr. Obouhov. Officer Brar spoke to Ms. Rampersad.
According to Officer Brar, Ms. Rampersad said that she was authorized to speak
on behalf of Mr. Obouhov. As a result, Officer Brar offered to have Mr. Joni
speak to Ms. Rampersad. Before doing so she said the following to Mr. Jonni
which was recorded “the person you’re speaking to is a paralegal under that
lawyer so I just want you to understand she is not a criminal lawyer but she is
a paralegal and she said he authorized her to speak on his behalf”. Mr. Jonni
then spoke to Ms. Rampersad briefly (one minute) and told Officer Brar he was
satisfied with the advice he had received from her.
[
11
]
Thereafter, the breath technician said the
following to Mr. Jonni as concerns Ms. Rampersad (which was also recorded):
“now you have the right to speak to a lawyer, sir. Your rights to counsel is to
speak with a lawyer. If you’d like I can contact the free duty counsel lawyer
for you to speak with in this situation. Because I understand she’s a paralegal
and she works under the lawyer but I still want to offer you a chance to speak
with an actual lawyer if you’re interested.” Mr. Jonni then said he did not
want to speak to duty counsel. After Mr. Jonni was brought to the breath room
and was receiving further information from the breath technician concerning
what would happen if he blew over 80, Mr. Jonni asked to speak again to the
“same paralegal” and the breath technician facilitated a further call between
Mr. Jonni and Ms. Rampersad and confirmed that he was “satisfied with the
advice”. Mr. Jonni then proceeded to provide the two breath samples of 190 and
170 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of blood.
[
12
]
The Crown submits that there was no section
10(b) violation. The defendant submits that there was a section 10(b) violation.
In particular, the defence submits that the defendant should not have been
permitted to speak to a paralegal at all because a paralegal is not authorized
to advise or represent persons charged with impaired driving or over 80. In this
case, it is clear that the police acted in good faith: they went to significant
lengths to put Mr. Jonni in touch with counsel of choice. In particular, they
called and left messages for an accountant who was later determined to not be a
lawyer so that route was abandoned. They called his counsel of choice Mr.
Obouhov three times and left messages and determined that he was in court on a
trial and they let Mr. Jonni know this. They then spoke to a person who
represented herself to be a paralegal (Ms. Rampersad) and who further
represented that she worked with counsel of choice and was somehow authorized
to speak on his behalf. Ms. Rampersad’s contact information came from Mr.
Jonni’s mother. Police facilitated two calls with the paralegal. However, the
difficulty is that a paralegal is not permitted as a matter of law to provide
legal advice on impaired or over 80 cases. In this regard see
R. v.
Augustine
,
[2019] O.J. 3522 at para 14
per Henschel J. as she then was. The
position is similar to a detained person who asks to speak to a relative or
friend to get advice on what to do when charged with a criminal offence. It is
well-known that a detained person cannot speak to a relative in those
circumstances. They can only speak to a relative for the purpose of obtaining
the name or contact information of counsel.
[
13
]
In my view, in this case, the police should not
have permitted any communication with the paralegal because it was not in
furtherance of allowing Mr. Jonni to exercise his right to counsel. He could
not exercise his right to counsel by speaking to a paralegal: see
Augustine
supra at para 19.
[
14
]
I have considered whether Ms. Rampersad was
merely a conduit for the advice of Mr. Obouhov and whether Mr. Jonni’s contact
with Ms. Rampersad was permissible on that basis. In other words, could Mr.
Obouhov advise Mr. Jonni via Ms. Rampersad. In my view, all of the
circumstances have to be looked at in order to answer this question. When all
of the circumstances are examined, it appears that Ms. Rampersad was more than
a mere conduit. While it is true that at times Ms. Rampersad said she was
speaking “on behalf of” Mr. Obouhov at other times the police said that Ms.
Rampersad had been authorized by Mr. Obouhov to “speak  with you and give you
advice” (page 5 of the breath room video transcript). At other times the
conversation with Ms. Rampersad was facilitated by the police saying “your
lawyer is on the phone” (see page 10 of the breath room video transcript). When
Mr. Jonni asked to speak to Ms. Rampersad a second time and the police
facilitated that contact, the breath technician said “I guess you want further
advice on the matter” (page 9 of the breath room video transcript).
[
15
]
The police in this case acted in good faith and
came very close to meeting their section 10(b) implementational obligations
because they made it clear to Mr. Jonni that Ms. Rampersad was not a lawyer and
they told him that his section 10(b) rights entitled him to speak to an “actual
lawyer” and they tried to reach his counsel of choice and they offered him duty
counsel which he declined.  However, the police should have known the point
made above in
Augustine
at para 19 that police do not fulfil their
section 10(b) implementational duties when they put a detainee in contact with a
paralegal and they should not have put Mr. Jonni in touch with a paralegal. He
should have been told a paralegal could not represent him or advise him in
connection with the impaired/over 80 charges he was facing. It is clear to me
that neither police officer (the arresting officer or the breath technician)
knew that a paralegal was not authorized to advise Mr. Jonni. The failure to advise
Mr. Jonni of this problem and instead to facilitate contact with the paralegal amounted
to a section 10(b) breach.
Should the breath samples to be excluded by
reason of the section 10(b) breach
[
16
]
The next question is whether the breath samples
should be excluded by reason of the section 10(b) breach. This requires a
consideration of the three-part test laid down in
R. v. Grant
2009 SCC
32
namely as follows: (i) the seriousness of the
Charter
infringing
conduct; (ii) the impact on the
Charter
protected rights of the accused;
and (iii) society’s interest in the adjudication of the case on the merits.
[
17
]
As concerns the seriousness of the
Charter
breach, this factor considers whether the admission of the evidence would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute by suggesting that the Court will condone
breaches of the
Charter
. In this case, I consider that the
Charter
breach was of moderate seriousness only. In many of the so-called paralegal
cases, there was confusion in the minds of the detainee as concerns the person they
spoke to. In some cases the detainee speaks to a paralegal but thinks they have
spoken to a lawyer: see
R. v. Alenich
2022 ONCJ 161
at para
45
and see
Augustine
supra
at para 18.
[
18
]
In the case at bar, the police acted in good
faith throughout. Mr. Jonni has not put in an affidavit on his own
Charter
application. Unlike the defendants in the cases mentioned above, there is no
evidence or suggestion that Mr. Jonni was confused about whether or not he was
speaking to a paralegal or a lawyer. The police made it clear to Mr. Jonni that
he was speaking to a paralegal and not a lawyer and that he was entitled to
speak to an “actual lawyer”. Police made significant efforts to contact Mr.
Jonni’s lawyer of choice and when that failed they offered him duty counsel
which he declined. As I have already explained, the police did not understand
the difference between a lawyer and a paralegal and they did not understand that
a paralegal could not advise Mr. Jonni in this case. Further, police could not satisfy
their section 10 (b) implementational obligations by putting Mr. Jonni in touch
with a paralegal and the police should have known this fact. The police should
not have facilitated the two calls with the paralegal.
[
19
]
Considering all the circumstances, the breach
was only of moderate seriousness. This factor favours exclusion of the breath
samples but only moderately so.
[
20
]
As concerns the impact of the breach, I have no
evidence from Mr. Jonni even though it is his
Charter
application and he
has the onus of establishing that the evidence should be excluded under section
24(2). I don’t know what would have happened had Mr. Jonni not been permitted
to speak to the paralegal which is what should have happened here. He clearly
wanted to speak to his lawyer of choice. Reasonable efforts were made to
contact his lawyer of choice but they were unsuccessful. It is possible that Mr.
Jonni would spoken to duty counsel if he had not been permitted to speak to the
paralegal but this remains unclear on this record. Mr. Jonni could have
testified on his
Charter
application and given evidence which might have
assisted the Court in determining the impact of the breach but he failed to do
so.
[
21
]
The taking of the breath samples was minimally
intrusive. Further, there is no evidence that Mr. Jonni felt distressed or was
confused because he spoke to Ms. Rampersad rather than duty counsel. Overall,
as concerns the second
Grant
factor, I would say that the impact on his
rights was moderate at most. He knew he was not speaking to a lawyer and he
knew that he was entitled to speak to a lawyer and he declined to do so when
offered duty counsel. As I have just said, there is no evidence that he would
have spoken to duty counsel if he had not been permitted to speak to a
paralegal. I would add that the fact that Ms. Rampersad was not authorized by
law to advise Mr. Jonni, does not mean that she gave him incorrect advice.
[
22
]
By way of summary on this point, the second
Grant
factor favours exclusion but only moderately so.
[
23
]
The third
Grant
factor, society’s
interest in adjudication on the merits favours the inclusion of the evidence.
The breath sample evidence is reliable evidence and the Crown’s entire case
depends upon this evidence.
[
24
]
I am aware that where the first two
Grant
factors make a strong case for exclusion, the third factor will rarely tip the
scale in favour of inclusion: see
R. v. McGuffie
2016 ONCA 365
. In this
case, the first two
Grant
factors favour exclusion but only moderately
so, not strongly. In some ways, the
Grant
analysis in this case is
somewhat similar to the
Grant
analysis in the
R. v. Beaver
2022
SCC 54
at paras
134-35
.
[
25
]
Balancing all of the
Grant
factors, I
have concluded that the admission of the breath samples in this case would not
bring the administration of justice into disrepute. As a result, the breath
readings will not be excluded from the evidence.
Summary
[
26
]
By way of summary, while I have concluded that
Mr. Jonni’s section 10(b) rights were violated, the
Grant
analysis does
not lead to the exclusion of the breath samples. The equal to or over 80 charge
is proved beyond a reasonable doubt. There will be a finding of guilt on this
charge.
Released:  June 10, 2025
Signed:
Justice Paul F. Monahan