Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj716/2025oncj716.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Lundi
, 2025 ONCJ 716
DATE: December
8, 2025
COURT
FILE No.:23-11408416
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
ALAIN LUNDI
Before Justice T. Lipson
Released: December 8, 2025
T. Bobrovitz................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
J. Danto-Clancy........................................................... counsel
for Alain Lundi
REASONS FOR SENTENCE
LIPSON J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
On
July 25, 2025, I found Mr. Lundi guilty of assault (5 counts), assault by
choking (3 counts), Utter threats (3 counts), mischief – interfere with
enjoyment of property (3 counts) and forcible confinement (1 count). He appears
for sentencing today. The Crown had proceeded by indictment.
[
2
]
The
Crown seeks a sentence of two years less a day plus 3 years of probation and
ancillary orders, including a s. 109 weapons prohibition for 10 years, a DNA
order and a s. 743.21 non communication order for the victim Sabrina Oliveira
and members of her immediate family. The defence submits that a non-custodial
sentence or, in the alternative, a conditional sentence with probation would be
fit and appropriate sentences in all of the circumstances.
Circumstances of the
Offences
[
3
]
My
reasons for judgment delivered on July 25, 2025 (
2025 ONCJ 713
), provide a
detailed account of the circumstances of the offences. By way of overview, the
following can be said:
[
4
]
On
July 15 and 16, 2023, Mr. Lundi engaged in a sustained and escalating pattern
of violence and intimidation against Ms. Oliveira. At a house party, Mr. Lundi
slapped Ms. Oliveira on both thighs during separate confrontations on the
porch. Later, in  a vehicle of one of their friends named Pascale Brisson, Mr.
Lundi straddled Ms. Oliveira and choked her with both hands, demanding she
apologize to his friends. Ms. Oliveira complied out of fear. Mr. Lundi
subsequently led Ms. Oliveira into Firefly Park, where he dragged her into a
secluded area beneath a tree and bush. There, he physically assaulted her by
kicking and slapping her repeatedly while she lay on the ground. He then
strangled her while she was on her knees, causing her to feel dizzy and
nauseous. Ms. Oliveira feared for her life. These events were witnessed and
recorded by Kayley McFarlane, whose video footage captured the sounds of
slapping and Ms. Oliveira’s pleas for help. Photographs taken later showed
extensive bruising consistent with her account.
[
5
]
During
an Uber ride to downtown Ottawa, Mr. Lundi continued his assaultive behaviour,
punching Ms. Oliveira and threatening in French to kill her multiple times. At
the Byward Market parking garage, Mr. Lundi directed Ms. Oliveira to urinate in
the elevator, then choked her inside the elevator and again four times in the
lobby. Surveillance footage showed Mr. Lundi backing Ms. Oliveira against the
wall, applying pressure to her throat, and forcibly kissing her. He then led
her to the top floor, placed her on a railing, and threatened to kill her. Ms.
Oliveira resisted and managed to escape. The video evidence corroborated her
account and depicted her visible distress. At the JTM bar, Mr. Lundi stomped on
Ms. Oliveira’s foot, causing visible injury, and took her phone without her consent,
intercepting a call from her mother. At Ms. Oliveira’s residence on Grammond
Circle, Mr. Lundi banged and kicked the garage door, causing visible damage.
His conduct disrupted the peaceful enjoyment of the property and instilled fear
in the household.
Circumstances of the
Offender
[
6
]
Mr.
Lundi is a 33-year-old man with no prior criminal record. He was raised in a
supportive family environment, is well-educated, and gainfully employed. He
holds a bachelor’s degree in international business and has worked in both the
financial and non-profit sectors. He is currently employed as a sales
representative. Mr. Lundi has two jobs. He resides with his parents and
maintains strong ties to his church and community. Despite these positive
attributes, the pre-sentence report noted his minimization of the offences and
lack of remorse. He continued to deny responsibility and blamed the victim,
which to the PSR author raised concerns about Mr. Lundi’s insight and
accountability. He has begun therapy and registered for anger management, but,
in the opinion of the PSR author, Mr. Lundi’s denial of wrongdoing undermines
the rehabilitative potential.
[
7
]
There
were numerous character letters from family, friends and associates which were
filed as exhibits and considered by the court.
[
8
]
Mr.
Lundi has completed a 9-session anger management letter.
[
9
]
It
should also be noted that prior to sentencing, Mr. Lundi addressed the court. He
appeared to reverse the position he took testifying at trial. He apologized for
his behaviour and said he now took full responsibility for his criminal
conduct. Mr. Lundi said he felt sincere remorse and regret for his actions. He
said that he was committed to making amends. Mr. Lundi said there was no excuse
for his actions, and that he does not minimize the seriousness of his conduct. He
said that he “is not defined” by his mistakes. Given Mr. Lundi’s denials of
almost all of the offences at trial as well as his statements concerning the
offence and the victim to the PSR author, I am naturally skeptical about his new
professed apology and remorse. However, I do have some degree of optimism that
he is sincere.
Victim Impact Evidence
[
10
]
Sabrina Oliveira described lasting physical and
psychological trauma, including PTSD and fear for her children’s safety. Her
victim impact statement is poignant and deserves significant weight in the
determination of a fit sentence. I will quote  excerpts of her victim impact statement:
“But make no mistake: the scars I carry-physical,
emotional, and psychological- are permanent. Two years have passed, yet it
still feels like yesterday. I was humiliated, beaten, strangled, and threatened
with death. My body bore the evidence, but my children bore the weight of my
silence in those first days. Just three days later, I forced myself to hide the
bruises and attend my daughter’s surgery. I concealed the violence, not by
choice, but because that is what survivors do. We survive, even when survival
feels impossible…
I am grateful to be here, still navigating through it
all. But gratitude does not erase the damage. I had to rebuild myself, piece by
piece- reconstructing resilience, dignity, and self-respect from the ruins of
what was left behind. I had to show my children that violence is never acceptable,
that silence is not safety, and that justice must always be pursued…
I was nearly erased. I was reduced to fear and
silence-but I did not disappear. What was meant to destroy me instead revealed
my strength…
What happened to me was not only an assault on my
body. It was an assault on trust, on love, and on the very foundation of what
it means to be human…
Those events instilled fear not only in me, but in my
children. Fear that no family should have to carry. I was forced to leave my
home-the place that should have been our sanctuary-because it no longer felt
safe…
The psychological toll has been profound. I continue
to live with PTSD. The strangulation injuries worsened a pre-existing neck
condition, leaving me with lasting pain…
The impact extends to my children. My daughter became
afraid to attend the gym. My son was terrified that if I stepped outside, harm
would come to me. Even now, when I am not at home, my children call in
fear-because the trauma left us all hypervigilant, constantly bracing for the
possibility of danger in places that should feel safe.”
[
11
]
Ms. Oliveira’s daughter Malia recounted nightmares and
emotional distress, while her young son developed anxiety and fear of
abduction.
[
12
]
Bertilde
Santos, the victim’s mother, expressed guilt and helplessness, and described
the emotional and financial toll of the incident. Mr. Lundi had entered her
residence without her permission. She pleaded with him to leave because he was
“terrifying the children.”
[
13
]
Stephanie Oliveira, the victim’s sister, detailed the
disruption to her family life and career, and the ongoing fear and financial
burden.
[
14
]
All statements reflect a profound loss of safety and a
plea for protection. The victims described sleepless nights, therapy needs,
relocation, and fear of encountering Mr. Lundi again.
Aggravating and Mitigating
Factors
Aggravating Factors
[
15
]
It is statutorily aggravating that these assaults
occurred within an intimate partner relationship. The accused’s assaultive and
threatening conduct constituted a grave breach of trust.
[
16
]
The offences involved multiple incidents of physical
violence, including assault by choking, which is considered particularly
serious due to the risk of death. The assaultive behaviour was prolonged,
intentional and multifaceted. The assaults occurred in several locations. Mr.
Lundi was aware that Ms. Oliveira had a pre-existing neck condition but
nevertheless choked her in Firefly Park and the Byward Market parkade.
[
17
]
The victim, Sabrina Oliveira, was subjected to
prolonged abuse over an extended period and across multiple locations,
indicating a pattern of controlling and violent behaviour. She suffered
significant bruising on the lower half of her body as a result of the assaults.
Mr. Lundi also grabbed her by the neck on four occasions in the parkade. He sat
her on a railing on the top floor of the parkade causing Ms. Oliveira to fear
for her life. Mr. Lundi tried to prevent her from calling her mother to get
away from him. He caused damage to the victim’s mother’s garage door. He was
trying to get into the house to get to Ms. Oliveira. The victim endured
profound emotional and physical trauma, including a persistent fear for her
life and safety. Ms. Oliveira’s children had to witness the accused’s explosive
anger and dangerous conduct at their home on Grammond Circle. Mr. Lundi’s
conduct caused significant emotional harm to not only Ms. Oliveira but also her
children and her mother, Bertilde.
[
18
]
Mr. Lundi minimized the seriousness of these offences
and deflected responsibility during the Pre-Sentence Report interview, showing
limited insight into the impact of his actions. Mr. Lundi placed blame on the
victim and suggested she was responsible for the altercation, further
demonstrating a lack of accountability. Mr. Lundi is entitled to maintain the
position he took at trial. It is important to note that the defendant’s
apparent lack of remorse is not an aggravating factor but, instead, deprives
him of a potential mitigating factor
Mitigating Factors
[
19
]
Mr. Lundi has no prior criminal record and has not
previously served a term of community supervision. He largely abided by terms
of his release order for over two years, including reporting to the police on a
weekly basis. However, he did breach his bail by celebrating a birthday in the
Byward Market not in the presence of his surety. He has spent a total of 6 days
of pre-sentence custody.
[
20
]
Mr. Lundi is currently involved in a stable
relationship with another partner.
[
21
]
He maintains strong familial and community ties and
resides with supportive parents. He is gainfully employed full-time and has a
stable employment history. He has been attending individual therapy and
recently enrolled in an anger management course, indicating a willingness to
engage in rehabilitation. Collateral sources, including his father and current
partner, describe him positively and report no concerns regarding violence.
[
22
]
Mr. Lundi engaged in anger management counselling.
Relevant Sentencing
Principles
[
23
]
The fundamental purpose of sentencing, as set out in
section 718
of the
Criminal Code
, is to protect society and to contribute to
respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society.
[
24
]
The sentence must reflect the principles of
denunciation and deterrence, particularly in cases involving intimate partner
violence and repeated assaults.
[
25
]
Mr.
Lundi is a first offender, and I must consider the principle of restraint
contained in
sections 718.2
(d) and (e) of the
Criminal Code
.
In
R. v. Romano
,
2021 ONCA 211
, the Court of Appeal indicated that a sentencing judge is
required to consider all sanctions apart from incarceration and impose
imprisonment only when there is no other reasonable punishment…It follows that
where imprisonment is required, the term should be as short as is reasonable
given the circumstances”. See para. 64.
[
26
]
Though
these provisions speak of restraint, it is vital to remember that
section 718.2
(e) requires a sentence to be consistent with the harm done to the victims or
the community. An assault “against an intimate partner is an offence against
that victim, but also an offence against the community because of the long term
and significant societal harm such offences cause:
see
R. v. Smith
2024 CanLII
53407
(NLPC)
[
27
]
Rehabilitation
is an important consideration in sentencing, especially for offenders with no
prior criminal record and demonstrated efforts toward personal improvement. However,
in
R. v. Cunningham
,
2023 ONCA 36
, the Court of Appeal described the
effects of intimate partner violence as “heinous” and reiterated the importance
of courts prioritizing general deterrence and denunciation in the sentencing
process: see para 26. Offenders who commit these offences abuse of a position
of trust concerning their victims, which is an additional aggravating factor:
see
Cunningham
at para.
27
;
Criminal Code section 718.2
(a)(iii).
[
28
]
Proportionality requires that the sentence be
commensurate with the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility
of the offender.
[
29
]
The Court must consider the impact on the victim,
including physical and emotional harm, and the need to protect the victim from
further harm.
Fit and Appropriate
Sentence
[
30
]
The
evidence at trial established that Mr. Lundi inflicted a range of very serious
physical and emotional violence that took place over several hours, including
acts of choking, slapping, kicking, stomping on Ms. Oliveira’s foot, death
threats, and directing her movements in the parkade. His conduct was not only
intended to cause her physical harm but also emotional degradation and
humiliation. The emotional and psychological harm Mr. Lundi caused to Ms.
Oliveira was severe. I again note that Ms. Oliveira’s mother, Bertilde,
daughter Malia and son Adare were directly exposed to the accused’s abusive
behaviour. They all suffered emotional harm. They were home at the time he came
back and committed further offences at the residence of Bertilde Santos. I
agree with the Crown’s submission that the presence of the children is a
significant aggravating factor.
[
31
]
The
accused choked the victim in Firefly Park, four times in the parking garage and
also in a parked vehicle during the party. Choking is extremely dangerous
conduct, particularly in this case where Ms. Oliveria’s previous neck injury
was known to Mr. Lundi. I agree with the Crown that these acts of choking were
done to humiliate, dominate and control the victim.
[
32
]
As
Crown and defence counsel noted in their submissions, the sentencing range for
intimate partner violence is broad, particularly in the instance of a
first-time offender. Sentencing is always a highly individualized process.
There are several cases cited by the Crown where a period of incarceration is
entirely appropriate, even for a first offender.
[
33
]
I
have carefully considered whether a conditional sentence is appropriate in this
case and have concluded that it is not. The assaultive behaviour by Mr. Lundi
was prolonged and multifaceted. The impact on the victim and her family has
been significant. The sentence must address not only the physical injuries
caused but also the emotional and psychological trauma which has resulted.
Given the accused’s breach of his bail order, I have concerns about his ability
to follow a conditional sentence order. More importantly, it is my view that in
this case, a conditional sentence would be inconsistent with the sentencing
principles identified in
ss. 718
-
718.2
of the
Criminal Code
. A conditional
sentence is not appropriate in this case given the high level of violence and
the need to adequately reflect the sentencing objectives in domestic assault
cases of denunciation and deterrence, both specific and general.
[
34
]
I am satisfied that in the circumstances of these
offences and this first offender, the appropriate sentence is in the mid to
high reformatory range. Mr. Lundi is to be credited for pre-sentence custody of
six days enhanced to 9 days on a 1.5 to 1 basis.
[
35
]
Mr. Lundi also spent a significant period on strict
release conditions. He did breach his bail order on one occasion by being
outside his home to celebrate his birthday without his surety present.
Nevertheless, he was under strict conditions including weekly reporting to the
police for over 2 years.
[
36
]
Mr. Lundi is a first offender, and the sentencing
principles of restraint, totality and proportionality are applicable in this
case.
[
37
]
The total custodial sentence will be
15 months
.
This will be followed by probation for three years.  This sentence is to be
apportioned as follows:
Counts
relating to incidents at Firefly Park:
Count 2:
Assault by choking     5 months
Count 14:
Assault                     5 months concurrent to count 2
Counts
relating to incidents in the Byward Market parkade:
Count 20 
Assault by choking   5 months consecutive
Count 6
Forcible confinement   5 months concurrent to count 20
Count 7
Utter Threats               5 months concurrent to counts 6 and 20
Counts Relating to Rowallen House Party porch
incidents:
Count 1 Assault                        Suspended
sentence and probation for 3 years
Count 18 Assault                      Suspended
sentence and probation for 3 years
Counts
relating to incident in Pascale Brisson’s car:
Count 19
Assault by choking    3 months consecutive
Counts
relating to Uber ride:
Count 3
Assault                        30 days consecutive
Count 4
Utter Death Threats     30 days concurrent to count 3
Count 5
Utter Death Threats     30 days concurrent to counts 3 and 4
Counts
relating to incidents at JTM Bar:
Count 8
Assault                        30 days consecutive
Count 16 - Mischief                  30
days concurrent to count 8
Counts
relating to incidents at Grammond Circle:
Count 13 - Mischief                  Suspended
sentence and probation 3 years (9 days of pre-trial custody credited).
Count 17-
Mischief                   Suspended sentence and probation 3 years
Terms of
probation:
1.
Report as required
2.
Sign waivers and releases for
probation to monitor counselling
3.
Counselling with particular focus
on intimate partner violence
4.
No communication directly or
indirectly with Sabrina Oliveira, Bertilde Santos, Malia Oliveira and Adare
Oliveira
5.
Not to be within 250 metres of any
place those people are known to be
6.
Not to possess or carry any
weapons as defined by the
Criminal Code
Ancillary Orders
: DNA; s. 109 Weapons Prohibition Order for 10 years;
section 743.21 non communication order with the same people noted above.
Released:  December
8, 2025
Justice T. Lipson