Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj47/2025oncj47.html

CITATION:
R.
v. Ho
, 2025 ONCJ 47
DATE:  2025-01-23
Toronto
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS  MAJESTY  THE
   KING
—  AND  —
SIK YAN MATTHEW HO
Before Justice Mara Greene
Reasons for Judgment
released January 23, 2025
V. Rishea…………………………..……………………………………… for the Crown
C. Bernhardt …………………………..………………………............……...for Mr. Ho
[
1
] Mr. Ho is charged with operating a conveyance with a blood
alcohol concentration of over 80 mg of alcohol in 100ml of blood and with
operating a conveyance while his ability to do so as impaired by alcohol.  At
trial, counsel for Mr. Ho argued that the results from his breath tests should
be excluded under s.24(2) of the
Charter
because of two violations under
section 10(b) of the
Charter.
Counsel further argued that the Crown
failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ho’s ability to operate a
conveyance was impaired by alcohol.
Brief Summary of the Evidence
[
2
] On July 8, 2023 at approximately 11:10 pm, police attended to
respond to a call about a motor vehicle collision.  Mr. Waqas called police
after Mr. Ho rear ended him.  Mr. Waqas spoke to Mr. Ho about the accident, but
Mr. Ho denied hitting him and refused to provide his insurance information. 
Mr. Waqas thought that Mr. Ho was impaired as he was talking to him loudly,
smelled of alcohol and did not maintain his balance properly when he exited his
vehicle.
[
3
] Officers Rorabek and Weagle responded to the radio call.  
Officer Rorabek spoke to Mr. Ho at the scene and after some discussion arrested
him for impaired operation of a conveyance. Officer Rorabek testified that her
grounds for making the arrest included:
-
When Mr. Ho was first asked if he had been in
accident he stated “I do not know”, though when asked again a few minutes later
he said he was not in an accident.
-
There was clear evidence of an accident
including debris on the ground, slight damage to Mr. Ho’s vehicle and slight
damage to Mr. Waqas’ vehicle.
-
Officer Rorabek detected an odor of alcohol from
Mr. Ho’s breath.
-
Mr. Ho was unsteady on his feet - swaying from
side to side.
-
Mr. Ho’s pupils were dilated and blood shot.
-
Mr. Ho’s speech was slurred and there was some
foam on the side of his mouth.
-
When Officer Rorabek asked Mr. Ho for his
driver’s license he provided his health card instead.
-
Mr. Ho dropped his wallet and all his cards on
the ground when he was searching for his driver’s license.
-
Mr. Ho lost his balance as he tried to collect
the contents of his wallet from the ground.
[
4
] After Mr. Ho was arrested, he was advised of his right to
counsel and the breath demands were made.
[
5
] After a lengthy delay at the roadside due to the police taking
steps to take care of Mr. Ho’s dog that had been with him in the vehicle at the
time of the collision, Mr. Ho was taken to the police station.  He spoke to
duty counsel and then provided two samples of his breath.  The results of the
breath samples were 210 mg of alcohol in 100ml of alcohol at 230am and 200 mg
of alcohol in 100 ml of blood at 254 am.
[
6
] Two issues were raised at trial in relation to the alleged
violation of Mr. Ho’s right to counsel.  First, Officer Rorabek failed to
advise Mr. Ho that he could contact any lawyer he wanted.  Instead, the officer
steered Mr. Ho towards using duty counsel. The second issue raised is that the
officers failed to provide Mr. Ho a reasonable opportunity to speak to counsel
at the roadside during the hour-long delay between the arrest and leaving the
scene.
[
7
] Counsel for Mr. Ho further argued that the Crown failed to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that his ability to operate a motor vehicle as
impaired by alcohol.
Steering towards duty counsel
[
8
] This alleged
Charter
violation relates to an alleged
deficiency in the information that Officer Rorabek provided to Mr. Ho about his
rights to counsel. The factual backdrop of this allegation relates to the fact
that Officer Rorabek, during her multiple attempts to advise Mr. Ho of his
rights to counsel, gave him only two options; counsel he already had or duty
counsel.  Mr. Ho argued that he ought to have been told in clearer terms that
he could contact any lawyer he wanted regardless of whether or not that lawyer
was already retained.
[
9
]  Mr. Ho was arrested at approximately 11:15pm.  Upon being
advised that he was being arrested, Mr. Ho immediately stated “please no”.  He
further stated that he wanted to take care of his dog.  At 11:20 pm, Officer
Rorabek advised Mr. Ho of his right to counsel.  She read the standard right to
counsel speech from the back of her memo book.  During Officer Rorabek’s recitation
of the rights to counsel,  Mr. Ho interrupted her a number of times.  Officer
Rorabek patiently asked Mr. Ho to listen to her. When Officer Rorabek finished
reading the rights to counsel, she asked Mr. Ho if he understood.  Mr. Ho
replied that he did not.  As a result, Officer Rorabek proceeded to the read
the standard caution again, but Mr. Ho again interrupted her talking about his wife
being in Arizona.
[
10
] Officer Rorabek then proceeded to explain the 10(b) rights to
Mr. Ho using simpler language.  Mr. Ho interrupted the explanation to ask why
he was being arrested.  Officer Rorabek advised Mr. Ho again that he was being
arrested for impaired operation of a motor vehicle.  Mr. Ho replied that he was
not impaired.   As the conversation between Mr. Ho and officer Rorabeck
continued, Officer Rorabek asked Mr. Ho if he had a lawyer.  Mr. Ho replied he
did not. Officer Rorabek then explained that if Mr. Ho did not have a lawyer
she could get him a lawyer for free to which Mr. Ho queried if he even needed a
lawyer.   The conversation about whether or not Mr. Ho wanted a lawyer
continued for a bit longer, with Mr. Ho continuously interrupting the officer.
Officer Rorabek was eventually able to complete the rights to counsel, the
caution and the breath demand.  Mr. Ho was then subjected to a pat down search,
cuffed, and by 11:28 pm he placed in the back of Officer Rorabek’s cruiser.
[
11
] Once secured in the back of the police car, Officer Rorabek
explained to Mr. Ho that she was taking steps to help his dog.  She asked Mr.
Ho if there was anyone at all that she could contact but he said there was
not.  Officer Rorabek then asked Mr. Ho if he wanted to speak to counsel.  Mr.
Ho’s response to this question was to repeat that he did not even know what he
was charged with.  Officer Rorabek again explained the reason for the arrest.
Mr. Ho interrupted the officer and asked about his dog.
[
12
] At 11:31, officer Rorabek again asked Mr. Ho if he wanted to
speak to a lawyer.  She advised Mr. Ho that he could speak to a free lawyer,
his own lawyer or any lawyer that he has.  Mr. Ho responded “I don’t know maam,
I just want to go home.”  He then stated that he did want to talk to a lawyer. 
At this point, Officer Rorabek advised Mr. Ho that he could speak to a lawyer at
the roadside, but he could not have privacy. Otherwise, he could wait and speak
to a lawyer at the police station.  Mr. Ho opted to speak to counsel at the
police station.
[
13
] Over the next 45 minutes at the roadside, Officer Rorabek asked
Mr. Ho a couple of more times if he wanted to speak to his own lawyer or duty
counsel.  She also explained to him that that they were delayed at the scene
because of issues around finding someone to care for the dog.    During the
conversations about counsel, Mr. Ho repeated that he did not have a lawyer and
Officer Rorabek kept reminding him that he could speak to a free lawyer. Mr. Ho
continued to ask why he was being charged and at times argued with the officers
about the charge. Mr. Ho also kept repeating that he wanted to go home with his
dog and that his wife was in Arizona.
[
14
] At 12:13, Officer Rorabek and Mr. Ho finally left the scene and
went to the police station.  They arrived at 12:53 am but remained in the
vehicle until 1:13 am because someone else was in the booking room when they
arrived.
[
15
] Once inside the station, Mr. Ho was asked if he understood his
right to counsel.  Mr. Ho advised that he did not understand.  The officers
explained his rights to counsel to him again.   Mr. Ho repeated that he did not
have a lawyer.  He was then advised again of the option of speaking to a free
lawyer.  Mr. Ho then stated that he did not want to speak to counsel.
[
16
] Once the booking was completed, officer Rorabek again asked Mr.
Ho if he wanted to speak to counsel.  This time, Mr. Ho stated that he did. 
Officer Rorabek then contacted duty counsel.
[
17
] Mr. Ho testified on the
Charter
application. He
testified that in his view, officer Rorabek never gave him the option to
contact any lawyer he wanted.  It was his understanding from all that officer
Rorabek said to him that his choice was duty counsel or a lawyer that he had
already retained.   Mr. Ho further testified that at the time of his arrest he
did not have a criminal lawyer, but he knew of at least three lawyers that he
would have attempted to contact had he been given this option. Mr. Ho testified
that while he did speak to duty counsel, he was dissatisfied with the advice
given.  Mr. Ho failed to ask for any specific lawyer and failed to complain
about the quality of advice given.  Mr. Ho explained at trial, that he did not
ask for a specific lawyer because he did not realize he had this option.
[
18
] Section 10(b) of the
Charter
guarantees everyone upon arrest
or detention the right to consult with counsel.   In
R. v. Edwards
2024
ONCA 135
at para
27
the court held that “The right to counsel in s.10(b)
clearly includes the right to a reasonable opportunity to contact counsel of
choice. Police conduct which interferes with a detainee’s ability to contact
counsel of choice within a reasonable time will amount to an infringement of
s.10(b).”  Under section 10(b) of the
Charter,
police are held to a
reasonable diligence standard. The police are also required to make sure that
the detainee understands the right to counsel (
R. v. Koralov
2022 ONCJ
582
at para
37
).
[
19
] In assessing whether or not the police have meaningfully
advised a detainee of his right to counsel, the police will not be held to a
standard of perfection.  Instead, the court must make sure that the essential
character of the s.10(b) right is conveyed which includes, at a minimum, that
the detainee understood the right to immediate access to counsel, including
access to free legal advice.  The court stated at para 36 of
R. v. Devries,
2009
ONCA 477
,
It is fruitless to search for phrasing that does not have any
potential to mislead anybody in any given situation.  Rather than pursuing the
hopeless task of finding absolutely unambiguous language, compliance with
s.10(b) must be measured by its ability to convey the essential character of
the s.10(b) rights to the detainee – the right to immediate access to a lawyer,
including access through the toll-free number to immediate free legal advice.
[
20
] The question, I must therefore ask is whether the police failed
to convey the essential character of the 10(b) right to Mr. Ho.
[
21
] Counsel for Mr. Ho argued that they did not because officer
Rorabek repeatedly told Mr. Ho that he had only two options:  he could contact
counsel that he already had or duty counsel.  Counsel for Mr. Ho argued that
these options excluded a key aspect of the 10(b) right which is to contact any
counsel Mr. Ho wanted.  He was not limited to a lawyer that he had already
retained or duty counsel.
[
22
] Respectfully, I disagree that Mr. Ho was given this limited
choice.   When Mr. Ho was first arrested, Officer Rorabek read him the standard
caution which included the standard language about accessing counsel of choice. 
In response to Mr. Ho expressing that he did not understand his right to
counsel, Officer Rorabek repeated the 10(b) rights and then attempted to
explain them in ordinary language.  Mr. Ho interrupted the officer a number of
times, questioning the reason for his arrest and expressing his concern for his
dog and his desire to go home.  When there were delays at the roadside because
of concerns for the care of Mr. Ho’s dog, Officer Rorabek repeated to Mr. Ho
his right to counsel and explained the delay.  Having watched the body worn
camera and the in-car camera which captured the exchanges between Officer
Rorabek and Mr. Ho, it is my view that officer Rorabek was extremely patient
and diligent. Despite Mr. Ho’s interruptions and argumentativeness, Officer Rorabek
remained focused on making sure that Mr. Ho understood his right to speak to
counsel.
[
23
] I agree that many times, the options presented included duty
counsel or counsel that Mr. Ho already had, but on at least three occasions
Officer Rorabek did specifically refer to the option of some other lawyer. 
Moreover, in my view, Officer Rorabek’s continued reference to duty counsel
must be taken in context with Mr. Ho advising he had no counsel, that he had no
friends  that the officers could call for him and the fact that he never
identified a lawyer he wanted to contact when Officer Rorabek did tell him that
he could contact any lawyer.
[
24
] I am mindful that Mr. Ho testified that his understanding that
night was that he only had 2 choices – counsel already retained or duty
counsel.  I further appreciate that he testified that had he known he could
call any lawyer, he would have asked for specific lawyers he knew by name.  I,
however, reject Mr. Ho’s evidence on this point. I have watched the videos of
Mr. Ho that night.  His sole focus was on his dog and going home.    Mr. Ho’s
evidence that he did not ask about other counsel because he did not know he
could is inconsistent with his overall behaviour that night.  Mr. Ho frequently
asked for things that were not offered including going home with his dog.  Moreover
Mr. Ho made repeated requests for things he knew were not available.  For
example, he kept asking to go home even though the officers told him that he
was not permitted to go home as he was under arrest.  It is my view that given
Mr. Ho’s overall behaviour on the night of his arrest, had Mr. Ho wanted
something, he would have asked for it.  This includes speaking to a specific
lawyer.
[
25
] When I consider all the evidence, it is my view that officer
Rorabek took all steps required to explain to Mr. Ho his rights.  I further
find that Mr. Ho understood his rights and exercised his rights.  While he testified
that he was not satisfied with the advice he received at the time, he did not
advise the officers of this. Even if this were true, the officers cannot
respond to issues that they are not aware of.
Access to counsel at the roadside
Summary of the Facts
[
26
] Mr. Ho was detained at the roadside from the time of his arrest
at 11:20 pm until 12:15 am.  He did not speak to counsel until 1:15 am despite
the fact that he made his first request to speak to counsel at 11:30pm.  As I
understand counsel’s argument, it is that Mr. Ho ought to have been afforded an
opportunity to speak to counsel at the roadside in private.  Moreover, to the
extent that Mr. Ho elected to delay his consultation with counsel until he
arrived at the station, this decision was made without having all the correct
information and as such was not a meaningful waiver of his right to consult
with counsel at the roadside.
[
27
] It is well established that officers are required to facilitate
access to counsel once a detainee indicates a desire to speak to counsel (
R.
v. Taylor
2014 SCC 50
at para
24
).   Police may delay access to counsel if,
after turning their mind to the specific circumstances, they conclude, on a
reasonable basis, that police or public safety requires a delay to access
counsel.  Even where such circumstances exist, the police must “take reasonable
steps to minimize the delay in granting access counsel” (
R. v. Rover
2018 ONCA 745
)
[
28
] In the case at bar, Mr. Ho asked to consult with counsel at
11:30pm.  Officer Rorabek advised Mr. Ho that he could speak to counsel while
seated in the back of the cruiser, but it would not be a private conversation
because the recording equipment would still be engaged.  Faced with this
information, Mr. Ho opted to delay his access to counsel until such time as he
could have a private conversation with counsel.
[
29
] At trial, Officer Rorabek testified that she could have and would
have turned off the microphone so that while there would be a video recording
of Mr. Ho while he consulted with counsel there would be no audio recording. 
She, however, did not tell Mr. Ho this.  Officer Rorabek testified that she
chose to not inform Mr. Ho about muting the microphone because she could not
guarantee that the audio would not be recorded due to technical issues with the
recording equipment.  She did not want to make a promise that his words would
not be captured as she could not guarantee the reliability of the recording
equipment being muted.
[
30
] In relation to Officer Rorabek’s reasons for keeping the video
equipment running, Officer Rorabek testified that she would not turn the video
off for two reasons.  Firstly, because it is police policy and secondly because
Mr. Ho had not been properly searched, he still had shoelaces and other items
that could be mis-used.  Officer Rorabek was concerned for Mr. Ho’s safety and officer
safety and as such felt it was prudent to keep the video recording on.
The decision to keep the video recorder on
[
31
] Counsel for Mr. Ho argued that officer Rorabek ought to have
offered to turn off both the audio and video in the cruiser so that Mr. Ho
could have spoken to counsel in private at the roadside.   He argued that officer
Rorabek’s decision to keep the recording equipment on was based on a blanket
policy as opposed to factors specific to Mr. Ho which is impermissible in
law.   Respectfully, I disagree.  Officer Rorabek’s decision to keep the video
recorder on was made in part on policy and in part because of the specific
circumstances of this case.  Specifically, that Mr. Ho had not been properly
searched and there was still a risk of harm to himself and others in those
circumstances.  I accept her evidence on this point and in my view her decision
was reasonable in the circumstances.  To that end, I note that Mr. Ho was
agitated at times while in the cruiser, he was having difficulties understanding
instructions and had access to items that could have potentially served as a
safety hazard to himself and others. I find no violation of s.10(b) of the
Charter
based on Officer Rorabek’s decision to keep the video recording on at all
times.
Failure to properly explain that the microphone could be turned off
[
32
] Officer Rorabek testified at trial that had Mr. Ho wanted to
speak to counsel at the roadside she would have left him alone in the cruiser,
turned off the microphone but kept the video camera on.  This was not properly
explained to Mr. Ho. Instead, he was just advised that she would walk away from
the area, but the recoding equipment would remain active.
[
33
] Mr. Ho testified that had he known that only the video would
have been active while he spoke to counsel, he would not have agreed to delay
his access to counsel.  I accept his evidence on this point. This is largely
because I accept that most people, given the option of talking to counsel at
roadside when detained for an hour, would choose to speak to counsel if they
knew their words would not be heard, even if the video captured them.   There
is a qualitive difference between one’s words as opposed to one’s actions being
recorded.
[
34
] I appreciate Officer Rorabek’s reasoning.   Machines fail all
the time and had Mr. Ho’s words been recorded; this too would have been a
violation of Mr Ho’s Charter rights.  Moreover, given Mr. Ho’s struggle in
comprehending the reason for his arrest and his general rights to counsel, I
cannot imagine how Officer Rorabek could have explained this more complicated
situation to him in a way that he would have understood.  Having said that, Mr.
Ho’s comprehension level did not factor into Officer Rorabek’s decision to
limit the information provided.  Instead, Officer Rorabek as a matter of
blanket policy does not provide detainees with this information.
[
35
] In my view, Mr. Ho’s decision to waive his right to consult
with counsel at the roadside was not a fully informed waiver and as such was
not valid. Officer Rorabek, having concluded that it was safe to allow Mr. Ho
to consult with counsel at the roadside with only the video recording
activated, should have given Mr. Ho this option.   I therefore find a violation
of Mr. Ho’s section 10(b) rights.
Section 24(2) of the
Charter
[
36
] In my view, despite the 10(b) violation, the evidence of the
breath results should still be admitted at trial.  In relation to the seriousness
of the
Charter
breach, it is my view that the violation is on the lower
end of seriousness. Officer Rorabek was clearly concerned about Mr. Ho’s
rights. She wanted to make sure he understood what he was charged with, what
his rights were and what was happening.  She was patient despite Mr. Ho being argumentative
and difficult.  It is my view that Officer Rorabek was doing her best to help
Mr. Ho understand his rights and exercise his rights.  Moreover, no attempts
were made to elicit evidence from Mr. Ho before he spoke to counsel. In fact,
when Mr. Ho wanted to volunteer information, the officers reminded him that he
should speak to counsel first.  In my view, this first prong militates in
favour of admitting the evidence.
[
37
] In relation to the impact on the
Charter
breach on the
rights s.10(b) was meant to protect, I am satisfied that  this prong favours exclusion
of the evidence.  Mr. Ho was at the roadside for a long time. He was impaired
and distressed about his dog.  Speaking to counsel may have been helpful.   The
breach, in my view, goes to the heart of what the
Charter
protected
right was meant to protect.
[
38
] In relation to third prong, the importance of trial on merits,
this prong strongly favours inclusion of the breath samples.  Impaired driving
is a serious offense, and the results of the breath tests are reliable evidence
that are necessary to prove the charge before the court.
[
39
] When I balance al these factors, in my view it would put the
administration of justice into disrepute if the readings were excluded.
[
40
] In light of my ruling, Mr. Ho is found guilty of the offence of
operating a conveyance while having a blood alcohol concentration of over 80 mg
of alcohol in 100ml of blood.
Impaired Driving
[
41
]    Counsel for
Mr. Ho argued that there was insufficient evidence to establish that Mr. Ho’s
ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol at the time of
driving.  Counsel pointed to the absence of indicia of impairment at the
police station when the breath tests were taken and the limited indicia of
impairment as seen by officers Weagle and Rorabek.
[
42
]    In
R. v. Stellato
,
[1993] O.J.
No. 16 (CA)
, the Court of Appeal held that,
In all criminal cases the trial judge must be
satisfied as to the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt before a
conviction can be registered. Accordingly, before convicting an accused of
impaired driving, the trial judge must be satisfied that the accused’s ability
to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol or a drug.  If the
evidence of impairment is so frail as to leave the trial judge with a
reasonable doubt as to impairment, the accused must be acquitted.  If the
evidence of impairment establishes any degree of impairment ranging from slight
to great, the offence has been made out.
[
43
]
In
R. v. Bush,
2010 ONCA 554
(C.A.)
,
Justice Durno (ad hoc), further explained the notion of “slight
impairment”.  Durno J.A., stated at paragraph 47 “Slight impairment to
drive relates to a reduced ability in some measure to perform a complex motor
function whether impacting on perception or field of vision, reaction or
response time, judgment, and regard for the rules of the road”.  Moreover,
as noted in
R. v. Reeves,
[2018] O.J. No. 4431
at para 76
,
“The test does not involve a scorecard noting which indicia are present and
which are absent.  It is the totality of the circumstances which much be
considered”.  I must also be mindful that evidence that a person’s
functional ability is affected does not automatically mean that their ability
to drive is also automatically impaired (
R. v. Andrews,
1996 ABCA
23
at para
23
)
I must consider the totality of the evidence in
determining if a person’s ability to operate a motor vehicle is impaired, and
not look at every piece of evidence individually.
[
44
]
In my view the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Ho’s ability
to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol.  The evidence of impairment
is so significant in this case, that I need not rely on the breath results to
reach this conclusion.   First of all, there is the fact of the accident.  Mr.
Waqas had been at the red light for 10 seconds when Mr. Ho rear ended him. There
was no evidence that Mr. Waqas   stopped suddenly, or that other cars did
anything to cause the accident.  This is an unexplained accident.
[
45
]
I am mindful that Mr. Ho’s statement denying the accident was admitted at
trial.  As such, I must consider it.  Mr. Ho’s denial is contrary to other
evidence that I do accept.  I found Mr. Waqas to be a very credible witness and
I accept his evidence that he was rear ended.  Moreover, Officer Rorabek
testified about seeing debris at the site of the accident and slight damage to
the vehicles.  I accept her evidence on this point. This evidence further
supports a finding that an accident occurred. When I consider all the evidence,
I reject Mr. Ho’s evidence that no accident took place.
[
46
]
Secondly, in addition to the unexplained accident, I have the evidence of Mr.
Waqas that Mr. Ho was unsteady on his feet as he exited his vehicle and that he
detected an odor of alcohol on his breath.  Moreover, Officer Rorabek also
testified that she detected an odor of alcohol on his breath and that he was
unsteady on his feet.  Thirdly, Officer Rorabek testified about additional
indicia of impairment including that  Mr. Ho had a difficult time accessing his
driver’s licence. He initially provided his health card instead of his license,
then when looking further dropped his wallet and then lost his balance when he
tried to retrieve his belongings.  This all suggests impairment of his motor
skills.   Fourthly, I saw Mr. Ho on video at the time of his arrest.  His
inability to understand Officer Rorabek and his overall demeanor further
support a finding of impairment.
[
47
]
I am mindful that by the time Mr. Ho was the breath technician at 2:00 am, these
indicia were no longer present.  This does not, however, detract from the fact
that they were present shortly after the time of driving. Nor does it cause me
to doubt the credibility or reliability of the evidence about Mr. Ho’s demeanor
at the roadside.
[
48
] In my view, the
unexplained accident, the unsteadiness on his feet, the odor of alcohol, the
red eyes, the slurred speech and the difficulty Mr. Ho had retrieving his
identification combined lead me to find that the only inference on all the
evidence is that Mr. Ho’s ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by
alcohol.  I therefore find him guilty of this offence.
Released January
23, 2025                                   _____________________
Justice
Mara Greene