Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj336/2025oncj336.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Robitaille
, 2025 ONCJ 336
ATE:  2025
06 16
COURT
FILE No.: Toronto 4815 998 23 48109580
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
JEAN-CLAUDE ROBITAILLE
Before
Justice André Chamberlain
Heard
on June 3 and 4, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on June 16, 2025
Joshua Tupper.................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
André Tran......................................... counsel
for the defendant Jean-Claude Robitaille
Chamberlain
J.:
[
1
]
Jean-Claude Robitaille faces charges of assault
with a weapon and assault causing bodily harm. On Canada Day 2023, Mr.
Robitaille was at Ashbridges Bay in Toronto. At one point, after playing soccer
with a group unrelated to the complainant, Michelle Powell, Mr. Robitaille
kicked a volleyball, striking Ms. Powell in the face. I must determine whether
the kick that struck Ms. Powell was a careless act or an accident, or if it was
a deliberate or reckless act, rendering his actions a criminal offence.
Facts Not in Issue
[
2
]
On Canada Day 2023, approximately 10 to 12
police officers worked in plain clothes at Ashbridges Bay, a popular beach and
gathering spot in Toronto. They sat together, some on blankets and others on
beach chairs. Their role that day was to monitor the situation during the
Canada Day celebrations. In previous years, some individuals had been setting
off fireworks at others, leading to injuries. The officers observed the crowd
and were prepared to advise others if they spotted any issues. Michelle Powell,
Paul Brykczynski, and Andrea Yepes were part of that group of officers.
[
3
]
The group sat south of the boardwalk, on the
beach, east of a public washroom building. Mr. Robitaille joined a group
playing soccer about 20 feet from where the police were stationed. He then left
the soccer players and started walking towards the officers. He would have been
unaware of their identities or the reason for their presence.
[
4
]
A volleyball, likely belonging to the group of
officers, lay on the beach between the officers and the individuals playing
soccer. Mr. Robitaille wound up and kicked the volleyball, striking Michelle
Powell in the face. It is undisputed that the blow caused her bodily harm, given
the evidence found in Exhibit 1, Ms. Powell’s medical records and her testimony
at the trial.
The Testimony of the Witnesses
[
5
]
Michelle Powell sat in a lawn chair, facing
west, while the rest of her group sat in a semicircle. She observed a family of
about five people, all Black, playing soccer roughly 20 feet away. She noticed
Mr. Robitaille trying to join their game, which appeared to be unwelcome by the
group.
[
6
]
A few minutes later, she glanced to her right
and saw Mr. Robitaille about 10 to 15 feet away, who appeared to be staring
directly at her. He was alone, and she only noted his upper body. She did not
see if a ball was nearby. She looked away for a moment, and when she turned
back, she felt a hard impact on her face. At that time, Michelle Powell was
wearing glasses.
[
7
]
After being hit, Ms. Powell placed her hands on
her face and noticed blood on her hands: the glasses had cut her nose and face
near her left eye. A stranger provided her with tissues to wipe away the blood,
while a colleague accompanied her to a nearby ambulance for medical treatment.
She was transported to North York General Hospital for further care.
[
8
]
Paul Brykczynski
was
part of that group of officers. He sat on a blanket on the west side of the
group, facing south. He saw a cluster of soccer players and noticed Mr.
Robitaille about 10 to 15 feet away, gazing intently past him. He watched as
Mr. Robitaille wound up and kicked the ball hard in his direction. The ball
flew past him about two to three feet above his head and struck Michelle Powell
in the face. She was sitting about six feet away to the east of his position.
He described the kick as a
“really hard kick. It was a
strong kick, not like a pass in a soccer game.”
He also testified that,
aside from the soccer game that had been happening earlier, behind where Mr.
Robitaille had come from, he did not see anyone else participating in sports
nearby.
[
9
]
When asked if Mr. Robitaille was with others
while he kicked the ball, Mr. Brykczynski testified that he was apart from the
people playing soccer. Mr. Brykczynski went to check on Michelle Powell, and after
seeing Mr. Robitaille kick the ball, he began to follow him. He noted that Mr.
Robitaille did not say anything but meandered slowly toward the public bathroom
just west of where they were sitting. He watched him pick up a red and black
bag from the sand, observed him attempt to engage others in conversation, and
saw him sit on the boardwalk. Mr. Brykczynski stated that Mr. Robitaille
appeared intoxicated at the time.
[
10
]
Paul
Brykczynski
then noticed
two uniformed police officers nearby; he identified himself and instructed them
to arrest Jean-Claude Robitaille.
[
11
]
Andrea Yepes was part of the team of
plainclothes officers that day. She was sitting in a lawn chair, with Michelle
Powell immediately to her left. She observed Mr. Robitaille’s unwelcome
interaction with a group of soccer players nearby, who eventually shooed him
away. She testified that as Mr. Robitaille walked away from the group, he moved
in the direction of the officers toward a volleyball that had rolled away from
their group. One of the officers had brought it along. She saw Mr. Robitaille
look down at the ball and sweep his leg back as if he intended to kick it back
to their group. She testified he was about 10 metres away at the time. Ms.
Yepes briefly looked away, only to immediately see the bright colours of the
ball fly by and felt the wind as it struck Michelle Powell’s face and glasses.
She did not observe the kick itself.
[
12
]
Andrea Yepes glanced at Mr. Robitaille and made
brief eye contact as he walked away. She ensured that the others were informed
of who had kicked the ball while some began to follow him, and then she
attended to Michelle Powell and brought her to an ambulance.
The Law
265
(1)
A person commits an assault when
(a)
without the consent of another
person, he applies force intentionally to that other person, directly or
indirectly.
[
13
]
Assault
is a general intent offence. The intent for assault causing bodily harm is the
same as that for assault. Intoxication is not a defence for general intent
offences.
[
14
]
The
mental element of assault, defined as the intentional application of force,
encompasses recklessness:
R. v. W.(D.J.),
2011 BCCA 522
. In that case,
the British Columbia Court of Appeal (BCCA) referenced its earlier decision in
R.
v. D.M.
,
2010 BCCA 162
.
253 C.C.C. (3d) 493
with approval, stating
that “intentionally” means not done by accident or through honest mistake.
Similarly, in
R. v. Dawydiuk
, 2010 BCCA 162
, the BCCA held that
“intentionally” means not done by accident or through honest mistake.
[
15
]
The
actus
reus
of the offence of assault causing bodily harm involves the intentional
application of force against another person without their consent, resulting in
bodily harm. The
mens rea
requires that
the
risk of bodily harm was either intended or was an objectively foreseeable
consequence of the accused's conduct
:
R. v. Nurse,
1993
CanLII 14691 (ON CA)
,
[1993], O.J. No. 336
(C.A.). To establish
an assault, the Crown does not need to demonstrate that the accused intended to
assault any specific person.
[
16
]
In
other words, a defence of accident denies the existence of the necessary
mens
rea
for the offence. The accused is not obligated to prove the defence of
accident. (
R v. Whitehorne,
2005 CanLII 34553
(NLPC))
[
17
]
Determining
whether the assault was accidental requires assessing the surrounding
circumstances. In cases where circumstantial evidence suggests intent to apply
force (e.g., an existing ‘angry’ state of mind; a precipitating event; evidence
indicating intent to hit someone even if not the actual victim; or a motive to
assault based on the circumstances of the interaction), the defence is unlikely
to succeed. Conversely, a lack of circumstantial evidence from which such
intent or recklessness can be inferred may lead to an acquittal.
Analysis
[
18
]
Non-consensual force was applied to Michelle Powell when a
volleyball struck her in the face. The issue is whether Jean-Claude Robitaille
intentionally or recklessly used force, and whether the risk of bodily harm was
intended or was an objectively foreseeable consequence of that force. If the
force was not deliberate or reckless, but rather accidental or careless,
reasonable doubt may arise, as the accused did not possess the necessary
mens
rea
.
[
19
]
Jean-Claude Robitaille attended Canada Day celebrations
at Ashbridges Bay. The Toronto Police Service deployed officers, some in plain
clothes, to monitor the crowd, as some participants had aimed fireworks at
individuals in previous years. The fact that the victim of this encounter was a
police officer in plain clothes was irrelevant to the issues presented at
trial.
[
20
]
There was no evidence at trial suggesting that
Mr. Robitaille had any animus toward the victim of this incident.
Notwithstanding that Michelle Powell, who is Black herself, observed Mr.
Robitaille trying to insert himself into a soccer game among a group of Black
individuals and was rebuffed, there was no indication that Mr. Robitaille was
in any way linking his rejection from playing with that group to Michelle
Powell.
[
21
]
No one suggested that he was observing Michelle
Powell during his interactions with that group, which might have led him to
feel she was somehow connected to that event or group. No one testified that he
could have been frustrated by the interaction with the group playing soccer, which
could have caused him to act violently by kicking the volleyball towards
Michelle Powell in that manner. To claim otherwise would be mere speculation.
There is no evidence of motive in his actions.
[
22
]
What we have is a man who approaches a loose
volleyball on the ground and kicks it in the general direction of a group of
people. However, one thing is clear: he kicks it hard, and one could even say
very hard. He is not kicking it toward people who are playing soccer or
engaging in any other sport. Whether he knows that the ball belongs to them is
irrelevant.  However, the force he used to kick the ball toward a group of
people not playing sports or thinking he might do so is relevant because the
force with which the ball was directed at the group is significant.
[
23
]
Paul Brykczynski watched as Jean-Claude
Robitaille kicked the ball, which he described as a “really hard kick. It was a
strong kick, not like a pass in a soccer game.” The force with which it struck
Michelle Powell was enough to cause considerable injury, so significant that
almost two years later, she is still coping with the effects of the concussion.
Andrea Yepes not only saw how quickly the ball flew past her but also felt the
wind rushing by her head.
[
24
]
The fact that this was not in the context of a
soccer game is also significant. One might argue that if he were in the midst
of playing a soccer game with others and kicked the ball in that manner,
striking someone in the head and causing these injuries, it would, in all
likelihood, not be intentional; rather, it would be careless or an accident.
However, this was not a game, and Jean-Claude Robitaille was not returning the
ball to players engaged in soccer, nor were they looking at or paying attention
to the ball so they could resume their game. Instead, these were people sitting
around on the beach, observing the other beachgoers and the crowds in general.
[
25
]
The distance between Jean-Claude Robitaille and
the victim in this incident is also a factor. He was not returning a ball to a
group of people so far away that he had to kick it with enough force to travel
dozens of metres. Two witnesses, Powell and Brykczynski, described him as being
10 to 15 feet away. Yepes testified he was perhaps 10 metres away. He was
looking toward a large group sitting together in chairs and on blankets.
Although they all vaguely noted that there were beach volleyball courts nearby,
no one testified that other groups were engaging in sports near where this group
was seated, except for the soccer players in the opposite direction of where
the kick went.
[
26
]
Mr. Robitaille decided to kick the volleyball
forcefully in their direction, as previously described. This was not a
reflexive action. He was walking away from a group of people with whom he had
just attempted to play soccer. As he moved away from that group and toward
another gathering of individuals seated in a semicircle on the beach, he
encountered a stationary volleyball nestled in the sand and intentionally chose
to kick it. He kicked it hard toward a cluster of 10 to 12 people sitting
together, located approximately 10 feet or 10 metres away from him.
[
27
]
The lack of circumstantial evidence to infer
intent or recklessness in his actions, which could otherwise establish
reasonable doubt, is countered by the force that Jean-Claude Robitaille applied
in kicking the ball and the proximity of the group of 10 to 12 people toward
whom he directed his kick on Canada Day 2023. The powerful kick of a volleyball
in the general direction of a group of people from a short distance can only
lead one to conclude that the risk of bodily harm was either intended or
was an objectively foreseeable consequence of his conduct.
[
28
]
That Jean-Claude Robitaille may have been
intoxicated at the time seems plausible, as described by Brykczynski when he
observed Mr. Robitaille walking away, or based on his behaviour in the
body-worn camera footage in Exhibit 3. While this may offer some insight into
his lack of judgment that day, it does not excuse his behaviour, as the
assaults in this case constitute a general intent offence.
Released:  June 16, 2025
Signed:
Justice André Chamberlain