Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj397/2025oncj397.html

CITATION:
R. v. Glasman
, 2025 ONCJ 397
DATE: 
2025.07.25
ONTARIO
 COURT  OF  JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS
   MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
   AND  —
GREGORY GLASMAN
Before Justice Fergus ODonnell
Reasons for Judgment-Conviction Entered
on 3 July, 2025
Jason Chaaya....................................................................................................  
for the Crown
Robert Wulkan........................................................  
for the defendant, Gregory Glasman
Fergus ODonnell J.:
Overview
Gregory Glasman is charged with a
     single count of operating a conveyance with an excess blood-alcohol level
     on 21 July, 2024.
The background facts are
     simple.  The Ontario Provincial Police (OPP) received a call
     informing them that a vehicle had been stopped for thirty minutes at a
     rural crossroads and that the driver appeared to be asleep.  When OPP
     Constable Lyon arrived about twenty minutes later, he and another officer
     found a vehicle consistent with that description (right down to the plate
     number) stopped at that intersection.  Mr. Glasman was in the
     driver's seat, the only occupant of the truck, with the keys in the
     ignition and the engine running.  The in-car video evidence showed that it
     took almost a minute for the officers to rouse him.  There was a
     smell of alcohol from his breath and he seemed disoriented, kind of dazed
     and confused.  He initially opened the wrong window for the officers
     and had some trouble finding his door handle.  He had to ask the
     officers where he was and why he was there.  He had no trouble
     walking and was able to follow instructions once outside the
     vehicle.
Seven minutes after arriving,
     Constable Lyon read Mr. Glasman the "approved screening
     device" (“ASD”) demand.  Mr. Glasman managed that process with
     no difficulty, but failed the ASD and was placed under arrest--because he
     was "impaired", to use Constable Lyon’s language. 
     Constable Lyon read Mr. Glasman his rights to counsel in the full,
     traditional format including access to duty counsel and Mr. Glasman said
     he did not want to call a lawyer at that point.
Constable Lyon transported Mr. Glasman
     to the OPP detachment.  Mr. Glasman did not ask for counsel at this
     time but did ask a few times where he was.  At the detachment,
     Constable Lyon read Mr. Glasman the right to counsel again. 
     Constable Lyon told the breath technician, OPP Sergeant Mask, his grounds
     for arrest and Mr. Glasman was handed over to Sergeant Mask.  In the
     breath room, Sergeant Mask read Mr. Glasman his rights to counsel again
     and at that point, Mr. Glasman expressed an interest in speaking with duty
     counsel.  For reasons that are incomprehensible to me, Sergeant Mask said
     to Mr. Glasman that he would have to provide the breath samples, whether
     he spoke with a lawyer or not.  However, within a minute of Mr. Glasman’s
     request to speak with a lawyer, Sergeant Mask called out for Constable
     Lyon to call duty counsel, which was done right away.   He spoke with duty
     counsel for about ten minutes.  Mr. Glasman subsequently provided samples
     that resulted in readings of 160 and 150 mg of alcohol in 100 ml of blood.
     As a result of those results, Mr. Glasman was charged with "operation over
     80 mg of alcohol".
The interaction between Mr. Glasman
     and Sergeant Mask was recorded and the video was played during the trial.
The Witnesses
The three witnesses I heard from
     were Constable Lyon, Sergeant Mask and Mr. Glasman.  I make the
     following general observations about their evidence.
First, Constable Lyon was a very,
     very green police officer.  Indeed, he had been a police officer for
     at most a few months at the time of Mr. Glasman's arrest. This trial was
     the first time he had ever testified.  He had, however, that most
     attractive characteristic a police officer or any other witness could
     have:  a complete absence of guile or artifice or agenda, or, put
     otherwise, evidence that left no doubt about its honesty and the absence
     of any inclination to evasiveness or cleverness or cuteness or
     combativeness in his answers.  Those characteristics reflect well
     upon him and will serve him well in the future.  Would that that were so
     of all witnesses.
Sergeant Mask was a far, far more
     experienced officer and witness than Constable Lyon.  It was contended on
     Mr. Glasman’s behalf that I should be dismissive of Sergeant Mask’s
     testimony because he was “often evasive”.  I think that “evasive” is too
     strong a word, although I understand the exchanges Mr. Wulkan was
     referring to.  I would concede that other officers faced with Mr. Wulkan’s
     questions (for example about how Sergeant Mask interpreted words or
     gestures from Mr. Glasman) might have given different answers or might
     have been more willing to engage in interpretation of those behaviours. 
     To do so would be consistent with applying one’s life experience to one’s
     interactions with others, which can be fair game.  At the same time, another
     witness might perfectly fairly perceive such questions as being an
     invitation to speculation and, having seen my share of evasive witnesses,
     I cannot say that Sergeant Mask’s intent or impact clearly fell into that
     category.  For the large part, his answers effectively read as, “I can’t
     read Mr. Glasman’s mind” and the fact that other witnesses might have been
     comfortable interpreting Mr. Glasman’s reactions in the manner requested
     by Mr. Wulkan is neither here nor there.  Based on my experience the worst
     that can be said about Sergeant Mask’s evidence was that he came across as
     a bit rigid on some occasions.  Excess rigidity can be a precursor or
     companion characteristic to evasion, but not necessarily so.  I was
     generally satisfied with Sergeant Mask’s evidence.
It was suggested that Sergeant Mask
     was intimidating, both in court and in the breath room video.  This came
     out both in Mr. Glasman’s testimony and in Mr. Wulkan’s submissions.  It
     gave rise to perhaps the most trenchant observation made during the trial,
     by Mr. Chaaya, when he wondered if we were all seeing the same video.  The
     very same question had already occurred to me, in relation both to
     Sergeant Mask’s presentation in the breath room and in the courtroom.  The
     defence characterization of Sergeant Mask as intimidating or overbearing
     or evasive is not made out by what I saw in either setting.
Mr. Glasman came across in both
     settings—the breath room and the courtroom—as generally quiet and
     mild-mannered.  It was the officers’ evidence that he was cooperative
     throughout and Constable Lyon noted that Mr. Glasman was expressing
     remorse from the get-go.  As with all witnesses in this or any trial, in
     assessing their evidence I have to make determinations of both credibility
     and reliability. To the outsider those might seem like pure synonyms, but
     the former refers to a witness’s honesty or a witness’s wilful desire to
     deceive whereas the latter asks if circumstances including ability to
     observe, memory, etc. are such that the witness’s evidence, even an honest
     witness’s evidence, can safely be relied upon.  In the present case, I have
     no reason to question Mr. Glasman’s honesty, but I have serious reasons to
     question his reliability, largely because what he describes does not match
     what is on the breath room video or how Sergeant Mask presented in court. 
     I do not make that determination lightly and I fully understand that there
     is an imbalance of power when a citizen deals with the police and that
     courtrooms are stressful places, but there is nothing in Sergeant Mask’s
     behaviour in either the courtroom or breath room that could objectively be
     read as intimidating, even if Mr. Glasman has come to believe that to be
     true.  With one brief, but avoidable, exception, which I address below,
     Sergeant Mask behaved flawlessly throughout his interaction with Mr.
     Glasman.  Otherwise, I do not perceive anything in Sergeant Mask’s words,
     tone, body language, general demeanour or behaviour that could satisfy the
     descriptors Mr. Glasman used, which included “agitated” and
     “intimidating”.  Mr. Glasman’s assertion, for example, that Sergeant Mask
     became intimidating when Mr. Glasman changed his mind and asked for
     counsel makes no sense when one considers that within seconds, perhaps a
     minute of that request and Sergeant Mask’s question about what happened to
     change Mr. Glasman’s mind about counsel, Sergeant Mask was calling out to
     Constable Lyon to make the call to duty counsel.  If this was an attempt
     at intimidation, it was very poorly executed.  I also note that Mr.
     Glasman testified that Sergeant Mask’s demeanour changed when he asked to
     speak with counsel; any such change of demeanour is entirely absent from
     the breath room video.
The Issues
The argument in this trial focused
     on the following issues:
Did Constable Lyon’s failure to
      identify the “approved screening device” by specific model number
      undermine his and the court’s ability to rely on the approved screening
      device test result as providing grounds for Mr. Glasman’s arrest?
Was Mr. Glasman’s arrest unlawful
      because he was arrested for impaired driving rather than for excess blood
      alcohol?
Did Sergeant Mask interfere with
      Mr. Glasman’s right to consult with counsel by telling him on more than
      one occasion that he would still have to provide Intoxilyzer samples,
      whether he spoke with counsel or not?
If any of these alleged
      constitutional shortcomings is made out, what is the appropriate remedy
      under s. 24(2) of the
Charter
?
The “Approved Screening Device”
Constable Lyon testified about the
     serial number of the device he used to take a reading of Mr. Glasman's
     breath at the rural intersection, but not the precise model.  He did
     say it was a Draeger.  When challenged in cross-examination as to how
     he could be certain it was an approved instrument if he did not know the
     model number, he replied that he was confident that it was an approved
     instrument because it is the device used by officers across the province
     and it was provided to him by his police service.  Mr. Wulkan argues
     that on the evidence before me I cannot be satisfied that the device used
     by Constable Lyon was in fact an approved screening device, which means
     that I cannot rely on the "fail" outcome as grounds for Mr.
     Glasman's arrest, which means that he was arrested and detained and
     required to provide samples of his breath without the requisite grounds
     for detention and search, all in violation of sections 8 and 9 of the
Charter
.
I disagree.  More importantly, the
     highest court in the province disagrees and has done for over thirty years. 
     The Court of Appeal for Ontario addressed this issue in
R. v. Gundy,
2008
     ONCA 284
, in the course of which Rosenberg J.A. stated for the Court:
[
47
]  
      In my view, cases holding that the officer did
not have reasonable and probable grounds because, although the officer referred
to the
device
as an
approved
screening
device
, he or she used a shorthand reference to the
device
or transposed some of the
numbers
or letters are wrongly decided.
In
the absence of some credible evidence to the contrary, it is not reasonable to
infer that an officer who says that he or she used an
approved
screening
device
actually
used an unapproved
device
.  That was the
holding of this court in
R. v. Kosa
(1992),
42 M.V.R. (2d) 290
at 291
:
We are of the view that the manufacturer's
model
number
given by the officer in
evidence as Model JA3 rather than Model J3A as set forth in the
regulations was no more than an innocent transposition of a
number
and letter and that the unchallenged
assertion by the officer that it was an
approved
screening
device
is
sufficient proof thereof. If such is the case, there is no need to look further
to justify the finding of reasonable and probable grounds.
[Emphasis added.]
And lest there be any residual doubt
from the foregoing, in its closing summary
in
Gundy
of how the admission
of evidence that is the object of a
Charter
argument should be analyzed
at trial, the Court proceeded to note:
[50]     
   To summarize, on a charge of “over 80” or impaired driving,
where an issue arises as to the admissibility of the results of the
Intoxilizer/Breathalyzer analysis, the trial court should proceed as follows:
Generally
…..
6.         In the
absence of credible evidence to the contrary, the officer’s testimony that he
or she made a demand with an
approved
screening
device
is
sufficient evidence that the officer had the requisite reasonable belief. 
The officer is not required to give the particular model
number
or otherwise identify the
device
.  Obvious errors such as incomplete reference
to the model
number
do not undermine the
officer’s testimony that the
device
was
an
approved
screening
device
.
There is no credible basis on the
     record before me upon which to conclude that Constable Lyon was wrong in
     his assertion that he had used an “approved screening device” to sample
     Mr. Glasman’s breath at the roadside.  It was suggested to me that because
     Constable Glasman had been cross-examined on the issue in this case, that
Gundy
does not govern.  That might be a good argument if the
     cross-examination had produced “credible evidence” (to use the language of
Gundy
) creating doubt about Constable Lyon’s assertion, but that
     did not happen here.
Accordingly
, Mr. Glasman’s “fail” result on
     the approved screening device gave Constable Lyon reasonable grounds to
     arrest him.
Arrested for the Wrong Offence?
The next issue chronologically is
     that Constable Lyon testified that he arrested Mr. Glasman for impaired
     driving, not for driving with excess blood alcohol.  This, Mr. Wulkan
     argues, means that Mr. Glasman was wrongfully arrested in violation of his
Charter
rights.  In support of this Mr. Wulkan relies on his
     cross-examination of Constable Lyon with respect to the issue of whether
     he did or did not have grounds to arrest Mr. Glasman for impaired driving. 
     That cross-examination ranged from Constable Lyon’s own understanding of
     the grounds for arrest for each offence to whether or not some defendants
     get charged with one of the two offences without getting charged with the
     other, something that Constable Lyon agreed occurs with some regularity.
Constable Lyon agreed that he had
     not had sufficient grounds to charge Mr. Glasman with impaired operation
     in light of the objective facts known to him as a result of his attendance
     on the scene.  If he had had those grounds, he would have gone directly to
     an arrest for impaired operation and foregone the approved screening
     device process.  This line of questioning concluded with Mr. Wulkan
     suggesting to Constable Lyon that if he had had grounds for impaired
     driving, he would have charged that offence, with Constable Lyon agreeing
     that was correct.
The evidence, however, must be
     assessed in its entirety, not based on one answer to a particular question. 
     What is not clear in Mr. Wulkan’s question is what time frame he is asking
     about, i.e. before the approved screening device result, after the result,
     at the police station with the benefit of reflection or whenever. 
     However, the entire context of all of the questions leading up to that
     final question was the process leading up to the decision to administer
     the approved screening device and there is no indication in this last
     question that Mr. Wulkan’s time-focus had changed or that Constable Lyon
     understood it to have changed.  I cannot and do not, therefore, take
     Constable Lyon’s answer as accepting that he had no reasonable grounds to
     arrest Mr. Glasman for impaired driving after he had the fail result on
     the approved screening device.  This is particularly so when I consider
     Constable Lyon’s very clear rejection of Mr. Wulkan’s suggestion to him that
     a person failing the approved screening device does not mean the person is
     impaired.  Constable Lyon was very clear that he considers a person who
     has failed the approved screening device to be impaired, a conclusion that
     was entirely reasonable.  That means that as soon as he had the ASD
     result, in Constable Lyon’s evidence, that was itself proof of impairment
     by alcohol, which in turn would mean that he subjectively believed he had
     grounds for arrest for impaired operation.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that
     when Constable Lyon arrested Mr. Glasman for impaired operation, he did in
     totality have grounds to conclude that Mr. Glasman was impaired by alcohol
     given the condition he was in, asleep in his truck in a live lane of
     traffic, difficult to rouse, opening the wrong window, having trouble
     opening the car door, uncertain where he was and having provided a
     screening sample over the legal limit.  The fact that Mr. Glasman was not staggering
     about once he got out of his truck is neither here nor there; impairment
     in the context of motor vehicle operation is not the province of the
     staggering, falling-down slobbering, incoherent drunkards that one might
     see in some movies.  That may be one presentation, but a person can be
     entirely unfit to drive due to impairment without any of those gross
     manifestations because impairment is defined by much more subtle shortcomings
     in ability to perceive, judge and react in a timely fashion, all of which
     are affected by alcohol consumption.  Looked at in the reasonable grounds
     context Constable Lyon was governed by in his decision to arrest, it is
     not open to rational dispute that once he knew the minimum level of
     alcohol in Mr. Glasman’s blood from the ASD result, which he said was over
     80,
[1]
that information, even standing alone, provides reasonable grounds for
     belief that Mr. Glasman was impaired by alcohol.
[2]
Accordingly, I am satisfied that
     the evidence establishes that, at the time Constable Lyon arrested Mr.
     Glasman, he did in fact have grounds to believe his ability to drive was
     impaired by alcohol and he also believed subjectively that he had those
     grounds.  This was, therefore, a lawful arrest.
Moving from there, whether Mr.
     Glasman was ultimately charged with impaired driving or driving with
     excess blood alcohol is neither here nor there.  These are decisions that
     thousands of officers will make in tens of thousands of cases across the
     country.  They will make charging decisions on a case-by-case basis and
     any given officer will not have the same charging approach as any other
     officer.  This is a matter determined by the facts of each case, the
     experience of each officer and the philosophy of the officer, but the fact
     that Mr. Glasman was not ultimately charged with impaired driving in no
     way whatsoever undermines whether or not there were objectively reasonable
     grounds to have arrested him for that charge or to have proceeded with
     that charge.  In this case, he was arrested for impaired and the police
     laid an excess blood alcohol charge.  No constitutional issue arises
     therefrom.
I note that even if there had been
     no grounds to arrest Mr. Glasman for impaired operation, so long as there
     were the inescapably clear grounds for the “over 80” charge, the
     significance of any such “false arrest”, while regrettable, would have
     been trifling because all the negative consequences of such a “false
     arrest” would have been exactly the same for the “false arrest” (the
     impaired, in Mr. Wulkan’s argument) and for the clearly valid charge (the
     “over 80” charge that was ultimately laid).  The idea that such a minor slip
     of the tongue by a police officer, with no conceivable real-world impact
     on the defendant should lead to potential exclusion under s. 24(2) would
     be ambitious in the extreme.
The Right to Counsel Issue
Mr. Wulkan also argues that
     Sergeant Mask violated Mr. Glasman's s. 10(b) right to counsel. 
     This, Mr. Wulkan says, arises out of comments by Sergeant Mask to Mr.
     Glasman in the breath room to the effect that Mr. Glasman would have to
     provide two breath samples whether he spoke to a lawyer or not, as well as
     Sergeant Mask asking Mr. Glasman what had changed between when Mr. Glasman
     had turned down counsel when it was offered minutes before during parading
     and him now asking to speak to counsel short minutes later.
As I said earlier, I am perplexed
     by why any officer, including an officer of Sergeant Mask’s experience
     would tell a detainee that he has to provide samples, regardless of
     whether he speaks to a lawyer or not or would ask a detainee, what has
     changed in the detainee’s mind since he just declined counsel in the
     booking process literally minutes earlier.  The statements about the
     obligation to provide a sample are absolutely true, but the constitutional
     concern is that it might send the message to a detainee that there is no
     point in talking to counsel since the detainee will have to provide
     samples no matter what.  That could be interpreted as demeaning of the
     utility of counsel or suggesting the futility of bothering to speak with
     counsel.  All of that is concerning because a detainee is clearly in an
     imbalance of power and the opportunity to speak with counsel allows him or
     her a chance to inform him- or herself of their rights, their options,
     potential consequences and any nuances that the detainee may wish to
     discuss privately rather than with the police officer.
The same concern arises with
     Sergeant Mask’s question to Mr. Glasman about why he had changed his mind
     about consulting with counsel.  While it may seem odd that a person
     changes his or her mind that quickly, any such “oddity” is irrelevant. 
     Subject to what I say later, it is none of the officer’s concern. 
     Exercising or not exercising one’s right to counsel is not a “one and
     done” kind of right.  The danger with an officer asking why is again that
     the question could be seen as an implicit discouragement from exercising a
     core constitutional right.  If it is true as Sergeant Mask testified, that
     he simply wanted to understand if there had been anything in his or
     Constable Lyon’s treatment of Mr. Glasman that had raised concerns (and I
     think in light of the overall evidence that that is actually true), the time
     for asking that question while still avoiding any risk of jeopardizing the
     detainee’s s. 10(b) rights, would be after the entire process is over,
     just as it would be appropriate after a person has had access to counsel
     but then refuses to provide a sample, to tell that person that refusal is
     itself an offence (while leaving counsel out of the sentence entirely).
In virtually every case where utterances
     such as these are made the
Charter
challenge for the Crown would be
     insurmountable, except for one enormous difference:  Sergeant Mask
     immediately called out to Constable Lyon to arrange counsel and made it
     clear to Mr. Glasman that he was not causing any inconvenience by
     exercising his right. Mr. Glasman then spoke with counsel for about ten
     minutes before providing the samples.
There is, necessarily, a chasm
     between this case and cases where officers make similar comments and the
     defendant does not exercise his or her right to counsel.  These utterances
     are still concerning, because of the risk they create, but if the
     constitutional right to access to counsel is actually satisfied, then
     there is no breach.
In this case, however, Mr. Glasman
     testified that he had limited his time with counsel because he thought
     there might be “repercussions” from the police in light of how Sergeant
     Mask had behaved.  Obviously, if I believed that was true, a s. 10(b)
     breach would be made out, but given the totality of the exchange seen on
     video and given the serious concerns I have stated about Mr. Glasman’s reliability
     as a witness, perceiving agitation and intimidation on Sergeant Mask’s
     part where none such was objectively evident, I reject his assertion that
     he would have spoken to counsel longer.  Indeed, Sergeant Mask
     specifically said to Mr. Glasman after arranging for counsel that Mr.
     Glasman was not inconveniencing him in any way.  Sergeant Mask was very
     foolish to have said the things he said about the samples regardless of
     speaking to counsel and for asking the reason for Mr. Glasman’s change of
     heart, but I do not take anything he said as being insincere.
It may well be that Mr. Glasman has
     come to believe he was time-limited, but I do not take that as being even
     remotely factual, never mind that it is more likely than not.
In the course of his questions and
     submissions, Mr. Wulkan sought to portray Mr. Glasman as a submissive,
     deer-in-headlights sort of character whose vulnerability should have been
     obvious to anyone, suggesting that his hand gestures, for example, were a marker
     of submission that Sergeant Mask should have picked up on and that showed
     a particular vulnerability.  Sergeant Mask did not accept that
     characterization and neither do I on all of the evidence.  Mr. Glasman was
     definitely quiet, calm and polite.  He was never argumentative or
     obnoxious.  He was uncertain about what to do and to some extent sought
     guidance from Sergeant Mask about that, which Sergeant Mask made clear was
     not advice he could give.  In other words, Mr. Glasman came across in the
     same way that the vast majority of impaired-driving detainees come across
     in the breath room.  Other than the imbalance of power that is always
     inherent in these situations, there was no particular vulnerability on his
     part.
[3]
To the contrary, I noted that at one point, Mr. Glasman tried to parlay
     some supposed fraternity between firefighters (his profession) and the
     police, which can only be taken as a hint at some accommodation that
     Sergeant Mask might make in recognition of that fraternity.  To his
     credit, Sergeant Mask made it clear to Mr. Glasman that that was
     irrelevant to his role as a police officer, but what it shows is that Mr.
     Glasman was not overwhelmed by the situation.
I am satisfied that there was no breach
     of Mr. Glasman’s right to counsel.  To the contrary, while I remain
     perplexed about Sergeant Mask intermingling any comment about the
     inevitability of breath samples with access to counsel discussions, I am
     satisfied on the entirety of the evidence and the entirety of Sergeant
     Mask’s comments to Mr. Glasman that Sergeant Mask made the availability of
     counsel clear and facilitated Mr. Glasman’s access to counsel immediately
     upon Mr. Glasman’s change of mind and that none of Sergeant Mask’s
     unfortunate comments compromised the quality of Mr. Glasman’s access to
     counsel, including its duration and coverage of any issues Mr. Glasman may
     have wanted to discuss privately.
In the result, no breach of the
     right to counsel has been made out.
It is for the foregoing reasons
     that I conclude that there was no breach of Mr. Glasman’s rights under the
Charter
.  With respect to the merits, the charge was clearly made
     out beyond a reasonable doubt, leading me to find Mr. Glasman guilty as
     charged.
Released:
    25 July, 2025
[1]
This
was an error on Constable Lyon’s part as the ASD regime defines a pass as 0-50,
a warn as 50-100 and a fail as anything over 100.  That error, however, is
neither here nor there in the circumstances of this case.
[2]
The
ASD result provides grounds to the arresting officer, for both the “over 80”
and “impaired offence”.  For evidentiary purposes at trial, however, if an
impaired driving charge is laid and is dependent on the blood alcohol level, it
would likely be necessary for the Crown to call a biologist to interpret the
breathalyzer results and their relationship to impairment beyond a reasonable
doubt.
[3]
It
was suggested that Mr. Glasman’s hand gestures demonstrated submissiveness or
vulnerability.  Some gestures may convey that impression, but none of Mr.
Glasman’s gestures were, either alone or in combination with his evidence,
demonstrative of that.  The reality is that some people are extremely
expressive with their hands all of the time and others not at all.  I have no
basis upon which to read Mr. Glasman’s gestures as reflective of anything other
than normal conversation.