Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj389/2025oncj389.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Chevis
, 2025 ONCJ 389
DATE: 
2025 07 18
COURT
FILE No.:  Elliot Lake 22-12200289-00, 23-12200085-01
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
STEPHENIE CHEVIS
Before
Justice G. Jenner
Heard
on December 2, 10, and 11, 2024; January 24, 2025; July 18, 2025
Released
orally and in writing on July 18, 2025
Leila Mehkeri....................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Sharon Sabourin..................................... 
counsel for the defendant, Stephenie Chevis
JENNER J.:
REASONS RE:
ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE AND APPLICABILITY OF SOLICITOR-CLIENT PRIVILEGE
I.
Introduction
[
1
]
Ms. Chevis has pleaded guilty to fraud. These
reasons address an evidentiary issue that arose in the course of a
Gardiner
hearing
at sentencing, wherein the Crown is seeking to adduce evidence of aggravating features
of the fraud, specifically its full quantum. The evidentiary issue relates to
the scope of potential solicitor-client privilege, and to the extent it does
apply, whether that privilege might be pierced.
II.
Procedural History
[
2
]
Ms. Chevis was originally scheduled to proceed
to trial in relation to allegations of fraud. Allegedly, over a 10-year period,
while employed as a secretary with bookkeeping responsibilities at Brown and
Fabris Law Office (BFLO), she fraudulently took funds from the law
firm’s general and trust accounts, by issuing cheques to her benefit. The trial
was scheduled on a with-or-without counsel basis, and Ms. Chevis was
self-represented in the months leading up to the trial dates.
[
3
]
Shortly before trial, Ms. Chevis hired counsel, Ms. Sabourin, and
the court was informed that the matter would now be for guilty plea, but that
some of the dates set for trial would be needed for a
Gardiner
hearing,
as the parties were not agreed on the full quantum of the fraud.
[
4
]
On December 2, 2024, Ms. Chevis pleaded guilty
to one count of fraud over $5,000.  Ms. Chevis agreed she took at least $60,000.
At the sentencing hearing, the Crown would lead evidence to seek to establish
their theory that Ms. Chevis was responsible for fraud in excess  $800,000. There
was an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) provided pursuant to
s. 724(1)
of the
Criminal
Code
.
[
5
]
Evidence was heard on December 2, 10, and 11,
2024. The court heard from the following Crown witnesses:
(1)
James Yakimovitch, forensic accountant;
(2)
Colleen Cowan, a Chartered Professional
Accountant (CPA) and expert in PC Law, the accounting software used by BFLO;
(3)
Cst. Pritchard, who was the case managing
officer for the investigation;
(4)
Zoe Fabris, who is now a lawyer, but during the
relevant time was employed intermittently as a summer student with BFLO, and is
also the daughter of Mr. Antoine-René Fabris, the managing partner of BFLO; and
(5)
Linda Browne, a clerk employed by BFLO during
much of the relevant time.
III.
Admitted Circumstances of the Offence
[
6
]
The following facts were presented in the ASF.
[
7
]
Ms. Chevis was previously named Stephenie
Fisher, and was previously married to Robert Fisher. During the time of the
offence, her spouse was Jason Lecompte.
[
8
]
In 2007, Ms. Chevis was hired at BFLO. BFLO
provides a range of legal services. Mr. Fabris was the sole legal practitioner
during the offence period. Ms. Chevis became a secretary whose responsibility
included some bookkeeping and remained in that position until her employment
was terminated in June 2017.
[
9
]
Ms. Chevis was in the habit of working later at night, explaining that
she found it easier to do her accounting software work at night when no other
employees were using the computer.
[
10
]
Towards
the end of 2016, Mr. Fabris began encountering difficulties with Ms. Chevis’s
work performance and became concerned about the amount of money coming into the
firm. Despite working full-time, he found he was unable draw personal funds
from the business, as the firm’s general account was dipping into the negative.
Mr. Fabris’s concerns caused him to install security cameras in the office in
January 2017, and to instruct Ms. Chevis to discontinue her after-hours work habit.
In April and May 2017, Ms. Chevis was surveilled entering the office after
midnight and she was terminated from employment in June 2017.
[
11
]
Following
Ms. Chevis’ departure, Mr. Fabris hired CPA Colleen Cowan to assist with the firm’s
monthly reconciliations, a process required by the Law Society of Ontario (then
Law Society of Upper Canada). Ms. Cowan had previously performed services for
the firm in 2007, including providing instruction to Ms. Chevis in relation to
bank reconciliations and PCLaw, the accounting software used by BFLO.
[
12
]
Ms.
Cowan quickly discovered that there had been a manipulation of accounting
records for some time, and that the firm had been defrauded of funds. In
conducting her reconciliation of the trust account, she noted the following:
•
Certain trust cheques which had been printed and drawn on the
trust account had not been recorded anywhere in PCLaw. Ms. Cowan created a
specific account within PCLaw with the designation “99999” to record such
specific cheques in PCLaw.
•
Certain trust cheques were altered after being printed and were
recorded in PCLaw with different information. Sometimes the payee had been
changed. Other times the amount had been changed.
•
Certain deposits were recorded in PCLaw, but not received by the
bank.
[
13
]
Ms.
Cowan noted similar issues with respect to the general account. Ms. Cowan
worked alongside Zoe Fabris (Mr. Fabris’s daughter) to compile the accounting
records.
[
14
]
Mr.
Fabris contacted Ms. Chevis to ask her what had been going on. Ms. Chevis broke
down and told him she had stolen some money the previous year, in the amount of
$60,000 to $70,000.
[
15
]
Mr.
Fabris hired a lawyer, Nidia Liva, and notified the Law Society of the
misappropriation of client funds. Ms. Liva in turn retained a forensic
accountant, James Yakimovich, to fully identify errors and improper entries
made by Ms. Chevis during her employment. Mr. Yakimovich’s received the
compiled documents from Ms. Cowan, and his investigation confirmed funds
misappropriated from both the firm’s trust and general accounts.
[
16
]
Ms.
Chevis was arrested on September 7, 2022. During a video interview with the
North Bay OPP, she explained that her conduct was the result of drug and
gambling addictions. She admitted to taking $60,000.
[
17
]
That
remains the extent of Ms. Chevis’s admission, and the basis for her plea of
guilt. She agrees that over the course of her employment with BFLO, she
fraudulently took funds from the law firm’s general and trust accounts. She did
so by issuing cheques either explicitly to her benefit, or indirectly to her
benefit, such as by issuing cheques to her then-spouse.
[
18
]
The
following additional facts concerning BFLO are admitted:
•
PCLaw could only be accessed from a standalone computer at the
back of the BFLO office. Ms. Chevis told another employee (Ashley Akers) that
accessing unrelated files on PCLaw could cause problems with the accounting.
•
Mr. Fabris discovered in his review of BFLO accounting records
that fictitious client files had been created in PCLaw.
•
BFLO employee Linda Browne noticed on occasion that numbered
trust cheques were missing or were not in sequence. For example, PCLaw would
indicate that the next available trust cheque should be a certain number, but
that number would be missing.
•
The only person who was a signatory for the trust account was Mr.
Fabris. Both Mr. Fabris and Ms. Browne were signatories for the general
account.
•
Ms. Chevis would buy and sell houses and her real estate
transactions were handled by BFLO. Ms. Chevis would bring in cheques and
deposit them into the trust account in anticipation of a house purchase.
Sometimes Ms. Chevis would leave money in the trust account from the sale of the
home. Ms. Chevis sometimes had as many as seven houses.
[
19
]
As
part of their own investigation, the OPP obtained bank records connected to Ms.
Chevis. D/C Pritchard compiled the financial information. Many of the
fraudulent cheques were made out directly to Ms. Chevis. Others did not
specially name her. The following facts are admitted with respect to those
cheques:
•
The law firm cheques
: Cheques totaling $75,914.53 were
made out to three separate law firms: Don Kirsh Law, Caitons Law, and Rose and
Rose Law. These three law firms sent emails containing collections
correspondence to Ms. Chevis’s attention at BFLO. The firms sought payment from
Ms. Chevis for unknown services and mortgages in default. The payment amounts
in these communications correspond to the amounts on the fraudulent cheques
identified.
•
The City of Elliot Lake cheques
: Cheques totalling $29,966.59
were made out to the City of Elliot Lake. They were not related to BFLO
business. Correspondence from the City of Elliot Lake showed the money was
credited to Ms. Chevis’s accounts with the City of Elliot Lake.
•
The Jason Lecompte cheques
: Two unauthorized cheques
($1,200 and $5,630) were made out to Ms. Chevis’s then-spouse, Jason Lecompte,
and were deposited into his accounts.
•
The Robert Fisher cheque
: One unauthorized cheque for
$2,000 was made out to Ms. Chevis’s former spouse, Robert Fisher, and was
deposited into Ms. Chevis’s bank account.
•
The Guelph Wrestling cheque
: One fraudulent cheque for
$400 was made out to Guelph Wrestling. Ms. Chevis’s son was a member of the
Guelph Wrestling Club.
•
The Hydro One Network cheque
: One fraudulent cheque for
$3,250 was made out to Hydro One Network. The cheque was credited to Ms.
Chevis’s account at Hydro One.
[
20
]
Additionally,
the review of fraudulent cheques showed many unauthorized cheques made out to
the benefit of various financial institutions. The ASF does not speak to the
cumulative quantum of these cheques but indicates that D/C Pritchard’s review
showed the cheques went to Ms. Chevis’s accounts at the various institutions.
[
21
]
Lastly,
as a result of the fraud, Mr. Fabris was required to personally replenish the
shortfall in his firm’s trust account. In addition to cash on hand, he had to
rely on a line of credit, remortgage his personal residence, and liquidate over
$300,000 in RRSPs.
IV.
The scope
of the
Gardiner
hearing shifts and solicitor-client privilege is raised
[
22
]
Based
on the ASF, the court understood the issue for determination in the
Gardiner
hearing to be limited to the quantum of the fraud committed, and in a
secondary sense the extent to which Ms. Chevis benefitted. I pause here to note
that that while the extent Ms. Chevis benefitted may be a relevant as evidence
she was responsible for a certain transaction or quantum of fraud and may be a factor
bearing on the appropriate sentence, a personal financial benefit to the
offender is not an essential element of the offence of fraud.
[
23
]
The
court’s understanding of the issues to be determined was based on a consistent
description in the ASF of the transactions at issue as “fraudulent” or
“unauthorized” and the stipulation, at para. 5 of the ASF, that “[i]t is agreed that Chevis was solely responsible for this fraud.” Nonetheless,
as the hearing proceeded, it became clear that the issues to be determined in
the
Gardiner
were wider in scope.
[
24
]
On December 10, 2024, Ms. Sabourin, on behalf of
Ms. Chevis, paused her examination of former BFLO employee Linda Browne, to
raise an evidentiary issue with the court. She sought to elicit evidence from
the witness concerning three transactions. On two occasions, Ms. Sabourin
indicated, a client of BFLO was an estate client for whom Mr. Fabris held a
power of attorney. Ms. Sabourin also alluded to private mortgages that had been
issued on behalf of clients of the firm. She further indicated that a client of
the firm had come into a significant amount of money, had willed funds to both
Mr. Fabris and Ms. Chevis, and Mr. Fabris had not executed that will as
written, but instead had used that client as a private mortgagee for Ms.
Chevis.
[
25
]
Both the defence and the Crown recognized that
these inquiries raised potential issues of solicitor-client privilege. It is
important to note that Ms. Chevis explicitly waived any solicitor-client
privilege she may have had in respect of any of these transactions or any of
her business with BFLO. The privilege concerns were with respect to BFLO’s
other clients as potential privilege-holders.
[
26
]
When this issue arose, my concern was not
initially limited to questions of solicitor-client privilege. The areas being
probed in cross-examination, including this new area being canvassed, seemed to
run contrary to my own understanding of the admissions in the ASF and the
issues to be determined in the
Gardiner
hearing. Questions had
been posed to explore whether persons other than Ms. Chevis might have had the
opportunity to commit some of the alleged fraud, whether some of the identified
transactions were legitimate rather than fraudulent, and now whether Ms. Chevis
was being framed, so to speak, for the fraud or poor bookkeeping of others. Mindful
that the ASF stipulated that “Chevis was solely responsible
for this fraud” and that the cheques in issue were consistently described as
“fraudulent” not “allegedly fraudulent,” I sought clarification from the
parties as to the ASF and their understanding of the issues for my
determination.
[
27
]
Hearing from the parties, it was clear they were
not
ad idem
with respect to the proper interpretation of the ASF. The
Crown, despite being potentially prejudiced by the defence’s strained
interpretation of the ASF, did not request procedural or substantive relief
from the court. The Crown, rather retreated from its interpretation of the ASF,
and agreed that the defence was clearly putting the Crown to its onus on the
total quantum of the fraud. The Crown agreed that I should not read the ASF as
excluding the possibility that a legitimate transaction was mis-posted and labeled
as fraudulent or that another person may have been responsible for a fraud attributed
to Ms. Chevis.
[
28
]
The parties were not able to immediately address
the question of solicitor-client privilege, and as the court day was coming to
an end, I instructed the parties to prepare five-page written submissions
addressing the procedural and substantive issues of solicitor-client privilege.
On the subsequent date, January 24, 2025, Ms. Sabourin was ill, and the hearing
could not continue. Only the Crown had filed submissions with respect to
solicitor-client privilege. I ordered that the outstanding submissions be
provided by February 13, 2025, which was a date selected to confirm
continuation dates.
[
29
]
In those submissions, which were subsequently
provided, the defence indicates it wishes to explore the following areas in
cross-examinations and potentially in leading its own evidence:
(1)
Whether a client of BFLO, who I will refer to as
“the Lottery Winner”, won a large sum of money in a lottery, was found not to
have capacity, and whether the firm took over carriage of the individual’s
finances through a trust account;
(2)
Whether private mortgages were thereafter given
by the firm to Ms. Chevis using the Lottery Winner’s funds;
(3)
Whether there are other private mortgages given
to Ms. Chevis using another unnamed client’s funds; and
(4)
Whether an estates client being assisted by BFLO
had funds deposited to Ms. Chevis’ account as benefits owing to her.
[
30
]
Ms. Chevis proclaims to have knowledge of these
transactions already. She is not seeking production. She is simply seeking to
elicit the evidence.
[
31
]
In written submissions defence suggests that
these areas of questioning engage solicitor-client confidentiality and
solicitor-client privilege, but suggests the innocence at stake exception can
be applied within a
Gardiner
hearing, and asks the issue of whether the
questioning will be permitted be explored in an
in camera
hearing,
with documents with client identifiers redacted or removed.
[
32
]
In the Crown’s written submissions, they characterize the defence
theory as being that a client instructed the firm to administer a will in a
certain fashion, and the firm departed from those instructions. The Crown is
concerned that the proposed areas of questioning engage solicitor-client
privilege. The Crown argues, however, that the innocence at stake exception
does not apply. To engage the exception, the Crown submits, an accused must show that she is otherwise unable to raise a reasonable
doubt as to her guilt and that there is a risk of wrongful conviction. The
Crown emphasizes that a finding of guilt has already been made in this case,
and the proceedings before the court involve sentencing. In any event, the
Crown, argues, Ms. Chevis would need to demonstrate that breaching the
privilege is the only way to raise a reasonable doubt as to guilt. In other
words, if breaching the privilege could raise a doubt, but another defence or
source of doubt is also viable, the exception does not apply.
[
33
]
The Crown submits that if the exception could be
applied within a sentencing hearing, the proper approach to the question is to
hold a two-stage analysis. First, the accused must demonstrate an evidentiary
basis to conclude that a communication exists that could raise a reasonable
doubt as to their guilt. If they succeed,
the judge
is to examine the privileged communication to determine whether, in fact, it is
likely to raise a reasonable doubt as to the accused’s guilt.
V.
Issues
[
34
]
To resolve this dispute raised by the defence’s
request, I am required to consider the following questions:
1.
Is the evidence sought to be adduced covered,
partially or wholly, by solicitor-client privilege?
2.
If the answer to question 1 is yes, is an
exception to the near-absolute rule against breaching solicitor-client
privilege engaged? The only exception advanced by the defence is the innocence
at stake exception, as articulated in
R. v. McClure,
2001 SCC 14 (CanLII)
, [2001] S.C.J. No.
13. This question therefore turns on the following two sub-questions:
(a)
Can the innocence at stake exception apply in a
Gardiner
hearing at the sentencing stage?
(b)
Is the evidence in question the only way to raise
a reasonable doubt about Ms. Chevis’s ‘guilt’?
3.
If all the preceding questions are answered in
the affirmative, the court must consider whether Ms. Chevis has demonstrated an
evidentiary basis that the communications exist which could raise a reasonable
doubt. If it does, I must examine the communication to determine if it is, in
fact, likely to raise a reasonable doubt.
VI.
Analysis
Is the
evidence at issue protected by solicitor-client privilege?
[
35
]
Solicitor-client privilege protects communications between
a lawyer and their client for the purpose of seeking or giving legal advice
which is intended to be confidential:
John H. Wigmore,
Wigmore
on Evidence
, McNaughton rev. ed. (Boston: Little Brown, 1961);
R. v.
McClure
,
2001 SCC 14
, at para.
36
. It does not generally protect facts or acts,
subject to limited circumstances and difficult cases: see, for example,
Maranda
v. Richer
,
2003 SCC 67 (CanLII)
, [2003] S.C.J. No. 69, at paras.
30-31
. Whether it protects
client identity is context-driven:
Lavallee
,
Rackel & Heintz v.
Canada (Attorney General)
,
2002 SCC 61 (CanLII)
, [2002] S.C.J. No. 61, at para.
28
.
[
36
]
It is, therefore, critical to accurately define
the nature of the evidence sought to be led. The question of whether the
privilege applies is not an all-or-nothing exercise. It could be that some, but
not all the evidence in issue is protected.
[
37
]
Any communications between BFLO and a client,
the Lottery Winner or otherwise, exchanged in the seeking of legal services are
clearly protected by solicitor-client privilege. But what of the existence of a
will that is administered or a private mortgage that is established? A will
that has been prepared but has not been administered may well be protected by
solicitor client privilege. I have difficulty, however, with the notion that a
legal instrument such as a will, a power of attorney, or a private mortgage,
could possibly remain covered by solicitor client privilege once the instrument
is acted on, and enters the public sphere. A will has beneficiaries. A power of
attorney must be disclosed to third parties, including financial institutions,
such that they can be satisfied of the attorney’s authorization to act. A
private mortgage necessarily involves a third party, in this case the proposed
mortgagor, Ms. Chevis.  Indeed, when this question was put to the parties, they
agreed that it would seem illogical to protect the existence of such public-facing
instruments within the scope of the privilege.
[
38
]
The question of whether the identity of a client
of BFLO is privileged is related. While there are circumstances in which the
identity of a client is protected by the privilege, these tend to be connected
to the nature and context of the advice sought. For example, a hit and run
driver who consults a lawyer and confidentially discloses his identity is
protected:
Thorson v. Jones
,
1973 CanLII 1105 (BC SC)
, [1973] B.C.J. No. 489. A client who intends
for their lawyer to establish a legal instrument on their behalf that will involve
third parties, is not similarly positioned, once those instruments are
actioned.
[
39
]
I conclude that the identity of clients of BFLO
who have engaged BFLO’s services to effect a legal instrument that obviously
contemplates sharing the fact of that instrument with third parties are not
protected by solicitor-client privilege. Subject to relevance, I am prepared to
permit Ms. Chevis to give or elicit evidence that identifies clients in that
category. I am further prepared to permit Ms. Chevis to give or elicit evidence
with respect to the existence of those legal instruments, and how they were
administered, again, subject to relevance. If she was a mortgagor or beneficiary
under one or more of those instruments, I cannot see how the other party’s
claim to solicitor-client privilege could prevent her from saying so. That she
was also an employee of the law firm providing services does not, in my view,
change that equation.
[
40
]
That said, I must remain mindful of Ms. Chevis
proposed dual role as party to such legal instruments and employee of BFLO. She
may have, in her capacity as an employee, been privy not only to the clients’
identities and the existence of certain legal instruments, but also
communications between those clients and BFLO relating to the purpose of
seeking or obtaining legal advice. The presence of an employee of a lawyer does
not defeat the confidential nature of communications:
Descotaux v.
Mierzwinski
,
1982 CanLII 22 (SCC)
, [1982] S.C.J. No. 43. Such persons are necessary to assist the
lawyer in providing legal advice. If Ms. Chevis was acting in her capacity of
an employee supporting BFLO’s provision of legal advice, communications she was
privy to that were otherwise protected by solicitor-client privilege remain so.
Those communications would certainly be protected by solicitor client privilege
and cannot be explored in evidence unless one of the narrow exceptions to privilege
applies.
[
41
]
Ms. Sabourin has indicated in oral submission
today that Ms. Chevis was not seeking to elicit such information, and so there
is no need for me to conduct an analysis of whether the privilege might be
pierced, under the innocence at stake exception, or otherwise, at this time.
[
42
]
I thank counsel for their vigilance with respect
to this issue and instruct counsel to apply that vigilance in the formation of
their questions to be put to witnesses. Care must be taken not to pose
questions that could tend to elicit evidence that remains covered by the
privilege.
Released July 18, 2025
Signed:
Justice G. Jenner