Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj337/2025oncj337.html

CITATION:
R. v. Randall
, 2025 ONCJ 337
DATE: 
June 16, 2025
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
SHAMARI RANDALL
Before
Justice Berg
Released
on June 16, 2025
RULING
ON APPLICATION TO EXCLUDE EVIDENCE
PURSUANT
TO SECTION 24(2)
CHARTER
M. Savage, C. Macorin.......................................................... counsel
for the Crown/PPSC
M. Ertel, S. Maisonneuve............................................................ Counsel
for the Applicant
Berg J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
On January 17, 2024, Shamari Randall was driving a motor vehicle
in downtown Ottawa. Due to the heavy tinting of the windows, the vehicle drew
the attention of a patrolling police officer who then ran the licence plate and
learned that said vehicle was rented. That officer, Constable Doyle, then
decided to conduct a traffic stop to ensure that the driver was properly
licenced and to address the issue of the tinting to the windows. Upon stopping
Mr. Randall’s vehicle, Constable Doyle made certain observations upon which he
concluded that the Applicant was in breach of the
Cannabis Control Act
and that he, the officer, therefore had the authority to conduct a search
pursuant to s. 12(3) of that Act. As a result of that search, it is alleged
that Mr. Randall was in illegal possession of drugs and a firearm and faces the
following charges as a result:
i.
s. 117.01(3)
Criminal
Code Possession of a handgun while
prohibited;
ii.
s. 355(b)
Criminal Code
Possession of proceeds of crime, to wit:
money not exceeding $5000;
iii.
s. 5(3)(a)
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
Possession of
oxycodone for the purpose of trafficking;
iv.
s. 5(3)(a)
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
Possession of
buprenorphine for the purpose of trafficking;
v.
s. 5(3)(a)
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
Possession of
cocaine for the purpose of trafficking;
vi.
s. 86(3)
Criminal Code
Careless transport of a firearm;
vii.
s. 86(3)
Criminal Code
Careless transport of a prohibited device;
viii.
s. 86(3)
Criminal Code
Breach of s. 117(h)
Firearms Act;
ix.
s. 88(2)
Criminal Code
Possession of a weapon dangerous to the
public peace;
x.
s. 88(2)
Criminal Code
Possession of a prohibited device
dangerous to the public peace;
xi.
s. 90(2)
Criminal Code
Carry a concealed weapon;
xii.
s. 90(2)
Criminal Code
Carry a prohibited device;
xiii.
s. 91(3)
Criminal Code
Possession of a prohibited or restricted
firearm without being the holder of a licence;
xiv.
s. 91(3)
Criminal Code
Possession of a prohibited device without
being the holder of a licence;
xv.
s. 92(3)
Criminal Code
Possession of a prohibited or restricted
firearm while knowingly not possessing of a licence and a registration
certificate;
xvi.
s. 92(3)
Criminal Code
Possession of a prohibited device while
knowingly not possessing of a licence;
xvii.
s.
94(2)
Criminal Code
Occupy a motor vehicle knowing that there was a
firearm in it;
xviii.
s.
94(2)
Criminal Code
Occupy a motor vehicle knowing that there was a
prohibited device in it;
xix.
s. 95(2)
Criminal Code
Possession of a loaded prohibited or
restricted firearm while not possessing a licence and a registration
certificate;
xx.
s. 96(2)
Criminal Code
Possession of a firearm that had been
obtained by the commission of an offence;
xxi.
s. 96(2)
Criminal Code
Possession of a prohibited device that had
been obtained by the commission of an offence.
Mr. Randall has elected to have his trial at the Ontario
Court of Justice. The trial and
Charter voir
dire proceeded in a blended
fashion. All Crown evidence is applicable to both hearings.
[
2
]
Mr. Randall has brought an application pursuant to s. 24(2)
Charter
for the exclusion of all evidence seized by the police during the course of the
afore-mentioned search. He pleads that his rights pursuant to sections 8 and 9
Charter
have been breached and that the exclusion of this evidence from his trial is a
just and appropriate remedy in the circumstances. He had originally also
pleaded a breach pursuant to s. 10(b)
Charter
but abandoned that
allegation during submissions. The matter was then adjourned to allow me to
prepare my ruling and judgement. During that interlude, the Court of Appeal
issued its decision in
R. v. McGowan-Morris,
2025 ONCA 349
. I then
invited counsel to consider whether they wished to reopen their pleadings on
the abandoned point. They did and I will deal below with s. 10(b) as well.
The Evidence
[
3
]
The first Crown witness was Ottawa Police Constable Bradley
Doyle. He testified that he had been a police officer for almost nine years. On
January 17, 2024, he was by himself in a marked police cruiser. He explained
that he was conducting “proactive patrols” of his assigned area. He explained
that these patrols involved going into areas where he knew there to be higher
levels of social disorder. He would run licence plates and be on the lookout
for people for whom he knew there to be outstanding arrest warrants. As he was
on patrol, he was passed by a blue Toyota SUV and he noticed that the front
passenger window was tinted such that he could not see inside the vehicle. He
queried the licence plate of that vehicle and was informed that it was
registered to a car rental company. The constable then decided to conduct a
traffic stop of that Toyota as he believed that the tinting of the window was
in contravention of the
Highway Traffic Act
and, as well, to ensure that
the person driving the SUV was properly licenced. Mr. Doyle told the Court that
he will sometimes stop rental cars to confirm that the drivers are properly
licenced as he has found that on occasion they are being driven by persons who
are unlicenced or whose licences have been suspended or who are supposed to be
driving with an ignition interlock installed in their own vehicle.
[
4
]
The traffic stop was conducted at 4:52 p.m. The officer went over
to the passenger side of the Toyota and explained why he was stopping Mr.
Randall and then asked for his driver’s licence and other documentation. He
received, in response, the rental agreement for the vehicle, a temporary
driver’s licence as well as Mr. Randal’s passport which he had provided
initially before he located the licence. When the constable queried the
passport from the computer in his patrol vehicle, he learned that it had been
revoked. He went back to Mr. Randall and, standing at the driver’s side window,
explained that he had to make some further queries about the passport. As well,
he still had to deal with the issue of the tinted window by issuing a
Provincial Offences Ticket. It was at this point that he noticed that there was
a pink-coloured vape pen near the gearshift area of the Toyota. He recognized a
red emblem on that item to be an indicator that it was a cannabis vape pen.
[
5
]
Constable Doyle, standing by the driver’s window, concluded that
the vape pen was being stored in contravention of the
Cannabis Control Act.
He testified that “It was cannabis being stored in a way that was readily
accessible to the driver. It wasn’t in its original packaging. It was ready to
be consumed.” He was asked about this during cross-examination. Given the
importance that I assign to this evidence, I will here provide the entirety of
this passage:
A. …The way that it
was being transported and stored was what was in contravention to the Cannabis
Control Act.
Q. Okay. And the
reason for that would be because it has cannabis in it?
A. It was readily
available to the driver.
Q. Right. How do
you know it has cannabis in it?
A. So, the markings
on it say that it contains THC and then if you look at – there’s a little glass
window – or I don’t know if it’s called a window, but, like, a – you can see
kind of by the mouth piece. Do you see what I’m referring to?
Q. Yeah. A. So that,
you can see that there’s a little bit of a yellow colouring. That’s the
intoxicating substance inside that pen that when you suck on it, it’s..
The vape pen was then shown to the witness and the
Court.
Q. Okay. So, when
you looked into the vehicle, you could tell that there was – that there was
intoxicating substance inside of that by looking through the glass window in
the....
A. No, I’m just
pointing to your attention that you can see that there is the – I guess, what
would be the intoxicating substance. What I had when I saw this pen – where it
was in the car, I had grounds to believe that there was cannabis being
improperly stored.
Q. Oh, okay. So,
you didn’t examine the pen – the pen at the time to see whether you could see
the intoxicating substance inside of it or not, but you did find a pink pen and
it’s got a THC emblem on it and I’m just going to show it to you here. Is that
it there?
A. That’s – yeah,
that’s....
Q. So – and sorry,
you said that seeing that - what you described as a vape pen, that gave you a
reasonable suspicion that there was – you go ahead and tell me what it was that
it gave you. What – what suspicion that you got as a result of seeing that pen?
A. I had grounds to
believe that there was cannabis being improperly stored in the vehicle.
Q. Okay. And when
you’re talking about cannabis being improperly stored, you’re talking about
that pink pen, that’s what you – like, you didn’t have grounds to believe there
was any other cannabis at this point, right?
A. I – I didn’t know.
Q. You didn’t know
one way or another.
A. Pardon me?
Q. Like, the –
like, the grounds for your search, they’re based on this pen and this pen only,
right?
A. For the whole
traffic stop or just at this moment?
Q. No, at this
point.
A. At this moment,
there was cannabis improperly – improperly stored. It was readily accessible to
the driver...
Q. Right.
A. ...which gave me
my grounds to search the vehicle to ensure that there was no more cannabis
being improperly store.
Q. These pens, like
do people have to fill them up themselves with cannabis or do they come with
cannabis oil in them?
A. I’m not sure.
Q. Well, can they
be empty or full?
A. Can they be
empty or full?
Q. Yeah.
A. I believe so.
Certainly – like, it’s – I don’t think they’re unlimited.
Q. So – so, at that
time when you were conducting that search, did you turn your mind to whether or
not that pen was empty or full?
A. I had no reason
to believe it was empty.
Q. What reason did
you have to believe it was full?
A. So, like, I – I
explained, there’s – you can see through that little glass window that
there’s....
Q. You can see that
now in the picture, but you didn’t see that then when you conducted the search,
right?
A. I never said
that.
Q. Did you examine
it to see whether there was any yellow showing in the glass window on one side
of it...
A. So....
Q. ...before you
did your search?
A. When you say on
one side of it, I don’t think it’s, like, a solid inside there, so it actually
has the ability to move inside there.
Q. Sir, did you
touch that pen at all before you conducted the search?
A. Did I touch the
pen before I conducted the search?
Q. Yeah.
A. The – the first
thing I did was I – I notified Mr. Randall that I would be conducting the
search.
Q. Right.
A. And then I had
him exit.
Q. Right. But – but
the reason why he was being asked – being told to exit the vehicle was because
you were going to conduct a search, right?
A. Yeah, because
there was cannabis readily available to him.
Q. Right. There was
cannabis readily available if there was cannabis inside that pen, right?
A. Yeah, and I had
reasonable grounds to believe that there was cannabis being improperly stored.
I saw a weed – a vape pen – I don’t know what the proper term for it is but....
A weed vape pen that was readily accessible to Mr. Randall and that’s what gave
me my grounds to search.
Q. The pen was
accessible to him but whether it was full or empty, you didn’t know, right?
A. The pen had a
THC marking on it which indicated to me that it contained cannabis, and it was
readily accessible to Mr. Randall.
Q. Right. The THC
marking means that, at some time, it had cannabis in it, but at this point, it
might have cannabis in it or it might not, right?
A. I had reasonable
grounds to believe that there was cannabis being improperly stored in the
vehicle and that it was readily accessible to Mr. Randall.
Q. Right. But just
to be clear, your reasonable grounds are based on your observations of this
pink pen only at this time, right?
A. That’s the only
cannabis that I observed in the vehicle.
Q. Right. It’s
because of that observation that Mr. Randall is removed from his vehicle so
that you can conduct a search, right?
A. Yeah, pursuant
to the Cannabis Control Act.
Q. Right. And it’s
because of that pink pen that you can search him, the vehicle and his clothing,
right?
A. Him and the
contents of the vehicle, correct.
Q. Right. And the
contents of the vehicle include the coat which you searched, right?
A. Yes, sir.
[
6
]
A bit later during the cross-examination, Mr. Doyle agreed that
it would not be illegal to have an empty vape pen in one’s vehicle. He was then
asked whether a
Cannabis Control Act
search was a broad power. He
responded in the affirmative, drawing a parallel to
Liquor Licence and
Control Act
searches. This led to the following exchange.
Q. Right. So,
that’s interesting that you raised that Liquor Licence and Control Act search.
Obviously, you wouldn’t be able to search a vehicle pursuant to the Liquor
Licence Act if there was an empty beer bottle in the vehicle, right?
A. If there’s
alcohol still contained within the bottle, then it wouldn’t be empty, so.
Q. So, if you saw
an empty beer bottle in the car, I guess you would have to look at it and see
whether there’s still alcohol in it in order to determine whether you had the
grounds to search for liquor in the vehicle, right?
A. I guess it would
depend on the circumstances.
Q. The
circumstances I just described to you is there’s an empty bottle. You said
there could still be alcohol in it. If it appears to be empty, obviously you’d
have to look at it and see whether there’s alcohol in it, right, before you
would search under the Liquor Licence Act, right?
A. Well, that would
be a search.
[
7
]
The constable advised Mr. Randall of what he had observed and its
significance and then explained that he now had the authority under the
Cannabis
Control Act
to search both Mr. Randall’s person and the vehicle and
requested that he step out of the Toyota. He was now detained pursuant to the
CCA.
Mr
. Randall did so and was searched by the officer for more cannabis.
None was found and so he was asked by Mr. Doyle to stand off to the side while
he searched the vehicle. Mr. Randall was left unhandcuffed and in possession of
his cell phone; there were no safety concerns.
[
8
]
The exact time that the
CCA
detention occurred is not
clear from the evidentiary record. The traffic stop was at 4:52 p.m. Constable
Doyle ran Mr. Randall’s name through his on-board computer at 4:57 p.m. At some
point after that, he returned to the Toyota and observed the cannabis vape pen
and detained Mr. Randall as a result. As we shall see, due to what was found
during the
CCA
search, the constable first arrested the accused at 5:04
p.m. after a brief search. I would estimate that the
CCA
detention
occurred at approximately 5:00 - 5:03 p.m.
[
9
]
It was cold out and so the constable offered Mr. Randall the
jacket that was draped over the driver’s seat of the Toyota. He searched the
jacket preparatory to handing it over and located a prescription bottle in a
pocket. The part of the label that had shown the patient’s name had been torn off
and it contained several pills. It has been admitted that those were 16
Buprenorphine tablets. However, at the time, Mr. Doyle was unaware of their
exact nature but believed that they were a substance controlled under the
Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act.
He walked over to Mr. Randall and placed him
under arrest for possession of a Schedule I substance at 5:04 p.m. He placed
him in handcuffs and then brought him to the front of his police cruiser which
was parked behind the Toyota and requested that another police unit come to
assist him. He then searched his prisoner and located something that he had
missed the first time he had conducted the search: five Oxycodone pills in
translucent packaging in the front pouch of the hoodie sweater. It has been admitted
that Police also located $1770.00 in the jacket located on the front driver’s
seat.
[
10
]
Constable Sebastian Bazinet and his escort arrived on scene at
5:07 p.m. in response to Mr. Doyle’s request for assistance. Mr. Doyle provided
his colleague with the grounds to search the vehicle as well a search incident
to arrest. At 5:07 p.m., Constable Doyle also arrested Mr. Randall for
possession for the purpose and placed him in the rear of the police cruiser and
provided him with his rights to counsel,
etc.
The constable understood
that his prisoner wished to speak to a lawyer. It was his evidence that he was
unable to provide him with that opportunity at the roadside as Mr. Randall was
a prisoner and he could not offer him the privacy that would be required.
[
11
]
After the rights to counsel and other cautions, Constable Doyle
returned to continue the search of the Toyota. He entered the area of the
driver’s seat and noticed that the gearshift compartment was popped open. He
inquired if any of the other officers who were now on scene had opened the
compartment and was advised that they had not. He then opened the compartment
further and looked inside. It was there that he observed a handgun. This was at
5:20 p.m. Mr. Doyle requested that a supervisor attend the scene and then went
and re-arrested Mr. Randall for the firearm and provided him with his rights to
counsel at 5:21 p.m., and his cautions and his s. 524 warning at 5:22 p.m. He
then examined the handgun and observed that while there was no cartridge in the
chamber, the magazine did contain rounds. It was admitted by the defence that
there were ten rounds of 9 mm. ammunition.
[
12
]
The officers then had a discussion about who would perform which
of the necessary tasks. Mr. Doyle then left at 5:42 p.m. with his prisoner for
the central cell block. They arrived there at 5:58 p.m. Mr. Randall was then
processed and ultimately put in touch with his counsel of choice at 6:26 p.m.
The call was completed at 6:53 p.m. and Mr. Randall was then lodged in a cell.
[
13
]
The last Crown witness was Constable Sebastian Bazinet, a fifteen-year
veteran of the Ottawa Police Service. On January 17, 2024, he responded to Mr.
Doyle’s radio request of 5:04 p.m. for an additional unit to assist him. Mr.
Bazinet had an escort with him: Constable Alicia Wallace. They reached
Constable Doyle’s position at 5:05 p.m. who then informed Mr. Bazinet that
there were grounds to search the Toyota pursuant to the
Cannabis Control Act
as well as incident to arrest for possession of a Schedule I substance. Relying
on what he had learned from his colleague, Constable Bazinet then began
searching the vehicle beginning with the front passenger side. On the seat, he
observed a black satchel. He opened its front pocket and noted a substantial
amount of cash: $1535.95. In the middle pocket, he located a bundle of crack
and two of powder cocaine, some baggies with white powder in them, a few pieces
of torn grocery bag plastic, a digital scale, and a knife. The total weight of
the powder cocaine was 41.85 gm. He also observed the cannabis vape pen that
had been noted by Mr. Doyle. There was also an orange-coloured prescription
pill bottle with no label on it in the centre console.
[
14
]
At 5:07 p.m., he advised Constable Doyle of what he had located
and that there were grounds to arrest Mr. Randall for possession of a Schedule
I substance for the purpose of trafficking. He returned to his search of the
vehicle and was searching the back seat area when he was joined by Constable
Doyle at 5:20 p.m. He observed Mr. Doyle begin to search the front driver’s
side; Constable Wallace was searching the front passenger area. Mr. Doyle asked
them if either had touched the area of the stick shift. They had not. Mr.
Bazinet then observed that the cover for the stick shift area appeared to be
misaligned and saw Mr. Doyle remove the cover and discover the handgun.
[
15
]
There was no evidence called by the defence on the
Charter
application that I am here deciding.
[
16
]
Constable Doyle was very defensive during cross-examination. At
times, he would not directly answer relatively straightforward questions. That
being said, there is no evidence at these proceedings that would lead me to
reject the officer’s evidence that he stopped Mr. Randall for the reasons he
gave, that he saw the vape pen as he stated, and that the events occurred as he
described. I accept his evidence and I also accept the evidence of his
colleague Constable Bazinet.
The Alleged breaches of Mr. Randall’s
Charter-
Protected
Rights
[
17
]
As I indicated earlier, Mr. Randall has pleaded breaches of his
s. 8, 9 and 10(b)
Charter
rights. It is the defence position that the
traffic stop detention was “a pure fishing expedition.” Secondly, the search of
the Toyota that occurred after the traffic stop was not authorized by the
Cannabis
Control Act
as Constable Doyle did not have the requisite reasonable
grounds to suspect that cannabis was being unlawfully stored in that vehicle.
[
18
]
With respect, on the evidence before me, I find that the defence
has not proven on a balance of probabilities that the traffic stop was anything
but what Constable Doyle described. I accept his evidence that he noticed
illegal tinting on the window as he described, learned that the Toyota was a
rental vehicle, and then decided to conduct a traffic stop pursuant to and
authorized by the
Highway Traffic Act
(see,
R. v. Nolet
,
2010 SCC
24
;
R. v. Bzezi
,
2022 ONCA 184
;
R. v.
Gonzales
,
2017 ONCA 543
)
.
Thus, I find that there was no breach on this ground. This leaves the alleged
s. 10(b) breach as well as the second arm of the alleged breaches of s. 8 and
s. 9.
[
19
]
In regards to the allegations of s. 10(b) breach, the evidence
before me is that Constable Doyle stopped the Applicant at 4:52 p.m. He
subsequently noticed the vape pen at some point between 5:00-5:03 p.m. and
instructed Mr. Randall to get out of his vehicle in order that his person and
the vehicle be searched pursuant to s. 12(3) of the
Cannabis
Control Act
. However, the police only
read out the informational component of s. 10(b)
Charter
at 5:07 p.m.,
three minutes after the alleged discovery of illegal drugs and some currency.
[
20
]
With
R. v. McGowan-Morris
,
2025 ONCA 349
, the Court of
Appeal has now clarified that in the context of s. 12(3)
CCA
searches,
the police must comply with the informational component of s. 10(b) without
delay, absent any concerns for public or officer safety, and prior to
conducting the
CCA
search. As stated at paragraphs 98-99 of that
decision, “[b]ut once the police have reasonable grounds for a search, and form
an intention to search the vehicle and its occupants, the occupants are
entitled to their full rights under s. 10(b) of the
Charter
.” The police
in the present case delayed the performance of this duty, for a period that
might be as long as seven minutes or as short as four minutes, from the moment
Mr. Doyle formed the subjective belief that he had reasonable grounds and asked
the Applicant to get out of the car until after the alleged discovery of the
items that led to criminal charges. They thereby breached Mr. Randall’s right.
The Crown has conceded this breach. It is to be noted that when the police
began their
CCA
search, Mr. Randall was not in handcuffs and was in
possession of his cell phone.
[
21
]
I turn now to
the second arm
of the alleged breaches of s. 8 and s. 9: that the warrantless search of Mr.
Randall and his vehicle, and detention of Mr. Randall for that purpose, was not
authorized by the
CCA.
Section 12 of that Act reads
(1) No person shall drive or have the care or control of a
vehicle or boat, whether or not it is in motion, while any cannabis is
contained in the vehicle or boat.
(2)
Subsection (1) does not apply with respect to cannabis that,
(a) 
is in its original packaging and has not been opened; or
(b) 
is packed in baggage that is fastened closed or is not otherwise readily
available to any person in the vehicle or boat.
2018, c. 12
, Sched. 1, s. 12 (1).
(3)
A police officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that cannabis is being
contained in a vehicle or boat in contravention of subsection (1) may at any
time, without a warrant, enter and search the vehicle or boat and search any
person found in it.
[
22
]
A warrantless search is
presumptively unreasonable and thus contrary to s. 8
Charter.
As Mr.
Randall has raised this issue, the Crown must establish on a balance of
probabilities that the search was authorized by law, that the law itself is
reasonable, and that the manner in which the search was carried out was
reasonable (
see,
R. v. Collins
,
1987 CanLII 84 (SCC)
;
R. v. Caslake
,
1998 CanLII 838 (SCC)
;
R. v. Nolet
,
2010 SCC 24
).
[
23
]
The search was authorized by a reasonable law. It is the manner
of the search that is being questioned. Constable Doyle had stopped the vehicle
being driven by Mr. Randall in order to conduct a
Highway Traffic Act
investigation. As he did so, he observed what was clearly a cannabis vape pen
located right beside the driver’s seat and out of its packaging. It is also
clear that the constable assumed that the mere presence of that vape pen
provided him with the reasonable grounds referred to in s. 12(3)
CCA.
Furthermore, I find that the first time that Mr. Doyle turned his mind to
whether the vape pen in question actually still contained any cannabis was in
court before me during the trial. It is to be remembered that such a device may
contain its full charge of cannabis, some of that charge, or have been emptied.
[1]
[
24
]
I accept that Constable Doyle believed that the mere presence of
the vape pen gave him the reasonable grounds to exercise his authority pursuant
to s. 12(3)
CCA
. The issue that remains is whether that belief was
objectively justifiable (see, for example,
R. v. Storrey
,
1990 CanLII
125 (SCC)
,
R. v. Fyfe,
2023 ONCA 715
at para.
52
). I find that it
is not. The vape pen is not cannabis, it is a device by which cannabis can be
consumed. In other words, it is an item of cannabis paraphernalia. When an
officer observes an item of cannabis paraphernalia, they are not making an
observation of cannabis. At its highest, that observation could raise a
suspicion that cannabis is present. However, the reasonable grounds required
for that officer to conduct a lawful warrantless search would require further
investigation.
[
25
]
Upon observing the vape pen, Constable Doyle objectively had a
reasonable suspicion that Mr. Randall was in breach of s. 12(1)
CCA.
However, given that what he had observed was an item of paraphernalia and not
actually cannabis, he did not yet have reasonable grounds to conduct a s. 12(3)
search. At that point, a further investigation was both called for and
permissible as noted by Trotter J.A. for the unanimous panel in
McGowan-Morris
at
para.
98-99
,
As
noted above, the respondent submits that the driver and passengers need not
necessarily be apprised of their s. 10(b) rights immediately. For convenience,
I repeat the respondent’s position:
Police
may question the driver about cannabis consumption and about whether there is
cannabis in the vehicle, and make observations of the driver, passengers and
items in plain view. But once the police have reasonable grounds for a search,
and form an intention to search the vehicle and its occupants, the occupants
are entitled to their full rights under s. 10(b) of the
Charter
.
I agree with this
qualification.
Constable Doyle observed the vape pen in plain sight.
Objectively, he did not know whether it actually still contained cannabis. He
should have investigated further to see whether its presence was actually in
breach of the
CCA.
That investigation could have taken the form of
questions to Mr. Randall, an examination of the vape pen itself, or both. There
were no safety concerns at that point nor would such investigative techniques
require much effort or time. Instead, Mr. Doyle took the mere presence of the vape
pen to provide him with reasonable grounds to conduct a search. As he was wrong
in that assumption, I find that he breached the s. 8 and s. 9 rights of Mr.
Randall.
Section 24(2)
[
26
]
The law governing the
application of the remedial section 24(2)
Charter
was
articulated by the
Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Grant,
2009 SCC 32
. A trial court must
assess and balance the effect of admitting the evidence on society’s confidence
in the justice system based on the following factors:
i.
the seriousness of the
Charter-
infringing state
conduct;
ii.
the impact of the breach on the
Charter-
protected
interests of the accused; and
iii.
society’s interest in the adjudication
of the case on its merits.
[
27
]
The seriousness of the
Charter-
infringing
state conduct:
It is to be remembered that the purpose of s. 12(3)
CCA
was not to create a new criminal search power. The clear reason for s. 12
CCA
“
is to ensure that cannabis is not readily available to any person in a
vehicle or boat. The public safety goal is to prevent the use of cannabis by
the driver or the occupants of a car or boat while it is being operated
” (
McGowan-Morris
,
at para.
64
). This
appellate interpretation is consistent with stated legislative intent:
In
parliamentary debates related to the enactment of the
CCA,
the Attorney
General of Ontario indicated that the purpose of the
CCA
is to
protect the public from the havoc caused by drug-impaired driving. Parliament’s
intent in enacting the
CCA
is to protect public health and
safety, protect youth and restrict their access to cannabis, and provide law
enforcement with the tools to achieve these objectives: Ontario, Legislative
Assembly, Official Report of Debates
(Hansard)
, 41st Parl., 2nd
Sess., No. 115 (2 November 2017), at p. 6143-6144 (Hon. Yasir Naqvi); Ontario,
Legislative Assembly, Official Report of Debates
(Hansard),
42nd
Parl., 1st Sess., No. 30 (1 October 2018), at p. 1342. (Hon. Caroline
Mulroney); See also
R. v. Nzita
,
[2020]
O.J. No. 3109
, at para. 23
.
R.
v. Byfield,
2023 ONSC 4308
at para.
105
[
28
]
Constable Doyle did form a
subjective belief that he had the necessary reasonable grounds and thus acted
in good faith. However, it is troubling that his belief was predicated on a logic
(
i.e.,
cannabis vape pen = presence of cannabis = reasonable ground) that
cannot be sustained by objective analysis. As the constable did not have
reasonable grounds to conduct the search, I find that this
Charter-
infringing
conduct by the state is serious in nature. The fact that a simple further
investigation could have possibly provided those grounds or perhaps even
demonstrated then and there that the grounds did not exist underlines how
egregious this conduct was. The police were negligent in not conducting a
further inquiry and the seriousness of their conduct is not mitigated by the
fact that they were acting in good faith. I would place this breach towards the
more serious end of the spectrum. Evidence gathered on the basis of a suspicion
that was nothing more than merely an unjustified reflex would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute. This factor supports exclusion of the
evidence in question.
[
29
]
In the circumstances of this
case, the actions of the police in the breaching of Mr. Randall’s s. 10(b)
right are to be seen as being at a low level of seriousness. I base this
analysis entirely on the fact that the clarification of the s. 10(b) informational
duty on police officers in the context of
CCA
searches has only just
been
clarified in
McGowan-Morris
,
some sixteen months after the
arrest of Mr. Randall.
[
30
]
The impact of the breach on
the
Charter-
protected interests of the accused
: It was not the dwelling
of Mr. Randall that was searched. Nonetheless, his right to be free from
arbitrary detention and his right to be secure against unreasonable search were
violated on mere suspicion. This is profoundly intrusive. The admission of the
evidence found as a result of the detention and search breaches would signify
that the protections of s. 8 and s. 9 count for nought. Given this high level
of impact on Mr. Randall’s protected interests, these breaches militate for
exclusion.
[
31
]
With respect to the breach of
Mr. Randall’s s. 10(b) right, I note that the importance of the informational
component of that right is such that a breach will rarely be of less than
moderate impact. In the case at bar, I find that impact upon his rights were
indeed moderate.
[
32
]
Society’s interest in the
adjudication of the case on its merits:
Clearly, this factor would militate
in favour of inclusion of the evidence. That society has a high level of
interest in the adjudication of cases involving illegal possession of firearms
and drugs cannot be gainsaid. The exclusion of the drugs and firearm, important
to the Crown case and reliable evidence, would serve to frustrate the societal
interest in combatting a significant societal problem. Yet, and as
stated by
the Ontario Court of appeal in
R. v. McGuffie,
2016 ONCA 365
at
paragraph
63
,
In practical terms, the third inquiry becomes important when one,
but not both, of the first two inquiries pushes strongly toward the exclusion
of the evidence. If the first and second inquiries make a strong case for
exclusion, the third inquiry will seldom, if ever, tip the balance in favour of
admissibility [cites omitted].
[
33
]
Balancing of the Factors:
The
Court cannot be seen to be condoning negligent and impactful behaviour of this
nature by the police even when the conduct in question was done in good faith.
To be clear, I am not referring here to the s. 10(b) breach
given that the constable could hardly have been expected to anticipate the
recent ruling by the Court of Appeal. I find that in the present case, the s.
10(b) breach adds little to the balancing analysis.
[
34
]
The evidence will be excluded.
Released: June 16, 2025
Signed:
Justice Berg
[1]
I was shown the vape pen during the trial. I am unfamiliar
with such devices and indeed, this was the first time I have ever examined one.
No expert evidence was called. The chamber into which the cannabis can be
loaded has a clear window by which the inside of that chamber can be observed.
I observed some substance which seemed to have solidified and be adhering to
the clear window. I do not doubt that the substance in question was a cannabis
product. However, I have no idea a) whether that substance was in that state
when the vape pen was seized or whether it had solidified between that time and
the trial; b) whether the substance in its present form and quantity could be
consumed.