Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj717/2025oncj717.html

CITATION:
R. v. Calzada-Preciado
, 2025 ONCJ 717
DATE: October 24, 2025
Information No. 4810 999 24 48101623-00
4810 998 24 48114862-00
ONTARIO
COURT OF JUSTICE
HIS MAJESTY
THE KING
v.
RODRIGO
CALZADA-PRECIADO
REASONS FOR
SENTENCE
BEFORE THE
HONOURABLE JUSTICE B. BROWN
on October
24, 2025 at TORONTO, Ontario
APPEARANCES
:
V. Sayed       Counsel for the Crown
B. Chaudry     Counsel for Rodrigo Calzada-Preciado
Friday October 24, 2025
BROWN, J
: (Orally)
Mr. Rodrigo
Calzada-Preciado entered a guilty plea on June 26, 2025, which was the date set
for trial, to a charge of possession for the purpose of trafficking in fentanyl
on May 2nd, 2024. He was in custody at the time and a pre-sentence report was
ordered. The case was put over for sentence to be imposed and for counsel to
put before the Court various materials and cases for the consideration by this
Court. The case is now before the Court for the imposition of sentence.
The Crown has
submitted that a sentence in the range of three years in the penitentiary, or
revised to a slightly lower amount, less any pre-sentence-custody enhanced
credit is the appropriate penalty. The defense is requesting consideration of a
conditional sentence less than two years in length.
I. The Facts
A. Circumstances
of the offense
The facts were
admitted pursuant to an agreed statement of facts which was filed in evidence.
There was an agreement that all of these facts be entered and considered by the
Court. Those facts are as follows: On May 2nd, 2024, at approximately 4:08
p.m., officers from 51 Division’s Community Response Unit, Officers Winslow,
Cedrone and Steger were conducting general patrol in the area of Jarvis Street
and Cawthra Square in Toronto. While patrolling on bicycles, officers observed
a male operating an electric scooter who had stopped beside a white Nissan
Rogue, Ontario license plate B-V-R-X 782, parked on the north side of Cawthra
Square. The male was rummaging through the open driver side door of the
vehicle. Officers conducted a CPIC inquiry on the license plate which returned
registered to Rodrigo Calzada-Preciado, date of birth 1976-06-27, wanted on a
Canada-wide bench warrant by the London Police Force. The male closed the door
of the vehicle and started traveling westbound on the electric scooter.
Officers intercepted the male, who verbally identified himself as Rodrigo
Calzada-Preciado. He was immediately arrested on the strength of the
outstanding warrant. On arrest, the applicant was searched. Officer Steger
located a plastic container containing fentanyl in the applicant’s pocket. A
fanny-pack worn by the applicant contained a prescription pill bottle with
methamphetamine. A black digital scale, and approximately $850 dollars in
Canadian currency were also located and seized. The officers also located a
glass pipe. The applicant was transported to 51 Division by Officer Simmons and
proceeded without incident. Officer Winslow weighed and sealed the drug
exhibits which included 14.66 grams of fentanyl in total, consisting:
• 5.37 grams of
blue/red fentanyl
• 2.86 grams of
green fentanyl
• 6.43 grams of
purple fentanyl
• 17.7 grams of
crystal methamphetamine
• $850 in
Canadian currency
• a glass pipe.
He was given his
rights to counsel and released on a Form 10 undertaking.
B. Circumstances
of the offender
Mr.
Calzada-Preciado was — as of the date the Court prepared this — 49 years of
age. He is a Canadian citizen and he has no prior criminal record. He has one
adult child who resides in San Diego. He is currently not in a relationship.
The relationship with the mother of his child ended some time ago and she also
lives in San Diego, California. He was in a relationship with a man which ended
after seventeen years in 2022. It appears that he had an excellent family life
with supportive parents.
The pre-sentence
report states, excerpting relevant portions, as follows: He was born in Mexico
City and he came to Canada through Toronto when he was 25 years of age. He
advised that he decided to leave Mexico due to intimidation and being
persecuted by police. He was granted Canadian citizenship as he arrived as a
refugee. His family consists of his mother, father, three brothers and three
sisters. He is the youngest of seven children. He recalled a positive childhood
and upbringing and reflected on how both of his parents were present and
emotionally supportive of him and his siblings.
At 18 years old,
the subject disclosed to his parents that he is a homosexual and he recalled
how he was accepted by them without judgment and how they were supportive of
him. The subject reflected on fond memories of traveling with his family and
meeting his ex-partner's family. The subject's father passed away in 2010 and
the subject discussed how he had a close relationship with his father prior to
him passing away. The subject maintains a supportive relationship with his
mother, who resides in Mexico. He speaks with her daily and visits with her
regularly. He maintains positive and supportive relationships with all of his
siblings.
He has one child
who is now 22 years old. He was in a relationship with the mother for four
years, and despite separating, he maintains a good relationship with her. He communicates
regularly with his son and the mother of his child in San Diego, California. He
has never been married, but he has been in a relationship with a man, his
ex-partner, for seventeen years. That relationship has ended. This
significantly impacted him emotionally, and he advised that he was struggling
with grieving issues and related emotional-health challenges.
In terms of
education, he attended a university in Mexico, starting in a program in
information technology. He switched out of that program because it was not for
him. He stopped attending school when he left Mexico and moved to Canada. In
2012, he started his own maintenance company and continued to operate this
business until 2024. He had a contract with a business, but once the contract ended,
his business struggled and he took on smaller jobs.
In terms of
substance use and addictions, I'm going to quote the whole first paragraph:
The subject
advised that he has no history of problematic alcohol use or treatment for a
problem with alcohol. In 2022, the subject began using crystal methamphetamine
and fentanyl. His substance use quickly escalated and he became psychologically
and physically addicted to these substances. The subject advised that he never
thought he would ever use illicit substances. However, he noted an incident
where his apartment caught fire and he lost all of his belongings and lost his
pets, and this event impacted him emotionally and was the catalyst for his
substance use. The subject began self-medicating unpleasant emotions associated
with this event, along with the separation from his partner. The subject
reports that he is now abstinent from all substances and is currently in a
methadone program at True North Medical Toronto Addiction Treatment Centre. By
the way, this report was prepared in the summer of 2025.
He has indicated
to the author of the report a diagnosis of depression and post-traumatic stress
disorder from a psychiatrist at a prominent addiction and mental health agency
in Toronto. The report doesn't have any other material with respect to that.
The report also indicates that the subject has expressed remorse for his
actions, stating, “I need to change. I need to get back on track.” He discussed
how the loss of his relationship with his ex-partner and the apartment fire and
loss of his pets impacted him negatively, and he felt hopeless thereafter. He
advised that he began using illicit drugs problematically in efforts to
self-medicate. As a result, he advised that he purchased large quantities of
drugs for personal use.
Those are the
excerpts from the pre-sentence report that the Court is going to refer to. As
noted, there is a reference to a potential dependency or addiction to Schedule
I drugs. The Court sought further information from the defense in that regard.
In that regard, the Court has obtained from the defense counsel 36 pages of
medical records from CAMH with respect to Mr. Calzada-Preciado's relationship
with that organization and that program. I’m going to provide a summary that
I've prepared for the Court in terms of those records.
Mr. Calzada had
previously advised through counsel that he suffers from a dependency or
addiction to fentanyl and potentially methamphetamine, from the past. The Court
had asked counsel for further information in that regard and the Court now
turns to the records from CAMH. The following appears to be relevant to the
issues before the Court from those records.
On January 20th,
2023, Mr. Calzada-Preciado attended at CAMH for a self-referral. He met with
staff at the Concurrent Disorders Clinic at CAMH and had a lengthy referral
intake which culminated in the preparation of a lengthy form. At that time, he
indicated that he had been taking fentanyl since September of 2022 and that he
was taking it daily. He indicated he never took cocaine and at that time was
taking methamphetamine daily or almost daily. He indicated he was not taking
street opioids, but was taking prescription opioids. CAMH then followed up with
a contact: his family physician, Dr. Gerson Moo, requesting a referral for the
addiction consultation. That referral was subsequently sent back by Dr. Moo to
CAMH.
On January 26th,
2023, a broad-spectrum drug screening conducted by CAMH at the time of a
meeting with Mr. Calzada-Preciado detected fentanyl but no methamphetamines,
and immunoassay drug screen detected negative opiates in the screen. On the
same day, January 26th, 2023, in a consultation with Dr. LeFoll, in person with
Mr. Calzada-Preciado, various notes were made. The doctor noted the goal of Mr.
Calzada-Preciado to stop using substances. There was noted use of fentanyl at
night daily, having started in September of 2022 with an indication that he did
not use other types of opioids. In terms of his usage, it noted the largest
amount ever used was a point a day, and that the average amount of money spent
on use per day was $20 dollars to $40 dollars.
It was noted that
this was the first time he was seeking help and that it was very important in
the view of the patient to make a change. When asked how ready he was to make
the change, on a scale of one to ten, Mr. Calzada-Preciado indicated a “five”.
Dr. LeFoll diagnosed Mr. Calzada-Preciado as suffering from a “moderate
substance use disorder” in severity. The doctor's impression was “moderate”
fentanyl use disorder. The doctor indicated that he would benefit from Suboxone
with a goal to abstain from opioids and start on Suboxone with a follow-up the
following week. Mr. Calzada-Preciado completed a lengthy consent to taking
methadone and Suboxone.
On January 27th,
2023, the prescription for Suboxone was started. On January 29th, 2023, there
was a note on his record that he failed to attend the pharmacy for his Suboxone
dose on that day. That was two days later. On a date in February of 2023 for an
appointment with Dr. LeFoll, it was noted that Mr. Calzada-Preciado did not
attend the appointment – again, that was a short time after he was prescribed
the Suboxone that he hadn't taken, it appears, since January 28th or earlier.
On April 13th of
2023, Mr. Calzada-Preciado attended an appointment with Dr. LeFoll. He
indicated he did not continue the Suboxone as he did not find it was effective
and that he went back to using fentanyl daily, smoking, not injecting, noting
that he cannot stop himself on his own. He indicated he would like to return
for an appointment to explore more options. He was still taking cannabis daily.
He indicated he did not use cocaine or methamphetamine. He still had a
diagnosis of “opioid use disorder, moderate”.
On April 27th of
2023, Mr. Calzada-Preciado did not attend for a consultation with the
addictions physician, Dr. LeFoll. Following that missed appointment in April of
2023, there was no indication of Mr. Calzada-Preciado attending at CAMH for any
treatment or testing. The Court does note that the most recent entry in those
records was on November 11th of 2024 when Mr. Calzada-Preciado’s physician, Dr.
Moo, sent a referral relating to his patient, who was the accused, being in
jail with an anticipated release date of December of 2024. It was noted at that
time that he has been lost to follow-up and that he had been started on
Suboxone. It also referenced legal involvement in September of 2024.
The offence date
in this case is May 2nd of 2024. Accordingly, there is no evidence before this
Court as to Mr. Calzada-Preciado taking any treatment from early 2023 until the
date of the offence, and no indication from CAMH as to his usage or treatment
in May of 2024, except that he most recently was not using methamphetamine. His
previous usage was noted in January as set out above, and that was January when
he was there in 2023.
His level of
dependency was classified as “moderate”, and there appeared to have been no
change to that diagnosis. It is clear from his actions that Mr. Calzada-Preciado
did not maintain any commitment to any particular degree to get treatment prior
to the offence date.
There also does
not appear to have been any attempt by virtue of meeting with CAMH to deal with
any dependency on the part of Mr. Calzada-Preciado after his offence. Although
his doctor made a referral, there was no indication that he ever appeared at
CAMH for treatment, testing or anything else of that nature.
Initially, on
June 10th of 2024, Mr. Calzada-Preciado was released on an undertaking on these
charges with no conditions that would have restricted any pursuit of drug
treatment. After being charged with additional charges, he was detained in
custody on October 7th of 2024. As set out herein, Mr. Calzada-Preciado was
released on bail July 18th of 2025 with a house arrest surety bail naming
Patricia Maria Calzada as the surety. He was permitted an exception to the
house arrest when in the direct and continuous presence of his surety. It is
not clear why he did not seek this important treatment in the presence of his
surety to return to CAMH. Nonetheless, it does potentially provide some insight
in terms of willingness to take treatment.
The defense has
made submissions that it was difficult or not possible for him to get continued
treatment while on bail. This is somewhat contrary to another defense
submission in court; The Court has been advised that he's currently taking
methadone and he's gone to appointments with his surety with a doctor to get
the drug, although the defense has not provided any letters or any evidence or
details in support of what his client has told him. It is not supported in
terms of having been at CAMH where he previously sought — on a very short-term
basis — some treatment. Again, the Court is lacking in details in terms of
what, if anything, he's been doing while he was out of custody.
There are a
number of letters which are in the nature of character references which have
been filed by the defense; One is in Spanish and it has not been translated, so
the Court is unable to determine the contents of that letter. The Court has
very carefully read the contents of the letters.
Those letters
included letter from Margarita Cortes-Guzman. She indicates she's a medical
secretary working at North York General Hospital, and she is the sister-in-law
because she has married his brother (and I'm quoting the wording from the
letter, even though some of it I know is not correct in terms of proper
grammar.) She indicates that the accused has always been a very kind person to
people around him. She indicates as the professional owner of his own business,
he is very hardworking, kind and adaptable. She indicates for his family and
those of them who have worked for him, he has always been an unconditional
supporter. She indicates that he has made mistakes through the twists of fate
and that's why he ended up in the detention center. She also indicates more
than ever, he is firmly focused on the lawful and right path he wants to return
to.
The Court also
considers a letter that's authored by Ana Karina Calzada. She indicates that
the accused is her uncle. He has shown qualities of strength, kindness and a
willingness to take accountability for his actions. She indicates he has a big
heart and he is always there for his loved ones. The Court also has the letter
from Maria Bunano, who indicates she's known the accused for over three years
and met him through work. She describes him as an excellent boss who has shown
understanding and patience, and was always willing to help others.
The Court also
has a letter from Jesus Calzada. This is the son of Mr. Calzada-Preciado. He
indicates, “My dad is the reason I am the man that I am today. It hurts to see
everything he built with sweat and tears all come crumbling down with one wrong
mistake.” He indicates that his father always put everyone first, that he
always had a smile on his face every day. He indicates that he is now 22 years
old and that he was hurt when his father wasn't there for his daughter’s gender
reveal and his daughter's baby shower, and that he misses his dad.
Finally, the
Court has a letter from Reina Alfaro, who is the sister-in-law of Mr.
Calzada-Preciado. She indicates that she's known him for over four years and
describes him as a great person, extremely hard working and responsible. She
indicates he used to be the owner of the “Great Clean” company. She indicates
he is a good person that can be trusted.
The defense has
also filed a series of certificates which relate to various programs of a
rehabilitative nature which the accused has taken while in custody. The Court
will just refer to these reports at this time. They are all certificates of
completion. The first one is with respect to the African Canadian Excellence
Session 6, “Making Good Choices” and “Asking For Help”; The Adult Learning and
Employment Programs for adult learning and financial literacy; The program for
loneliness; The program for the media's perception of black men; The program
“Positive Black Images and Role Models”; The program “Winds of War”; The
program “Dealing With Conflict Situations”; The Program “Follow Me”; The
program “The Company We Keep”; the program “Black Employment Support Program”;
The program “Healthy Relationship Series”; The program “Use of Leisure Time”;
The Program “Life Skills - Men's Educational Sessions”; those are the programs
for which the Court has been provided with certificates of completion, which
the Court considers with respect to the circumstances of the offender.
Mr.
Calzada-Preciado has expressed remorse to the author of the pre-sentence
report. However, it is important to note the nature of that remorse. It was in
the nature of remorse for the effect this offense has had on his life, rather
than any remorse for having had drugs to sell to other people, for having
highly addictive Schedule I drugs, being fentanyl and crystal methamphetamine,
which are the drugs which have caused great disruption and damage to even his
life, much less potentially might cause similar damage to other people. Mr.
Calzada-Preciado, this Court would find, is intimately aware of how addictive
these drugs can be and what they can do to other people, and yet he chose to
get them to sell to other people. There is no expressed remorse for that other
than the entry of the guilty plea on the day he was about to start his trial.
II. Legal
Parameters
The maximum
penalty for this offense is set out by Section 5, subsection 2 of the
Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act
for the offense of possession for the purpose of
trafficking in the Schedule I drug, which is fentanyl, is life imprisonment.
III. Positions of
Crown and defence on sentence:
The Crown submits
that the appropriate range of sentence for this offense is three-to-five years
jail, and submits that for this offender and this offense, the appropriate
sentence is three years incarceration, less pre-sentence custody for time spent
in custody with enhanced credit for Summers. In the end, the Crown revised this
and agreed that it would take into account the actual days of pre-sentence
custody credit, being 303 actual days; applying the Summers credit of a
multiplier of 1.5 days credit for each day, this would give rise to enhanced
pre-sentence custody credit of 455 days. After the Crown took that initial
position, additional evidence came before the Court relating to lockdown days,
partial, full and tiered, and triple-bunking days as noted below.
In addition, the
defense has made the submission that Mr. Calzada-Preciado suffers from a
dependency to Schedule I drugs which he possessed, and had a portion of them
for personal use. Applying
the principles in
R. v. Marshall,
2021 ONCA
344
, related to the additional credit for the conditions in the jail, and what
the Crown characterized as the fairly weak connection by way of his drug
dependency related to the offense, the Crown revised its position to one of 32
months jail, less 455 days of enhanced pre-sentence custody credit. This would
result in a sentence of incarceration of 960 days less 455 days, which is 505
days in jail. This would result in a sentence of approximately 16 months and 25
days in jail. The Crown also requested various ancillary orders. The Crown
strongly opposed a conditional sentence, should the Court have been inclined to
consider a sentence of two years less a day.
The defence
initially submitted that the appropriate sentence was a conditional sentence of
two years less a day. In oral submissions made in court following the written
submissions and the filing of lockdown records, the defense revised that to be
a position of a length similar to that requested by the Crown, which is 16
months and 25 days in jail, albeit the defense request is that be the length
for a conditional sentence.
IV. Mitigating
and Aggravating Factors:
A. Mitigating
Mr.
Calzada-Preciado is a first offender, but not a young offender. He has
expressed remorse to the author of the pre-sentence report, but as noted above,
his remorse is for the effect this offense has had on his life, rather than the
effect of this offense potentially on other people who might have taken or
become addicted to the highly addictive drugs that he possessed for the purpose
of trafficking. While Mr. Calzada-Preciado entered a guilty plea to this
charge, he did so at the very last opportunity. The case was set for trial and
three days of court time were set aside for this trial. The very late entry of
the guilty plea on the first day of trial meant that other cases could not
utilize some of this, if not all of this time for their cases. While a guilty
plea is an indication of remorse and mitigation of penalty, the value of this
mitigation is lessened by the circumstances of the timing of the guilty plea.
The defense has
submitted that the defendant suffers from an addiction or dependency to both
fentanyl and methamphetamine, and that this was related to the commission of
the offence. The Court has reviewed earlier in the reasons the review of the
materials from CAMH. The Court would question whether he actually had an
addiction to methamphetamine around the time of the offense, given the CAMH
records which the Court has reviewed. It would seem he might have had a past
addiction to methamphetamine but had not been taking it for quite some time
before the offence before the Court. That is a notable circumstance this Court
would find with respect to the submission that he is suffering from a drug
dependency.
It is also
mitigating that the pre-sentence report indicates that he suffers from
depression and P-T-S-D, although there's no further information in that regard.
The report indicates that the accused has strong rehabilitative prospects,
evidenced by the numerous programs he has attended while incarcerated, his
commitment to change, and clear support of many friends and family members. The
Court is a little bit unclear on his long-term commitment with respect to drug
dependency, although notes the Court has been recently advised that he's not
currently consuming any drugs.
B. Aggravating
Mr.
Calzada-Preciado was in possession of a significant amount of fentanyl, being
14.66 grams, and as well he had three different varieties of that Schedule I
drug being blue/red, green and purple. This was in a container that he had been
storing them, available for sale. He was also in possession of a significant
amount of crystal methamphetamine being 17.7 grams. The varieties of these
drugs, together with a digital scale, together with a significant amount of
cash being $850 dollars of Canadian funds, are indicative of a more involved
trafficking scheme than a very low-level drug trafficker.
Although the
Court accepts the defense position that he was moderately dependent on taking
some fentanyl, the Court finds that the quantity of these two highly addictive
Schedule I drugs went far beyond what he would have possessed for his own use.
The Court would note the entry of the guilty plea and the admission of facts is
also consistent with that scenario.
Mr.
Calzada-Preciado was also on release for charges of possession of fentanyl, and
impaired by a drug in the operation of a motor vehicle at the time of the
offense. This is clearly an aggravating factor. He failed to appear in court
for those charges and there was an outstanding warrant for arrest when he was
stopped by the police in relation to the investigation in the charge before
this Court.
V. SENTENCING
PRINCIPLES
A. Analysis
The Court bears
in mind the guiding comments of
the Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Lacasse
2015 SCC 64 (CanLII)
,
[2015] S.C.J. No. 64
. In that judgment, the Court stated that sentencing
ranges are primarily guidelines, not hard and fast rules.
Even if an
appellate court has established a range, it may be that a fact pattern may
arise which is sufficiently dissimilar to past decisions, that the range must
be expanded. Sentencing ranges are nothing more than summaries of the minimum
and maximum sentences imposed in the past, which serve in any given case as
guides for the application of all the relevant principles and objectives.
However, they should not be considered averages, let alone straitjackets, but
should instead be seen as historical portraits for the use of sentencing judges
who must still exercise their discretion in each case. Accordingly, a
sentencing range is not a straitjacket to the exercise of discretion of a
sentencing judge. Each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an
offender with a unique profile. Everything depends on the gravity of the
offense, the offender's degree of responsibility, and the specific
circumstances of each case. “Sentencing ranges must in all cases remain only
one tool among others that are intended to aid trial judges and their work.”
The Court specifically considers paragraph 73 of Lacasse.
In 2010, the
Supreme Court of Canada
noted in
R. v. Nasogaluak
2010 SCC 6 (CanLII)
,
[2010] 1 S.C.R 206
, at
paragraph
43
that “no one sentencing objective trumps the others, and it falls
to the sentencing judge to determine which objective or objectives merit the
greatest weight given the particulars of the case.” Sentencing is highly
individualized.
See
R. v. Suter,
2018 SCC 34
. As the Court stated in
paragraph 4:
The delicate balancing of the various
sentencing principles and objectives is called for, in line with the overriding
principle that a “sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence
and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
(
Section 718.1
of
the Criminal Code.)
Accordingly, there will be cases where the particular
circumstances of the offense and/or the offender call for a sentence that falls
outside of the normal sentencing range. This is one such case.
In 2021,
the
Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Parranto
2021 SCC 46 (CanLII)
,
[2021] S.C.J. No. 46
,
in
the majority judgment at paragraph 10 noted that proportionality is the
organizing principle for the Court in imposing a fair, fit and principled
sentence. Proportionality is the fundamental principle. “Sentences must be
proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of responsibility of
the offender” and the unique circumstances of each case. Parity and
individualization are important yet secondary principles. The demands of
proportionality must be calibrated by reference to the sentences imposed in
other cases. Individualization is central to the assessment of proportionality
in that it demands consideration of the individual circumstances of each
offender, as set out in paragraph 12 of that case.
As often stated
by appellate courts considering sentence appeals, every case has its unique
features relating to the offender or the offence. The Court has reviewed all of
the cases referred to by the defense and the Crown in this case. The absence of
mention by this Court does not mean that this Court has not considered a
particular case. It simply reflects the Court's view that it's not worthy of
going into detail in the reasons.
The principle of
proportionality is also codified in the
C
riminal Code,
which states that
the sentence imposed by the Court must be proportionate to the gravity of the
offense and the degree of responsibility of the offender.
(
See Section
718.1 of the
Criminal Code.)
Further, the Court bears in mind that, the
fundamental principle of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute,
along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the objectives:
A) Denunciation;
B) Deterrence, both
generally and specifically for the offender;
C) Separation of the
offenders from society where necessary;
D) Rehabilitation;
E) to provide reparation for
harm done to victims or to the community; and
F) to promote a sense of
responsibility in offenders and acknowledgement of the harm done to victims or
to the community.
(
Section 718
of the
Criminal
Code
)
The Court bears
in mind any applicable sentencing principles as set out in Section 718.2 and as
well, the principles of parity, totality and judicial restraint in considering
a sentence of deprivation of liberty or imprisonment as set out in Section
718.2,(b)-(e). The emphasis of the Court in considering those various
objectives depends on the nature of the offence and the circumstances of an
offender. The Court considers the circumstances of the offender and the
offense.
Starting first
with the circumstances of the offender, the Court specifically considers the
first principle of judicial restraint, as Mr. Calzada-Preciado has no prior
criminal record. This principle is codified in section 718.2.
The Court also
considers the combination of
R. v. Proulx
2000 SCC 5 (CanLII)
,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 61
, together
with the prior Court of Appeal
decision in
R. v. Priest
1996 CanLII 1381 (ON CA)
,
[1996] O.J. No.
3369
. The Court of Appeal
judgment in
Priest
predated the availability
of conditional sentences. While the
Priest
judgment
related to property
offences, the principle which has emerged from its consideration of the case is
that the Court should explore all other dispositions before imposing a
custodial sentence. This principle followed the Court’s earlier
case of
R.
v. Stein
(1974)
1974 CanLII 1615 (ON CA)
,
15 C.C.C. (2nd) 376 (O.C.A.)
at page 377,
a judgment
authored by Justice Martin. The Court also held that for a first term of
imprisonment, the length should be as short as possible. Proulx has made it
clear that a sentence of incarceration should only be imposed if a conditional
sentence is not appropriate.
The Court also
considers the judgment of the Court of Appeal for Ontario
in
R. v. Batisse,
2009 ONCA 114 (CanLII)
,
[2009],
93 O.R. (3d) 643
, and most particularly at paragraphs 32 to 34. The principle
of restraint for a first offender requires a sentencing judge to consider all
sanctions apart from incarceration and where incarceration is imposed, to
impose a term as short as possible and tailored to the individual circumstances
of the accused, following
R. v. Priest.
Secondly, it requires the
sentencing judge to consider rehabilitation.
Thirdly, where
the case is serious and involves violence, general deterrence and denunciation
are also significant factors to be considered. The Court will bear in mind
judicial restraint in considering the sentence for Mr. Calzada-Preciado, as a
first — although not youthful — offender. The Court also considers whether Mr.
Calzada-Preciado is addicted or dependent on Schedule I opiates such as
fentanyl. The Court had asked the defense for information, and in that regard,
the Court has above in the reasons outlined the information that has emerged
from his attendance and relationship at CAMH. The Court would note that more
recently, there is no indication that he was taking methamphetamines.
The Court would
indicate that there is an indication that he had a moderate diagnosis of a
dependency to fentanyl, but it also outlined the nature of his consumption of
fentanyl, which appears to have emerged from Mr. Calzada-Preciado himself. As a
result, the Court notes that there might be some dependency on fentanyl, but
there does not appear to be a dependency on methamphetamine, at least as it
relates to the material outlined before this Court for the consideration of sentence.
The Court would also note, as indicated above, that the quantity of substances
of fentanyl that were possessed for the purposes of trafficking went far beyond
what he would have consumed for personal use.
VI. Nature of
Offence
Courts have
renewed emphasis on deterrent sentences for drug trafficking related offenses.
Courts are eminently aware of the dangers posed to society by drug crime and
the importance of deterrent sentences for drug traffickers.
In
R. v. Smith,
(1987),
1987 CanLII 64 (SCC)
,
34 C.C.C. (3d) 97 (S.C.C.)
Justice Lamer noted:
Those who import and market hard drugs for
lucre are responsible for the gradual but inexorable degeneration of many of
their fellow human beings as a result of their becoming drug addicts. Such
persons with few exceptions should, upon conviction, in my respectful view, be
sentenced to and actually serve long periods of penal servitude.
The Supreme Court
of Canada further considered drug offences
in
Pushpanathan v. Canada
1998 CanLII 778 (SCC)
,
[1998]
1 S.C.R. 982 (S.C.C.)
. Justice Cory wrote of the social and economic costs of
illicit drug use in Canada, and stated at pages 1039 to 1040:
The cost to society of drug abuse and
trafficking in illicit drugs are at least significant, if not staggering. They
include direct costs such as healthcare and law enforcement, and indirect costs
of lost productivity.
In Canada, the total cost to society of
substance abuse has been estimated to be $18.45 billion dollars annually (the
Canadian Center on Substance Abuse, “
The Costs of Substance Abuse in Canada
:
Highlights”
). Of this amount, the cost flowing from illicit drugs is
$1.4 billion dollars.
(McKenzie, supra.)
In 1992, there were 732 deaths,
7095 hospitalizations and 58,571 hospital days in Canada attributable to
illicit drugs.
(McKenzie.)
Mortality from illicit drugs is less than for
alcohol and tobacco, but tends to involve younger victims.
These significant and often tragic
consequences serve to emphasize that the harm caused by trafficking in illicit
drugs is very properly a matter of grave concern in Canada, as it is throughout
the world.
As
noted by the
Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Pearson,
(1992),
1992 CanLII 52 (SCC)
,
77 C.C.C. (3d) 124
:
Drugs are responsible for 70% to 80% of
prison terms. Crimes resulting from the application of narcotics legislation
(possession and trafficking); crimes committed under the influence of alcohol
or other drugs (rape, violence and homicide); crimes committed to obtain drugs
(theft and prostitution).
In the context of
its consideration of the bail provisions relating to trafficking in narcotics,
the Supreme Court noted,
Most offenses are not committed
systematically. By contrast, trafficking in narcotics occurs systematically,
usually within a highly sophisticated commercial setting. It is often a
business and a way of life. It is highly lucrative, creating huge incentives
for an offender to continue criminal behavior...
Most recently, in
2021, 23 years after the
Pushpanathan
case,
the Supreme Court of Canada
considered the dangers posed by trafficking in hard drugs and the impact it has
in Canada
in
R. v. Parranto
,
2021 SCC 46
and the Court noted the
following at paragraphs 87 to 89:
[87] The dangers posed by trafficking in hard
drugs such as heroin and cocaine have long been recognized in Canada. Over the
past few decades, however, society's awareness of the true gravity of
trafficking in such drugs has grown to the point that we are reminded on a
daily basis of the death, destruction and havoc it causes in communities across
Canada.
[88] Trafficking in such substances causes
both direct and indirect harms to society. Directly, the distribution and abuse
of hard drugs leads to addiction, debilitating adverse health effects, and all
too frequently, death by overdose as Justice Lamer (as he then was) astutely
observed, “Where addiction and death occur, as they so often do, those who
oversee the distribution of these drugs are personally responsible for the
gradual but inexorable degeneration of many of their fellow human beings.”
R.
v. Smith
(1987),
1987 CanLII 64 (SCC)
,
CanLII 64 (S.C.C.)
,
[1987] 1 S.C.R. 1045
.
[89] Trafficking also leads indirectly to a
host of other ills, including an increase in all manner of crime committed by
those seeking to finance their addiction, as well as by organized crime
syndicates. (
Pushpanathan v. Canada
for Justice Cory), (
R. v.
Kang-Brown,
2008 SCC 18
,
at paragraph
184
for Justice Deschamps
dissenting, but not on this point.) Given that much of this criminal activity
is violent, trafficking has come to be understood as an offense of violence,
even beyond the ruinous consequences it has for those who abuse drugs and in
the process, destroy themselves and others.
More
specifically, the Court considered fentanyl as a drug and the devastating effect
it has on people in Canada. This Court agrees with the Crown’s submission that
fentanyl is an exceptionally dangerous substance, as reflected by the comments
of
the Supreme Court of Canada in
Parranto
as follows, quoting from
paragraphs 94 to 96:
[94] Synthetically produced and readily
available on the illicit market, fentanyl is an extremely dangerous and
powerful painkiller and sedative. As with other opioids such as heroin and
morphine, it is a highly addictive substance which, when taken outside of
controlled medical environments, puts its users at risk of serious harm
including brain damage, organ damage, coma and death. Fentanyl's potential for
harm is, however, significantly greater than other opioids. It is, for example,
estimated to be 80 to 100 times more potent than morphine and 25 to 50 times
more potent than pharmaceutical-grade heroin. Given its strength, a lethal dose
will often be less than two milligrams, an amount as small as a single grain of
salt. (
R. v. Smith
2016 BCSC 2148
at paragraph
24
.) The risk of overdose
and death from fentanyl is thus extremely high, particularly for naive users or
where it is taken in combination with other substances such as alcohol or other
opioids. The risk of overdose is also one that can be difficult to guard
against, as traffickers often surreptitiously mix small amounts of fentanyl
with other substances to create a cheaper product with the same effects,
thereby drastically increasing the profitability. (H. Hrymak, “
A Bad Deal:
British Columbia’s Emphasis on Deterrence and Increasing Prison Sentences for
Street-Level Fentanyl Traffickers
”.) This deceptive practice leaves users vulnerable
and unaware, especially as fentanyl is physically indistinguishable from other
hard drugs such as heroin, oxycodone and cocaine. (Clayton Ruby on
Sentencing
at paragraph 24), (
R. v. Joumaa
, paragraph 12.)
[95] Analogs or derivatives of fentanyl
further exacerbate the risks as these substances can be far more potent than
even fentanyl itself, with some estimated to be as much as 100 times more
potent than fentanyl. One such analog, carfentanil, is so toxic that it has no
safe or beneficial human use, even within the medical community in highly
controlled environments. (A. Sabbadini and A. Boni,
Sentencing Drug
Offenders).
[96] Beyond its mere potential to cause harm,
however, fentanyl has had and continues to have a real and deadly impact on the
lives of Canadians. Indeed, trafficking in fentanyl is so deadly that various
courts have described it as a national crisis, reflective of an increased
understanding of the gravity of the harm it causes. (
See
R. v. Smith,
2017
BCCA 112
,
at paragraph
50
,
R. v. Vezina,
2017 ONCJ 775
at paragraph
58
,
R. v. Aujla,
2016 ABPC 272
at paragraph
1
). This heightened
understanding is supported by the available statistical evidence. The expert
evidence on the record before us establishes, for instance, that
fentanyl-related deaths in Alberta increased by 4,858% between 2011 and 2017,
rising from 12 deaths in 2011 to 583 deaths in 2017. More broadly, federal
statistics on opioid-related deaths show that between January 2016 and March
2021, approximately 23,000 Canadians lost their lives due to accidental
apparent opioid-related deaths with fentanyl involved in 71% of these deaths.
(Special Advisory Committee on the Epidemic of Opioid Overdoses,
Opioid and
Stimulant-related Harms in Canada).
The epidemic also shows no signs of
abating, with over 6000 accidental deaths occurring in 2020 alone, 82% of which
involve fentanyl (Government of Canada,
Federal actions on opioids to date).
These figures throw into stark relief the dark and inescapable reality that
every day in our communities, fentanyl abuse claims the lives of Canadians. (
R.
v. Loor
,
2017 ONCA 696
, at paragraph
33
).
In Ontario, our
Court of Appeal has
noted in
R. v. Lynch,
2022 ONCA 109 (CanLII
)
at
para.
15
that:
Fentanyl is known to be a much more dangerous
drug than almost any other, and that this reality directs that a sentence
imposed for trafficking in fentanyl should be as long or longer than a
corresponding sentence imposed for trafficking in cocaine.
The Court
in
Lynch
considered the range of sentence for mid-level traffickers in cocaine to be
5-to-8 years. Fentanyl is more dangerous than cocaine and the Court noted that
a higher penalty should be imposed.
Referring to
R.
v. Olvedi,
2021 ONCA 518
, (
leave to appeal refused)
, the Court noted
that trafficking in fentanyl should be as long or longer than a corresponding
sentence for trafficking in cocaine. The Court
in
Lynch
noted, parroting
the words of the Supreme Court of Canada over many decades, at paragraph 17 as
follows:
The problems that dangerous drugs pose for
our society are well-known. They involve drug addiction, adverse health
consequences and unfortunately all too often, death. Further, drugs are often
sold to already vulnerable people, thereby exacerbating their difficult
circumstances. Still further, there are the indirect costs to society through
increased healthcare expenses, increased demands on the healthcare system,
increases in robberies or other forms of criminal activity, and increases in
violence. Simply put, the greater those risks are when a particular drug is
being trafficked, the greater the offender’s culpability or moral
blameworthiness for choosing to traffic in that drug.
In commenting
upon a scenario where a trafficker is not at the upper end or pinnacle of the
drug- dealing empire, the Court made the common sense and obvious statement
that, “the producers of a product cannot get it into the hands of the consumer
if there's no one to sell and deliver it.”
In terms of the
role of a trafficker as compared to a high-level supplier of drugs, therefore,
the Court would note the person who is at the level of distributing and selling
drugs to the ultimate consumer is still a necessary component in the drug
chain.
As it relates to
the range of sentence, this Court acknowledges that the quantity of the drugs
involved
in the
Lynch
case were far less than those in the subject case,
but the Court considered the case for the principles relating to sentencing for
offences related to fentanyl, as opposed to cocaine. A common Schedule I drug
over the years has been cocaine. There is no cocaine involved in this case, but
the principles of it being a highly addictive Schedule I drug are also
relevant. Appellate courts have often spoken about the principles as related to
trafficking and trafficking-related offenses. As it relates to cocaine, the
Court considers
R. v. Bajada,
2003 CanLII 15687 (ON CA)
,
[2003], O.J. No. 721 (C.A.)
, and the comments
in the textbook
Sentencing
by Clayton Ruby, which states under the
heading of “cocaine” at page 865 to 866,
Cocaine used to be regarded by the courts as
a drug which is somewhat more serious than marijuana but less serious than
heroin. However, due to the existence of crack cocaine and intravenous cocaine
users, this attitude seems to be changing. More recent sentences for cocaine
seem on par with those imposed for heroin possession or trafficking.
(Sentencing, Clayton C. Ruby)
The Court would
note, as indicated earlier in the reasons, that it takes the view that fentanyl
is far more serious than cocaine, at least at the level of the Court of Appeal
for Ontario. In
R. v. Hamilton and Mason
2004 CanLII 5549 (ON CA)
,
[2004], 186 C.C.C. (3d) 129
(O.C.A.)
at paragraphs
104 to 113
, the Court noted that the immense direct and
indirect social and economic harm done throughout the Canadian community by
cocaine is well-known, and it quoted from the Supreme Court of Canada
case of
Pushpanathan
v. Canada
.
It is important
to note the qualities of the other Schedule I drugs to truly appreciate the
nature of the substances and severity of offenses relating to trafficking and
possession for the purpose of trafficking in those substances. In this case,
the Court has heard evidence that the accused was also in possession of
methamphetamine. This fact is to be considered with respect to sentence before
this Court. As courts have indicated over the years, methamphetamine is highly
addictive.
In R. v. Holt,
(1983)
1983 CanLII 3521 (ON CA)
,
4 C.C.C. (3d) 32 (O.C.A.)
affirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada, 4
C.C.C. (3d) 32n, the Court
referred to
R. v. Ward,
1980 CanLII 2882 (ON CA)
,
[1980] 56 CCC (2d) 15
at para
18
. In that judgment, Justice Martin speaking for the Court recognized
methamphetamine as one of the more dangerous drugs stating,
The principle has been clearly expressed by
this Court on many occasions and by other appellate courts in Canada that save
in exceptional circumstances, a custodial sentence is required to be imposed
following a conviction for trafficking in the more dangerous drugs, of which
methamphetamine is one. We are of the view that there were, at the time of
sentencing, no exceptional circumstances which justified a departure from that
principle in the present case. Having regard to the nature of the drug, the quantity
involved, and the obvious commercial nature of the transaction, the fact that
the offender had during the interval between the commission of the offense and
his trial rid himself of his drug dependency was a mitigating circumstance, but
not an exceptional circumstance. Nor was the fact that he was at the time of
sentence gainfully employed an exceptional circumstance, although it was a
factor which was entitled due weight.
Over the years,
methamphetamine has been moved from the less serious Schedule III to the more
serious Schedule I of the C-D-S-A. As a result, the offense is now subject to
the more serious punishment of life imprisonment as with fentanyl. In other
words, Parliament has reflected its view that methamphetamine is even more
serious than it was when recognized by the Court of Appeal for Ontario
in
Holt
and
Ward,
when the maximum punishment was only 10 years
imprisonment.
As
noted by
Justice MacDonnell in
R. v. Villanueva,
(2007),
2007 ONCJ 87 (CanLII)
,
46 C.R. (6th) 129
(O.C.J.)
, considering methamphetamine:
Prior to 1997, trafficking in methamphetamine
was a hybrid offense under the
Food and Drugs Act
punishable in
proceedings by way of indictment by a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment.
When the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
came into force in 1997,
methamphetamine was listed as a Schedule III substance, and therefore the
punishment for trafficking remained the same as it was under the
Food and
Drugs Act.
On August 10th, 2005, however, methamphetamines was moved to
Schedule I. Both heroin and cocaine are Schedule I substances. Trafficking in a
Schedule I substance is an indictable offence, punishable by imprisonment for
life.
The Crown takes
the position in this case initially that the appropriate range in sentence for
trafficking in this amount of fentanyl is 3-to- 5 years incarceration. More
specifically, in this case, the Crown submits that the lower end of the range
may be appropriate as it is anticipated to be a case with mitigation, such as a
first offense, a guilty plea (although not an early guilty plea), and
potentially rehabilitation.
The Crown’s
position, in light of the mitigating factors above, and in anticipation of the
pre-sentence report, that a 3-year sentence would be appropriate. The Crown
also relied on a series of cases in that regard, and the Court will indicate
later on as it has above, that the Crown has modified that position somewhat.
Reference was made to the following cases:
In
R. v. Griffith,
2023 ONCA
822
, the Court confirmed a 5-year sentence for possession for the purpose of
trafficking of 58 grams of fentanyl, 68 grams of cocaine and 3.25 grams of
crack, and proceeds of $3000 dollars.
In
R. v. Margerison,
2022 ONCA
211
, the Court of Appeal upheld an 8-year sentence for possession for the
purpose of trafficking of 44 grams of fentanyl, finding it was not unfit, given
the aggravating circumstances in that case.
In
R. v. Lynch
,
2022 ONCA
109
, the Court raised a sentence from 4 to 6 years for a mid-level trafficker
who possessed, for the purpose of trafficking, 41 grams of fentanyl, 965 grams
of cocaine and 149 grams of M-D-M-A. The Court found that 6 to 8 years was the
appropriate range, and that the sentence judge had improperly discounted
denunciation and deterrence.
In
R. v. Thombs,
2022 ONCA 850
;
2022 ONCJ
165
, after having been at the Ontario Court of Justice, the Court of Appeal
dismissed a sentence and conviction appeal. The sentencing judge imposed a
9-year sentence, upheld by the Court of Appeal, for possession for the purpose
of trafficking of 54.35 grams of fentanyl, plus 3.2 grams of hydromorphone, 4.9
grams of oxycodone and 20.63 grams of methamphetamine.
In
R. v.
Disher,
2020 ONCA 710
,
the Court sentenced an offender to 8 years for
possession for the purpose of trafficking of 42 grams of mixed fentanyl and
heroin. The Court affirmed that trafficking and fentanyl warranted significant
sentences given their deadly nature — that was a Court of Appeal judgment.
In
R. v. Loor
,
2017 ONCA 696
, the Court of Appeal stated at paragraph 50 that generally
offenders, even first offenders who trafficked significant amounts of fentanyl
should expect to receive significant penitentiary sentences. In that case, a
6-year sentence was upheld on a low-level participant in a drug-trafficking
ring.
The Crown has
also relied on a series of trial decisions regarding sentence.
In
R. v.
Tonkin,
2023 ONSC 2139
, the offender pled guilty to one count of possession
of cocaine for the purpose of trafficking and one count of possession of
fentanyl for the purpose of trafficking. The police had stopped the offender
and another person in a car as they were delivering drugs. The police seized
55.62 grams of cocaine, 27.15 grams of fentanyl, 20.41 grams of marijuana and a
cutting agent. The offender was 21 years of age at the time. Justice Nakatsuru,
the sentencing judge, found that the offender had a limited role in the drug
transportation scheme, had incurred a Charter violation in his dealings with
police, had pled guilty, and had excellent prospects of rehabilitation. He
nonetheless imposed a sentence of 29 months jail on the fentanyl count and 4
years in total.
In
R. v.
Bieber,
2022 ONCJ 53
, a first-time offender was pulled over on a traffic
stop. The offender appeared drowsy. The officer conducted a search of the
vehicle and found drugs. It turned out that the offender had, among other
drugs, 14.1 grams of fentanyl, 57.2 grams of methamphetamine, 47.4 grams of
cocaine, as well as marijuana and pills of various kinds. The offender pled
guilty to various counts, including possession of fentanyl for the purpose of
trafficking. The offender had no criminal record. He had a difficult
upbringing, including fathering a child at the age of 18 years. He had made
several unsuccessful attempts at rehabilitation for his drug addiction, but
after arrest, had made greater rehabilitative strides. The offender pled
guilty. The sentencing judge imposed a sentence of 42 months less 3 months for
Downes
credit.
In
R. v.
Abdella,
2024 ONSC, unreported, a 27-year-old racialized first-time
offender had 57 grams of fentanyl plus cutting agents, and a 6-year sentence
was imposed.
In
R. v. Hillier,
2021, ONCJ 634
, the offender pled guilty
to possession for the purpose of trafficking in methamphetamine and possession
for the purpose of trafficking in fentanyl. The police observed the offender in
a car in contravention of a bail condition. They arrested the offender and
searched him incident to arrest. He had in his possession 28.1 grams of
fentanyl, 18.7 grams of methamphetamine, 9.2 grams of cocaine and just over
$1000 dollars in cash. The sentencing judge found the offender to be a
mid-level drug trafficker. The offender did use opioids and his drug-dealing
supported his habit in part. Part was for profit as well, the Court would note,
just like the case at bar. He did show remorse in the offences by pleading
guilty. He also, however, had a criminal record, including a previous drug
possession conviction. The trial judge sentenced the offender to a global
sentence of 4 1/2 years jail.
The defense has
also filed many cases for the Court's consideration in a 266-page casebook put
before the Court. Most of the cases cited by defense counsel were trial
decisions where sentence was imposed.
In
R. v.
Gallant,
2025 ONCJ 238
, the Court considered the situation of an addict
trafficker and the lesser degree of moral blameworthiness for the offending
behavior at paragraph 43 of that case. The Court would note that this case
involved far lesser quantities of fentanyl and that the accused was truly an
addict trafficker with potentially no profit from the crimes. That is not the
case at bar.
In R
. v. Gibb,
2022 BCSC 1853
, the Court considered a similar scenario of far less
quantities of a Schedule I drug, which was fentanyl and carfentanil, and a
family history of drug dependency.
In
R. v. Gordon,
2023 ONCJ 157
, the
Court considered a case where police seized from the accused 7.02 grams of
cocaine, 12.07 grams of fentanyl and 30 hydromorphone pills. As of the time of
sentence, he had been taking drug treatment.
In
R. v.
Grant,
2021 ONCJ 507
,
t
he Court considered sentence following a
trial for possession for the purpose of trafficking in the following
substances: Fentanyl, 9.5 grams; Crack cocaine, 26 grams; cocaine, 13.2 grams;
and methamphetamines, 4 grams; together with possession of oxycodone, 1 1/2
pills. He was a very youthful 18-year-old first offender and committed offences
out of character. He also had endured depression, anxiety and bullying. He also
had a prosocial post-offence conduct. He was a very different offender and this
was a very different offense, and accordingly, this case is not particularly
helpful to this Court's consideration.
In
R. v. Han
,
2022 ONCJ 343
, the defendant was intercepted delivering 15.6 grams of fentanyl
on behalf of another person to a customer. She was given a small amount of
fentanyl in exchange for her role and appears that she was not generally
involved in this business. She was addicted to fentanyl and under the control
of a local drug dealer. The Court found that there were unique circumstances in
that case, unlike the case that bar and imposed a conditional sentence.
In
R. v.
Hastings,
2024 ONSC 6328
the Court at paragraph 55, noted that
following
R.
v. Woods,
2024 ONCA 664
—
which this Court would note was a very
short endorsement — the Court found that a conditional sentence could be
imposed in exceptional circumstances, generally with a guilty plea and strong
evidence of expression of remorse, and significant steps having been taken
towards rehabilitation. In that case, a conditional sentence was imposed where
there had been 14.15 grams of fentanyl and it was possession for the purpose of
trafficking.
In
R. v. Hugh
,
2024 ONSC 6135
, the accused had entered a guilty plea to possession for the
purpose of trafficking in fentanyl in relation to 15.7 grams. The accused was
63 years of age and had no immigration status in Canada, having stayed after a
visitor's permit. He had suffered a stroke and had permanent weakness and was
at high risk of falling, needing hourly supervision. That case is entirely
different from the case at bar.
In
R. v.
Landell,
2023 ONSC 6526
, the accused had 2 grams of cocaine on his person
at the time of arrest, and upon a search of his residence, a further 257 grams
of powder cocaine was located, together with 29.5 grams of crack cocaine and
$4000 dollars in cash. The Court found that the circumstances were not
exceptional. He was sentenced to a term of 2 years incarceration.
In
R. v.
McIntosh
,
2012 ONCJ 216
, the Court considered sentence for the theft of
multiple BlackBerry cell phones. The Court found that the criminal conduct was
completely out of character and stated that “sometimes good people do bad
things.” The Court’s not entirely sure why defense counsel put that case before
the Court.
In
R. v. Mori
,
2020 ONCJ 620
, the Court considered sentence for possession for the purpose of
trafficking in a mixture of 38.66 grams of fentanyl and heroin, 7 grams of
crystal methamphetamine, and a small amount of cocaine. The Court found that
this was an exceptional case. The accused had led a lifetime of addiction and
completed extensive rehabilitation treatment for drug addiction. There were
other details set out in the reasons for sentence in that case that distinguish
it from the case at bar.
In
R. v.
Nacinovich,
2020 ONSC 7604
, the Court considered a sentence for possession for the
purpose of trafficking in fentanyl, 9.6 grams. He had pretrial custody
including lockdown time. Both of the defendant’s parents were deaf and he was
bullied at school. He was removed from his parents when he was only 14 years of
age. The Court set out the extenuating circumstances in that case, including a
restrictive house arrest and extensive rehabilitation which the accused had
undergone. It was during the COVID pandemic. In the end, the Court imposed a
sentence of two years less a day less pre-sentence custody.
The defense also
relied upon
R. v. Proulx
,
2000
SCC 5
, setting
out the nature of a
conditional sentence when it would be appropriate to impose on an offender,
noting paragraph 22.
VIII.
Consideration of a conditional sentence
The defense in
this case is requesting a conditional sentence. The Court considers that
option. The defense relies upon a number of cases in that regard, which are
noted in the reasons.
In
R. v. Russell
,
2023 ONCJ 133
, the police
executed a search warrant at the home of the accused and discovered 7.75 grams
of fentanyl and 33 grams of cocaine. The Court found that he was not an addict
- he trafficked for profit. Nonetheless, the trial judge imposed a conditional
sentence. The Court would note the same judge imposed a similar sentence in the
case noted above.
In
R. v.
Schneider,
2019 BCCA 310
, (the Court would note that this was a case from
British Columbia), the case as cited seemed to suggest that provincial courts
of appeal and other courts in that province impose more lenient sentences. The
accused in that case sold $20 dollars worth of heroin to an undercover officer.
The Court found a suspended sentence to be appropriate. The Court does not find
that British Columbia case to be of assistance in Ontario.
The defense also
relied upon
R. v. Voong
,
2015 BCCA 285
, but it is unclear to this Court
what portion or principles the defense relies upon from that lengthy case.
In
R. v.
Shearer,
2022 ONCJ 288
, the Court considered sentence in a case where the
accused sold 0.43 grams of fentanyl and later seized 2.84 grams of fentanyl
from his bedroom. He was sentenced to a 20-month conditional sentence.
Obviously, the quantity of drugs in that case was far less than the case at
bar.
In
R. v.
Williams,
2023 ONCJ 259
, the Court considered sentenced for a charge of
possession for the purpose of trafficking in fentanyl, 14.27 grams, which
included a cutting agent. The Court also considered a reading in of the facts
relating to 3.1. grams of cocaine and 180 grams of cannabis. The Court in that
case imposed a conditional sentence. That case is not particularly helpful.
In
R. v.
Woods,
2023 ONCJ 622
,
t
he Court considered a list of special
circumstances set out on pages 10 to 11 of the reasons, including a
long-standing opioid addiction for over 20 years following an injury, a
particularly difficult life, a very early guilty plea, positive employment
history, great strides taken in rehabilitation, and significant remorse and
insight. The Court effectively considered there to be exceptional circumstances
in that case which are not present in the case at bar.
As noted, the
defense has submitted that a conditional sentence would be appropriate for this
offender and this offense. In order to consider that, the Court must consider
section 742.1
of the
Criminal Code
.
The relevant portions of that
section are as follows:
If a person is convicted of an offense ...
and the Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of less than two years... the
Court may, for the purpose of supervising the offender's behavior in the
community, order that the offender serve the sentence in the community, subject
to... the conditions imposed under section 742.3 if:
a) the Court is satisfied that the service of
the sentence in the community would not endanger the safety of the community,
and would be consistent with the fundamental purpose and principles of
sentencing set out in
section 718
to 718.2.
b) the offense is not an offense punishable
by a minimum term of imprisonment.
The Court must
first determine whether a conditional sentence of imprisonment would be legally
available. Firstly, the offence is not punishable by a minimum term of
imprisonment. If not disqualified by the provision, the Court will go on to
consider for this offender with no prior criminal record and who, to the
knowledge of the Court, has not been charged with breaching his terms of bail,
that the safety of the community would not be endangered by Mr.
Calzada-Preciado serving his sentence in the community. Without getting into
that issue, however, there is a much more significant issue. The key issue in
this case is whether a conditional sentence would satisfy the fundamental
purpose, principles and objectives of sentencing as set out in
Section 718
to
718.2
of the
Criminal Code
for this offense and this offender. The case
law is clear that the paramount principles, primary sentencing objectives in a
case of this nature are denunciation and deterrence.
Courts have been
clear that in some cases a conditional sentence may satisfy the principles of
denunciation and deterrence, (
see
R. v. Proulx
2000 SCC 5 (CanLII)
,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 61
at
paragraphs
102 and 107
,
R. v. Wismayer
,
(1997)
1997 CanLII 3294 (ON CA)
,
33 O.R. (3d) 225 (C.A.)
)
As
noted by Justice Doherty in
R. v. Killam
,
1999 CanLII 2489 (ON CA)
,
[1999] O.J. No. 4289 (C.A.)
a conditional sentence “does not, generally speaking, have the same
denunciatory effect as a period of imprisonment.
Incarceration
remains the most formidable denunciatory weapon in the sentencing arsenal.”
In
Proulx
at paragraph
96
, the Supreme Court specifically considered the principal
and objective of judicial restraint pursuant to
section 718.2
(d) — that is to
say that “an offender should not be deprived of liberty, if less restrictive
sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances”. However, the Court stated
that this principle is, of course, not solely determinative but involves a more
comprehensive consideration. As stated in that paragraph, “a determination of
when less restrictive sanctions are ‘appropriate’ and alternatives to
incarceration ‘reasonable’ in the circumstances requires a consideration of the
other principles of sentencing as set out in
Section 718
to
718.2
.”
So this is but
one of the principles and objectives to consider. The Court must have regard to
both the seriousness of the offense and the offender's degree of
responsibility.
THE COURT: I'm
going to take a recess at this point because we've been going for quite some
time and I have to give the staff a break. It's not much longer though, so
we're going to take fifteen minutes so the parties can be excused.
R E C E S S
UPON RESUMING:
REASONS FOR
SENTENCE (Continued)
BROWN, J:
(Orally)
The Chief Justice
in
Proulx
went on to state at paragraph 106, “there may be certain
circumstances in which the need for denunciation is so pressing that
incarceration will be the only suitable way in which to express society's
condemnation of the offender's conduct.” This is stated by the Court of Appeal
for Ontario in
R. v. McGregor,
[2008] O.J. 4939 (C.A.)
: “
The nature
of the offence or the circumstances of the offender may require that a term of
incarceration to adequately express society's condemnation of the conduct at
issue or to achieve the required deterrent effect.”
The Court
considers all of the case law noted above, together with all the cases that
have been put before the Court in terms of when a Court might properly impose a
conditional sentence. The Court finds that this is not a case of exceptional
circumstances. While the defense takes the position that Mr. Calzada-Preciado
is addicted to drugs — and the Court would note that he has completed a number
of programs while in the detention center — that his involvement in the last
number of years with respect to drug treatment is somewhat tenuous. While the
Court has been advised he has been doing a methadone program, the Court hasn't
been advised of any extensive or particular treatment programs that he has
taken. In that regard, he has done less than he could have done in terms of
rehabilitation. While he has had a bail term with respect to house arrest, it
appears that no steps were taken to have him go to appointments with his surety
in order to pursue this important step.
There is some
evidence that he has a dependency to fentanyl. It has been described as
“moderate”. It is clear, however, that he possessed drugs well beyond his
personal needs and this is also evidenced by his admission on the guilty plea.
If he is addicted to drugs to some extent, and this explains some of the drugs
he possessed, this is a problem that he has not yet addressed in his life in a
suitable way.
Considering the
overall principles of denunciation and deterrence and most particularly, the
circumstances of this offense, and the quantity and type of the Schedule I
drug, being fentanyl, and the crystal methamphetamine which was read in and to
be considered on sentence, the Court finds that a conditional sentence would
not satisfy the fundamental purpose, principles and objectives of sentencing.
The Court of Appeal for Ontario has been clear that a jail sentence, and often
one in the penitentiary, is required for trafficking in Schedule I substances
such as fentanyl and particularly where there are no exceptional circumstances.
If the Court were to impose a penitentiary sentence, obviously a conditional
sentence would not have been available. In any event, the Court is not going to
impose a conditional sentence.
With respect to
pre-sentence custody credit, the Court would note that the accused was
initially released on an undertaking. He subsequently went into custody and he
has served to this point in time a period of actual days of pre-sentence
custody of 303 days; the Court notes that the
Summers
credit is
appropriate to be taken into account given the circumstances of 1 1/2 days credit
for each of those days. This would result in 455 days of enhanced pre-sentence
custody credit, which the Court will provide.
The defense in
this case has also sought credit for lockdown and credit for harsh conditions
while in the jail. The Court can consider the impact of lockdown and harsh
conditions as it has previously in the past as well, with respect to the
COVID-19 pandemic. As it relates to the time spent in pre- sentence custody,
the Court can acknowledge that conditions have been extremely challenging and
has considered that as a significant factor. In applying this credit, however,
the Court can deduct a specific number of days or do what is referred to as a
Marshall
credit. The Court in this case
relies on
R. v. Marshall
,
2021 ONCA
344
, a decision of Justice Doherty for the Court of Appeal for Ontario. The
Court will not deduct a specific number of days to reflect those conditions.
Instead, the Court considers the nature of those harsh conditions and lockdowns
with all of the other mitigating factors in coming up with an appropriate
sentence in this case (
see also
R. v. Avansi,
2023 ONCA 547
at paragraph
9
).
In all the
circumstances, the Court is going to apply the
Summers
pre-sentence
custody credit as indicated, of 1 1/2 to 1, for the actual days of pre-sentence
custody credit, and as indicated above, there are 303 days actually of
pre-sentence custody. The enhanced pre-sentence custody credit is 455 days.
Applying
the principles in
Marshall
, the Court takes into account the
additional evidence related to lockdown days (partial, full and tiered) and
triple-bunking days as noted above.
In addition, the
Court takes into account the defence submission that Mr. Calzada-Preciado
suffers from a dependency, to some extent, to the Schedule I fentanyl drugs
which he possessed and had a portion of them for personal use. Applying
the
principle in
Marshall
related to the additional credit for the
conditions in jail, and the somewhat tenuous connection by way of his drug
dependency related to fentanyl but not methamphetamines is set out in the
material before the Court. The Court finds that an appropriate sentence is one
of 32 months of jail. This is 2 years and 8 months less enhanced pre-sentence
custody credit. This would be converted to a number of days, being 974 days as
a sentence. The Court will then subtract from that sentence after the
Marshall
credit, the enhanced pre-sentence custody credit of 455 days. This would
result in a sentence of incarceration of 974, minus 455 days, which is a total
of 519 days in jail. This is approximately 1 year and 5 months.
The Court is also
going to be making ancillary orders in this matter. The first one is a D-N-A
secondary designated defense order and a D-N-A sample is to be taken in the
circumstances. The second is a Section 109 Weapons Prohibition Order, which
will be made for a period of 10 years. There will also be a forfeiture order
signed by the Court for the amount of $850 dollars Canadian currency, the
digital scale and the cell phone. The Court is also going to make a
recommendation that Mr. Calzada-Preciado be given counseling for any drug
dependency that he might have at the current point of time.
Those are the
reasons of the Court. Are there any questions?
E N D   O F    E
X C E R P T