Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj156/2025oncj156.html

CITATION:
R. v.
Elkhodary, 2025 ONCJ 156
DATE: February 19,
2025
Information No. 4810-998-23-48122571
ONTARIO
COURT
OF
JUSTICE
HIS
MAJESTY
THE
KING
v.
WAISUDDIN
AKBARI
R
E
A
S
O
N
S
F
O
R
J
U
D
G
M
E
N
T
BEFORE
THE
HONOURABLE
JUSTICE
B.
BROWN
On February 19, 2025, at
TORONTO,
Ontario
APPEARANCES
:
C.
Coughlan
Counsel
for
the
Crown
J. Ortega                       Counsel
for
Omar
Elkhodary
BROWN
J.
:
(Orally)
Mr. Omar
Elkhodary is charged with an assault on Vicky Moscoe on November 2nd, 2025,
contrary to
Section 266
of the
Criminal Code
.
The Crown proceeded
summarily.  The trial commenced on January 20th, 2025.  The court made an order
excluding witnesses.
The Crown
called the complainant, Ms. Vicky Moscoe, and put in evidence two video clips,
one of which recorded events from the complainant's cellphone at the time of
the allegations.  The defence called two witnesses, Mr. Omar Elkhodary and his
girlfriend, Ms. Jo Marie Ortega.  The allegation is that Mr. Elkhodary pushed
Ms. Moscoe.  The defence has argued that Mr. Elkhodary was acting in
self-defence.
UNCONTRADICTED
EVIDENCE
The allegations
relate to November 2nd, 2025, in the evening around 7:20 p.m., on November 2nd
or 3rd of 2025.  There is no issue in this trial as to the date of the
allegations.  This was a few weeks after the October 7th, 2024 attack by what
the complainant related was by the Hamas terrorists, wherein numerous hostages
were taken from Israel.  Ms. Moscoe had posters of children hostages she was
placing on poles in the area to raise awareness about the hostages.  One was of
a little girl, “Aviv”, with her mother and little sister.  Another poster was
of a little girl separate from “Aviv”.
Ms. Moscoe was
on the east side of Yonge Street just south of Empress in the City of Toronto. 
She was in the process of placing the posters on poles in that area.  She was
approached by Mr. Elkhodary who started to tear down the posters she had placed
on the poles.  As he had his hands up to tear down her posters, Ms. Moscoe put
up her hand on the poster to stop him from pulling it down.  This was recorded
on the video clip in evidence.  The video clip also recorded a number of
statements made by both parties.  The allegation related to events that
followed those acts.
After the
exchange with the complainant, there were two other women in the area who
approached.  These women were not known to the complainant.  They appeared to
try to intervene to stop Mr. Elkhodary from doing what he was doing and the
second video clip relates to their involvement.  This involvement with the two
women is not the subject of any charges in this trial.
ANALYSIS
The defendant,
Mr. Elkhodary, is presumed to be innocent.  The Crown must prove his guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt.  The defendant has no burden to prove anything, to explain
anything, or to persuade the court of anything.  The principle of reasonable
doubt also applies to the issue of credibility.  The assessment of credibility
is not a matter of choosing between competing versions, or determining which is
more credible or to be preferred.
Where the
defendant has testified, or called evidence from other defence witnesses, or
exculpatory evidence has been elicited from other witnesses in the trial, that
evidence is entitled to the benefit of the application of reasonable doubt in
the assessment of its credibility and the fact-finding that follows.  If the
evidence is believed and it affords a defence, the defendant is entitled to an
acquittal.  Even if that evidence is not believed in the sense of believing it
to be true, if it nonetheless raises a reasonable doubt, the defendant is
entitled to that doubt and an acquittal will follow.  Even if that evidence is
rejected, the Crown must still prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, based on
all of the evidence in the trial.
There is no
legal requirement that the evidence of a complainant be corroborated, that is,
supported by other independent evidence.  A determination of guilt or innocence
must not turn into a mere credibility contest between two witnesses, or a
bipolar choice between competing evidence called by the Crown and by the
defence.  This approach would erode the presumption of innocence and the burden
on the Crown of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  In the often quoted
reasons of the Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. W.(D.),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, [1991] 63 CCC
(3d) 397, the Court suggested an appropriate jury instruction for the
consideration of evidence in the trial, which this Court finds is appropriately
captured as follows:
1
. if you
believe the evidence of the accused and it affords a defence, obviously you
must acquit.
2
. if you do
not believe the testimony of the accused but you are left in a reasonable doubt
by it, you must acquit, and
3
. even if you
are not left in doubt by the evidence of the accused, you must ask yourself
whether, on the basis of the evidence which you do accept, and on the basis of
all of the evidence in the trial, you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt,
by that evidence, of the guilt of the accused.
SELF-DEFENCE
The court also
considers the law with respect to self-defence.  This is set out in
Section 34
of the
Criminal Code
which states:
34 (1) A person
is not guilty of an offence if
(a) they
believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another
person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person;
(b) the act
that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting
themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and
(c) the act
committed is reasonable in the circumstances.
(2) In
determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the
court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other
parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:
(a)
the
nature of the force or threat;
(b)
the
extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other
means available to respond to the potential use of force;
(c)
the
person's role in the incident;
(d)
whether
any party to the incident used threatened to use a weapon;
(e)
the
size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;
(f)
the
nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the
incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that
force or threat;
(f.1) any
history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident;
(g) the nature
and proportionality of the person's response to the use or threat of force; and
(g)
whether
the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person
knew was lawful.
Section 34(3) is
not quoted as it is not relevant in this case.
The Supreme
Court of Canada considered this provision in
R. v. Khill
,
2021 SCC 37
. 
The court considers self-defence in light of this judgment.
For the defence
in this trial, the court will consider whether the accused first,
believed on
reasonable grounds that force was threatened or being used against him or
someone else;
whether he acted
for the purpose of defending himself or the other person; and,
whether the
accused's actions were reasonable in the circumstances.
As characterized
by the court in
Khill
at paragraph
18
, the Crown bears the onus of
proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the answer to at least one of these
questions is no.  In
Khill
, the court noted that the act must be
reasonable in the circumstances and the fact finder must consider a wide range
of factors to determine what a reasonable person would have done in a
comparable situation.  The current provision came into force in March of 2013. 
A driving force to the amendments to the
Criminal Code
was the desire to
simplify the law of self-defence.
At that time,
the offences and situations to which self-defence could apply were expanded. 
However, there was a greater degree of flexibility to the trier of fact in
being the requirement that the court assess the reasonableness of the accused's
response by reference to a non-exhaustive list of factors.  The key issue
considered by the court in
Khill
was the accused's role in the incident
and the extent to which the accused played a role in bringing about the
conflict.  In consideration of that aspect, the conduct of the accused sheds
light on the nature and extent of the accused's responsibility for the final
confrontation that culminated in the act giving rise to the charge.
In considering
the new provisions for self-defence, the Supreme Court of Canada in
Khill
at paragraph
39
, noted that the scope and application of self-defence was
broadened and that it employed a multifactorial reasonableness assessment.  The
court also predicted in paragraph 44 that additional claims of self-defence
will be placed before triers of fact.  However, as noted in paragraph 46, based
upon the requirement to consider enumerated factors, the provisions narrow the
scope of self-defence in some factual circumstances and broaden it in others.
In that case at
trial, the Crown argued that the actions of the accused were rash and
unreasonable, that he could have exercised a number of prudent alternatives, including
calling 911, staying in the house, and that it was only a property offence. 
The defence had submitted on appeal that the Section 34(2)(c) criteria should
be limited to unlawful, provocative, or morally blameworthy conduct on the part
of the accused and not a broader type of conduct of an accused in a wider context
in which the accused acted: See paragraph 26.
It is important
to bear in mind, as set out in paragraph 66, that the court can consider any
mistaken beliefs reasonably held by the accused and the subjective purpose of
the accused under Sections 34(1)(a) and (b) and the criteria in 34(2).  It is
noteworthy that Section 34(1)(c) is primarily concerned with the reasonableness
of the accused's actions, not his mental state.  In order to properly consider
the relevant issues, the court needs to consider the evidence and make findings
of fact.
CONSIDERATION
OF EVIDENCE
Before assessing
the credibility of the various witnesses, the court will summarize the evidence
on the video clips relevant to the court's consideration of the testimony of
the witnesses in the assessment of evidence in this case.
Video Clip of
Allegations
This first video
clip is fairly brief, and it was marked as Exhibit 1.  It is the product of
filing on the smartphone held by the complainant, Ms. Moscoe, as she held it in
her hand.  The view and the vantage point is therefore constrained from being
held by the complainant as she was engaged in an interaction with Mr.
Elkhodary.  For instance, it does not show the full view of both parties from a
point further back, in order to capture everything that took place.
There is no
doubt that as the camera was filming, Mr. Elkhodary used this as a tool on his
behalf to narrate events.  For instance, at the outset, he said, "You just
physically assaulted me" when he was, at that point, clearly several feet
away from the complainant.  He then chose to walk back towards the complainant
and where she was located near a pole where the poster had been placed.  It is
important, this court would note, that even if the complainant had touched him
earlier, his response was to walk back to the complainant, rather than to
continue his departure from the scene.  In other words, he chose to go back to
the complainant and continue to rip the posters and potentially have a
confrontation with the complainant as a result, and that is what took place.
This video clip
is significant and it is helpful in the consideration of testimony in this
case.  It is only 1 minute and 29 seconds in length.  No transcript was
provided for this clip.  The court is not going to produce a transcript of
everything on the video as it can be played for details.
Although Mr.
Elkhodary used profanities when he spoke, and this was recorded on the video,
and the court would generally not use those profanities, it is important to
state the actual evidence to reflect the true context of the events.  When the
complainant asked him his name, he said, "None of your fucking
business".  He then reached over to the pole and there was the noise of
what seemed to be removing tape from the pole as he narrated, "Are you
touching me?"  As she spoke, he said, "Did you just touch me on your
own camera?"  The court would note that this does not grammatically make
sense to touch someone on your camera, but again Mr. Elkhodary seemed focused
to allege that the complainant had touched him, as this was the second time he
stated this.
The complainant
explained in testimony that the posters were of hostages and he said, "I
don't give a fuck" as he reached over again to get closer to the posters. 
He clearly continued to take down the posters in front of the complainant.  He
turned away from the complainant to respond to a woman who was to his left,
away from the position of the pole.  A female voice then said, he does not have
to do that and he asked if she has a problem.  He then said, "What the
fuck?", the same swear word he had been using earlier.  He said, “What the
fuck is your problem?  Leave.”  He then went back to removing the poster from
the pole.  He seemed to be directing that comment towards the woman who was behind
some distance.
He turned to
continue what he was doing with the pole removing the tape and the posters
across from the complainant.  The other two women were not in view.  In
response to his actions, the complainant stated, "No, I want these
two" referring to the posters of the children.  At the time, the video
moved slightly.  This was at the point that the complainant testified that he
pushed the complainant, as she narrated in her viva voce testimony in court. 
That was evident as the video moved.  Immediately after this point, one other
woman moved over to his right as he continued to remove the posters, and the
complainant appeared in a position somewhat facing him as the video continued.
Mr. Elkhodary's
girlfriend was already in the area standing next to him as he was across from
the complainant.  As pointed out in the testimony of the complainant in court
in reference to this video, immediately after he pushed the complainant, one
other woman moved into the area.  She moved next to Mr. Elkhodary.  There was
no assault captured on the video clip of the other woman towards Mr. Elkhodary.
Mr. Elkhodary
made statements that people have assaulted him, which are not captured on the
video.  Mr. Elkhodary still continues to go back to the post to continue to
remove the poster.  During this time, his girlfriend is standing next to him as
he continues to remove the poster.
The Posters
that were removed
Exhibit 3 was a
photograph of the two posters that were removed and crumpled up and given back
to the complainant after they were taken down.  The first shows, "Raz, 4
years old, Israeli, kidnapped from her home by Hamas".  The second shows,
"Aviv, 2 years old, Israeli, kidnapped from her home by Hamas".  Both
posters state below the images:
On October 7th,
nearly 200 innocent civilians were abducted from Israel into the Gaza Strip. 
Their whereabouts remain unknown.  More than 3,000 women, men and children,
ranging in age from 3 months to 85 years old were wounded, murdered, beaten,
raped and brutally separated from loved ones by Hamas.
And then it
stated, "Take a photo of this poster and share it.  Please help bring
them...." and then the poster was ripped so you can't read what it says
after that.
Second Video
Clip
In the second
video, marked Exhibit 2, the court indicated that it was of marginal relevance
at the time of the objection to its admissibility by the defence.  It showed
the poster that was retrieved from Mr. Elkhodary's girlfriend and returned to
the complainant.  This is the poster that was filed as Exhibit 3.  However,
although the defence objected to the admissibility of this video clip early on,
it appears to show a portion of the subsequent events that relate to Mr.
Elkhodary's testimony that the other two women assaulted him.
The complainant
testified that this video was taken seconds after the first video.  The court
had to rule upon the admissibility of this video prior to the defence advancing
self-defence in this case.  This indirectly made the video more relevant,
ironically, even though the defence initially opposed its admissibility in
evidence. This video clip is significantly longer, running 5 minutes and 40
seconds.  It was also filmed on the complainant's smartphone.
It starts off
showing Mr. Elkhodary using both of his hands to hold a female who was shorter
than him.  As he held on to the female, he pushed her backwards across the
sidewalk.  She was alone at the time.  His girlfriend came over to Mr.
Elkhodary.  As this point, that female was outnumbered by the two of them,
being Mr. Elkhodary and his girlfriend.  Then a second female ran over to the
area.  She was also shorter than Mr. Elkhodary and she appeared to use her
hands for a few seconds to slap him with an open hand, wearing gloves to hit
his arms.  At that point, the first female left the area, as did the second
female.
Mr. Elkhodary
then followed the second female as she left and the confrontation continued. 
The accused’s girlfriend remained beside him.  The four people then appeared to
argue as the complainant filmed them.  The accused then exchanged words with
the complainant.  At 50 seconds or so, Mr. Elkhodary left the area, walking
with his girlfriend.  Then he went back to the area where his glasses had
fallen on the sidewalk where he had the physical exchange with the other
female.  It appears that the parties were exchanging words as they waited for
the police to attend.  As indicated, towards the end of the video, the
complainant asked Mr. Elkhodary's girlfriend for the crumpled poster she had
been holding in her hand, which was turned over to the complainant and marked
later as Exhibit 3.
Viva Voce
Testimony Witnesses
In this case,
the court starts with an assessment of the evidence of Mr. Elkhodary.
Omar Ashraf
Elkhodary was born in Scarborough.  His mother is Lebanese and his father is
Egyptian.  They immigrated to Canada.  He testified that his mother remarried
and she is married to a Palestinian who has family members there.  He testified
that he disagreed with the posters on a fundamental level.  He stated that he
disagreed with spreading hateful propaganda and that the posters were
fabricated.  He testified it was a simple protest of misinformation.  He
indicated that the complainant argued with him and tried to knock him away from
the poster and he said, don’t touch me, leave me alone.
Then Mr.
Elkhodary and the complainant got into a verbal argument. He testified that he
told her not to touch him and she continued to try to knock his hands away. He
said she tried to slap his hand away. He testified that he had told people in
the area and that they swarmed. They were hitting. The three of them were
surrounding him. The court is summarizing his evidence and the way he gave it,
not grammatically changing anything.
He testified he
felt pressure behind him. He was pulled in one direction and then some force
behind him kicked or was behind him. He told them not to touch him, to leave
him. He defended himself. He told them he got them to stop touching him. He
testified he pushed them away for self-defence. He testified he did not want a physical
altercation, that he did not want to be touched. He agreed that he asked the
two women passing by to leave the area.
He did not wish
to agree with matters that were clearly factual that might put him in a bad
light. For instance, he is 5 feet, 11 inches in height and he was asked if he
was taller than the victim. The complainant had just travelled in and out of
the courtroom before his testimony, in addition to the extended period of time
he saw her during the allegations. He refused to admit that he was taller than
the victim, stating, "I do not know how tall she is". The court would
note that he was not asked her height, he was simply asked if he was taller
than the victim. However, he did admit that the other two women were shorter
than him. The court would note, Mr. Elkhodary is clearly taller than the
complainant. The court saw that.
He did admit
that his girlfriend was in the area, so it is clear that he was not alone. The
court would note that initially, Mr. Elkhodary and his girlfriend outnumbered
the complainant who was placing the posters, working alone. She did not know
the other two females who came along after the fact.
In
cross-examination, the Crown suggested that Mr. Elkhodary pushed the
complainant away and he responded, he has seen the video and that allegation.
The court would note that Mr. Elkhodary did not deny or disagree with the
suggestion in responding to the question. He did not agree that she was not
hitting or slapping his hands away at the time. His position was that it was
self-defence when he pushed her away. Essentially, the court would note that he
did admit that he pushed the complainant away but added that it was in
self-defence.
He was
cross-examined as to whether he felt threatened by the complainant and he
responded that he felt trapped and swarmed by three people at the same time. He
did not agree that he was taller than the complainant, which the court
indicated earlier, but he did admit that he was younger than the complainant.
The court would
also note that the evidence in this case reflected what the court finds were
three parts to the incident:
First, there was
the exchange between the complainant and Mr. Elkhodary culminating in him
pushing her. To that point, there was no assault by the complainant evident on
the video and the court found that Mr. Elkhodary was narrating things on the
video that were not reflected on the video. He admitted he pushed the
complainant but argued in his testimony that it was in self-defence.
The second part
this court would find was when the other two females joined the group of Mr.
Elkhodary, his girlfriend, and the complainant, who was previously alone with
the accused and his girlfriend. At this later point, it is evident that there
was some pushing and shoving with Mr. Elkhodary and the other two females.
The third part
is the second video, where Mr. Elkhodary, moments after the first video, is
holding one of the two females as she is alone with him and he is clearly
manhandling her by pushing her backwards down the sidewalk. Sometime after
that, the second female joined her and tried to strike him.
The whole
sequence this court would find as in the video and admitted evidence in this
case, was indicative of a push to the complainant, which was followed by the
other two females joining the exchange. As evidence proceeded, Mr. Elkhodary
clearly wanted a physical confrontation, which he had with the female on the
second video as he pushed her backwards.
When asked in
cross-examination about the point in time just before he pushed the
complainant, he was asked if he could have just stopped doing what he was doing
and walk away. The court considers his answer to that question that he was
already swarmed at the time and he had no room to move, he could not exercise
his freewill to leave. The court would note, that was not believable, based
upon what the court could see and has heard in evidence.
However, this
portion of the exchange took place
after
he pushed the complainant, not
before or at the same time. He essentially tried to rely upon a potential
explanation that he felt threatened by actions that transpired after he pushed
the complainant as some sort of rationale as to why he pushed her. He pushed
her, this court would find, because he wanted the complainant out of the way,
so that he could successfully complete his actions in taking down the posters.
The complainant was smaller than him and older than him. He was with his
girlfriend. He was not alone.
On a
consideration of his evidence, together with the video evidence, the court
finds that the motivation for his action at the time that he pushed the
complainant was not in acting in fear of the complainant but pursuing his
actions of returning to the area of the pole to continue to successfully remove
the posters. The court finds that the motivating factor behind him pushing the
complainant was to be able to get her out of the area so he could remove the
posters. He was not acting in fear of the complainant after he returned to
challenge her actions with posting the pictures of the children.
He also
testified that at this point he was not physically capable to walk away. The
court would find that he had numerous opportunities to walk away from the pole,
to leave the posters and leave the area and he clearly chose not to do so. He
was on a mission, this court would find, to take down the posters. That was his
purpose and his motivation for doing what he did, including pushing the
complainant to get her out of the way as he continued to take down the posters.
He was not acting
in self-defence. The court rejects his evidence that he was acting in
self-defence as a motivating factor when he pushed the complainant. Mr.
Elkhodary wanted to make a visual point by taking down the posters in front of
the complainant. He was cross-examined as to whether he could have just left
and come back later to take down the posters. It was clear to the court that he
wanted the audience of the complainant to his actions. He was cross-examined
about having no reason to feel threatened or in fear of the complainant as she
was not physically bigger than him. He did not answer the question and wanted
it to be rephrased.
He continued to
state that he was swarmed by three people and did not respond to the scenario
put to him when earlier he was dealing with the complainant and whether he had
reason to feel threatened or any fear from the complainant. He stated that he
was not physically capable to walk away. He stated that he had no room to move,
no ability to exercise free will, as people's bodies were in his way. When
asked in cross-examination if he stopped taking down the posters whether the
people would have stopped swarming him, he stated he did not see the
correlation between that because he had asked them to leave him alone.
What this court
finds lacking in credibility is his position that there was no correlation
between the women in the area, that is to say the additional two women, and his
taking down the posters. This defies belief. It is not believable and the court
rejects his testimony. It was absolutely clear that the two additional women
were concerned about what he was doing, including with the posters. It would be
clear to any human being that his behaviour of taking down the posters of the
child hostages was causing the women to come over and to try to stop him from
doing that action. It was disingenuous for him to state to the court that there
was no correlation or connection. The court rejects this testimony.
He also
effectively refused to answer the question in cross-examination as to whether
he felt fear or threatened by the complainant at the time he pushed her. He
turned the question to feeling threatened by three people swarming him.
The court would
note that at a later point in time, when there was scuffling between Mr. Elkhodary
and the other two women, the court would accept that he might have been
potentially acting in self-defence at this later point in time, but not as it
related to acts of him pursuing the female on the second video, including
pushing her backwards as he held on to her to do that. That would go against
any sort of position that he was arguing he was acting in self-defence as he
was pushing her backwards, away from the area. While he might have been struck
by another female, shortly after he pushed this woman backwards, that was well
after the portion of time that he admitted pushing the complainant. The court
does not have a reasonable doubt arising from his evidence.
Evidence of
Jo Marie Ortega
This witness is
the partner of Mr. Elkhodary. She testified she was with him at the time of the
allegations. They saw the posters and went to a post to take it down. She
walked over, when she saw him in a conversation with the complainant. The two
parties then had an argument about the poster. Later, two other women showed
up. The court would note there is a clear demarcation of the times within which
the two women showed up, after the exchange between the accused and the
complainant. Then she said that all three women pulled him and almost swarmed
him and tried to stop him from taking down the poster.
The court would
note significantly as it relates to this portion of her evidence, the
complainant was holding a smartphone recording the initial video and that this
does not disclose actions of the complainant in pulling Mr. Elkhodary. She was
holding the phone in her hand as this was going on. This witness testified that
the women were pulling him, dragging him and grabbing his arms and jacket in
the back. This is not what the first video showed at the initial portion of the
allegations, at the time just before Mr. Elkhodary pushed the complainant and
while that was happening. It may have happened after the first video or after
Mr. Elkhodary pushed the complainant. This witness testified that after he
pushed the women off of him, she saw that take place.
It is important
to consider that her evidence is consistent with the potential self-defence
action by Mr. Elkhodary taking place but a notable period of time after he
pushed the complainant. It was interesting when the court considered the
evidence of Mr. Elkhodary's girlfriend, Jo Marie Ortega, that she made the very
clear connection that the women were trying to stop him from taking the down
the posters, even if Mr. Elkhodary refused to acknowledge that correlation or
connection. She did not relate the acts of her boyfriend immediately after,
when he grabbed the smaller female and pushed her backwards as she was alone
with him. She just left that out of the narrative she gave in court as it
related to the acts with the three women.
The court would
also note that her narration of events and positions was contrary to the video
as she indicated the female came to her left as she was behind Mr. Elkhodary.
The video shows this female, in fact, to his right at the point. Yet she
maintained the two women were behind Mr. Elkhodary and the complainant. If this
was the position, then based on the evidence of this defence witness, Mr.
Elkhodary was clearly free to leave the area. He could have left to his right.
Further, when
she described the swarming motion she saw, she related that they were pulling
his hands down, grabbing his arms and hands and trying to stop him from taking
the poster down. Then later in her cross-examination she testified that there
was grabbing, pulling, and pushing in a different direction. But most
significantly, this court would note she did not testify as to her boyfriend,
Mr. Elkhodary, pushing the complainant, which he clearly admitted. It is also
notable that she did admit that the complainant was holding her phone in one
hand and using her second hand to grab his arm to stop him from taking down the
poster.
Parts of her
evidence were lacking in reliability. For instance, she described one female
who was shorter than him almost climb over him to grab his arms. That was not
evident in the video at all, when the court takes into account the various
angles, based upon the phone being held by the complainant.
Overall, the
court had real concerns about the credibility of the testimony of Mr.
Elkhodary, as indicated earlier. The court has rejected his testimony with
respect to the events in question, absent the admission that he pushed the
complainant. He maintained through his testimony that, regardless, he was
entitled to remove the posters and there was no connection between that act and
the physicality that took place.
He maintained
that he had been swarmed by three people who did not respond to his commands to
leave him alone. The court would add this was all the while he was continuing
to take down the posters, an action with which the three women clearly took
issue. He was essentially causing a conflict, a confrontation and then seeking
to rely on self-defence when he refused to stop taking down the posters. He
stated he felt claustrophobic and unable to exercise his free will. He said it
was his free will to express himself by taking down the posters. He continued
to maintain he had no room to leave the area.
The court finds
that he could have left the area before he pushed the complainant, which is the
assault allegation being considered by the court in this trial. Although he had
maintained he acted in self-defence by pushing the complainant, the court finds
that he stayed in the area for a period of time even after the confrontation
and did not leave, even though he stated at various points in his testimony
that he was unable to leave. The court does not have a reasonable doubt with
respect to the assault allegation pertaining to Ms. Moscoe arising from his
testimony, especially when considered with the video evidence and the other
evidence in the trial.
The court would
note that as it relates to the evidence of Ms. Ortega, the court found her
evidence to be lacking in reliability and credibility, based upon what was
shown in the video clips and also when compared to the evidence of Mr.
Elkhodary, including the admission that he had pushed the complainant. She
seemed to want to colour the events as her boyfriend being attacked by three
women, which was not an accurate statement of what happened in this case
relative to the allegation. She also had inconsistencies in her version when
the court compared it with Mr. Elkhodary's testimony and the video clips. The
court did not believe her evidence and does not have a reasonable doubt arising
from her testimony.
Evidence of
the Complainant, Vicky Moscoe
The complainant
was very clear in her testimony that she was pushed before the two women came
over to the area. She testified she was shoved and she felt her forehead being
knocked by the defendant, Mr. Elkhodary. She felt the pain of being hit by his
hand on her forehead.
The court would
note that this was at the point in time, as she relayed it in narrating with
the video, that there was movement in the video as she held the phone while she
was being pushed. The timing of this push to the complainant, being the assault
allegation, was as indicated prior to the other two women arriving in the
immediate area and that is significant in this trial.
Ms. Moscoe
testified that she was not touching Mr. Elkhodary as he stated on the video.
She admitted that as she tried to stop Mr. Elkhodary from removing the posters
that she had put on the pole, that her hand might have touched his hand as she
tried to protect the posters, but she did not intentionally touch or assault
him. She was forthright in her evidence in that regard.
In
cross-examination, the complainant maintained that the first person pushed was
her and that Mr. Elkhodary had pushed her. She maintained that she did not see
Mr. Elkhodary swarmed at all at that point. She was not intentionally touching
him before he pushed her. She maintained, as she had throughout, that her
fingers or hand might have come in contact with him when he tried to rip down
the posters and she tried to protect the posters, but that any touching, if it
happened at all, was not intentional.
Ms. Moscoe was
also consistent that Mr. Elkhodary was not surrounded by the other two females
at the time, but rather that she was standing next to him, and his girlfriend
was in the area. It is apparent in reviewing her testimony and the videotape
evidence and given the timing she related as to when the camera shook and she
was pushed by Mr. Elkhodary, he was not surrounded by the other two females and
the complainant at the time. He was not swarmed, to use the term coined by the
defence.
Her evidence was
consistent and made sense. She was not contradicted. She was forthright and
made admissions against interest, including the scenario that her fingers might
have come in contact with him as she tried to protect the posters and prevent
them from being taken down. The court accepts her testimony as accurate and
factual.
FINDINGS OF
FACT
The court finds
that Ms. Moscoe placed the posters on a post on the public street of child
hostages from Israel. After she did so, Mr. Elkhodary approached in a
confrontational manner and started tearing down the posters right in front of
the complainant.
This started a
verbal dispute between the two parties as he swore at the complainant and as he
continued to take down the posters. At one point he walked away and then he
returned to continue to take down the posters. He was there with his
girlfriend.
Ms. Moscoe did
not threaten Mr. Elkhodary, nor did she assault him.  While there might have
been incidental physical contact between her fingers trying to keep the posters
up on the post, as he relentlessly tried to rip them down in front of her, she
did not assault him. He then pushed her. He did this, the court would find, for
the purpose of getting her out of the way, to effectively intimidate her so
that she would remove her hands from protecting the posters. His goal and
purpose was laser focused, it was to tear down the posters of the children in
front of Ms. Moscoe.
After he pushed
her, the other two young women in the area approached him. The court finds that
he did not push the complainant in a purpose related to any self-defence, but
rather to engage his goal of successfully taking down the posters.
CONSIDERATION
OF SELF-DEFENCE
The court will
consider the components of
Section 34(1)
of the
Criminal Code
, as stated above.
The Crown bears the onus of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the answer
to at least one of these questions is no. The court will consider 34(1)(b)
first. That can be considered as the motive for the actions, and the question
is as follows:
Did the accused
do something for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or another
person from that use or threat of force,
Section 34 (1)
(b)?
The purpose of
the accused doing the act is relevant.  It is a subjective inquiry.  If there
is no defensive or protective purpose, the rationale for the defence fails: 
See paragraph 59 of
Khill.
Accordingly, if
the acts of the accused are done for the purpose of vigilantism, vengeance, or for
some other personal motivation and not for a defensive purpose, self-defence is
not available.  While a situation may evolve from a different purpose, such as
defense of property, it can transition into a situation of self-defence.
The court would
note there is no indication whatsoever that Mr. Elkhodary did anything for the
purpose of defending his girlfriend.
Based on the
consideration of the evidence of Mr. Elkhodary, together with the evidence of
Ms. Ortega and Ms. Moscoe, and the findings of fact, the court finds that Mr.
Elkhodary pushed Ms. Moscoe away, not in self-defence, but in an action to
further his purpose and motive of taking down the posters.  He wanted Ms.
Moscoe out of the way, he wanted her to stop protecting the posters, and he pushed
her to assist in this goal.  In that respect, the court finds that his motive
in pushing Ms. Moscoe was not an act of self-defence, but rather an act to
pursue the goal of taking down the posters. That, in and of itself, would
disentitle self-defence in this case.
In this case,
the court has found that Mr. Elkhodary acted in pushing the complainant, not
for the purpose of self-defence, but rather to get her out of the way so he
could successfully take down the posters. The absence of the requisite purpose
of Mr. Elkhodary acting in self-defence disentitles him to the defence.
The court will
nonetheless also consider the second question, which relates to the catalyst,
and whether Mr. Elkhodary believed, on reasonable grounds, that force was being
used or threatened against him or another person.
Section 34(1)
(a), the court
needs to consider the accused's state of mind and perception of events that led
him to act. For this element, the accused must subjectively believe that force
or a threat thereof was being used against him or that of another. In the
absence of that subjective belief, self-defence is not available to the
accused.
This belief must
be held on reasonable grounds, which objective component is based upon the
perspective of an ordinary person who shares the attributes, experiences, and
circumstances of the accused, where those characteristics and experiences are
relevant to their belief and actions. This is a blended or modified objective
standard as stated in
Khill
: paragraph
54
.
What would a
reasonable person with those relevant characteristics and experiences perceive?
The Supreme Court of Canada explained that this requirement operates to shield
otherwise criminal acts from punitive consequences, and as a result, the
defence cannot depend exclusively on an accused's perception of the need to
act. Through the reasonableness requirement, community norms and values are
incorporated in weighing the moral blameworthiness of the actions of the
accused. Quoting Justice Paciocco, currently a judge on the Court of Appeal for
Ontario, in his article, "It is a quality control measure to maintain a
standard of conduct that is acceptable, not to the subject, but to society at
large".
The court in
Khill
opined that in assessing the modified objective standard, reasonableness is not
to be considered through the eyes of people who are overly fearful,
intoxicated, abnormally vigilant, or members of criminal subcultures. Personal
prejudices or irrational fears towards an ethnic group or identifiable cultures
cannot inform an objectively reasonable perception of a threat as racist
beliefs are antithetical to equality and cannot ground a belief held on
reasonable grounds. The court also clarified that an honest but mistaken belief
can be reasonable and is not a bar to self-defence: paragraph 57.
In conclusion,
the Court stated that reasonableness is a matter of judgment. To brand a belief
as unreasonable in the context of a self-defence claim is to declare the
accused's act as criminally blameworthy: see paragraph 58.
In this case, it
is noteworthy that the complainant, Ms. Moscoe, did not assault or threaten to
assault Mr. Elkhodary. If there had been any physical touching by the
complainant, it was purely, this Court would find, for the purpose of
protecting the posters and not any intentional act of touching or assault. It
was accidental or coincidental touching if it took place, in the course of
protecting the posters, as his hands were in the area trying to take down the
posters she was trying to protect.
What is
important in this case is whether there is any evidence that Mr. Elkhodary had
any belief on reasonable grounds that force was being used or threatened
against him or another person by Ms. Moscoe. There is no evidence of any threat
by Ms. Moscoe. The court finds that there was no intentional application of
force by Ms. Moscoe, prior to her being pushed by Mr. Elkhodary.
The court finds
that Mr. Elkhodary did not have any belief on reasonable grounds that force was
being used or threatened against him or anyone else by Ms. Moscoe. The court
does not have a reasonable doubt in that regard. Mr. Elkhodary cannot take
advantage of self-defence, based on the Court's consideration of the criteria
in
Section 34(1)
(a). There is no need for the court to consider further aspects
of self-defence as it does not apply in this case.
The Crown has
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that self-defence did not apply in this case
and that Mr. Elkhodary assaulted Ms. Moscoe by pushing her. The Crown has met
its onus of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Elkhodary
assaulted Ms. Moscoe by pushing her and he is accordingly found guilty of the
charge.