Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj267/2025oncj267.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. F.(D.)
,
2025 ONCJ 267
DATE: 
2025 05 14
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region  998 23 11100450
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
F. (D.)
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on April 11, 2025
Reasons
for Sentence released on May 14, 2015
Mr. W. Milko......................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Mr. D. Paquette................................................................................ counsel
for the accused
De Filippis,
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
The defendant was found guilty, after trial, of
sexually assaulting his wife.
[1]
These reasons explain why I conclude that the appropriate sentence is three
years in the penitentiary.
[
2
]
The following excerpts from my earlier reasons will
suffice to give context to this decision:
[1]     Sometime
between August 1 and October 31, 2020, the complainant awoke to the sensation
of a penis in her mouth and another one in her rectum.  She has no memory of
how this happened.  The defendant, her husband, is charged with sexual
assault.   She met the defendant in 2012.  They married in 2017 and have two
children – an 11-year-old and a 10-year old.  The parties separated in 2021,
several months after the incident in question.  She reported it about three
years later, on September 30, 2023, after going to the police about a separate
complaint against her husband.
…..
[30]
It is not in
dispute that sexual activity occurred involving the complainant, defendant and
a third party in a shed at the matrimonial home in late summer or early autumn
2020 and that the complainant has no memory of how these events began and
developed.  That the complainant suddenly awoke and bolted from the scene
in a state of shock and distress was not seriously or successfully challenged.
At issue is whether the Crown has proven she did not consent to the sexual
activity given her lack of memory about it.  In this regard, the Crown did
not assert the complainant lacked the capacity to consent.  Moreover,
notwithstanding the defendant’s comments in the online conversation and the
complainant’s trial testimony that he subsequently told her she appeared to
enjoy the threesome, this case was not argued on the basis that the defendant
had an honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent.  The Defence
position is that I cannot conclude, based on all the evidence, that the Crown
has proven an essential element of the offence, non-consent.
…..
[33]
There is no question
the complainant was intoxicated.  That she awoke means at some point she
fell asleep or passed out and I conclude from this that she was severely
intoxicated.  Her first memory upon awakening is vivid and compelling; a
strong and disgusting odour, immediately followed by the sensation of a penis
in her mouth, hearing the words, “no teeth, no teeth”, and the awareness of
being anally penetrated.  The complainant quickly ran out into the night,
without pants, and without any words being spoken.  I agree with the Crown
that this emotional and physical response is relevant to the issue of consent.
 Significantly, the parties had discussed a threesome – at least to the
extent that the defendant revealed he would enjoy watching his wife have sex
with other men – early in their relationship and the complainant had refused to
participate.  Moreover, after the events in question at this trial, when
the parties engaged in sexual activity, the defendant suggested it be repeated.
Again, the complainant rejected this. The Defence suggestion that the fact the
complainant knew her husband always wanted this experience and, therefore, she
might have changed her mind about a threesome is speculation.  To have a
doubt based upon this would not be one based on reason and common sense that is
logically based on the evidence or lack of evidence.
[34]
The complainant’s
adamant refusal to participate in this type of sexual activity, expressed
before and after it occurred, and her palpable reaction after awakening from
her stupor is compelling proof and permits an inference to be drawn with
respect to the issue of consent.  This mostly uncontested circumstantial
evidence persuades me that the complainant did not voluntarily agree to the
sexual activity. In this regard, the fact that the complainant has had other
incidents of memory gaps, including not remembering several people present in
the shed on September 6, 2020, a possible date for the events in question, does
not cause me to doubt my conclusion.  Moreover, while Defence counsel
suggested she does strange things while intoxicated the only evidence on point
is that she would sometimes reveal her buttocks in private places.  The
complainant attributed this to her weird sense of humour.  This does not
trouble me and is not relevant to the issue of consent.
I now consider two final pieces of evidence, one of which,
as already noted, is relied upon by the Defence in support of the submission
that, at very least, it should raise a reasonable doubt about a finding of
non-consent.
…….
[42]
The defendant
penetrated the complainant’s anus with his penis while another man put his
penis in her mouth.  That these acts occurred was never seriously in
question.  The circumstantial evidence proves, as asserted by the
complainant in trial testimony, that she did not consent to what either man did
to her.  The online conversation does not raise a reasonable doubt
this.   The Crown has discharged its burden of proving that the
defendant directly, and as a party, engaged in sexual activity with the
complainant knowing of, or being reckless of or wilfully blind to, a lack of
consent on her part.
VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENT
[
3
]
The following excerpts from a written statement provided by the victim demonstrates
the harm she has suffered:
The trauma of this event has
affected my relationships with friends and family….A lot of people are upset
that I spoke up about what happened….I am unable to have contact with most of
my family members, and I no longer make plans with friends, or go out and do
the things I used to enjoy.  I feel like I no longer know who I am…...Since
this event, I have felt an overwhelming sense of fear, shame, guilt, disgust,
and confusion.  My life has changed in ways I never imagined.  I struggle
emotionally with constant anxiety and depression, which became extremely
heightened when everything happened…. The stress has caused my hair to fall
out, drastic weight loss, constant nightmares, as well as left me completely
worn out both physically and mentally.
…..
I have had to seek professional
help (on a long term basis) to help me cope with what happened…I have been
through many different medications and counselling sessions.  These have all
been out of pocket costs, as I do not have insurance….I have missed a lot of
work due to everything.  I had to take a 3 month stress leave and returned to
work prematurely against the advice of my doctor. I needed to
get back to work to support my children.
…..
Near the
beginning of everything after I reported the event I was so scared for myself
and my children…. I live in fear of retaliation constantly….
PRESENTENCE REPORT
[
4
]
The defendant cooperated in the preparation of presentence report.  The
author of that report provided the following assessment of him:
[Omitted] is a 40 year old
repeat offender awaiting sentencing before the Court having been convicted
of
two
counts
of
Sexual
Assault, Mischief
Under
$5000,
Assault
with
a
Weapon,
Publish
Intimate Image Without Consent and Voyeurism, all contrary to
Criminal Code
of Canada.
[2]
It
was
reported
the
subject
enjoyed
a
positive
childhood
and
adolescence,
having
been
predominantly raised by
his mother following his parents’ divorce.
He
recalled having frequent contact with his
father
and noted he was brought up in an environment free of any harm or abuse, with
all his basic needs catered for.
Collateral
sources reveal the subject continues to enjoy close familial
relationships.
The subject relayed he met the
victim in 2012 and they married in 2017.
They
have two daughters together.
He
disclosed his relationship with the victim was “up and down”, noting his
substance use was a contributing factor to their relationship ending.
In addition, he alleged he did not have a
good understanding of the victim’s mental health.
The victim shared the significant negative impact the offences
have
had
on
her.
She
described
her
relationship
with
the
subject
in
negative
terms, labelling the subject as
“controlling in many ways”.
Presently,
the subject has access to his children every other the weekend.
Both the subject and collateral sources
note they enjoy a positive relationship.
Following
the
subject’s
completion
of
high
school he trained
as
an
iron
worker.
For
the
last
22
years, the subject has been employed as
an iron worker with [omitted]. He has held a variety of roles during this
period, most recently in [omitted] . The subject highlighted
the
physical
cost of
his
career
on
his
health,
but
reported
plans
to
continue
working
in
this field for a further 12 years.
The subject identified previous
concerns with alcohol, noting it became a habitual problem for him to the point
where he was unable to limit his consumption.
Furthermore, the subject acknowledged consuming alcohol on a frequent
basis during the time the matters before the Court occurred.
In addition, the subject described
frequent periods of cocaine use.
The
victim asserted substance use was problematic for the subject for large parts
of their relationship.
In April 2024,
the subject indicated he recognized the need to address his substance use and
attended a drug and alcohol rehabilitation
facility
in
[omitted]
for
35
days.
He
noted
this
came
at
a
time
when
he
had
not
seen his children for eight months.
The
subject reported he learned new skills and gained perspective on the type of
lifestyle he wished to lead.
Although
the
subject
denies
culpability
for
the
matters
before
the Court,
he
identified
a
willingness
to comply with the Court’s disposition.
It is assessed he would be a suitable
candidate for community supervision, should this be a sentencing option.
The subject would benefit from a
structured rehabilitative environment and programming to develop his victim
awareness and insight into his offending behaviour.
SUBMISSIONS
[
5
]
Defence counsel acknowledged the people in the courtroom present to offer
support to the defendant, including the victim’s father.  Counsel added that
the defendant has a minor criminal record and described the presentence report
as positive. Counsel asserted that he was challenged in what to say and
explained this by questioning my guilty verdict. In doing so, he repeated some submissions
made at the conclusion of evidence at the trial. I interrupted this and invited
counsel to offer sentencing submissions based on my verdict and added that his
challenge to it properly belongs in another forum.  Defence counsel suggested I
impose a conditional sentence order.
[
6
]
The Crown referenced the leading case on intimate partner sexual
assault; namely,
R v A.J.K.
2022 ONCA 487 (CanLII)
which established a
range of three to five years.  Counsel submitted that this case involves a
breach of trust by a husband towards his intoxicated and vulnerable wife.  While
acknowledging the inherent violence of sexual assault, counsel submitted that
there is no evidence of additional violence or other aggravating factors.  In
these circumstances, the Crown suggested a sentence at the lower end of the
range established by the Court of Appeal for Ontario.
[
7
]
In concluding his submissions Crown counsel pointed out, “as a matter of
fairness to the accused” that at the judicial pretrial in this matter, the
Crown proposed a sentence of two years less one day in the reformatory in the
event of a guilty plea. It appears counsel brought this to my attention in the
event I wished to consider a conditional sentence order.  Such an order, of
course, can only be considered if a jail sentence below two years is otherwise
appropriate.
APPLICABLE LEGAL PRINCIPLES
[
8
]
The applicable sentencing principles are set out in Part XXIII of the
Criminal
Code
.
Section 718.1
provides that the cardinal principle of sentencing is
proportionality. This means that the severity of a sentence will depend on the
seriousness of the offence (and its consequences) as well as the moral
blameworthiness of the offender;
R v Lacasse
2015 SCC 64
. With respect
to the seriousness of the present offence, I note that section 718.2(a)(ii) directs
that a Court shall consider evidence that the offender in committing the offence
abused an intimate partner.
[
9
]
R v A.J.K.
,
supra,
is an important decision with respect
to sentencing for sexual assaults committed against an intimate partner.  The
Court of Appeal for Ontario noted that the
Criminal Code
treats such
relationships as an aggravating factor.  This follows from the fact that people
are vulnerable in domestic relationships and a sexual assault in this context
results in profound violation.  The Court of Appeal identified the starting
point range for sexual assaults with forced intercourse as three to five years
in jail.
[
10
]
There
is nothing about this offence or offender that takes this case out of the range
established by the Court of Appeal.  As such, I cannot accept the Defence
submission that a conditional sentence order be imposed.  In this regard, I am
not dissuaded by the Crown sentencing position before trial.  Assuming the maximum
reformatory sentence was appropriate following a guilty plea, it is not a fit
sentence now.   This is not to suggest that the defendant is to be penalized
for asserting his right to be presumed innocent and electing to proceed to
trial.  Going to trial is not an aggravating factor.  However, it is well
settled that a guilty plea is a mitigating factor to be considered in arriving
at a proper sentence. A person who is prepared to acknowledge responsibility
for wrongdoing is further along in the rehabilitative process.  Moreover, a
guilty plea saves limited judicial resources and avoids inconvenience or
distress to witnesses.
[3]
[
11
]
The
presentence report is positive in the sense that it shows the defendant has
been a productive member of society and presently understands the need to
address substance abuse issues.  I also consider the fact that he has strong
support in the community. However, this is a significant crime.  The sexual
acts profoundly violated the victim’s body and dignity.  She has suffered, and
continues to suffer, substantial harm.  The defendant’s moral blameworthiness
is high. He had been aware for years that the victim opposed participation in
these sexual acts.  That the defendant’s heavy consumption of alcohol and cocaine
may have contributed to his decision to ignore her enduring objections and act
out his fantasy does not diminish blameworthiness.
[
12
]
The
defendant is sentenced to three years in the penitentiary.
[
13
]
I
also issue these ancillary orders:  The defendant will provide a sample of his DNA
and pay a victim fine surcharge in the amount of $200.00.  He is prohibited
from possessing the weapons and devices described in
s. 109
of the
Criminal
Code
for 10 years.  He is subject the sex offender registry (SOIRA) for 20
years.  Pursuant to 743.21, he is prohibited from communicating with the victim
while in custody.
Released:  May
14, 2025
Signed:
Justice J. De Filippis
[1]
See
R v F.(D.)
2025 ONCJ 15
(CanLII)
.
[2]
The defendant is a “repeat offender” only in the sense that he has a prior
conviction for operating a motor vehicle while his blood alcohol level exceeded
the legal limit (“over 80”).  Moreover, the presentence report notes the
defendant was found guilty of the several listed offences. That is not correct.
The Crown withdrew all charges except the one count of sexual assault that is
the subject of this decision.
[3]
The significance and proper treatment of a guilty plea is fully discussed in
the
Report of the Attorney General’s Advisory Committee on Charge Screening,
Disclosure, and Resolution Discussions,
Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 1993,
beginning at p. 309.