Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj325/2025oncj325.html

CITATION:
R. v. Dooney,
2025 ONCJ 325
DATE: 
June 12, 2025
ONTARIO
COURT OF JUSTICE
Central
West Region
His
Majesty the King
-and-
Conor
Dooney
Decision and Reasons issued June 12, 2025
Justice of the Peace A.G. Summers
Appearances:
Wade Poziomka. …...................................................Municipal
Prosecutor for Norfolk County
Peter
Karsten. …………………………………………counsel for the Accused Conor Dooney
Statutes Considered or Cited:
Highway Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8
,
as amended
Cases Considered or Cited:
R. v S. (W.D.),
1994 CanLII 76 (SCC)
, 1994 CarswellAlta 327
R. v.
Hammond
,
2005 BCPC 111
R. v. Hawkins
,
2009
ONCJ 101
R. v. Lising,
2000 BCSC 1003
R. v. Odish,
2016 ONCJ
118
R. v. Safdar
,
2018
ONSC 7066
Note: no related radar detector precedent identified
Justice of the Peace A.G. Summers -
Decision of the Court
:
1
.         The accused, Conor Dooney
(“Conor”), has been charged that, on July 16th, 2024, he “Drove Motor Vehicle -
Perform Stunt – Excessive Speed” pursuant to sub-
section 172(1)
of the
Highway
Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8
, which reads as follows: 172(1) No person
shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway in a race or contest, on a bet or
wager or while performing a stunt.
2
.         “Stunt” is defined in
O. Reg.
455/07
, Races, Contests and Stunts as, amongst other things, as follows: 3. 7.
Driving a motor vehicle at a rate of speed that is 40 kilometres per hour or
more over the speed limit, if the speed limit is less than 80 kilometres per
hour.
To which he has pled not guilty.
3
.         I have considered the
evidence and written submissions before me. The essential elements of the
charge before the court must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt by the
prosecution if the Accused is to be found guilty as charged, and until then there
is a presumption of innocence.
4
.         The issues not in
dispute include municipality/jurisdiction, identity, date and time of offence,
and location/place where incident occurred. Also not in dispute is that the Accused
was operating a motor vehicle on the date and place specified in the charge. Additionally,
not in dispute is that the Accused was travelling above the posted 80 km/hr
speed limit and the Accused’s vehicle had a dash and rear camera in operation
that captured the incident before the court.
5
.         What is in dispute is
whether the officer initiated the cruiser's radar device capturing an elevated
speed supporting an allegation of stunt driving. I will focus my analysis of
the evidence on the issue in dispute.
6
.         Here we have a situation
where I am faced with two versions of the same event. The overarching question
is whether, on the whole of the evidence, a trial judge is left with a
reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused. In every case, the Crown bears
the burden of proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt to assure an innocent
accused is not convicted. This burden is fundamental in our justice system and
applies to a case, like this one, where credibility is the main issue. To
assist a trial judge in this task, the Supreme Court of Canada provided a
three-part test found in
R. v S.(W.D.)
to determine whether the Crown
has satisfied their burden in a case that turns on the issue of credibility.
7
.         First, if I believe the Accused's
evidence that the Accused did not commit the offence as charged, I must find
not guilty and acquit. Second, even if I do not believe the Accused’s evidence,
if the evidence leaves me with a reasonable doubt about guilt, or about an
essential element of the offence charged, I must find not guilty of that
offence and acquit. Third, even if the evidence does not leave me with a
reasonable doubt of the Accused's guilt, or about an essential element of the
offence charged, I may convict only if the remainder of the evidence I do
accept proves guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
8
.         It is not, however, a
contest of credibility. A trial judge cannot simply choose between the evidence
of the Crown witnesses and the evidence of the defence witnesses. The standard
of proof beyond a reasonable doubt is at the heart of a R. v. S.(W.D.)
analysis. The standard is not to choose between the Accused or prosecution
evidence, or which account I prefer.
OFFICER ROONEY’S EVIDENCE
9
.         Officer Rooney's
evidence in chief is that he observed a vehicle approaching southbound on
Hillcrest Road in Simcoe, Norfolk County, at a speed that grabbed his
attention. In response to passing the Accused's vehicle, he then initiated the
cruiser's speed measuring device and locked two speed readings. The first was a
locked reading of 128 km/h and another locked reading of 131 km/h in a posted 60
km/h zone. The speed measuring device would have been invisible to a radar
detector until the point he depressed the activation button on the device.
10
.       He began his 6:00 p.m. –
6:00 a.m. shift on July 16, 2024, and did not test his speed measuring device
at the onset of his shift. He testified to conducting the radar unit function
check at 11:06 p.m. pursuant to manufacturer's instructions. I took judicial
notice this function check was 11 minutes prior to passing the Accused's
southbound vehicle, and five hours and 11 minutes after commencing the shift.
Officer Rooney was a qualified radar device operator since 2002 and renewed in
June 2021 with qualifications covering the next five-year period.
11
.       In examination in chief,
Officer Rooney testified he had read, then recorded, these two elevated speeds
before undertaking a U-turn to follow the Accused's vehicle southbound on
Hillcrest. He testified he was 100% certain he turned on his radar transmitter
after passing the Accused's vehicle on Hillcrest Road just past Evergreen Road.
No direct evidence was offered as to whether the officer had lost sight of the Accused's
vehicle. However, he testified there were no other vehicles in proximity of 8th
Street West because he had just passed through there. He also testified to
slowing and looking down intersecting roads in an effort to locate the target
vehicle, after completing a U-turn.
12
.       Following the U-turn,
remaining on Hillcrest Road now southbound and passing by 8th Street West, the
officer then observed brake lights come on for a couple of seconds or a little
bit longer than he would normally suspect or observe brake lights to come on.
The brake lights then went off and then another, sort of, semi-extended brake
period occurred. This caused the officer to wonder if the driver saw the
officer's headlight come into view after the cruiser turned around, and
subsequently was now braking from a high speed down to a more manageable speed.
The vehicle then made a third brake application, shorter in duration, and made
the right turn onto 7th Street West, travelling in a westbound direction.
13
.       On cross-examination, the
officer testified the Accused "had braked some distance before the actual
turn occurred, there were three brake light observations. One slightly
extended. A short time span between the second. That one was then slightly
extended. And then a shorter one simply right before the turn, as if somebody
were slowing to make the actual turn... the first two, he suspected, were
slowing down from the speed that he believed the vehicle to be travelling at
well before that turn occurring. So, they appeared to him to be completely
independent from the vehicle just braking to slow down to a speed to make an
actual turn."
14
.       I took judicial notice
the officer offered no direct evidence of observing the Accused's vehicle
travelling at a high rate of speed immediately prior to taking a third radar
speed reading. The officer testified that he then activated his front-facing
antenna on 7th Street after he and the Accused navigated a right-hand turn and
recorded a much lower speed of 70 km/h in a posted 80 km/h zone, and the Accused
was travelling under the speed limit. He further testified he did not know why
the Accused's radar detector did not alert audibly on the dash camera video,
that he could only speculate the Accused's device was not working. On
cross-examination, the officer did refer to his notes and testified it was a
much lower speed and the Accused was travelling 70 km/h in an 80 km/h zone.
15
.       The officer testified to
catching up to the vehicle that had made that same turn onto 7th Street West
and approximately one kilometre down 7th Street West, did engage a traffic
stop. The officer indicated he informed the Accused the readings were not
available to be shown. The officer testified that when he made a U-turn and
engaged his now front-facing radar speed recording device, the act of switching
from a rear-facing to a front-facing unit deleted the two elevated speeds of
128 and 131 that were recorded from the rear-facing direction. The officer
testified in chief that ordinarily his standard practice is not to advise the
driver of the reason for a roadside stop until actually obtaining identifying
documents. After confirming identity, the officer testified on
cross-examination, he engaged in conversation regarding the alleged travelling
speed and advised the Accused of the purpose of the roadside stop.
16
.       When asked about the Accused's
radar detecting device receiving a radar signal, the officer testified he was
unable to know what was inside the Accused's car or whether the device was
functioning, and these devices were not legal. The officer acknowledged
watching the video from the Accused's dash camera and denied confirming the
audible beeps he heard after turning right on 7th Street were associated with
the Accused's radar detector. The officer denied hearing audible beeps on the
dash cam recording that supported his evidence that he initiated his
rear-facing antenna identifying a 128 and 131 locked speed reading. The officer
admitted to hearing an audible beep on the dash camera video which coincided
with his testimony that he took a third reading after following the Accused's
car after it slowed, made a right-hand turn onto 7th Street, then proceeded
down 7th Street and registered 70 km/h in an 80 km/h zone.
17
.       The officer testified he
had no locked speed or time of recording evidence other than his verbal
evidence. On cross-examination, the officer testified he did write down the
locked speed of 128. He also testified that radar cannot print out tracked
speeds and he was not required to show an Accused evidence of tracked speeds
pursuant to the operators manual.
OFFICER ROONEY'S EVIDENCE
RELATED TO SHOWING RECORDED SPEEDS
18
.       During cross-examination,
the officer testified that at the roadside the Accused did request to see the
speed readings but could not be 100% sure. The defence asked if the officer
needed to refer to his notes to refresh his memory at all. The officer's
response was that he didn't recall off the top of his head whether he made
annotation of that or not. He might have. He could not say. He stated he didn't
know, adding "I mean, I could look through my notes. I don't want to pause
the court unnecessarily to look for that." Nevertheless, he testified he wasn't
able to show it to the Accused due to the fact that the convenience memory
reading of the locked feature was no longer there to show him, if he did
request it. As to writing the locked speed, the officer testified on
cross-examination that he did write down the 128 reading.
19
.       The officer testified
that he would gladly show it to somebody if it's available to do so. However,
under the circumstances here, the way that this particular radar functions, the
officer was not able to do so once he changed the mode over from opposite [rear
facing] to a same [forward] direction.
OFFICER ROONEY'S EVIDENCE
RELATED TO A SPEED READING ON A SLOW VEHICLE
20
.       During examination in
chief, the officer testified the first time he had heard the Accused had a
radar detecting device was during the trial. The officer testified during
examination in chief, and I quote, "he is trained to not activate a radar
device until he actually first observes, as part of our tracking history, to
observe a vehicle and the operation [of the radar], actually observe it is
travelling at a high rate of speed, and then really activate the radar unit to
basically corroborate or confirm our visual operations of that vehicle."
21
. He further testified that after
turning onto 7th Street West and closing the distance on the Accused's vehicle,
he then obtained further radar readings of the vehicle. The result of that
further radar reading was 70 km/h in an 80 km/h zone, and he testified on
cross-examination that the Accused's vehicle was travelling much slower. The
officer also testified previously that he is trained to not engage the radar
device unless the target vehicle is visually travelling at a high rate of speed.
CONOR DOONEY’S EVIDENCE
22
.       The Accused testified
that between 11:00 p.m. and midnight on July 16, 2024, he left a car wash and
drove at a speed between 15-25 km/h beyond the posted 60 km/h zone in an
attempt to dry his car. He operated a 2017 Volkswagen Golf inherited in January
2024 from his father with a hard-wired radar detector built in which turned on
and off with minimal delay when the engine started. When the car turns off, it
turns off. He testified the dash camera video alerts with a beeping sound, and
that night the detector turned off when the engine turned off. He acknowledged
the device was illegal and it no longer was installed on the vehicle.
23
.       The Accused testified the
hard-wired radar detector was a Valentine 1 Gen II model which produces a deep
signal in quick succession depending on the strength of the radar beam the
device is registering. The device was mounted to the front left windshield by
suction cups which followed the curve of the windshield but remained positioned
horizontally. The device was on a default setting that recognized radar within
a 3 km radius. The beeping alert becomes louder and more constant with a
detected stronger signal. He testified he was aware the device had not been
altered and that his radar device was on during the entirety of the dash camera
video that was recorded and presented in evidence.
24
.       The Accused further
testified his car was equipped with a front and rear facing dash camera and the
recording of the incident before this court was recorded and presented into
evidence as Exhibit 1. The video recorded a beeping sound which was alleged to
be emitted from the hard-wired radar detector. The beeping sound occurred
closer to the end of the video and did not occur on Hillcrest Road which was a
posted 60 km/h zone. He testified the radar beep was audible after he made a
right-hand turn from the direction of Hillcrest, and well past when the officer
testified to observing his vehicle pass at a high rate of speed.
25
.       The Accused testified in
chief that during the roadside stop the officer did not explain the reason he
was pulled over until after the officer asked for licence, registration, and
insurance. The Accused testified he asked the officer at first to see his radar
and the speed and the officer responded, and I quote, "yes, I can show
you. And he never really ended up showing me." The Accused further
testified in chief that when the car was being towed, he again asked the
officer to see it and he said that it reset, and he only had proof on paper.
The Accused denied being shown the proof on paper.
26
.       Further on
cross-examination, the Accused testified the detecting device was a 12-volt
install and was on sensor mode "A" which does not filter any signals
and grabs them all. It has to be plugged in and the unit has two volume
controls so you can hear the audible tone. The Accused testified he did not
test the unit pursuant to manufacturer's specifications prior to getting on the
road and leaving the car wash, and afterwards after the officer issued the
ticket.
27
.       On cross-examination, the
Accused agreed the remaining car wash water on the windshield would reasonably
be more on his vehicle when he passed the officer than when pulled over. The Accused
denied the car wash water on the windshield was the reason his detector may not
have detected the officer's radar beam when the officer first passed his
vehicle. When reading from the manual, the Accused disagreed that rain,
moisture, or dust in the air can shorten a radar range and this was a reason
for a weak alert.
28
.       During cross-examination,
the Accused testified his vehicle did not have wipers engaged at any point and
his windows were tinted. The prosecution read from the manual that some
windshields have a dark tint band across the top and to avoid mounting behind
that band. The Accused denied that his windshield had a metal band across the
top edge which otherwise could have interfered with the detector's functions.
He denied having a thumbnail setting and his particular unit could not mute and
so it could not be made to not make an audible sound.
29
.       On cross-examination, the
Accused denied believing the officer lied about the first use of the radar
device based upon an assumption that his radar detecting device didn't make a
sound. He testified he based his belief on the officer's notes and what the
officer said that he said he accidentally reset the speed in his notes. The Accused
denied the officer didn't show him the speed on his radar device because he was
making up what he says the speed was locked at. The Accused believed the
officer reset the device, that according to the officer he reset and cleared
the speed that he locked in on his radar device. The Accused testified it was a
possibility the officer intentionally didn't create a radar reading, then lied
about the speed, and then said he cleared it when asked to see the speed.
30
.       On redirect, the Accused
testified he believed his windshield water or water in or around the radar
detector was cleared off by the time the Accused passed the officer. I took
judicial notice the alleged two high speed readings were taken from behind the Accused's
vehicle and not directly through the front left side of the windshield where
the radar detector was mounted. When asked about a tinted band on the front of
the windshield, the Accused agreed there is a small one and if the tint was
infused with metal it could inhibit the radar detector. The Accused further
testified the tint on his vehicle was dyed film without metal in it.
FINDINGS
31
.       I found the evidence of
the Accused reliable and credible and accept his evidence that he was operating
his inherited motor vehicle that had a built-in radar detecting device that
turned off and on with the start of the engine, and the device would not
significantly delay and functioned with an ability to alert continuously while
the engine ran.
32
.       I accept the Accused's
evidence that he did request to see the elevated readings, that the officer
indicated they would be shown, and they were written, and the speeds were not
shown during the roadside stop. I accept the Accused's testimony that he was
travelling above 80 km/h in a 60 km/h zone.
33
.       I accept the officer's
testimony that the Accused had passed him at an elevated speed. I question why
the officer would take a further speed reading on a vehicle he was observing
depressing their brake lights multiple times to decelerate and was not observed
to be travelling at an elevated speed when an alleged third speed reading was
taken. It makes reasonable sense that a car depressing brake lights multiple
times would be travelling at a rate reduced from the 128 and 131, and with
those brake lights illuminating on the Accused's vehicle, the target vehicle
would not physically be able to accelerate beyond the 128 and 131 after thrice
slowing and navigating a right-hand turn – without the officer observing the
target vehicle pulling away from him at a high rate of speed. The officer
testified pursuant to tracking history requirements he is trained not to
activate the speed measuring device unless an elevated speed is visually
observed to corroborate the alleged readings.  As to consistency,
R. v.
Safdar
, found where an inconsistency of a witness involves a material
matter central to the elements of the alleged offences and about which common
sense dictates that an honest witness is unlikely to be mistaken, the
inconsistency can demonstrate carelessness with the truth that may undermine
the whole of a witness’ testimony.
34
.       Persuasively the finding
in
R. v. Hammond
,
which
distinguished
R. v. Lising
, both from the
British Columbia Supreme Court, provides guidance as to proof of radar speed.  In
Lising
, evidence of visual assessment was insufficient to find conviction,
the trial judge did not view radar reading as merely corroborating the
officer’s visual observation that the accused was speeding. The trial judge was
permitted to base the conviction on radar evidence if it was found reliable and
was not rebutted or weakened. As to weighting,
R. v. Odish
found when an
officer tracks a vehicle first with his or her own eyes and makes a
determination, based on experience, that a vehicle is travelling well over the
speed limit, then the radar is activated and the radar reading corroborates the
officer’s own observation, it bolsters the strength of the radar reading
element. It then makes reasonable sense, when an officer does not first track a
vehicle visually and make an experienced determination that the vehicle is
travelling well over the speed limit, the radar reading evidence is weakened.
35
.       As to tracking history,
R.
v. Hawkins
in reviewing a Genesis radar unit’s manual, at section 6.4 in
relevant part: For each enforcement action taken by the police with respect to
a speeding offence arising out of the use of this radar unit a tracking history
must occur. The tracking history shall consist of 1) a visual observation of an
approaching or receding Motor Vehicle that appears to be in excess of the
posted speed limit in the area and an estimation by the officer of the speed
that the motor vehicle is travelling; 2) having made the visual observation and
estimate of the rate of speed, the radar unit will be placed in the operational
mode; and 3) Note, that the target displayed on the radar unit is consistent
and confirms the officers initial observations and estimate, and that the audio
tracking tone emitted by the radar unit is consistent with the visual
observations and the target speed displayed; and 4) absence of any one of the
above tracking history components and NO ENFORCEMENT ACTION [emphasis not added]
shall be undertaken.  Here, the officer testified in chief being bound by a
similar tracking history requirement.
36
.       I considered why the
officer waited until the Accused had made a right-hand turn onto 7th Street
from Hillcrest southbound, to engage his front-facing speed detection antenna.
There was no evidence offered the Accused's vehicle was travelling at a high
rate of speed after slowing to make a 45-degree turn onto 7th Street. As a
trained radar operator, the officer would reasonably know that evidence of
alleged rear facing recorded speeds of 128 and 131 would delete if he took a
front-facing reading. Knowing this, and while the target vehicle was
substantially slowed or at a minimum not substantially accelerating away after
completing a right-hand turn without corroborating officer testimony of a
visual observation of a motor vehicle appearing in excess of the posted speed
limit in the area, why would an experienced certified radar officer choose to
take an action that deleted elevated readings, take a reading that reasonably
would not satisfy a standard tracking history component, particularly when
further readings were not necessary to substantiate the charge.
37
.       I considered whether the
radar readings were automatically deleted, accidentally deleted, were offered
to be shown and were represented to be written, though I do not question the
readings were not shown to the Accused at the roadside and the Officer’s
evidence did evade the answer on point.
RADAR DETECTION DEVICES
38
.       It is illegal to operate
a radar detection device. I believe the spirit of the legislation is to
disallow these devices because it encourages drivers to exceed posted speed
limits. The Accused admitted to driving over the speed limit and it is a
reasonable inference he was assured in not being detected driving over the
speed limit as it was his practice to drive with a radar detector engaged and
operating in his vehicle during the entire time his engine is running.
39
.       It is common knowledge
that a functional radar detection device would beep when it is engaged by a
speed recording device's radar beam. The decision today in no way is a
precedent that radar detectors are legal. The Accused is not charged with
having and operating an illegal radar detecting device, and the evidence was
not considered as to whether the Accused would be convicted of having an
illegal speed detecting device.
40
.       The decision today does
not condone the use of illegal speed detecting devices, nor does it intend to
send a message to the general public that the use of a speed detecting device
is a viability when defending a stunt driving charge.
DASH CAMERAS
41
.       Dash cameras and body
cameras are standard and acceptable evidentiary elements that are regularly
offered to corroborate evidence. The case before the court has a civilian
producing dash and rear camera evidence that challenges the officer's viva voce
evidence and is not taken to be less credible because it is produced by a
civilian. The elevated speed recorded on the dash camera was further supported
by the Accused's vehicle being accelerated aggressively after the engine
shifted into 4th gear, and I took judicial notice no evidence was led to
establish the speed the Accused's vehicle could reasonably be travelling based
solely on the dash camera video. The dash camera corroboration of the Accused's
evidence was weighed in totality of the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.
SPEED MEASURING DEVICES
42
.       As to precedent, this
case illustrates the importance of an officer's ability to produce a reading of
a speed measuring device in writing as part of disclosure when the evidence
supports a writing was undertaken when the evidence is rebutted. This case
illustrates the importance of documenting speed recording device readings
especially when considering the significant consequences of stunt driving
convictions.
43
.       As to equating the Accused's
qualification and training to operate a radar detection device to an officer's
qualification and training to operate an in-cruiser speed measuring device, I
find these are not one and the same. A civilian Accused does not use the
detection as evidence of supporting a charge. However, an officer's measuring
evidence is used to support a charge against a civilian and accordingly, the
standard is high to secure a conviction beyond a reasonable doubt. I disagree
with the prosecution that the Accused's evidence related to the radar detection
device and proper function is to be rejected in its entirety.
44
.       The Accused responded to
the prosecution's questions regarding the user's manual with a lay-person's
acceptable responses as a general user. The Accused was persuasive in a general
knowledge of the unit, was knowledgeable regarding its function and his routine
manner of checking operational capacity, and corrected the prosecution when the
prosecution questioned on specifications that did not apply to the Accused's
unit. I did not find the argument that water on the Accused's windshield after
washing the car would or would not prevent the radar detector from alerting in
this circumstance persuasively. The prosecution is tasked to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that water on the windshield did cause the detector to fault,
and I am not satisfied on the totality of evidence on this point.
PERJURY
45
.
The prosecution
put the Officer to questions in response to anticipated assertions by the
defense the officer has perjured his testimony and did not take elevated speed
radar readings. To these assertions the officer did testify being 100% certain he
took two elevated speed readings prior to taking a non-elevated speed reading.
In this case, certainty and speed-reading evidence was weighted on a beyond a
reasonable doubt standard. A charge of perjury is not before this court, however,
any inconsistency or tenets of perjured testimony that could be inferred from
the officer’s testimony on the whole of the evidence, those considerations
including weighing dash and rear camera evidence as it relates to an absence of
radar detection alerts, and any associated Charter Rights implications, are
left to a higher court or appropriate tribunal or administrative body.
RULING
46
.       The issue here is not
whether the Accused exceeded the posted 80 speed limit, the question is how
much above the posted 80 speed limit did the Accused travel. After applying the
three-prong test of
R. v S. (W.D.)
and after weighing all of the
evidence I do accept, and even if I don't believe the Accused’s evidence, if I
am left in reasonable doubt about guilt, I must find not guilty.
47
.       I found the evidence of
the Accused Conor Dooney consistent, forthright, and credible. He satisfied me
beyond a reasonable doubt that he operated his motor vehicle above the posted 60
km speed limit. He also satisfied me that he was operating an unlawful radar
detecting device while operating his motor vehicle above the posted 60 km speed
limit, however an associated radar detecting device charge is not before this
court.
48
.       I found the evidence of
Officer Rooney not reliable, was rebutted and was weakened. This highly
experienced and trained officer took a reading of a slowing and slow vehicle,
and while the same slowed vehicle did not visually travel at a high rate of
speed prior to the alleged third speed reading.  The officer testified he had
registered speeds of 128 km/h and 131 km/h. Despite these elevated readings the
officer contraindicated his testimony and mandated training requirements that
he not take a radar speed reading on a vehicle that was not visually travelling
at a high rate of speed. This highly trained and skilled radar operator would
know that the rear facing antenna elevated speeds would delete when a subsequent
front facing antenna speed reading was taken on the Accused’s vehicle that was visually
not travelling at a high rate of speed and consequentially not needed to make
out this charge.
49
.       I found the evidence of
Officer Rooney unreliable on the whole of the evidence, and do not accept
beyond a reasonable doubt that he recorded rear directional speeds of 128 km/h and
131 km/h while the Accused's vehicle was travelling southbound on Hillcrest
within a 60 km/hour zone. The officer was inconsistent in his testimony, and it
is a reasonable inference he did deviate from the requirements of speed
tracking as required by a certified radar operator. The officer was evasive in
his evidence regarding whether the Accused had asked to see the readings, and
assertedly avoided referencing his notes to clarify his testimony on this
point.
50
.       Further, there was
inconsistency in the Officer’s testimony in relation to the provision of the
speed reading to the Accused and whether a representation was made it would be
shown at roadside because it was available and written, or whether it was known
it was deleted, resulting in an alleged contraindication to the officer notes.
As to any consideration of a lesser or included charge, in my view, it would be
in error in law to impose a lesser charge conviction on evidence by an officer
that I found unreliable, rebutted, and weakened. Had the officer produced the
alleged written reading notations he testified to have existed, or had not been
inconsistent in testimony as to whether he had or did not write down the
readings, as to whether he had or did not take elevated speed recordings,
whether he did or did not tell the Accused he would show him the readings, and
whether he told the Accused he made a mistake and deleted the readings.  This
point was further complicated by the Accused's testimony the officer notes were
inconsistent to the officer's testimony, which was not sufficiently
counter-argued by the prosecution.
51
.       These issues do not turn
on whether the officer was mandated by the unit’s manual to show the readings,
this turns on the inconsistencies in testimony raising a reasonable doubt. A
device’s manual guides the court as to necessary steps and when undertaken can
satisfy the court an alleged speed measuring capacity indicates the unit was in
full working order at the time of the readings.  A device manual’s contents regarding
disclosure of readings to an accused do not bind this court as precedent.
52
.       The prosecution is tasked
to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The prosecution did not establish the
essential element of elevated speed required to make out a stunt driving or
speeding charge beyond a reasonable doubt.  The Accused's admission to driving
in a range above the speed limit in this instance will not produce an included
charge conviction.
53
.       Considering the totality
of the evidence on the beyond a reasonable doubt standard it is my decision
that the prosecution has not proven the charge of stunt driving, and an
included charge conviction is not warranted in this circumstance, and I find
you Mr. Dooney, not guilty.
54
.       This court finds that
where speed measuring evidence lacks reliability due to successful rebuttal, an
officer's viva voce testimony may nonetheless satisfy the
beyond-reasonable-doubt standard when corroborated by speed readings that are:
(1) disclosed to the accused, and/or (2) supported by electronic recordings or
other reliable documentary evidence.
55
.       The court further finds this
ruling establishes stare decisis precedent with binding common law effect,
subject to the superior binding authority of a higher court.
Decision Released June 12, 2025, in Norfolk County.