Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj18/2025oncj18.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Dupree
, 2025 ONCJ 18
DATE: 
January 14, 2025
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
MELISSA DUPREE
Before
Justice Berg
Released
on January 14, 2025
DECISION
ON CROWN APPLICATION PURSUANT
TO
SECTION 117.05
Criminal Code
S. Reynolds....................................................................... counsel
for the Crown/Applicant
B. Samson................................................................................. counsel
for the Respondent
Berg J.:
[
1
]
On June 13, 2024, officers of the Ottawa Police
Service attended the home of Melissa Dupree and her family where four long guns
were seized without a warrant. The seizing officer, Constable Brett Price
prepared a Return to a Justice on June 27, 2024. That form clarifies that he
seized the firearms in question without a warrant because it had not been
practicable to obtain a warrant beforehand. The reason for the seizure was that
Mr. Price had reasonable grounds for believing that it was not desirable in the
interests of the safety of Ms. Dupree that she should possess those weapons due
to possible danger to herself. The Return to a Justice has places where it can
be indicated if there were concerns about the safety to other persons should
Ms. Dupree maintain possession of the guns. These sections were left blank.
[
2
]
The
Crown seeks an order pursuant to
s. 117.05
Criminal Code
for
the disposition of these weapons. Furthermore, should I grant that order, the
Crown also seeks an order prohibiting Ms. Dupree from possessing such weapons,
etc.,
for a period of up to five years. Ms. Dupree is
opposed to the disposition of her property and wishes to have the firearms
returned to her. She has no criminal record or charges outstanding before the
courts. She was in legal possession of the seized firearms and they were
properly stored when located by the police on June 13.
[
3
]
I will now summarize the events that led up to
the seizure of the firearms. This summary is based on the various exhibits that
were adduced at this hearing. On June 13, the Ottawa Police Service had been
notified that a psychiatrist from the Montfort Hospital had been doing a
virtual session with Ms. Dupree. The doctor became concerned during the course
of that session that she was a high risk for suicide and, therefore, he was
issuing a Form 1
Mental Health Act.
The police were also informed that
Ms. Dupree was a member of the Canadian Armed Forces and that she had firearms
in her residence. It appears that the doctor had placed his call to the
paramedical services who then contacted the police for assistance.
[
4
]
As the police were en route to the Dupree
residence, they obtained further information. They learned that the doctor had
become concerned when she told him that she had been researching ways to end
her life such as overdosing or hanging. They also were told that she had
stopped taking her medication for depression, trauma disorder, and anxiety a
week earlier. The police were also very concerned to learn that Ms. Dupree had
apparently told the psychiatrist that she did not wish to surrender her
firearms.
[
5
]
The police and ambulance services arrived at the
home. It is a rural property, a working farm of some fifty acres with the house
set well back from the road, and with outbuildings and wooded areas. They did
not approach at first but attempted to contact Ms. Dupree on the three phone
numbers that they had for her. She did not answer. A decision was then made to
call for further police units to attend and, in effect, contain the property. A
bit later, Ms. Dupree’s husband, Chris Dupree, walked down the driveway from
the direction of the house and approached the police. He was then interviewed
by members of the police Negotiator Unit. A while later, members of the
Tactical Unit searched the house and the outbuildings. Ms. Dupree was not
there. A nearby dwelling, that of Ms. Dupree’s parents-in-law was also searched
to no avail. The police then began to search the wooded areas in the vicinity.
Meanwhile, the firearms were located in a gun safe and seized.
[
6
]
When Chris Dupree was interviewed, he told the
police that his wife had had mental health issues for a long time but had been
getting worse over the previous week. She had confided in her psychiatrist
about this and the doctor had then started the chain of actions that led to the
police attending. It was noted that Mr. Dupree was not otherwise very
cooperative with the police and took the position that the situation was being
blown out of proportion.
[
7
]
Prior to the police approaching the house, Ms.
Dupree had written and signed a note indicating that she was capable of making
her own decisions relative to her mental health and did not want anyone else
doing so; the text of that note is appended to this decision. She then, it
seems, had taken a go-bag, which, given her volunteer work for an emergency
response organization, was always ready, and went into the woods. The Dupree children
were not present as it was a school day.
[
8
]
After approximately nine hours in the woods, she
came out and approached the police who were still looking for her. I will here
quote from the Investigative Action of one of the officers.
At
2115 hrs. Melissa walked into the yard from the west bush. She presented in
good health and apologized for causing such a scene. She was informed about the
Form 1 issued by her doctor and although she was upset with her doctor she was
cooperative with police and agreed to go to hospital.
[
9
]
The police took Ms. Dupree to the Montfort
Hospital pursuant to the Form 1
Mental Health Act
and she was assessed
by a psychiatrist (not her doctor) while there. That assessment was conducted
within hours of the events to which I have just referred. The Psychiatry Consultation
notes generated as a result of the assessment have been filed as an exhibit at
this hearing. Those notes establish the following:
-
Ms. Dupree is 45 years of age, living with her
husband and two teenaged sons. She is a member of the military but has been on
sick leave since October 22 due to mental health issues and was being followed
by a psychiatrist, Dr. Kang.
-
Her psychiatric diagnoses are anxiety/depression
and PTSD. It is remarked that “No history of previous admissions or suicidal
attempts.”
-
No substance abuse was noted.
-
She had stopped taking her medication two weeks
previously due to side effects. “She admitted having increasing passive
suicidal ideation in the past few days (ex.: wondering how many pills she
should take to have an overdoes). She was advised to discuss this with her
psychiatrist at a routine appointment scheduled for the following day.
-
Under the heading ‘Impression and Plan’, the
consultant psychiatrist concluded that Ms. Dupree was not actively suicidal at
present.
The evidence before me is that Ms.
Dupree was then discharged from the hospital on the morning of June 14 within
an hour of being assessed by psychiatrists. There is no evidence that she has
been hospitalized since then or that it has been felt necessary by anyone to
seek a Form pursuant to the Mental Health Act.
[
10
]
Ms. Dupree testified at this hearing. I find
that she was both credible and reliable. She explained that she had ceased taking
her medication due to the side effects and had been discussing this issue with
her psychologist, Dr. Jennifer Newman. She had begun a different type of
therapy but that would take three to four weeks to take effect. She told the
psychologist that she thought it would be smart to consult as well with Dr.
Khan, her psychiatrist, as well as her primary care provider in the interim.
She had a scheduled telephone consult with Dr. Khan the next day: June 13. Dr.
Khan and the primary care doctor are both military personnel.
[
11
]
She did consult with Dr. Khan as scheduled.
However, it seems that the doctor became concerned about Ms. Dupree, a concern
that she did not think warranted. She terminated the phone call and went and
informed her husband. They then began to do some housework. Eventually, they
realized that there was a significant police presence near their house
including a drone. It was at that point that she wrote the note that is appended
below. She continued to do housework. The police then began to approach the
house.
[
12
]
Ms. Dupree testified that she suffers from
depression and anxiety due to certain incidents that occurred during her
military career. She was expecting the police to attend at her house after she
terminated the call with the doctor, however, she was anticipating a couple of
officers and a social worker for a wellness check. That was not who showed up. As
she explained, “the approach of uniformed and armoured people coming to my home
put me into a flight of the fight and flight.” She grabbed the go-bag and fled
into the woods. She was there for nine and a half hours. The only weapons she
took with her were a hunting knife and a pocket knife. It was her evidence that
she took those with her due to the presence of coyotes, foxes, and bears in the
woods. She left her cell phone in the house because she knew that the police
would be able to track it if she took it with her.
[
13
]
She testified that she decided to come out of
the woods due to her concern about her youngest son. The police had still not
located her. She came out of the woods and approached a constable. She
explained that she was fine and then told him that she was carrying two knives.
He asked her to put them on the hood of his vehicle and she complied. She also
cooperated when he told her that she had to go see a doctor and, as I have
already mentioned, she was taken to the Montfort Hospital after being allowed
to change her clothes.
[
14
]
There was no psychiatrist available in the
Emergency Department that night and so she had to be held there under guard
until the morning. She was not given any medication. Then at roughly 07:00 or
08:00 hrs, she was seen by a psychiatrist; I have already reviewed that
doctor’s report. During her testimony, Ms. Dupree advised that she was
discharged quickly after that. It was her evidence that she did not have any
suicidal thoughts on the day of the incident. During cross-examination, she
explained that she had looked up lethal dosages of medications and had herself
thought this was troubling and that was why she had discussed it with the
psychiatrist. She was adamant that she had not been thinking of acting on the
information she had found online.
[
15
]
Ms. Dupree has continued meeting with the
psychologist, Dr. Jennifer Newman, since this incident. The session most recent
to the date of this hearing (November 15) was November 12, 2024. The doctor’s
Session Note for that date, which along with several others was entered as an
exhibit, notes that this was Ms. Dupree’s twentieth session. No safety concerns
were referenced in that Note nor were any mentioned in the Notes for the
sessions held on August 9, 21, September 5, 19, October 3, 17, and 30.
[
16
]
The Session Note for September 5 makes reference
to the events that led up to the seizure of the firearms. Dr. Newman notes, as
early as this date, that “Melissa continued to deny any experiences with
depressive mood since the last session and further denied any thoughts of death/suicide.
No other safety risks were identified. It is writer’s opinion that melissa is
coping well and has demonstrated good insight/judgement with regard to this
very challenging situation.”
[
17
]
In the Session Note for October 3, there is a
reference to Ms. Dupree’s family doctor referring her to the Operational
Service Injury Program at the Royal Ottawa Hospital for a new psychiatrist. That
program is for military veterans and RCMP officers. Ms. Dupree testified on
November 15 that she had been accepted into the OSI program and was awaiting to
be assigned a psychiatrist.
[
18
]
She has not recommenced taking the medication
that she stopped a week or so before the June 13
th
incident.
However, she has been following a hormone replacement therapy which she
describes as “unbelievable, 180 difference …. Miracle.”
[
19
]
The defence provided me with a letter from a
volunteer organization within which Ms. Dupree has grown into a leadership
role. Importantly, the letter details the efforts that she has expended at that
organization
since
the events of mid-June. These are “September:
Operation Wildrose, serving as a Public Information Officer; November, Heavy
Equipment Operator Proficiency Development to refine her skills.”
[
20
]
Three character letters were filed as exhibits
by the defence. Beyond establishing that Ms. Dupree is well-socialized and not
isolated in the community, two of the letters make explicit reference to the
psychological issues she faces. My point here is that Ms. Dupree is open about
her mental health challenges with those close to her.
[
21
]
Her lawyer asked her about why she had the
firearms in question. One, a shotgun, she testified, was to hunt turkey.
Another, a .22 calibre, was to protect the farm animals. A third long gun
belonged to a military friend who was posted out of the country. She was
holding it for him but did not have the combination for its trigger lock. The
fourth weapon was a BB-gun.
[
22
]
Ms. Dupree was asked during cross-examination
about the letter she had written (see appendix) and whether it would be
appropriate in some circumstances for a person to be taken to hospital against
their will. Sensibly, she answered “Yes, I would hope so.”
[
23
]
The
defence also called Ms. Dupree’s husband, Chris Dupree, to the stand. He, too,
has a military background. He testified that he had noticed fluctuations in his
wife’s temperament in the period leading up to June 13 but attributed them to
the onset of menopause. He was aware that she had been on medication for mental
health issues, specifically PTSD arising from her time on active military
service. He was also aware at the time that she had ceased taking it but had
not been concerned. He recounted how his wife had advised him that morning
about the conversation with the psychiatrist and how it was likely that the
police would attend to check on her. He recounted that they had decided to
cooperate with the police knowing that they would likely require her to go to
the hospital.
[
24
]
Ms. Samson asked Mr. Dupree about his wife’s
state of mind since June 13.
Since
there’s been a change in the medications and stuff, she stabilized quite a bit,
especially, you know, with the hormone replacements and stuff like that.
There’s no mood swings or – definitely a significant reduction in irritability.
Beyond these
changes for the better, there has not been any significant change in their
family life.
[
25
]
He became aware after the fact that she had
looked up lethal dosages of medication. However, he had not been concerned
because of his trust in her and the fact that she had not displayed signs or
symptoms of being suicidal. He noted that it is not uncommon for people who
have served in the military to develop mental health issues and to display such
behaviours as part of the their process of recovery. He stated categorically “I
had no concern that she would harm herself or anybody at any other time.” He
has no concerns at all about his wife at the present time. He was a credible
and reliable witness.
[
26
]
This present application was brought by the
Crown pursuant to
s. 117.05
Criminal Code
which deals with the
disposition of things seized pursuant to
s. 117.04
.
117.05 (1)
Where any thing or document has been
seized under
subsection 117.04(1) or (2), the justice
who issued the warrant authorizing the seizure or, if no warrant
was
issued, a justice who might otherwise have issued a warrant, shall, on
application for an order for the disposition of the thing or document so seized
made by a peace officer within thirty days after the date of execution of the
warrant or of the seizure without a warrant, as the case may be, fix a date for
the hearing of the application and direct that notice of the hearing be given
to such persons or in such manner as the justice may specify.
…
(3)
At the hearing of an application made
under subsection (1), the justice shall hear all relevant evidence, including
evidence respecting the value of the thing in respect of which the application
was made.
(4)
Where, following the hearing of an
application made under subsection (1), the justice finds that it is not
desirable in the interests of the safety of the person from whom the thing was
seized or of any other person that the person should possess any weapon,
prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and explosive substance,
or any such thing, the justice shall
(a)
order that any thing seized be forfeited
to Her Majesty or be otherwise disposed of; and
(b)
where the justice is satisfied that the
circumstances warrant such an action, order that the possession by that person
of any weapon, prohibited device, ammunition, prohibited ammunition and
explosive substance, or of any such thing, be prohibited during any period, not
exceeding five years, that is specified in the order, beginning on the making
of the order.
[
27
]
Thus, the test that I must apply in this case is
that articulated by sub-section (4). To be clear, that test concerns itself
with the situation at the time of the hearing, not at the time that the concern
of the police crystalized (see, for example,
R. v. Peacock-McDonald,
2007 ONCA 128
at para.
40
;
R. v. Kuleczka,
2023 ONSC 3876
, at para.
24
).
[
28
]
As expressed by Blacklock J. of this Court in
R.
v. Bokhari,
[2009] O.J. No. 5975 at para. 12
, the question a Court must
consider in s. 117.05(4) is
Am
I satisfied, after reviewing the evidence in its totality, that it is more
likely than not that there are in fact legitimate concerns indicating that the
Respondent currently lacks the responsibility and discipline required of a gun
owner?
See,
too,
R. v. Vardomskiy,
2013 ONSC 4113
at para.
52
;
R. v.
Davidson,
2011 ONSC 249
at para.
35
;
The Crown does not have to prove that Ms. Dupree
actually will use the firearms in a fashion dangerous to the public; the burden
on the Crown is not that high (see, for example,
R. v. Kuleczka
,
2023
ONSC 3876
, at para.
24
).
[
29
]
I must decide the present application by analyzing whether it is
‘not desirable’ that Ms. Dupree possess firearms. What does this mean?
Blacklock J. in
Bokhari
used the term ‘legitimate concerns’ in
explanation but does not really elucidate the meaning of the former term.
Preferrable is the approach of Justice Melvyn Green of
this court in
R. v.
Douglas,
2013 ONCJ 649
where he examines the decision of Moldaver J.A. [as
he then was]
in
R. v. Hurrell,
2002 CanLII 45007 (ON CA)
,
[2002] O.J. No. 2819
. At paragraphs 48-49
of Douglas, Green J. writes
I confess to having difficulty locating any
materially greater legal clarity or direction in the words ‘not advisable’ than
I do in the words ‘not desirable’. Neither expression of the legal standard
fits comfortably with the adjudicative work normally conducted by criminal court
judges.  More immediately helpful is the guidance afforded by Durno J. in
the more recent case of
R. v. Day
,
[2006]
O.J. No. 3187 (S.C.J.)
.  As said at para. 36 of the
Day
case:
‘the appropriate test is whether there are legitimate concerns the person lacks
the responsibility and discipline the law requires of gun owners’. (See also,
R.
v. Morgan
,
[1995] O.J. No. 18 (Prov. Div.)
;
R. v. Biscope
,
[2001] O.J. No. 628 (S.C. J.)
and
R. v. Shannon
,
[2005] O.J. No.
1653 (S.C.J.)
.)
However,
R. v.
Hurrell
, supra
,
remains of practical utility through its endorsement of certain regulatory
criteria as properly applicable to the risk-assessment analysis inherent in the
Crown’s application.  As said by Justice Moldaver at para. 48:
Finally, to the extent that
the police or the issuing justice need a framework within which to assess the
"non-desirability/public interest" component of s. 117.04(1),
Parliament itself has provided guidance in
ss.
5(1)
and
(2)
of the
Firearms Act,
S.C. 1995, c. 39. These
provisions deal with the eligibility for holding a firearms licence and read as
follows:
5(1) A person is not eligible to hold a licence
if it is desirable, in the interests of the safety of that or any other person,
that the person not possess a firearm, a cross- bow, a prohibited weapon, a
restricted weapon, a prohibited device, ammunition or prohibited ammunition.
(2) In determining whether a person is eligible
to hold a licence under subsection (1), a chief firearms officer or, on a
reference under section 74, a provincial court judge shall have regard to
whether the person, within the previous five years,
(a) has been convicted or
discharged under
section 730
of the
Criminal Code
of
(i) an offence in the
commission of which violence against another person was used, threatened or
attempted,
(ii) an offence under this
Act or Part III of the
Criminal Code
,
(iii) an offence
under
section 264
of the
Criminal Code
(criminal harassment),
or
(iv) an offence relating to
the contravention of subsection
6(1) or (2) or 7(1) or (2) of the
Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act;
(b) has been treated for
mental illness, whether in a hospital, mental institute, psychiatric clinic or
otherwise and whether or not the person was confined to such a hospital,
institute or clinic, that was associated with violence or threatened or
attempted violence on the part of the person against any person; or
(c) has a history of
behaviour that includes violence or threatened or attempted violence on the
part of the person against any person.
Since the decision in
Hurrell
,
the
Firearms
Act
has been amended and now includes the following further factors that
must be considered:
(d)
is or was
previously prohibited by an order — made in the interests of the safety and
security of any person — from communicating with an identified person or from
being at a specified place or within a specified distance of that place, and
poses or could pose a threat or risk to the safety and security of any person;
(e)
in respect
of an offence in the commission of which violence was used, threatened or
attempted against the person’s intimate partner or former intimate partner, was
previously prohibited by a prohibition order from possessing any firearm,
cross-bow, prohibited weapon, restricted weapon, prohibited device or
prohibited ammunition; or
(f)
for any
other reason, poses a risk of harm to any person.
[
30
]
None of these
Hurrell
factors are operant in the present
case. Beyond the bald fact that Ms. Dupree is being treated as an outpatient
for PTSD, depression and anxiety, there is nothing in the
evidence before me to suggest that she has been a threat to herself or others.
In fact, there is strong evidence from her husband, whom I find has his wife’s
and children’s best interests firmly in view, that she was not nor is not
posing a risk of harm to any person on June 13 or since that date. The medical
evidence arising from the psychiatric assessment conducted hours after the
police intervention as well as the psychology reports referred to earlier lead
me to the same conclusion.
[
31
]
The purpose of an application such as that before this Court is
“the protection of the public from the destructive force of firearms in the
hands of persons not equipped morally, mentally, or emotionally to handle them”
(
Vardomskiy
, supra,
at para.
10
; see, too,
Hurrell
, supra,
at
paras.
31ff
.;
Kuleczka
, supra,
at para.
23
). The evidence before me
establishes that Ms. Dupree does not fall into that category of person. The
Crown’s application for the disposition of the firearms is denied as is the
related request for an order of prohibition. It is my understanding, therefore,
that the aforementioned weapons are to be returned to her.
[
32
]
One final comment. I do not wish it to be taken that I am second
guessing the psychiatrist who commenced the events of June 13. That doctor was
not called to testify and I am not aware of what policies govern his actions
upon being confronted by the information that he had about Ms. Dupree that day.
All I can say is that the analysis that I have just completed is a legal one
and not governed by medical policies, ethics, or standards.
Released:  January 14, 2025
Signed:
Justice Berg
Appendix: The note
left by Ms. Dupree.
Melissa Dupree, of over 16 years
of age and capable of making health decisions of my care refuse to be forced to
a medical facility. If I have been deemed incapable, I, in my rights, request a
tribunal review of my ability to consent to health decisions. I do not consent
to any health decisions made by anyone else, other than myself.
I understand there may be health
concern [
sic
] but my acknowledgement and awareness of my mental health
struggles are grounds to prove my clear capacity to be the sole person to make
those decisions.
(signed)                                                  (signed)
Melissa Dupree             witness          Chris
Dupree
13 June 2024