Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj84/2025oncj84.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Harris
, 2025 ONCJ
84
DATE:  2025·02·13
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
MARK
HARRIS
RULING ON s 11(b) APPLICATION
Heard: February,
13, 2025.
Delivered: February
13, 2025
Ms. Alice Pan ...................................................................   counsel
for the Crown/Respondent
Mr.  Barry Fox .................................................................   counsel
for the defendant/Applicant
KENKEL J.:
[
1
]
Mr. Harris is charged with impaired
operation of a conveyance and 80+, operating a conveyance with a blood alcohol
level in excess of the legal limit.
[
2
]
The first trial was adjourned at the request
of the Crown. The second trial date is in March, just outside the
Jordan
limit. The Crown submits that the
non-attendance of a witness was a discrete event that stopped the delay clock
until the next trial date. The defence submits that the delay from September to
March was unnecessary despite the problem with the witness. The delay should be
attributed to the Crown. The fact that the defence was not available for the
first trial date offered doesn’t reasonably convert the few weeks to the second
date to defence delay.
[
3
]
This case proceeded with dispatch at every
stage. Counsel was retained before the first appearance. By the second
appearance disclosure had been reviewed and a case management meeting had been
held with the Crown. The matter was in Blitz Trial Scheduling Court less than
six weeks from the first appearance. The defence took the first date offered –
September 5, 2024 to continue the following day.
[
4
]
On September 5, 2024, the Crown applied
without notice for an adjournment of the trial. A civilian witness under
subpoena had told the Crown the day before the trial that he was in London
Ontario working on a contract and couldn’t return to Newmarket. The Crown’s
request for an adjournment was granted. New trial dates were set that day for
March 13
th
and 14
th
, 2025. One earlier date had been
offered (February 20,21, 2025) but that one date was not available to the
defence. Mr. Fox had other availability but took the next earliest date
offered.
[
5
]
I find that the Crown’s adjournment
application caused significant delay in this case. There were two days for
trial set aside and the Crown had four police officers who did attend. They
could have proceeded with those witnesses over the two days scheduled, then
scheduled an hour later before the same judge for the missing witness.
[
6
]
The Crown chose instead to start another
case and give that priority. That decision was likely based on a careful review
of many factors. This ruling is not a criticism of that decision.
[
7
]
Our criminal trial courts in York Region
often have four or more trials scheduled for each courtroom. The “stacking” of
lists maximizes the efficient use of trial time where so many defendants
resolve at the last possible moment despite all efforts to conclude cases earlier
in the process. At times, the expected average resolutions do not materialize
on a given day and the Crown is faced with difficult choices.
[
8
]
Most of this case could have been done as
scheduled. The delay for the one witness to provide evidence related to the
identity of the driver would have required an adjournment of a few weeks or months
at most. The Crown could have considered applying for the use of remote
testimony by Zoom for that witness. Even for an identification witness, remote
testimony has proved successful for both parties in many cases. They call it
Zoom for a reason.
[
9
]
The resulting delay to March flows from the
Crown’s decision to focus on another case. The discrete event – non-attendance
of the witness – did not cause the adjournment of the trial to March. I find
the Crown is responsible for the resulting delay. The fact that the defence was
unavailable for one date offered in the months between September 2024 and March
of 2025 does not reasonably relieve the Crown of that responsibility,
particularly where the defence took the very next date offered.
[
10
]
When the matter was re-scheduled it was not
given priority. It was scheduled outside the Jordan guidelines.
[
11
]
The total delay in this case is 18 months
and 4 days to the last day of trial. That exceeds the
Jordan
limit by 4 days.
[
12
]
The defence has not waived any period of
delay. On the contrary they have repeatedly put the Crown and the court on
notice that delay was an issue. There was no defence delay.
[
13
]
This case is not complex. There are no
exceptional circumstances that justify the delay. Had the trial proceeded as
scheduled with the witnesses who did attend the trial the matter would have been
completed well before Christmas.
[
14
]
The defence took meaningful steps at every
stage to expedite the proceedings. I agree with Mr. Fox that it is rare to
complete all case management steps and be in the trial scheduling court within
42 days of the first appearance.
[
15
]
An overall assessment of all of the relevant
circumstances shows this case took longer than it should have. I find Mr.
Harris’ s 11(b)
Charter
right
to a trial within a reasonable time was breached. The proceedings must be
stayed.
Delivered:  February 13, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel