Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj341/2025oncj341.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
of the
Criminal Code
.  These subsections
and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code
, which is concerned with
the consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
, read as follows:
486.5  ORDER
RESTRICTING PUBLICATION
— VICTIMS AND WITNESSES
—     (1)
Unless an order is made under section 486.4, on application of
the prosecutor in respect of a victim or a witness, or on application of a
victim or a witness, a judge or justice may make an order directing that any
information that could identify the victim or witness shall not be published in
any document or broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is
of the opinion that the order is in the interest of the proper administration
of justice.
(2)
JUSTICE SYSTEM PARTICIPANTS —
On
application of the prosecutor in respect of a justice system participant who is
involved in proceedings in respect of an offence referred to in subsection
(2.1), or on application of such a justice system participant, a judge or
justice may make an order directing that any information that could identify
the justice system participant shall not be published in any document or
broadcast or transmitted in any way if the judge or justice is of the opinion
that the order is in the interest of the proper administration of justice.
.   .   .
(2.1) OFFENCES
–
The offences for the purposes of subsection (2)
are
(a)   an offence under section
423.1, 467.11, 467.111, 467.12, or 467.13, or a serious offence committed for
the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with, a criminal
organization;
(b)   a terrorism offence;
(c)   an offence under
subsection 16(1) or (2), 17(1), 19(1), 20(1) or 22(1) of the
Security of
Information Act
; or
(d)   an offence under
subsection 21(1) or section 23 of the
Security of Information Act
that
is committed in relation to an offence referred to in paragraph (c).
(3)
LIMITATION
– An order made under this section does not apply
in respect of the disclosure of information in the course of the administration
of justice if it is not the purpose of the disclosure to make the information
known in the community.
. . .
486.6  OFFENCE
—
(1)
Every person who fails to comply with an order made
under any of subsections 486.4(1) to (3) or
subsection 486.5(1)
or
(2)
is
guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Martinez-Calderon
, 2025 ONCJ 341
DATE: 
2025 06 25
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region  998 23 47106611
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
Wilfredo Martinez-Calderon
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on May 1 & 2, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on June 25, 2025
Ms. C. Gzik........................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Mr. C. Combei............................................................................................... for
the defendant
De Filippis,
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
The defendant went to trial on the following
charge: On October 24, 2023, at the City of Hamilton, knowing that [the
complainant] is harassed or being reckless as to whether [the complainant] is
harassed, did engage in conduct that causes [the complainant] to reasonably, in
all the circumstances, fear for her safety pursuant to s. 264(2), contrary to
s. 264(3).  I heard from four witnesses, including the defendant.  Much of this
evidence is not controversial.
[
2
]
On the day in question the defendant was 40
years old, and the complainant was 13 years old.  They do not know each other. 
At 11 AM, the complainant stood at a bus stop in front of a McDonald’s
restaurant in downtown Hamilton.  A surveillance camera (without audio) at the
restaurant captured the interaction between the complainant and defendant.  The
video shows the following events:
As the
complainant waited for the bus, on Barton Street, a blue car drives past her on
this busy street.  The car changes lanes, from the left to the right, and
pauses in front of the complainant.  The car then enters the restaurant parking
lot.  The car is parked in the closest spot to the complainant.  It is a spot
reserved for those with an accessible parking permit.  There are other parking
spots available for those without such a permit. The defendant exits the blue
car, stands beside it while swinging his arms, and then walks the short
distance to the complainant. After about 25 seconds, he walks back to his car
and stands outside of it, with his hands behind his back, watching the
complainant for a few minutes until the bus arrives and she enters it.  The
defendant enters his car and leaves the parking lot and drives behind the bus.
[
3
]
Surveillance cameras inside and outside the bus
shows the following: The complainant is seated while the bus  travels to her
destination.  When the bus stops to let her out, the blue car, driven by the
defendant, passes by, without stopping.
[
4
]
These reasons explain why I find the defendant
guilty.
OTHER EVIDENCE
[
5
]
M.S. is the mother of the complainant.  She
testified that on the day in question, while at work, she received a telephone
call from her daughter, who was then in grade eight.  The complainant said that
she did not feel well and would go home on the Barton street bus.  Not long
after, M.S. received another call from her daughter, reporting that she had run
home from the bus because of “this situation”.  M.S. described her daughter as
upset, crying and out of breath during this conversation.  She called the
police.
[
6
]
The complainant testified that after she called
her mother and left school, she waited for the bus in front of McDonalds on
Barton Street.  She had a backpack and was wearing black leggings and a purple
shirt with a bow on it.   While waiting for bus the defendant slowly approached
her.  He said she was beautiful and asked if she was going to school.  When the
complainant replied she was waiting for the bus to go home, he offered her a
ride in his car. She said no, thank you and he walked away.  When the bus
arrived and she entered it, the defendant got into a blue car.  The complainant
saw the car behind the bus.  Five minutes later, the bus arrived at her stop.
When she left the vehicle, the complainant saw the blue car drive past her. The
complainant ran home and called her mother.
[
7
]
The complainant estimated that her total
interaction with the defendant at the McDonald’s was about three minutes and the
above noted conversation testified lasted 20 – 25 seconds. She did not know
this man and her mother had warned her about strangers.  She testified that she
was “really, really scared” and added that, “it shook me up that he offered to
drive me home and I did not know what his intentions were or what kind of man
he was”. The complainant noted that he “was polite but it felt flirty”.  The
following exchange occurred with Defence counsel:
Q: He was
flirting with you
A: That is
what it felt like
Q: An older
man walks up to you, is trying to be flirtatious and offers you a ride, you
said no thank you and he backs away, is that all
A: That is all
Q: Was the
majority of your anxiety because he offered you a ride
A: My main
fear is a man who I have never met before coming up to me and offering me a
ride home
[
8
]
PC Dobbie reviewed entire video from McDonalds. 
He testified that the defendant never entered the restaurant.
[
9
]
The Defendant testified that on the day in
question he drove from his home in Vaughan to visit his father in Hamilton.
Barton Street is the route he took to his father’s home at the corner of Wentworth
Street and Main Street.  When he passed the McDonalds, he saw “an attractive
girl”.  He thought she was “at least 18 years old”.  He parked his car in the
restaurant lot and approached her.  He continued his testimony as follows:
I told her she
was pretty and if she needed a ride I could take her. She said no, thank you. I
said are you sure and she said, she was positive. I went back to my car and
waited for the Barton bus to come and then got in my car and went in the same
direction the bus was going.  I was not following the bus. This is the route to
see my father.  I passed the bus and kept going.
[
10
]
The defendant added that he “did not understand her
to be nervous”.
[
11
]
The defendant could not recall his father’s
address but said it was “it is at the back of the pita place at Wentworth”.
When the Crown presented a google map with images of the area in question the
defendant identified the building with the pita place and the second-floor
apartment unit belonging to his father.  The defendant had telephoned his
father before coming to Hamilton but there was no answer.  He made the one hour
and 20-minute trip anyway because it was his day off work.  He described his
relationship with his father as “bad” and they have had limited contact over
the years.
[
12
]
The defendant lives alone in a basement
apartment.  He does not have a physical disability but is schizophrenic.  He
does not have an accessible parking permit but went to the spot reserved for
such people at McDonalds because he did not plan to be there long. The Crown produced
a Hamilton newspaper published on the day of this cross-examination and read a
headline “Child grabbed by stranger”. The defendant replied, “that’s not very
good”. The following exchange then occurred:
Q: Why do you
think its ok to ask a young attractive woman to get into your car.
A: My family
is broken.  Not a good relation.  I have never been in love. I saw something
different in her and thought I could talk to her. I saw sweetness and kindness
and that’s why I asked (sic) her for a ride.
……
Q: You came to
Hamilton to find a young sweet female as you would not be known in Hamilton
A: She was on
my way, that is why I offered her a ride, I said nothing incorrect, nothing
dirty
[
13
]
The defendant testified that if the complainant had
entered his car he would have “spoken to her like a friend” and that he was not
necessarily looking for a sexual relationship.   He agreed “it was a mistake
not asking her age” and added “but I assumed she was over 18”. The defendant
understands that “sex with an under age person is against the law”. He
explained, “I take medication for schizophrenia and I lost control there by not
asking her age”. Later, the exchange with counsel continued as follows:
Q: You asked
her if she was going to school.
A: Yes.
Q: You knew
she was going to school and therefore likely under age.
A: I thought
she was over 18.
Q: Why wait
for the bus to arrive and leave?
A: She
rejected me, so I waited in the car and thought about it, I didn’t want to wait
there like I had been fooled so I waited for the bus.
[
14
]
The defendant agreed he did not see his father
that day.  He passed his place without stopping because his father had still
not replied to his earlier telephone call. He returned home.  The defendant
agreed he did not use the building intercom to see if his father was home or
otherwise look for him.
CRIMINAL HARASSMENT
[
15
]
Subsection 264 (1)
of the
Criminal Code
sets out the
offence of criminal harassment, and
s. 264(2)
specifies
that the conduct amounting to criminal harassment can be committed in one of four
ways:
(1) Criminal harassment –
No person shall, without lawful authority and knowing that another person is
harassed or recklessly as to whether the other person is harassed, engage in
conduct referred to in subsection that causes that other person reasonably, in
all the circumstances, to fear for their safety or the safety of anyone known
to them.
(2) Prohibited conduct –
The conduct mentioned in subsection (1) consists of
(a) repeatedly following from
place to place the other person or anyone known to them;
(b) repeatedly communicating
with, either directly or indirectly, the other person or anyone known to them;
(c) besetting or watching the
dwelling-house, or place where the other person, or anyone known to them,
resides, works, carries on business or happens to be; or
(d) engaging in threatening
conduct directed at the other person or any member of their family.
[
16
]
The Information in this case does not specify
any of the enumerated grounds.  In submissions the Crown relied on subsection
264 (2) (c)and (d) – watching/besetting and engaging in threatening conduct. 
That said, the parties focussed their submissions on the threatening conduct.
SUBMISSIONS
[
17
]
Defence counsel argues that the defendant was a
credible witness and that “the few inconsistencies are due to “mental health
challenges”.  The defendant found the complainant to be attractive and believed
her to be over 18 years old.  He had a 20 - 25 second interaction with her and
disengaged when she declined his offer of a ride.  Counsel submits that the threatening
allegation fails because there was no design to instill fear. In this regard,
it was noted that defendant engaged in a brief polite conversation and left.  In
these circumstances it cannot be said the complainant’s fear was reasonable. 
In any event, the defendant did not intend that nor was he reckless about the
matter.
[
18
]
The Crown submits that these facts show the
defendant is guilty of harassment by threatening conduct: A middle-aged man
approached a 13-year-old girl, told her she was pretty, and offered to drive
her home.  When she refused, he waited for her to get on a bus and followed the
bus in his car.  The Crown asserts words can be threatening and that following
in a car is a tool of intimidation. As such, in all the circumstances, the
complainant reasonably feared for her safety and the defendant had to know
this.  Counsel also argues that the defendant’s testimony about why he was in
Hamilton is not credible since he never saw, or attempted to find, his father.  The
Crown suggested the defendant came to the city because he is not known, and
this would facilitate commission an offence.
[
19
]
The Crown concluded her submissions by reading the
names of several young women who have been raped and murdered in Canada.  These
comments, like the question put to the defendant, in cross-examination, about a
recent child abduction are of no assistance to me in deciding this matter.
ANALYSIS
[
20
]
The Crown carries the burden of proving guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.  This fundamental principle of law means that if the
defendant has called evidence, there must be an acquittal where the testimony
is believed or where the testimony is not believed but raises a reasonable
doubt.  An acquittal will follow even if the defence evidence is rejected, but
the remaining evidence fails to convince, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
defendant is guilty
(R. v. W(D),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
.
[
21
]
Probable guilt is not the criminal law standard
of proof – it is closer to certainty.  A reasonable doubt is a doubt based on
reason and common sense which must be logically based on the evidence or lack
of evidence
(R. v. Villaroman
,
2016 SCC 33 (CanLII)
).  In applying the
standard, I can accept some, part, or none of what a witness states.  The
testimony of a witness is assessed based on the person’s sincerity and
accuracy.
[
22
]
I have confidence in the evidence given by the
complainant. Her interaction with the defendant was captured on video. For the
most part, her account of the conversation is in accord with that given by the
defendant.  In any event, her credibility and reliability were not seriously or
successfully challenged.  I do not have confidence in the testimony by the
defendant, as I will explain.
[
23
]
The elements of the offence of criminal
harassment were discussed by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in
R. v.
Kosikar
1999 CanLII 3775
and
R. v. Kordrostami
2000 CanLII 5670
.
Applying those principles to this case, In this case, the Crown must prove that
(1) the defendant engaged in threatening conduct toward the complainant, (2)
this harassed her, (3) the defendant knew the complainant was harassed or was
reckless or wilfully blind to it, (4) the defendant’s conduct instilled fear in
the complainant, and (5) this fear was reasonable.
[
24
]
The
mens rea
requires an intent to commit
the prohibited act. The knowledge requirement can be satisfied by recklessness
or willful blindness that the act caused the victim to be harassed.
R v Sim
2017 ONCA 856 (CanLII)
, confirmed how the
actus reus
is to be
determined.   As in the present case, Sim was convicted under paragraph
(2)(d) – “engaging in threatening conduct directed at the other person”. In that
case, the trial judge found that the Crown had established the mental element
or
mens rea
of the offence. The
Court of Appeal for Ontario noted as follows:
[14]  
   Sim does not challenge this finding. He does, however,
challenge the trial judge’s finding that the
actus reus
had been made out.
The trial judge found:
I have found that the
actus reus
of
threatening has been made out on the basis of all the evidence I accept. In
particular the accused’s recklessness at least about the link being made
between the real-life [P.L.] and the on-line [P.L.]. As well as the recklessness
about the complainant finding out about the home page and the whole website, as
she eventually did.
[15]  
   Sim submits that the trial judge erred in law in making this
finding because establishing the
actus reus
of the offense
requires proof
that the accused subjectively intended to engage in threatening conduct. The
trial judge acknowledged that if the
actus reus
imports a requirement to prove an
accused’s subjective intention, then Sim was entitled to be acquitted. But the
trial judge held that there was no such requirement. I agree. For that reason,
I do not accept Sim’s submission.
[16]
R. v.
Burns
, 77 W.C.B. (2d) 402 – relying on the judgment of the Yukon
Territory Court of Appeal in
R. v. George
,
2002 YKCA 2 (CanLII)
, 52 W.C.B. (2d) 530 – this court endorsed
an objective standard for determining the
actus reus
of harassment by
engaging in threatening conduct. At para. 2, the court wrote:
(1)
To establish harassment under
s. 264(2)
(d) of the
Criminal
Code
, the Crown had to establish that the appellant engaged in “threatening
conduct”. We accept the definition of threatening conduct given in
R. v. George
at
para.
39
that, in order to meet the objectives of s. 264, the
threatening conduct must amount to a “tool of intimidation which is designed to
instill a sense of fear in the recipient”. The impugned conduct is to be viewed
objectively, with due consideration for the circumstances in which they took
place, and with regards to the effects those acts had on the recipient.
[Citation omitted.]
[17]  
   In support of his submission, Sim focuses on the word
“designed” in the phrase “tool of intimidation which is designed to instill a
sense of fear in the recipient”. I do not read this phrase or the word
“designed” in the way Sim does for two main reasons.
[18]  
   First, Sim’s submission is inconsistent with s. 264(1) of
the
Code
and
thus is contrary to Parliament’s express intent. Subsection 264(1) specifies
that the
mens
rea
component of criminal harassment can be met by an
accused’s knowledge or recklessness. To suggest that the
actus reus
of
threatening conduct requires a specific intent to instil fear is contrary to
the plain language of s. 264(1).
[19]  
   Second, as this court said in
Burns
, under
s. 264(2)
(d) the
conduct in question must be viewed objectively. In other words, would the
accused’s threatening conduct cause a reasonable person in the complainant’s
situation to fear for her safety? The word “designed” does not require the
Crown to prove the accused’s subjective intention. And, in assessing whether an
accused’s conduct is threatening under
s. 264(2)
(d), a judge is not required to get
into the accused’s mind.
[
25
]
In considering
the actus reus
, context is
important.  This is not a case like
Burns
and
George
, cited in
Sims
,
where the accused made unwelcome remarks to adult women, without anything
more.  The Court in those cases found that while the remarks were
inappropriate, they were not threatening.  In the present case, the
complainant, a 13-year-old girl was approached by a 40-year-old.  He commented
on her looks and offered her a ride.  When the offer was declined this stranger
walked a short distance away and watched the girl for about two minutes until
she boarded a bus.  He then entered his car and travelled behind that bus for
about five minutes until the girl got off and continued on his way.  The girl
was aware of all this.  She ran to her home and frantically called her mother
for help.
[
26
]
I am satisfied that the
actus reus
has
been proven in the present case.  The defendant’s conduct was threatening, and
it caused the complainant to be harassed and reasonably fear for her safety.  As
noted in
George
, at paragraph
41
, “…. Instilling a sense of something
undesirable to come is indeed engaging in an act designed to instill a sense of
fear.”
[
27
]
The defendant’s trial testimony is particularly problematic
with respect to
mens rea
because he is schizophrenic.  I do not know
what, if any, impact this illness had on his conduct.  There is no suggestion he
is unfit or not criminally responsible.  The only references to this
issue came from the defendant in explaining his schizophrenia may be why he did
not ask the complainant how old she was and by Defence counsel in submissions who
suggested certain inconsistencies in the defendant’s testimony might be
explained that way.  Three questions arise with respect to the
defendant’s evidence.
[
28
]
First, there is the matter of the defendant’s perception
of the complainant’s age.  He testified that she looked to be over 18 and that
he assumed as much.  He added that he understands that “sex with an under age
person is against the law”. His perception stands in contrast to the fact that
the complainant is an obviously young person wearing leggings, with a shirt and
bow.  She was standing at a bus stop with a backpack.  It is not surprising
that the defendant asked her if she was going to school.  In these
circumstances, he must have known the complainant was a minor. That offering the
complainant a ride would alarm her is a fact about which he was at least
reckless or wilfully blind.
[
29
]
Second, is the question of why the defendant did
not leave after the complainant declined his offer of a ride.  He testified he
did not do so immediately after being rejected would make him look foolish.  Instead,
he stood nearby and waited until the complainant got on the bus. This is
difficult to understand.  His action arguably highlighted the rejection.  In
any event, assuming he was motivated by the need to save face, this focus on
himself came at the expense of the complainant, a fact about which he was at
least reckless or wilfully blind.
[
30
]
The third question is why the defendant followed
the bus.  His position is that he did not do so for a sinister purpose but
because that is the route to his father’s residence.  Support for this position
can be found in the fact that when the complainant got off the bus, he
continued to drive without stopping. In this regard, there is no reason for me
to reject the defendant’s assertion that his father lived at a place further
down the road.  However, he had driven for one hour and 20 minutes from Vaughan
to Hamilton to see his father and when he arrived at the place, he did not visit
him.  On arrival, he did not telephone him or go to the door of his apartment. 
Instead, the defendant returned home. It is difficult to understand why he
followed the bus at all.  Why not return home from the place he had encountered
the complainant?  In any event, this decision came at the expense of the
complainant, a fact about which he was at least reckless or wilfully blind.
[
31
]
On the day in question, the defendant arrived in
Hamilton, interacted with the complainant, and returned to Vaughan.  He did
nothing else.   Taken together, the answer to the three questions satisfies me
that
mens rea
has been proven in this case.
[
32
]
I find the defendant guilty.
Released:  June 25, 2025
Signed: Justice J. De Filippis