Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj77/2025oncj77.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4 Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1) Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice may
make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim or
a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted in
any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6 OFFENCE
— (1) Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
This hearing is governed by
section 278.95
of the
Criminal Code
:
Publication prohibited
278.95
(1)
A
person shall not publish in any document, or broadcast or transmit in any way,
any of the following:
(a)
the
contents of an application made under subsection 278.93;
(b)
any
evidence taken, the information given and the representations made at an
application under section 278.93 or at a hearing under section 278.94;
(c)
the
decision of a judge or justice under subsection 278.93(4), unless the judge or
justice, after taking into account the complainant’s right of privacy and the
interests of justice, orders that the decision may be published, broadcast or
transmitted; and
(d)
the
determination made and the reasons provided under subsection 278.94(4), unless
(i)
that
determination is that evidence is admissible, or
(ii)
the
judge or justice, after taking into account the complainant’s right of privacy
and the interests of justice, orders that the determination and reasons may be
published, broadcast or transmitted.
Offence
(2)
Every
person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on
summary conviction.
☒
An order has been made
under s. 278.95(1)(c) allowing these reasons
to be published, broadcast or transmitted.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Neveau
, 2025 ONCJ 77
DATE: 
2025 02 10
COURT
FILE No.:  Toronto
4817
998 22 70007909
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
CLEIS NEVEAU
Before
Justice Seth Weinstein
Heard
on January 24, 2025
Ruling
on Application to Admit Evidence of Other Sexual Activity – Stage 2
February
10, 2025
Stephanie Abrahams......................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
Megan Schwartzentruber........................................................... counsel
for Cleis Neveau
Ashley Dresser........................................................................ counsel
for the Complainant
WEINSTEIN J.:
[
1
]
The Applicant is charged with two counts of
sexual assault and one count of failure to comply with a probation contrary to
section 271
and
733.1
of the
Criminal Code
.
[
2
]
The complainant alleges that the Applicant touched
her breast without her consent and later engaged in non-consensual oral sex and
sexual intercourse. The Applicant does not dispute that he engaged in sexual
intercourse and other sexual activity with the complainant. He claims, however,
that it was all consensual.
[
3
]
On December 20, 2024, the defence brought an
application to introduce the following evidence of other sexual activity of the
complainant:
(1) That on the
date of the alleged incident, the complainant told the Applicant that she was
not interested in having sex because she was dealing with a sexually
transmitted infection (“STI”).
(2) That in the
hours before the alleged sexual assault, the complainant asked the Applicant’s
girlfriend, C.E., to engage in a threesome with the Applicant; and
(3) That the day
before the alleged sexual assault, the complainant asked C.E. and the Applicant
to attend with her at a “topless party.”
[
4
]
It is the position of the defence that this
evidence is relevant to impeach the complainant’s evidence and to establish a
motive to fabricate the allegations against the Applicant.
[
5
]
I granted the Stage one application, in part. Given
its proximity to the alleged sexual assault, I found that the evidence relating
to the STI fell outside the 276 regime as it was not evidence of “other sexual
activity”: See
R. v. Reimer
,
2024 ONCA 519
at para.
45
. Further, the evidence
of the threesome proposal was relevant to the complainant’s credibility as it could
reveal inconsistencies in her statements to police. However, I was not
satisfied that the evidence of the topless party was capable of being
admissible at trial and dismissed that aspect of the application.
[
6
]
At the Stage-two hearing, the parties agreed
that the defence should be permitted to lead evidence with respect to whether
the complainant had propositioned C.E. and the Applicant to engage in a
threesome. However, they disagreed about the scope of what the complainant can
be asked about this incident. In addition to asking whether she made the
proposal, the Applicant wants to suggest that the complainant had a sexual
interest in C.E. It is submitted that this sexual interest provided the
complainant a motive to fabricate when C.E. later confronted her about whether
she had sex with the Applicant.
[
7
]
It is the position of the Crown that there is no
nexus between having a sexual interest and motive to fabricate. Moreover, recent fabrication can be alleged without resorting to any evidence
of the complainant’s sexual interest in C.E. The Crown submits that the Applicant
should only be permitted to ask questions about the complainant’s sexual
interest in C.E. if the complainant first agrees that she had propositioned the
threesome. However, if she denies it happening, any further questions will
unduly interfere with the complainant’s privacy and dignity.
[
8
]
Counsel for the complainant argues that the
defence has failed to establish that the complainant had a sexual
interest in C.E. Accordingly, the proposed evidence should be
circumscribed to the sexual proposition made to the Applicant and C.E.
[
9
]
I agree that the evidence of the threesome
proposition is admissible to establish a potential prior inconsistent on a
material issue and that this evidence has significant probative value that is
not substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper
administration of justice. The sole issue that I must therefore determine is
whether the defence should be permitted to ask any questions about the
complainant’s sexual interest in C.E.
Factual Background
[
10
]
I will only review the salient facts that
are necessary for me to decide this narrow issue.
The Alleged Offence
[
11
]
The sexual assaults are alleged to have taken
place at the complainant’s home on the night of August 10, 2022, and into the
early morning of August 11, 2022.
[
12
]
The complainant alleges that she spent the
evening with the Applicant and others at an event at Allen Gardens. At the end
of the night, she invited the Applicant and another woman back to her
apartment.
[
13
]
The first count of sexual assault relates to an
event that allegedly occurred while the complainant and Applicant were smoking on
the balcony. It is alleged that the Applicant suddenly reached over, pulled
down her bra and grabbed her left breast. The complainant claims that she told
the Applicant to stop and that he complied and went back into the apartment.
[
14
]
The complainant told the police that she later
found the Applicant in her bed. The complainant alleges that she asked the
Applicant to leave but he refused. She alleges that the Applicant started to
touch her breast and clitoris area and then proceeded to get on top of her. The
complainant claims that she tried pushing him off but was unable to do so. She
stated that she continued to tell the Applicant that she did not want to have
sex but that the Applicant ignored her and proceeded to have sexual intercourse.
The complainant said that she was then forced to perform oral sex on the
Applicant until he ejaculated into her mouth.
[
15
]
The complainant told police that several days after the alleged
event, C.E. confronted her about having sex with the Applicant. The complainant
told C.E. that she did not consent to the sexual activity. It was only after
speaking with C.E. that the complainant called the police. When asked why she
did not report the sexual assault right away, the complainant stated, “I didn’t
remember actually until the conversation” and that while talking with [C.E.],
“it like all came back.”
Evidence of Other Sexual Activity
[
16
]
The Applicant did not testify at the Stage 2
hearing and did not provide an affidavit. Instead, he relies on an affidavit from
C.E.
[
17
]
C.E. states in her affidavit that she has been
in a relationship with the Applicant since June 2022 and became friends with
the complainant sometime in the summer of 2022.
[
18
]
On August 10, 2022, C.E. was at an event with
the Applicant and a group of friends. The complainant was at the same event and
joined the group. According to C.E., the complainant was flirting with her and
at one point asked whether she would be interested in engaging in a threesome
with her and the Applicant. C.E. did not accept.
[
19
]
C.E. stated that the Applicant eventually told
her that he engaged in sexual intercourse with the complainant. C.E. then confronted
the complainant and asked her if anything had happened between her and the
Applicant. The complainant told her that they had sexual intercourse but that
it was not consensual.
Relevant Legal Principles
[
20
]
The centrality of a complainant’s credibility in proving a
sexual offence does not necessarily permit the defence to introduce sexual
activity evidence beyond the scope of the offence charged. The admissibility of
any evidence of prior sexual activity is governed by
section 276
of the
Criminal
Code
.
[
21
]
Section 276 is
designed to protect
the integrity of the trial process from
outdated, myth-based reasoning which undermines the dignity and privacy
interests of sexual assault complainants. Only where the probative value of the
other sexual activity evidence is significant and not substantially outweighed
by the danger of prejudice to the proper administration of justice will the
evidence be admissible.
[
22
]
Section 276 sets out strict criteria before evidence of other
sexual activity is admissible. At the stage-2 hearing the court must determine
whether the proposed evidence meets the criteria for admissibility under s.
276(2) to (4). In determining whether the proposed evidence is admissible,
section 276(3) lists the criteria to be considered:
a.   the
interests of justice, including the right of the accused to make a full answer
and defence.
b.   society’s
interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual assault offences.
c.   whether
there is a reasonable prospect that the evidence will assist in arriving at a
just determination in the case.
d.   the
need to remove from the fact-finding process any discriminatory belief or bias.
e.   the
risk that the evidence may unduly arouse sentiments of prejudice, sympathy, or
hostility in the jury.
f.  
  the potential prejudice to the complainant’s personal dignity and
right of privacy.
g.   the
right of the complainant and of every individual to personal security and to
the full protection and benefit of the law; and
h.   any
other factor that the judge, provincial court judge or justice considers
relevant.
[
23
]
The Supreme Court explained the importance of the trial judge’s
gate-keeping function when considering applications to introduce evidence of
prior sexual conduct in
R. v. T.W.W
,
2024 SCC 19
, at paras
27-28
:
In order to be potentially admissible, the relevance
and probative value of the evidence in each case must go beyond a general
ability to undermine the complainant’s credibility … it must respond to a
specific issue at trial that could not be addressed or resolved in the absence
of that evidence.
Trial judges must guard against improperly widening
the scope of when other sexual activity evidence should be admitted given that,
as Karakatsanis J.
noted
in
Goldfinch
, “credibility is an issue that pervades
most trials” (para. 56)… Too broad an approach to credibility … would cast open
the doors of admissibility, overturning Parliament’s specific intention and
this Court’s longstanding jurisprudence that evidence of other sexual activity
will be admitted only in cases where it is sufficiently specific and essential
to the interests of justice. Given the specific thresholds set by Parliament
and their underlying objectives, something more is required to show that
admission is justified.
[
24
]
In
R. v. R.V.,
2019 SCC 41
,
the Supreme
Court described the limits
section 276
places on the accused’s
right to cross-examine the complainant. These limits are essential to
protecting the complainant’s dignity, privacy, and equality interests: see
para. 40. They are also vital to ensuring that cross-examination is not used to
embark upon irrelevant, misleading, or humiliating questioning that does not
advance the truth-seeking function of the trial but instead descends into
forbidden myths and stereotypes.
[
25
]
Evidence of other sexual activity will not pass the threshold
test for admissibility where it has minor or trifling probative value. The
evidence must have “significant probative value,” and that probative value
must not be “substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper
administration of justice” from its admission. In
R. v L.S.,
2017
ONCA 685
, the Ontario Court of Appeal held that evidence which has
“significant probative value” is evidence that has more than “trifling
relevance” and is capable in the context of all the evidence of leaving the
jury with a reasonable doubt: see para. 90; see also
R.
v.
Darrach,
2000 SCC 46
, at paras.
39-41
.
Analysis
[
26
]
The Crown and the complainant have agreed that evidence of the complainant
propositioning C.E. and the Applicant is admissible to impeach the complainant
on her statement to the police. The only additional issue to be determined is
whether the defence can suggest that the complainant had a sexual interest in
C.E. and that this sexual interest provided the complainant with a motive to
fabricate the allegations when confronted by C.E.
[
27
]
I  am satisfied that evidence of the complainant propositioning
the threesome is not being advanced for twin-myth reasoning. Rather, the
evidence has significant probative value and in that it is relevant
to impeach the complainant. I am also satisfied that evidence of the
complainant’s sexual interest in C.E. is relevant to the complainant’s
motive to fabricate. Finally, the probative value of the evidence is not
substantially outweighed by the danger of prejudice to the proper
administration of justice.
[
28
]
The Applicant has provided, through C.E.’s unchallenged
affidavit, an evidentiary foundation that the complainant and C.E. had a
relationship relevant to whether there was a motive to fabricate.  Not only is
there evidence that C.E. and the complainant were friends, but it is also reasonable
to infer from her request for a threesome that the complainant had a sexual
interest in C.E.
[
29
]
I appreciate that the defence can raise motive to fabricate
without asking the complainant about whether she had a sexual interest in C.E. However,
if the defence is precluded from asking whether the complainant had a sexual
interest in C.E., they will be hamstrung in their attempt to demonstrate the
strength of the complainant’s motive. The sexual nature of her interest in C.E.
potentially heightens the value the complainant placed in the relationship,
strengthening any potential motive to preserve a relationship when she is confronted
by C.E.
[
30
]
The potential use of this evidence sought by the Applicant is not
outweighed by the prejudicial effect of this evidence. In a judge alone trial,
the risk that admissible evidence will be improperly used is significantly
diminished. The dangers of twin-myth reasoning with respect to the proposed use
of the evidence is unlikely given the judge alone nature of the trial and the
purposes for which the Applicant seeks to use the evidence.
[
31
]
I appreciate that any questions of the complainant relating to
the alleged threesome might have a negative effect on her dignity and right to
privacy. However, in my view there is no additional prejudice to the
complainant and her rights by virtue of counsel being permitted to ask
questions about her sexual interest in C.E. It is simply an additional question
about a subject that she is already going to be asked about in evidence. In my
view, this additional question will have minimal additional impact on
complainant. Nor will it have an impact on society’s interest in the reporting
of sexual assaults.
[
32
]
Finally, counsel has made it clear that she is not looking to ask
any specific details of the complainant’s interest in C.E. or her sexual
interests more broadly. She only seeks to cross-examine her to determine if she
had a sexual interest in C.E. and whether this interest gave rise to a motive
to fabricate. Any cross-examination will be confined to this issue. The questions
should be limited to whether the complainant C.E. propositioned C.E. and the
Application for a threesome, whether the complainant was sexually interested in
C.E. and whether because of this interest, she fabricated her allegations
against the Applicant.
February 10,
2025
Signed:
Justice Seth Weinstein