Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj112/2025oncj112.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Doherty
, 2025 ONCJ 112
DATE: 
February 27, 2025
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
—
AND —
STEPHEN DOHERTY
Before
Justice B. Green
Heard
on February 27
th
, 2025
Ruling
on the Pretrial Application for the Appointment of Counsel for the
Cross-Examination of the Crown’s Witnesses
Ms. K. Beard.................................................................. counsel
for the Crown
The defendant Stephen Doherty.......................................... 
on his own behalf
Green J.:
A.
Introduction
[
1
]
Mr. Doherty is charged
with assault with a weapon, 2 counts of uttering threats, 2 counts of mischief,
using ammunition in a careless manner and breach of an undertaking. These
charges involve two different incidents that are alleged to have occurred on
July 8
th
and August 3
rd
, 2024. While there are two separate
informations, Mr. Doherty consented to have both trials run concurrently since both
incidents involve the same witnesses. The matters are set for a two-day trial
commencing on June 17
th
and continuing June 18
th
in #2
Court.
[
2
]
Mr. Doherty is
representing himself. While preparing for the upcoming trial, the adult witnesses
expressed concern to a victim witness worker that they are afraid of Mr.
Doherty, and they do not want him to cross-examine them directly. The witnesses
are not children and Mr. Doherty is not charged with any of the offences set
out in
section 486.3(2)
of the
Criminal Code
. As a result, the crown
brought an application pursuant to
section 486.3(3)
of the
Criminal Code
to appoint counsel for the purposes of assisting Mr. Doherty with
cross-examining these witnesses so that he does not confront them directly
during the trial.
[
3
]
The appointment of
counsel for cross-examination of witnesses pursuant to this subsection is
discretionary. The onus is on the crown to establish on a balance of
probabilities that the order “would allow the giving of a full and candid
account from the witnesses of the act complained of
or
would otherwise be in the interest of the proper
administration of justice” [emphasis mine].
[
4
]
The crown served and
filed a notice of application with supporting affidavits from a victim services
worker outlining the basis for this application. The matter was scheduled to be
heard on February 18
th
, 2025. The crown provided ample time to
address this application since the trial does not commence until June 17
th
,
2025. The crown also tendered two additional affidavits from a case manager in
the crown’s office and from the local Crown Attorney to provide some background
facts about the ages of the complainants, their relationship to the defendant
and a summary of the allegations.
[
5
]
On the first date
scheduled for the hearing, Mr. Doherty sought to challenge the evidentiary basis
for the crown’s application. He wanted to ask the witnesses questions about
disclosure as well as cross-examine the affiants and/or the witnesses about the
allegations. I allowed Mr. Doherty the opportunity to cross-examine the victim
service worker about the basis for the application. He abandoned the request to
cross-examine the crown’s witnesses who sought the protection of this court
order and the affiant who provided background information.
[
6
]
The matter was
adjourned to February 27
th
for the crown to call
viva voce
evidence in support of the application. Mr. Doherty was permitted to
cross-examine the victim service worker about the witnesses’ concerns and whether
they can give a full and candid account if he is permitted to ask them
questions directly. On both dates, it was difficult to focus Mr. Doherty’s
attention on the matter in issue which is a factor that is relevant to the
interests of the proper administration of justice. Mr. Doherty is not a lawyer,
so it is understandable that he was not sure about what is relevant evidence
for this application.
[
7
]
Mr. Doherty was not
opposed to the idea of having counsel to assist him with cross-examination. Rather,
he sought a more fulsome order to provide him with a lawyer throughout the
trial pursuant to
section 684
of the
Criminal Code
. I explained to him
that section applies in the Court of Appeal so I cannot make that order. I also
explained that I do have the power to appoint amicus but that type of
appointment is for the benefit of the court.
[
8
]
Mr. Doherty sought clarification
from the court about the role of an advocate appointed pursuant to subsection
486.3, he wanted to know whether the appointed advocate would disclose their
conversations and whether he could instruct counsel on what questions he wants him/her
to ask the witnesses. Mr. Doherty also wanted to have input into who is
appointed to represent him during cross-examination. In particular, he asked
for a female lawyer because he believes that would be a tactical benefit to him.
Preferably, he would like to have two lawyers.
[
9
]
There are various
guiding decisions about each of the discreet issues Mr. Doherty raised during
this pretrial application. To avoid any delays of the trial, in addition to
deciding whether the crown has met the onus set out in
section 486.3(3)
of the
Criminal
Code
, I will provide specific directions for how counsel will be selected,
the benefits and limitations of that counsel and Mr. Doherty’s role in
instructing that counsel.
B.
Facts in support
of the application:
[
10
]
Mr. Doherty initially sought
to cross-examine one of the affiants about issues related to disclosure and the
veracity of the allegations. Prior to the second day of this application, the
crown provided Mr. Doherty with an additional affidavit from the Crown Attorney
summarizing the facts. As a result, Mr. Doherty was satisfied that the contents
of that document could be made an exhibit without any cross-examination. It was
filed as exhibit 1 on the application.
[
11
]
While the appointment
of counsel is intended to enhance the truth-seeking goal of a trial, this
application is not concerned with the truth of the allegations. In many
respects, this type of pretrial hearing is similar to a bail hearing. The court
relies on the facts as alleged when making the determination of whether the
crown has met the test set out in
section 486.3(3)
of the
Criminal Code
.
Mr. Doherty may still bring a separate application to address any disclosure
issues and he will have a fulsome opportunity to challenge the crown’s case
during the trial.
[
12
]
The second exhibit
filed by the crown was a series of affidavits prepared by Ms. MacLellan. She is
a victim service worker who interviewed all four of the crown’s witnesses. Mr.
Doherty was given the opportunity to cross-examine Ms. MacLellan about the evidence
in the affidavits that she provided to the court.
[
13
]
During the
cross-examination, Mr. Doherty elicited evidence from the affiant that she is
an employee of the Attorney General. She receives referrals from the crown attorney’s
office and the police with respect to her clients. As part of her role, Ms.
MacLellan provides
assistance and support
to victims. She provides the complainants with courts updates, release
documents, as well as trial and victim impact preparation. Mr. Doherty
suggested that she is biased in favor of the complainants and that bias
impacted the manner in which she reported the complainants’ concerns. Ms.
MacLellan explained that she honestly reported what the witnesses told her in
anticipation of the upcoming trial.
[
14
]
Ms. MacLellan was also challenged
by Mr. Doherty about a word that she used in the affidavit. From his
perspective, her lack of comprehension of that word was indicative of her bias.
[
15
]
Although Ms. MacLellan assumes a
position that is perceptually adverse in interest to Mr. Doherty, I found her
to be a fair, candid and credible witness. I do however agree with Mr. Doherty that,
in future, the crown’s witnesses in a pretrial application should be referred
to as complainants and not “victims”. This reference presupposes Mr. Doherty’s
guilt which is not appropriate.
[
16
]
By way of background,
there are four complainants. They are Mr. Doherty’s neighbours. The police have
been called six different times for disputes between Mr. Doherty and his
neighbours prior to the alleged offence dates. On July 8
th
, 2024,
Mr. Drysdale and his wife, Ms. Butler, reported to police that, after a heated
exchange, Mr. Doherty threatened Mr. Drysdale with an axe handle and then
struck him with the axe handle causing him to fall to the ground. Ms. Butler
began screaming when her husband was attacked with the weapon. The incident was
captured in a video recording.
[
17
]
Mr. Drysdale is 84
years old. He described Mr. Doherty to Ms. MacLellan as unstable, erratic and that
he suffers with mental health issues. Mr. Drysdale has ongoing concerns for his
safety. He is fearful of the defendant because of their “unfortunate history”
and his most recent experiences with him. He related that he would feel
intimidated and nervous if Mr. Doherty is permitted to cross-examine him. The
victim service worker stated in the affidavit that Mr. Doherty “would not be able
to give his best testimony” in such frightening circumstances.
[
18
]
Ms. Butler is Mr. Drysdale’s
wife. She is 77 years old. The victim service worker explained that Ms. Butler
has a “huge degree of fear” towards the defendant. She is intimidated by him
and just the sight of him makes her afraid. She expressed concern that, if he
is permitted to cross-examine her directly, she “would stumble over her words,
be unable to speak clearly and would be trembling.”
[
19
]
After Mr. Drysdale was
allegedly assaulted with a weapon, another neighbour became involved in the
occurrence. Mr. Robb Gingell and his wife, Kim Gingell approached Mr. Doherty.
Mr. Gingell was carrying what appeared to be a golf club. There was an
“animated” discussion between everyone. Mr. and Mrs. Gingell allege that Mr.
Doherty stared at them and stated, “you two are next”.
[
20
]
Mr. Doherty was
arrested and released on an undertaking not to communicate with these witnesses
or attend within a radius of their properties. Less than a month later, the
Gingells called the police and reported that Mr. Doherty walked past their home,
walked onto their lawn, he grabbed a 911 sign and bent it. Mr. Gingell was not
at home at the time, but he returned home shortly thereafter. He saw Mr.
Doherty nearby and began yelling at him. Mr. Doherty responded by raising his
hand and making a motion as if he was pointing a gun at him. Mrs. Gingell
advised that he used his two fingers to point at his eyes and then pointed at
them, a gesture that he was watching them.
[
21
]
Mrs. Kim Gingell is 68
years old. She expressed concerns about Mr. Doherty’s mental health issues. Ms.
Gingell was described as “terrified of the accused”. She does not want to
interact with him or have any communication with him at all. She explained that
she would feel nervous, panicked, emotional and she may cry if Mr. Doherty will
be able to ask her questions.
[
22
]
During the interview
with Ms. MacLellan just the thought of Mr. Doherty confronting Ms. Gingell made
her very upset. The worker explained that “she became flustered, started to raise
her voice and speak rapidly as she expressed very adamantly that she did not
wish to be cross-examined by the accused.”
[
23
]
Mr. Rob Gingell is the
youngest witness at 67 years old. The allegations are that Mr. Gingell
approached Mr. Doherty on both dates. The first time he approached him with a
golf club, and they engaged in a heated exchange. The second time, Mr. Gingell
initiated a verbal confrontation after Mr. Doherty bent a sign on his lawn. Consistent
with his responses to Mr. Doherty in the past, Mr. Gingell initially advised
the victim service worker that he didn’t care if Mr. Doherty asked him
questions.
[
24
]
After some thought, Mr.
Gingell changed his mind because he is aware that Mr. Doherty has a “long and
significant history of mental health issues”. He would be uncomfortable if Mr.
Doherty asked him questions. Unlike the other witnesses who expressed fear, Mr.
Gingell was concerned about whether he could control his own emotions while
being cross-examined by Mr. Doherty. During the conversation with Ms.
MacLellan, she noted that Mr. Gingell became upset, he raised his voice, spoke
quickly, and expressed his anger about the defendant.
C.
Legal Analysis
i.
General
principles:
[
25
]
The crown has brought
this application pursuant to
section 486.3(3)
of the
Criminal Code
which
states:
486.3
(3)
In any proceedings against
an accused, the judge or justice may, on application of the prosecutor in
respect of a witness who is not entitled to make an application under
subsection (1) or (2), or on application of such a witness, order that the
accused not personally cross-examine the witness if the judge or justice is of
the opinion that the order would allow the giving of a full and candid account
from the witness of the acts complained of or would otherwise be in the
interest of the proper administration of justice. If the order is made, the
judge or justice shall appoint counsel to conduct the cross-examination.
Factors to be considered
(4)
In determining whether
to make an order under subsection (3), the judge or justice shall consider
(a)
the age of the witness;
(b)
the witness’ mental or
physical disabilities, if any;
(c)
the nature of the
offence;
(d)
whether the witness
needs the order for their security or to protect them from intimidation or
retaliation;
(e)
the nature of any
relationship between the witness and the accused;
(f)
society’s interest in
encouraging the reporting of offences and the participation of victims and
witnesses in the criminal justice process; and
(g)
any other factor that
the judge or justice considers relevant.
Application
(4.1)
An application referred
to in any of subsections (1) to (3) may be made during the proceedings to the
presiding judge or justice or, before the proceedings begin, to the judge or
justice who will preside at the proceedings or, if that judge or justice has
not been determined, to any judge or justice having jurisdiction in the
judicial district where the proceedings will take place.
No adverse inference
(5)
No adverse inference
may be drawn from the fact that counsel is, or is not, appointed under this
section.
[
26
]
Mr. Doherty was assured
at the outset that, if I decide to order the appointment of counsel, that is
not an indication that I believe the allegations, nor will it impact my
assessment of the case against him during the trial. This section clearly
states that “no adverse inference may be drawn” from the appointment of
counsel.
[
27
]
Mr. Doherty sought to
challenge the basis for this application. He wanted to cross-examine the
witnesses directly and/or the affiants about the expressed concerns with
respect to him cross-examining them during the trial. He also wanted to ask
questions about other issues that will not assist me with deciding this
application.
[
28
]
During his
submissions, Mr. Doherty was focussed on his fair trial rights. A criminal
trial is not only about the interests of the defendant. Although this decision
dealt with a different evidentiary aid for complainants, the Supreme Court of
Canada made guiding remarks in
R. v. L.(D.O.)
,
1993 CanLII 46 (SCC)
,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 419
at paras
46
, 48 - 49:
Based on this Court's pronouncements that the principles of
fundamental justice reflect a spectrum of interests from the rights of the
accused to broader social concerns, a fair trial must encompass a recognition
of society's interests.
Our Canadian society has a vested interest in the enforcement of
criminal law in a manner that is both fair to the accused and sensitive to the
needs of those who participate as witnesses.
In R. v. B. (K.G.),
1993 CanLII 116 (SCC)
,
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 740
,
this Court recognized the need to balance the
accused's interests in a criminal trial with the interests of society
. The respondent submits that
the effect of
s. 715.1
of the
Criminal Code
is to allow, as evidence at trial,
statements taken out of court "without any of the procedural requirements,
controls and safeguards that are built into the traditional trial process and
that have become fundamental to our system of justice". One must recognize
that the rules of evidence have not been constitutionalized into unalterable
principles of fundamental justice. Neither should they be interpreted in a
restrictive manner which may essentially defeat their purpose of seeking truth
and justice.
And further at paras 48 and 49:
Children
may have to be treated differently by the criminal justice system in order that
it may provide them with the protections to which they are rightly entitled and
which they deserve. Even in this particular case, when the interests of the
child witness may seem completely at odds with those of the accused, one must
recall the words of La Forest J.
in R. v. Lyons,
1987 CanLII 25 (SCC)
,
[1987] 2 S.C.R. 309
, at p. 362
:
It seems to me that s. 7 of the Charter entitles the appellant to
a fair hearing; it does not entitle him to the most favourable procedures
that could possibly be imagined.
Therefore, the
question is not whether the accused can imagine a situation where his rights
would be greater but rather, whether
s. 715.1
violates his rights. [emphasis
mine]
[
29
]
In addition to
balancing the potentially competing interests of the participants, a Court must
also guard precious court resources. In
R. v. G.M.C.
2022 ONCA 2
at para
109
, The Court of Appeal observed that:
It
is a bedrock principle of our criminal justice system that an accused person
has a constitutional right to a fair trial. But that does not mean a trial
without limits. While giving paramount consideration to the right of an accused
to make full answer and defence, a trial judge has a public responsibility to
ensure appropriate use of valuable public resources (courtroom and court staff time)
and to ensure that other participants in the justice system (including
witnesses and jurors) are not unnecessarily burdened.
[
30
]
In the seminal decision
of
R. v. Levogiannis
1993 CanLII 47 (SCC)
,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 475
the Supreme Court emphasized
that “t
he goal of the
court process is truth seeking and, to that end, the evidence of all those
involved in judicial proceedings must be given in a way that is most favourable
to eliciting the truth.” Testimonials aids like virtual appearances and the
appointment of counsel for cross-examination do not inhibit the accused’s right
to confront their accusers. Rather, these aids facilitate the search for truth
by ensuring witnesses are able to provide a fulsome account.
[
31
]
I did not require the
crown to produce the witnesses who seek this protective order during the
pretrial application for the defendant to cross-examine them directly in order for
the crown to establish that witness cannot give a full and candid account if
s/he is directly cross-examined by the defendant. That process would make
absolutely no sense, it would be circular and would circumvent the purpose of this
section.  The Supreme Court explained
in
R. v. Levogiannis
, supra
at
para.
34
that a
trial
judge has "substantial latitude" when deciding these applications and
“the evidence need not take any particular form”.
[
32
]
I permitted the crown to
rely on the evidence of the victim services worker who interviewed the witnesses
about their fears, concerns and whether the witness believes they will be able
to provide a full and candid account if they are cross-examined by the
defendant. I also permitted the crown to rely on the evidence in an affidavit
provided by the Crown Attorney about the allegations.
[
33
]
In
R. v. Amiri
,
2024 ONSC 5036
at para 8
, Justice Bird observed that the trial judge failed to
give the Appellant the ability to cross-examine the affiant on a section 486 application
and that was found to be an error on review. As a result, Mr. Doherty was
permitted to cross-examine the victim services worker because her evidence was
relevant to this application. He abandoned his other requests but I would not have
allowed him to cross-examine the case manager or the Crown Attorney because the
issues he wished to explore were irrelevant to this application.
ii.
Has the crown has
met its onus for the order?
[
34
]
As noted earlier, the
Supreme Court explained
in
R. v. Levogiannis
, supra
at para
13
that “t
he goal of the court process is truth
seeking and, to that end, the evidence of all those involved in judicial
proceedings must be given in a way that is most favourable to eliciting the
truth”. There are statutorily prescribed factors that seek to achieve the
truth-seeking function of a trial and balance the rights of the defendant to directly
confront his or her accuser, the interests of the complainants not to be traumatized
during the proceeding and society’s interest in a fair trial for all
participants.
[
35
]
The crown must
establish on a balance of probabilities that “
the order would allow the giving of a full and candid account from the
witness of the acts complained of or would otherwise be in the interest of the
proper administration of justice.” To make this determination, I am guided by
the factors to be considered that are outlined in
subsection 486.3(4)
of the
Criminal
Code
.
[
36
]
In
R. v. Tehrankari
,
[2008] O.J. No. 5652
at para 9
, Justice McKinnon cautioned that:
I do not read the amended sections as establishing a
carte
blanche
for ordering counsel to cross-examine witnesses
based solely on the fact that a witness is nervous or uncomfortable. Experience
shows that many persons charged with sexual assault are subjected to
cross-examination by highly aggressive defence counsel, and no doubt the
complainants involved would prefer not to be subjected to such
cross-examination. The preference of a witness cannot drive the answer to the
question in issue.
And further that at paras 19 and 20
:
Weighing the unfettered
right of the accused to defend himself against the discretionary order that I
might make to accommodate a witness, I believe I must be satisfied on a balance
of probabilities that a full and candid account would be unachievable should
the accused cross-examine an individual witness. The evidence on a
voir dire
must
establish the "necessity" of making such an order. I am not prepared
to hold that expert behaviourial evidence would be required in every case, but
at a minimum there must be reliable, trustworthy evidence from sources with
intimate knowledge of the individual witness so that the court can be satisfied
on a balance of probabilities that a full and candid account could not be
achieved in the event the witnesses were subject to cross-examination by the
accused.
I am buttressed in this
view by the words of Morden A.C.J.O. in
M.(P.), supra
, at p. 347 where he stated:
I am not suggesting that evidence on this issue has to take any
particular form and, certainly, that it be a litany containing the words of the
statute, but, at least, it must have some reasonable relevance to the necessity
requirement of the statute.
[
37
]
Since the Supreme
Court’s
decision in
Levogiannis
supra
, there have been multiple
decisions in Ontario that have considered the test to be met in this
application. Justice Boswell held in
R. v. Predie
,
[2009] O.J. No. 2723
at
paras 14 and 15
that:
The
circumstances need not be ones that would create inordinate or exceptional
stress. The section requires only that the court form the opinion that the
appointment of counsel is necessary to obtain a full and candid account from
the witness.
It
is not necessary, nor in my view appropriate, that a trial run be undertaken.
In other words, it is not necessary that the witness try to give evidence and
fail, before an order appointing counsel can be made.
[
38
]
The crown astutely observed
that in 2015 the wording of section 486 was amended to remove any reference to “necessary”.
The test is more broadly worded that the Court must be satisfied that the order
“would allow” for the giving of a full and candid account or otherwise be in the
interests of justice.
[
39
]
All four witnesses described
Mr. Doherty as suffering from mental health issues. In addition, I have
considered that Mr. Drysdale and Ms. Butler are elderly witnesses who are
frightened of the defendant. Neither of them feels that they will be able to
fully express themselves if they are confronted by the defendant. Similarly,
Mrs. Gingell is terrified of Mr. Doherty. She is worried about crying,
panicking and not being able to articulate her thoughts. The allegations against
Mr. Doherty with respect to the assault with a weapon on Mr. Drysdale are
serious. Moreover, the interactions on July 8
th
are captured on a
video recording.
[
40
]
The crown has clearly met
its onus of establishing on a balance of probabilities that an
order appointing counsel to cross-examine each of them
would allow the giving of full and candid accounts from these witnesses of the
acts complained of by them.
[
41
]
In contrast, Mr.
Gingell is not fearful of the defendant at all. He approached the defendant and
verbally engaged him on both occasions. In addition, Mr. Gingell did not express
concern about how the defendant will act during the trial. Rather, Mr.
Gingell’s concern was that he would not be able to control his own emotions. I
am not aware of any mental health issues or neuro divergence that could impact
Mr. Gingell’s ability to manage his temper. He is an adult who will be directed
to answer questions thoughtfully, respectfully while showing age-appropriate
restraint and decorum.
[
42
]
There is, however, a
second part to the test in subsection 486.3 that can be relied on when the
order “would
otherwise be in the interest
of the proper administration of justice”. During these proceedings, I found
that Mr. Doherty was distracted by various irrelevant issues including references
to the bible and communication styles. He was not focused and appeared to be
somewhat disorganized when addressing me on specific issues.
[
43
]
I appreciate that Mr. Doherty is
not a lawyer, and he was receptive to the court’s directions for the most part.
Nevertheless, I am concerned that the proceedings will be unnecessarily
protracted or stray into various irrelevant subjects between the parties if Mr.
Doherty is given the opportunity to personally cross-examines this witness. I
have also considered that Mr. Doherty expressed that he will benefit from
counsel assisting him to cross-examine the witnesses as long as he has input
into the questions being asked of them. As a result, it is more likely than not
that the appointment of counsel to cross-examine Mr. Gingell is in the interests
of the proper administration of justice.
iii.
Additional
directions about how to select counsel:
[
44
]
Mr. Doherty wasn’t consistent
in his position during the application about whether he wanted to consent to
the crown’s application. He vacillated between acknowledging the benefits of
having counsel to assist him, the potential negative perception of directly
confronting the complainants and insisting on his right to confront his
accusers.
[
45
]
He was unequivocal that,
if counsel is appointed for cross-examination, he wants to have input into the
gender
of that counsel. He did not express any concerns about
any proposed counsel’s skills or experience. He did not have a particular
lawyer in mind who he hoped would be available to assist him. He was adamant
that it would be a tactical benefit to him that the lawyer is a woman.
Presumably, he believes that a female lawyer would be a more persuasive or
favourable advocate with a female complainant, jurist and/or a female crown.
Mr. Doherty also asked the court to appoint two lawyers to assist him with
cross-examination.
[
46
]
Justice Bird recently
observed in
R. v. Amiri
,
2024 ONSC 5036
at para 21
that:
While orders appointing counsel to cross-examine complainants
are commonplace, there is very little guidance on what procedure should be
followed in deciding who the lawyer ought to be. Section 486.3(4) was silent on
the matter, saying only that the judge shall appoint counsel. No process for
doing so was included in the legislation that applied at the time, or in any
subsequent provisions.
[
47
]
Justice Bird relied on an
earlier decision of Justice Wakefield in
R. v. P.N.S
,
2010 ONCJ 244
as
well as the process for selecting assessors in dangerous offender applications to
arrive at the conclusion at para 26 that “the selection of 486.3 counsel is one
that is important to the fair trial rights of a self-represented accused
person”. Furthermore, she found at para 27 that “the failure to give the
Appellant the opportunity to make submissions including proposing a different
lawyer to conduct the cross-examination, was a procedural error.”
[
48
]
Mr. Doherty must be
given the opportunity to suggest a criminal lawyer of his choosing, who is
prepared to take on the role of 486.3 counsel and who is available for the
trial dates. If the lawyer of his choosing is not available, he may bring an
adjournment request to set a new trial date when that lawyer is available. Any
delay that occurs because of his choice of counsel may be attributable to the
defendant.
[
49
]
If Mr. Doherty does not
have a particular lawyer in mind, it is ordered that he must be provided with a
list of lawyers from Legal Aid who are available for the trial date and who are
willing to assume the role of 486.3 counsel. Mr. Doherty will have the
opportunity to choose from that list of lawyers regardless of whether any of
them are female. Mr. Doherty’s rationale for insisting on a female counsel is
specious. The gender of counsel is not important to protecting his fair trial
rights. In addition, he should only be assigned one lawyer for these
proceedings.
[
50
]
If Mr. Doherty is not
satisfied with the list of available counsel, he must immediately bring an
application to address his concerns in front of me. I am directing that any
such application is to be heard with dispatch and added to the list in any of
the courts in which I am presiding to avoid delays in the trial proceeding as
scheduled. To be clear, Mr. Doherty’s participation in the selection process
must be meaningful. He will not be permitted to thwart the appointment of
counsel by rejecting counsel without reason.
iv.
The role of
486.3 counsel:
[
51
]
Mr. Doherty expressed
concern that the lawyer appointed to cross-examine the witnesses will have
access to his questions and may inform the crown of his defence prior to trial.
I explained to Mr. Doherty that the lawyer that is appointed to cross-examine
the witnesses is bound by the same solicitor client privilege that applies to private
counsel. Although there is some debate in the caselaw about whether appointed
counsel is in a “solicitor-client relationship”,
in
R. v. Bakhash
,
2017
ONSC 3835
at para
49
, the Court was very clear that:
There are, however, some aspects of a
solicitor-client relationship that are encompassed by an appointment under s.
486.3. The lawyer in reviewing disclosure is bound by the implied undertaking.
The lawyer is required to conduct the cross-examination in a manner that
advances the accused's interests. Undoubtedly, as well, the lawyer is subject
to the duty of confidentiality. As Code J. noted in
Faulkner, supra
(and
notwithstanding my disagreement regarding the ultimate characterization of the
relationship) a court-appointed lawyer needs some of the important
characteristics of a fully retained defence lawyer to be able to do his or her
job.
Among
those characteristics includes the ability to discuss strategy, tactics, and
evidence in a confidential manner
. [emphasis mine]
[
52
]
This assurance should
alleviate any of Mr. Doherty’s concerns about the confidentiality of his
relationship with the appointed counsel.
[
53
]
Mr. Doherty also sought
some directions about the extent of his involvement with the questions that
appointed counsel will put to the witnesses. For example, he asked about
whether he would be supplying the lawyer with a list of questions that s/he
must ask during the trial. A number of courts have grappled with the issue of
how the unrepresented defendant ought to instruct counsel and the parameters of
that relationship. The following decisions provide significant guidance:
R. v. Bakhash
, supra at para
48
:
Although defence
counsel is never a mere mouthpiece for his or her client, instructions must be
taken in critical areas. I agree with Gray J. that court-appointed counsel must
put the defence theory to the witnesses, within proper reason of course:
Thornton,
supra
.
R. v. Thorton
,
2014 ONSC 6688
: The Court held that there is an
obligation for 486 counsel to “consult with the accused and take instructions”.
In addition, at paras 58 and 59:
Where the
appointment of counsel is made, it is not to be forgotten that the accused
still has the right to make full answer and defence. Were it not for the
mandatory appointment of counsel, the accused would have the unfettered right
to conduct his own cross-examination. In my view, court-appointed counsel is
obliged to pursue any line of inquiry that the accused wishes to pursue,
provided it does not contravene any ethical considerations and is otherwise
relevant. In this respect, the position of court-appointed counsel is different
from that of retained counsel, who may be able to decline to pursue certain
lines of inquiry on tactical grounds.
That is not
to say that counsel must ask specific questions written out for him or her by
the accused. Neither must counsel necessarily ask questions in the specific
form dictated by the accused. In that respect, I agree with the decision of my
colleague Code J. in
R. v. Faulkner, supra
. However, at a minimum counsel must pursue lines of
inquiry that the accused wishes to pursue, provided it is proper to do so.
In
R. v. Shenker
,
2021 QCCQ 2376
, the Court
provided this very helpful summary of a various judgements that have addressed
this issue:
To
summarize, the following principles outline the nature - and limits - of
appointed counsel's involvement in a matter where he is forced upon the
self-represented accused by operation of s. 486.3
C.C
.:
1.
Designated counsel represents and assists the accused only for the
limited purpose of preparing and conducting the cross-examination(s). In other
words, he does not act as defence counsel "at large".
2.
Whether or not there is
an application under s. 486.3
C.C.
, the self-represented accused cannot be forced to subject the
complainant to a cross-examination.
In other words, even if counsel is appointed by the Court as a
preventive measure, the accused is still free to declare that he has no
questions for the complainant. The presence of a court-appointed lawyer does
not
compel
the accused to proceed to a
cross-examination. Such tactical decisions remain the accused's.
3.
Similarly, once the cross-examination has begun, the
self-represented accused can unilaterally choose to put an end to it at any
time, even if the designated attorney believes that this would be an unwise
tactical decision.
4.
Court-appointed counsel has an obligation to obtain and review the
Crown disclosure before proceeding to the cross-examination.
5.
Court-appointed counsel has an obligation to confer with the
self-represented accused in advance in order to fully grasp the anticipated
theory of the defence. Counsel must also craft his cross-examination
accordingly, giving the accused's anticipated defence due regard and striving
to advance the defence in question, if this is legally and strategically
feasible.
6.
The self-represented accused may propose general lines of
questioning to the court-appointed lawyer. Unless those lines of questioning
are inadmissible, improper or otherwise vexatious, counsel shall attempt to
pursue them to the best of his abilities.
7.
None of the foregoing
may ever force an attorney to compromise his ethical or professional duties. No
matter what lines of questioning the accused wishes to have explored, the
attorney must respect the bounds set by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R
.
v
.
Lyttle
, as well as
countless other appellate decisions that prohibit harassing, redundant,
misleading, collateral, aggressive or abusive questions.
After all, as a matter of principle, even when an accused is
self-represented, the same rules of evidence apply.
8.
The self-represented
accused cannot force court-appointed counsel to read a script of pre-drafted
questions. Nor may he demand to vet the lawyer's anticipated questions in
advance.
Although counsel must respect the theory of the defence and the
lines of questioning proposed by the accused, it remains the lawyer's
prerogative and responsibility to decide how to conduct the cross-examination,
what questions to ask, in what order and with what tone.
9.
Should any conflict
arise between the self-represented accused and the designated lawyer about
questions proposed by the accused, the matter should be raised before the trial
judge (in the absence of the witness) who will make a ruling on the question's
admissibility.
[
54
]
I agree with and adopt
the reasons in the
Shenker
decision as the process to be followed with
respect to the manner in which Mr. Doherty will instruct counsel and the
ability to raise objections with the Court if counsel refuses to address
specific areas of cross-examination.
v.
Additional
issues addressed with Mr. Doherty at the end of the hearing:
[
55
]
To assist Mr. Doherty
with preparing for the trial, he was directed to the Ontario Court of Justice
website at
https://www.ontariocourt.ca
because it provides ample information and
resources to assist the unrepresented litigant. In addition, to ensure that the
proceedings are not delayed if Mr. Doherty is unable to access the site, the
following forms, documents and information pages were printed off and provided
to him in hard copy:
•
A copy of the
Charter
;
•
A copy of the
Criminal
Rules of the Ontario Court of Justice
;
•
Three blank application
forms;
•
The “definition and
glossary of criminal terms”; and
•
The “step by step”
directions for a “trial court”.
[
56
]
Mr. Doherty was
directed that, if he has an issue with outstanding disclosure, he should write
to the crown’s office as soon as possible. If he wishes to bring an application
for issues with respect to purportedly missing disclosure and/or any alleged breaches
of his
Charter
rights including the manner of his arrest, he must serve
and file a completed application form in advance of the trial in compliance
with the
Criminal Rules of the Ontario Court of Justice
.
[
57
]
In addition, Mr.
Doherty was provided with some additional guidance for the trial:
•
He was instructed to
attend the trial with his disclosure readily available either in a hard copy or
accessible to him on a computer. It is essential to have the disclosure to
compare what witnesses have said before the trial and compare that to their
evidence.
•
He was instructed to
attend with instruments to keep careful notes whether that is a pen and paper
or a computer;
•
The roles of the
participants were explained to Mr. Doherty as follows
[1]
:
o
A trial judge is an independent and impartial judicial
officer who hears your trial and decides if you are not guilty or guilty. The
judge knows nothing about your case at the start of your trial except your
charges. The judge’s role is to ensure that you have a fair trial. The judge
has an obligation to assist you to ensure that you have a fair trial, but it is
not the judge’s role to give you legal advice or to be your legal
representative.
o
The Crown is the person with the authority to
prosecute the charges against you. It is the Crown’s responsibility to prove
all the essential elements of the offences with which you are charged beyond a
reasonable doubt.
o
The court clerk who is sitting in front of the judge
assists in many ways including reading the charges out loud and asking you if
you plead guilty or not guilty, swearing or affirming witnesses, and taking
care of the exhibits during the trial.
o
The court reporter is responsible for making a record
of what is said during the trial. You need to understand that everything that
is said in court is recorded.
[
58
]
I explained to Mr.
Doherty that the Crown is not required to call witnesses or subpoena witnesses
for his defence. If he wants to call witnesses or rely on the evidence of other
witnesses during the trial, he should send that list to the crown who will
decide if they will make the witness available for the trial. If the crown will
not arrange for the witness’ attendance, he will have to subpoena them himself,
in advance of the trial, to ensure their attendance in person. He was
instructed that he can attend at the front counter of the Peterborough
courthouse for assistance with how to subpoena a witness.
D.
Conclusion:
[
59
]
In summary, an order
has been made appointing counsel for the purpose of cross-examining Mr.
Drysdale, Ms. Butler, Mr. Gingell and Mrs. Gingell. Mr. Doherty must have some
input into the selection of that counsel. He can either choose his own lawyer
who is prepared to act as appointed counsel on the dates set for trial or he
must choose from a list of lawyers supplied by Legal Aid. If Mr. Doherty obtains
a lawyer who is willing to act as 486.3 counsel, but that lawyer is not
available for the trial date, he must promptly bring an adjournment
application.
[
60
]
Mr. Doherty must participate
in the selection of 486.3 counsel in a meaningful way. I will not allow the
order to be thwarted by rejecting counsel without a
bone fide
reason. If
either the crown or Mr. Doherty have issues with the selection process, they
are directed to bring an application for directions without delay.
[
61
]
Once counsel has been
appointed for the purposes of cross-examining the witnesses, that counsel must
review the disclosure and view the recordings of the incidents. He or she must
prepare for the trial, which includes seeking confidential instructions from
Mr. Doherty about what questions he has for the witnesses and the theory of the
defence. Counsel does not have to follow a script and he or she is bound by the
rules of evidence and ethics.
[
62
]
If there is a question
or area of cross-examination that Mr. Doherty wants to put to the witness and
counsel is refusing to do so, that issue is to be raised with the Court during
the trial so that I can provide directions. Since the crown cannot communicate
with a witness about their evidence while the witness is being cross-examined,
Mr. Doherty should not have any issue with addressing these issues in the
presence of the crown.
[
63
]
Finally, I am ordering
that this matter return in front of me in the next two weeks to provide an
update as to the selection of appointed counsel and if s/he is available for
the dates that are scheduled for this trial.
[1]
All this information was extracted from the guide to
self-represented litigants.