Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj332/2025oncj332.html

ONTARIO  COURT  OF
 JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Foran,
2025 ONCJ
332
DATE:  2025·06·16
NEWMARKET
BETWEEN:
HIS
 MAJESTY  THE  KING
—
 AND  —
PAUL
J. FORAN
JUDGMENT
Evidence and Submissions
Heard: June 16, 2025.
Delivered: June
16, 2025
Ms. Agatha Mapelli ................................................................................   counsel
for the Crown
Mr. Barry Fox ....................................................................................   counsel
for the defendant
KENKEL J.:
Introduction
[
1
]
Mr. Foran was stopped just after exiting an
LCBO liquor store. The officer had several reasons for the stop. An Approved
Screening Device (ASD) test was conducted. That test resulted in a “Fail”
showing Mr. Foran had a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of 100mgs or higher.
A few minutes later Mr. Foran told P.C. Hyde that, contrary to his earlier
statement, he actually had been drinking shortly before the ASD test. Constable
Hyde conducted a second ASD test which ended with the same result. Approved
instrument tests later at the station measured Mr. Foran’s BAC at 247mgs and
232 mgs. Mr. Foran is charged with having a blood alcohol concentration in
excess of the legal limit within 2 hours of operating a conveyance (80+) s
320.14(1)(b).
[
2
]
Both counsel agree the Crown has proved the
count alleged subject to consideration of the following
Charter
issues:
•
SECTION 8 – LAWFUL DEMAND – The second ASD test
was not pursuant to a second demand. Was it a legal search?
•
SECTION 10(B) – HOLDING OFF – Was the second ASD
test a breach of s 10(b) as it was conducted after right to counsel advice was
given but before access to counsel was provided?
•
SECTION 10(B) COUNSEL OF CHOICE – Did the police
“steer” the accused to duty counsel resulting in a breach of his s 10(b) right
to counsel of choice?
CHARTER ss 8,10(b) – The Second
ASD Test
[
3
]
P.C. Hyde made several observations
including the odour of alcohol coming from the accused that provided the
required reasonable suspicion for the roadside ASD test. He asked Mr. Foran if
he had consumed alcohol within 15 minutes prior to the stop and Mr. Foran said
he hadn’t. The fail of the ASD test led to Mr. Foran’s arrest.
[
4
]
After his arrest, and after right to counsel
advice had been provided, Mr. Foran told P.C. Hyde that he actually
had
consumed alcohol 5 minutes before
the test. Constable Hyde discussed the matter with P.C. Johnson who was at the
scene and is a qualified breath technician. They agreed that the possibility of
mouth alcohol from recent consumption might affect the validity of the initial
result. They decided to conduct another test. Constable Hyde administered a
second ASD test that also resulted in a Fail.
[
5
]
The defence notes that there was no new ASD
demand for the second test. The defence submits there was no continuing demand,
and the second test was therefore unlawful. Further the test was a breach of s
10(b) because it was an investigative step taken after right to counsel advice
had been provided but before implementation of that right.
[
6
]
The defence described the situation created
by the accused’s statement as a “Catch-22”. The officers could no longer rely
upon the accuracy of their original test, but nor could they lawfully
administer a new test.
[
7
]
The Crown has proved that P.C. Hyde had the
reasonable suspicion required for the ASD demand and test. The information he
had at the time showed no reason to doubt the accuracy of the result. The
subsequent arrest based on the ASD fail result was lawful. The right to counsel
advice given complied with s 10(b) of the
Charter.
[
8
]
What should happen when a police officer
receives new information that causes the officer to question the original
grounds for arrest? It’s not unusual for detained persons to tell an officer
contradictory things at the roadside. What an officer does next is based on the
circumstances of the case and different officers might reasonably arrive at
different conclusions.
[
9
]
Some officers might decide to continue the
arrest based on the original information provided. In other cases, the
information may cause the officer to have a concern that if the accused’s
second statement was the true one, the ASD result might not be valid. That’s
what happened. Constable Hyde testified that the odour of alcohol coming from
the accused dissipated after he stepped out of his vehicle. His discussion with
Constable Johnson led them to offer a second test.
[
10
]
I disagree with the defence that the
accused’s second statement resulted in a legal dilemma for the officer. The
defence is right that the accused could not have been compelled to participate
in the second test. His arrest was ongoing, and he had already provided the
sample required by the demand. The further test was conducted entirely for his
benefit, to ensure there was no possibility that the original test was
inaccurate. It’s understandable that he chose to comply, even though the test
wasn’t legally required.
[
11
]
Once right to counsel advice has been
provided, officers are required to refrain from eliciting incriminating
evidence until the accused has had a chance to speak with counsel –
R v Bartle,
1994 CanLII 64 (SCC)
, [1994] SCJ No 74. That rule
does not prevent the police from continuing the investigation at the instance
of the accused by checking the validity of the grounds for the arrest. The
officers here were not eliciting incriminating evidence. They were not required
to conduct a further test, but were right to do so in this case to ensure that
it was necessary take Mr. Foran to the station for evidentiary testing via
Approved Instrument.
[
12
]
There was no breach of sections 8 or 10(b).
SECTION 10 (b) – Counsel of Choice
– Steering
[
13
]
At the roadside Constable Hyde read the
standard right to counsel advice which included the explanation that Mr. Foran
had the right to call any lawyer he wished. Mr. Foran responded that he thought
he probably should call a lawyer, but he didn’t have a lawyer to call. In
cross-examination PC Hyde confirmed that it was his standard practice to advise
a detained person that they have the right to call a lawyer other than duty
counsel, but he agreed that any conversation on that point beyond the standard
advice was not in his notes. He testified that the ICC (In-Car-Camera) video
would have recorded the conversation, but it was not played by either party.
[
14
]
The Crown was unable to play the station
videos at trial. PC Hyde did not note the booking conversation that led to the
call to duty counsel, in part because that discussion was with another officer
(the Staff Sergeant), and in part because it was recorded. He recalled that Mr.
Foran requested duty counsel in that discussion. He didn’t recall Mr. Foran
asking to speak to anyone else about contacting a lawyer. He didn’t recall any
request by Mr. Foran to contact another lawyer.
[
15
]
The defence notes that there was no direct
evidence as to the words spoken by Mr. Foran that resulted in the officers
making the call to duty counsel. The defence submits that the officers decided
to call duty counsel, not Mr. Foran.
[
16
]
I agree with the defence that the evidence
on this point is minimal. However, the absence of evidence is not necessarily
positive evidence of a breach.
[
17
]
Constable Hyde’s evidence showed that right
to counsel advice was properly provided. His evidence that Mr. Foran chose to
speak to duty counsel is uncontradicted by any other evidence or circumstance.
While the officer did not record the exact words of that discussion, his
failure to do so was reasonably explained. To the extent that some trial cases
cited by the defence in their Application suggest a duty on the police to go
further and review various implementation options with a detained person even
if not requested, that approach has been rejected –
R
v Shen,
2023 ONSC 3847
at para
44
,
R v Persaud,
2020 ONSC 3413
.
[
18
]
The implementation duty upon the police depends
upon what the accused says. The only evidence on this point is that Mr. Foran
requested to speak to duty counsel. I agree with the defence that the evidence
on this point was minimal, but it is sufficient. Had the defence been in
position to call any evidence contesting Constable Hyde’s testimony on this
point on the
Charter voir dire,
the Crown would have had little to point to in response. The burden
though is on the defence to establish the breach alleged on the balance of
probabilities –
R v Collins,
1987 CanLII 84 (SCC)
, [1987] SCJ No 15.
[
19
]
I find the evidence fails to prove the
breach alleged.
Conclusion
[
20
]
The Crown has proved the arrest, ASD test
and approved instrument tests were lawful. The defence has failed to prove the
s 10(b) breaches alleged on the balance of probabilities. The
Charter
applications are dismissed.
[
21
]
The Crown has proved the charge beyond a
reasonable doubt. There will be a finding of guilt.
Delivered:  June 16, 2025.
Justice Joseph F. Kenkel