Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj266/2025oncj266.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Gobin
, 2025 ONCJ 266
DATE: 
2025 05 13
COURT
FILE No.:  24-91100297
Central
East Region - Newmarket
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
— AND
—
KENNETH GOBIN
Before
Justice M. Townsend
Sentencing
Submissions Heard on May 8, 2025
Reasons
for Sentence released on May 13, 2025
A. Barkin............................................................................................... counsel
for the Crown
C. Nagel........................................................... 
counsel for the defendant Kenneth Gobin
TOWNSEND J.:
[
1
]
All Canadians have the right to be who they are,
worship how they wish, love who they want, believe in what they wish to
believe, and to do all this free from violence, discrimination and intolerance.
We live in a world right now that seems to be marred by hatred and discord. Every
time we turn on the TV, listen to the radio, or read the newspaper, we can see
that headlines constantly refer to difference and divide, rather than
community, acceptance and togetherness.
[
2
]
The Canada that we all know, and the Canada that
we all wish to see flourish, is a country where the cultural identities of all
its citizens are encouraged, all faiths are recognized, and people, no matter
their background, are given equal protection and treatment under the law.
Section 15(1)
of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
enshrines
this "Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right
to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination
and, in particular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic
origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
[
3
]
On March 12, 2025, I found Mr. Gobin guilty of
two counts of assault and one count of breach of probation. More specifically I
found Mr. Gobin guilty of spitting on Tilda and Malcolm Roll and breaching his
probation order by not keeping the peace and being of good behaviour. In
addition, I found that the Crown had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Gobin said words to the effect “Hitler should have killed you all”, “Hitler was
right”, “Hitler should have taken you out”, or some variation thereof. I also found
that Mr. Gobin made a “salute” often associated with the Nazi movement and said
something like “hail Hitler”. I found that all these words were proximate to
the intentional assault on Mr. and Ms. Roll by spitting.
[
4
]
The Crown seeks a sentence of 18 months jail for
Mr. Gobin, followed by a period of probation. This Crown position is based on
the particularly aggravating factors related to this offence, Mr. Gobin's
criminal record, the impact that this offence has had on the community, and the
principles of general deterrence and denunciation. Mr. Nagel on behalf of Mr.
Gobin seeks a sentence of 90 days jail, followed by a period of probation. Mr.
Nagel bases this position on the "step-up" principle related to Mr.
Gobin's criminal record, the prospects of rehabilitation for Mr. Gobin, and the
specifics related to Mr. Gobin's personal circumstances.
Relevant Legislation
[
5
]
Section 718
of the
Criminal Code of Canada
outlines the following:
718
The
fundamental purpose of sentencing is to protect society and to contribute,
along with crime prevention initiatives, to respect for the law and the
maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by imposing just sanctions
that have one or more of the following objectives:
(a) to denounce unlawful conduct and the
harm done to victims or to the community that is caused by unlawful conduct;
(b) to deter the offender and other persons
from committing offences;
(c) to separate offenders from society, where
necessary;
(d) to assist in rehabilitating offenders;
(e) to provide reparations for harm done to
victims or to the community; and
(f) to promote a sense of responsibility
in offenders, and acknowledgment of the harm done to victims or to the community.
718.1
A
sentence must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender.
718.2
A
court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration the following
principles:
(a) a sentence should be increased or
reduced to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances
relating to the offence or the offender, and, without limiting the generality
of the foregoing,
(i) evidence that the offence was
motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on race, national or ethnic origin,
language, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or physical disability, sexual
orientation, or gender identity or expression, or on any other similar factor,
…
(iii.1) evidence that the offence had a
significant impact on the victim, considering their age and other personal
circumstances, including their health and financial situation,
shall be deemed to be aggravating
circumstances;
(b) a sentence should be similar to
sentences imposed on similar offenders for similar offences committed in
similar circumstances;
…
(d) an offender should not be deprived of
liberty, if less restrictive sanctions may be appropriate in the circumstances;
and
(e) all available sanctions, other than
imprisonment, that are reasonable in the circumstances and consistent with the
harm done to victims or to the community should be considered for all
offenders, with particular attention to the circumstances of Aboriginal
offenders.
[
6
]
As mentioned above, I find that the Crown has
proven the statutorily aggravating factor outlined in section 718.2(a)(1) -
that the offence was motivated by hate or prejudice based in particular on the
fact that the victims are Jewish people.
Victim Impact Statements
[
7
]
Tilda Roll, Malcolm Roll, Richard Amar and Anne
Trojman all provided victim impact statements. In all of the victim impact
statements the same sentiments prevail – the victims felt degraded,
disrespected, and dehumanized. Mr. Gobin's actions were not only offensive to
the victims, but offensive to all Canadian Jews. Each of the complainants and
witnesses expressed pride in their Jewish heritage and identity. They expressed
anger and frustration at the reference to Hitler, and the millions of Jewish
people that died in the Holocaust.
[
8
]
Anne Trojman's victim impact statement was
particularly telling in her description of the impact of this offence.
"The emotional impact of this event has been profound. I have always felt
that Canada is a safe and welcoming country. I am an immigrant myself. I felt
that my faith and identity could be expressed freely and without fear. This
incident has shaken that belief". Tilda Roll stated that she is angrier
now than she was at the time of the offence. Each person expressed a sense of
fear and vulnerability present that had never been present before even in the
face of other antisemitic sentiment they have witnessed.
[
9
]
Three organizations provided community victim
impact statements.
Section 722.1(1)
of the
Criminal Code
provides as
follows:
722.2 (1) When determining the sentence to
be imposed on an offender or determining whether the offender should be
discharged under section 730 in respect of any offence, the court shall
consider any statement made by an individual on a community’s behalf that was
prepared in accordance with this section and filed with the court describing
the harm or loss suffered by the community as the result of the commission of
the offence and the impact of the offence on the community.
[
10
]
Jamie Kirzner-Roberts of the Friends of Simon
Wisenthal Centre, Richard Robertson of the B’nai Brith National Organization of
Canada, and Michael Teper of the Canadian Antisemitism Education Foundation all
read out prepared community victim impact statements.
[
11
]
Each individual cited statistics with respect to
the prevalence of hate-motivated offences directed toward the Jewish community.
Mr. Teper from the Canadian Antisemitism Education Foundation said the
following:
The 2023 Hate Crime Statistical Report of
the Toronto Police Service states that out of the 365 hate-motivated criminal
occurrences reported, 130 of them, being 36%, were directed against Jews. By
contrast, Jews constituted 4.5% of the population of Toronto, as counted in the
2021 Census. In brief, we are targeted for a full eight times our demographic
share of hate. We therefore do not view Mr. Gobin’s violence in isolation, but
against the backdrop of this epidemic of hate crime targeting Jews.
…
In this context, some Jews are giving up on
life in Canada. As evidenced by media stories such as this, they are leaving
the country. Many Jews are afraid to drop off their children at the local daycare.
Our institutions are constantly on the watch for graffiti and vandalism and
break-ins. Our religious and community institutions are forced to divert their
financial resources away from programming, maintaining and building our
infrastructure, and direct these funds instead towards hiring security guards
and police officers. Based on bitter historical experience, we feel that Canada
“is on a very dark trajectory that will not end well.”.
[
12
]
Ms. Kirzner-Roberts shared the following
community perspective:
The crime committed by Mr. Gobin was not
simply an outburst of hateful speech — it was targeted, and it was violent. By
confronting Jewish residents walking home from synagogue, spitting on them,
praising Hitler, performing a Nazi salute, and explicitly stating that he
wished they would be murdered because they are Jewish, Mr. Gobin crossed a
dangerous threshold. These were not merely offensive words — they were acts of
intimidation and dehumanization that echo the darkest moments in our collective
history. … When expressions of hate are paired with physical acts of
aggression, they become a serious threat to public safety and social cohesion.
History has shown us that when such hatred is tolerated or minimized, it paves
the way for more widespread and devastating violence. The actions of Mr. Gobin must
be understood within this broader context—they are not isolated, but part of a
historical pattern that demands serious attention and accountability.
[
13
]
The impact that this offence has had not only on
the complainants and witnesses directly involved, but on the Jewish community
as a whole, is great. Hate-motivated attacks are not only targeted at the
individual victim of the assault but are targeted at the broader community to
which that victim belongs. It is clear from the individual and community victim
impact statements that when a particular demographic of people are constantly,
consistently, and repeatedly targeted by incidents entirely fueled by hate, the
impact of those crimes grows exponentially.
[
14
]
It must always be remembered though, that while
I take the impact of this offence on the community very seriously, Mr. Gobin is
to be sentenced on this offence, he is not to be, and will not be, punished for
the entirety of hate-motivated attacks on the Jewish community. His actions are
but part of the landslide of hate directed toward the Jewish community; he was
not the beginning, nor (as referenced in the community victim impact
statements) will he be the end. While Mr. Gobin is not at all responsible for
the fears of the Jewish community, he is certainly responsible for exacerbating
those fears.
Pre-Sentence Report
[
15
]
A pre-sentence report was prepared for this
sentencing hearing, and a redacted copy has been made an exhibit.
[
16
]
Mr. Gobin is a 36-year-old man who comes before
the Court with a prior criminal record. According to the pre-sentence report,
Mr. Gobin was born in Toronto, Ontario and he appeared to have a normal
childhood until his mid-teenage years after when he began to use cannabis.
This, according to his parents, is when much of his behavioural difficulty came
about. Mr. Gobin lives at home with his parents and his sister, although both
those relationships are strained.
[
17
]
Mr. Gobin had some difficulty in high school and
did not pursue post-secondary education. Mr. Gobin is currently unemployed and
is receiving ODSP support because of some mental health diagnoses. Mr. Gobin
has previously been diagnosed with a delusional disorder; however, he chose to
disregard prescribed anti-psychotic medication in favour of marijuana use as a
means of relief. Mr. Gobin testified at trial that he had used cannabis shortly
before this offence.
[
18
]
Mr. Gobin comes before the Court with a previous
criminal record. His criminal convictions start in December of 2006, there
appears to be a break from 2013 to 2019, and then is consistent up to the
present. His convictions include 5 prior assault, assault causing bodily harm
or assault with a weapon convictions; 2 prior robbery convictions; 6 prior
failing to comply with court order convictions; one criminal harassment
conviction; one utter threats conviction; and some convictions related to the
use of a weapon or firearm.
[
19
]
Most recently on May 9
th
, 2024, Mr.
Gobin was convicted of fraud and personation related offences. He was sentenced
to 120 days time served and a period of probation. Counsel submits that Mr.
Gobin has 4 unused “real” days of pre-sentence custody to “use” for this
offence. Counsel relies on
R. v. Barnett
,
2017 ONCA 897 (CanLII)
, [2017] O.J. No. 6102 at paragraph
27
for authority to apply these
4 days of pre-sentence custody. I disagree with
Barnett’s
applicability.
There does not exist a link between this offence and the offence for which Mr.
Gobin served his pre-sentence custody. Counsel submitted that he was present
for the s.524 hearing and that these allegations were presented to the court on
that hearing. That, in my opinion does not create a link as referred to in
Barnett
,
and the reality was that Mr. Gobin’s release order remained in effect on these
charges at all times.
Analysis
[
20
]
Since October 7
th
, 2023, I note, as
did Justice Horkins in the unreported Ontario Court of Justice decision of
R. v. Doyle
, (July 26, 2024) that
"it is a fact that the Jewish community in Toronto has been dealing with a
tremendous increase in hate crimes, antisemitism and under this pressure of
feeling that everyone is against them, to put it crudely."
[
21
]
Many of the cases presented by both the Crown
and the defence with respect to sentencing for hate-motivated attacks relate to
mischief charges, in that the offender spray-painted swastikas on property
(vehicles and even tombstones). There was some discussion by those courts that
this activity might be characterized as political commentary.
[
22
]
Mr. Gobin’s actions were not politically
motivated, they were hate motivated.
[
23
]
The caselaw presented by both the Crown and the
defence are wide ranging in the ultimate disposition. In
R. v. Soles
,
[1998] O.J. No. 5061
the offender received the equivalent of 18 months for willfully damaging a
building in a Jewish cemetery. In
R. v. Koppe
,
[2024] O.J. No. 5584
the offender was given a conditional sentence
of 18 months. In
R. v. Schneider
,
[2022] O.J. No. 6230
, Justice M.B. Greene sentenced the offender
to 2 years probation after crediting 90 enhanced days of PSC on the
Information.
[
24
]
Justice Libman in the unreported decision of
R. v. O’Sullivan Martinez
(October
1, 2021) sentenced an offender for spitting on women, and in particular
directing his hateful actions toward women in the Asian community. After taking
into consideration the one year of pre-sentence custody that had already been
served, Justice Libman sentenced Mr. O’Sullivan Martinez to a further period of
probation.
[
25
]
In
R. v. Dickey
(Ontario Court of Justice, September 8, 2022), Justice Marion
sentenced Mr. Dickey to for entering a store in Windsor and confronting a
female store clerk. He was aggressive with her, shouted references to the “KKK”
and frequently used the “N” word. He then spat on the store clerk. In that case
the sentencing judge imposed a sentence of 80 days on top of the pre-sentence
custody, and a further period of probation.
[
26
]
Imposing a fit sentence is often the most
difficult task faced by a trial judge. This is a highly individualized process,
and one that rarely comes down to a mathematical calculation. The sentence must
be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and to the degree of
responsibility of the offender. The court must weigh both aggravating and
mitigating factors present in every case, before determining what it feels to
be a fit sentence.
[
27
]
Mr. Gobin’s prior criminal record is
aggravating. For an assault causing bodily harm conviction in 2023 he received
the equivalent of a 9-month custodial sentence. He has multiple convictions for
assault, and breaches of court order. He has prior convictions for violent
offences and offences involving weapons.
[
28
]
Mr. Gobin appears to have shown no remorse for
his actions. He had a trial, which is his right, and he may not agree with the
outcome of that trial. While in his allocution he did say “I am sorry about the
whole situation”, he further simply reiterated what he told me (and I rejected)
in his testimony at trial: that “the Jews” hate him, he was just trying to ride
his bike, that he was spat on by the complainants, and that he was the one who
was attacked. While a lack of remorse certainly is not an aggravating factor on
sentence, it is simply lack of a mitigating factor.
[
29
]
Mr. Gobin’s personal circumstances, his mental
health history, and his background provide some mitigation on sentence. Mr.
Gobin has started working with a counsellor to better himself, he is actively
seeking employment, and he is making efforts toward rehabilitation.
[
30
]
The most aggravating factor involved here
however is the hate motivation behind this attack. The
Criminal Code
explicitly outlines hate motivation as a statutorily aggravating factor.
[
31
]
Mr. Gobin’s actions were disgusting – both
morally and physically. To spit on someone shows the ultimate in disrespectful
and degrading behaviour. It sends a message to a person that they are
worthless. Assaulting someone by spitting on them can leave an injury longer
lasting than a black eye.
[
32
]
To spit on someone, all the while shouting
hateful language is even more demeaning. Spitting on a Jewish person, telling
them that you wished Hitler had killed them and their entire community,
saluting and praising the person responsible for the Holocaust, is a despicable
act of assault.
[
33
]
Frequently we hear news stories about members of
the Jewish community, and the community as a whole, suffering victimization at
the hands of hate-filled offenders. Threats are made to bomb schools,
tombstones and places of worship are vandalized, posters and material are
strewn about in the street. This has to stop. The hateful targeting of Jewish
people, and the targeting of any of the multicultural communities that make up
Canada has to stop.
[
34
]
One way to get this to stop is for the court to
impose sentences which accurately reflect the principles of general deterrence
and denunciation. Members of the public need to know that if you commit a hate
motivated offence – whether toward the Jewish community, the Black community,
women, or the LGBTQ+ community to name a few – you will be sentenced
accordingly. Sentences imposed must reflect the reality that hate motivated
offences are on the rise. Communities must not be forced to be revictimized
over and over again by the actions of hate-filled offenders.
[
35
]
In the case before me, a significant jail
sentence is the only way for the principles of general deterrence and
denunciation to be met. A significant jail sentence is proportionate to the
seriousness of the offence, the degree of responsibility of the offender, and
the significant impact that this offence has had on the individual complainants
and the larger Jewish community.
[
36
]
Canadians deserve to feel safe. Safe from
violence, safe from harm, and safe from hate. Words can be a weapon, and
sometimes words like the ones used by Mr. Gobin can inflict serious lasting
injuries.
Conclusion
[
37
]
The appropriate sentence in this case, given all
the aggravating and mitigating factors, and taking into account all the
principles of sentencing, is one of 12 months jail. For the reasons stated
above there will be no deduction of the requested 4 real days of Pre-sentence
custody. Following that jail sentence there will be 2 years of probation with
appropriate terms.
[
38
]
In addition, I will make a DNA Order, and a
s.110 Order for 10 years.
Released:  May 13, 2025
Signed:
Justice M. Townsend