Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj541/2025oncj541.html

ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. Josiah
, 2025 ONCJ 541
DATE: 
July 29, 2025
COURT
FILE No.: 25-087
West
Region
BETWEEN:
His Majesty the
King
— AND —
Josiah,
Kingsley
Before
Justice of the Peace K Kellough
Heard
on April 1, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on July 29, 2025
S. Odem...................................................................................... counsel
for the prosecution
No appearance by or on behalf of Kingsley
Josiah, even though notified of time and place; proceeding on an
ex parte
basis
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE K Kellough:
[
1
]
On January 15, 2025, the defendant Kingsley Josiah
was charged under Part III of the
Ontario Provincial Offences Act,
R.S.O.
1990, c. P.33
, as amended, with using a number plate upon a vehicle other than
a number plate authorized for use on that vehicle, contrary to
section 12(1)
(d)
of the
Highway Traffic Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8, s. 12
, which provides:
Every person who, uses or
permits the use of a number plate upon a vehicle other than a number plate authorized
for use on that vehicle; is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable to
a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for
not more than thirty days, or to both, and in addition the person’s licence or
permit may be suspended for not more than six months.
[
2
]
An
ex parte
trial was set for
April 1, 2025. On that day, the defendant was paged and did not appear in the
courtroom or online by zoom to address the charges.  No one else appeared on
his behalf.
[
3
]
A review of the paperwork and
procedural history of the matter was done, and the court considered
section
54 of the
POA
, which reads:
Where a defendant does not appear at the time and place
appointed for a hearing and it is proved by the prosecutor, having been given a
reasonable opportunity to do so, that a summons was served, a notice of trial
was given under Part I or II, an undertaking to appear was given or a
recognizance to appear was entered into, as the case may be, or where the
defendant does not appear upon the resumption of a hearing that has been
adjourned, the court may,
(a) proceed to hear and determine the proceeding in the
absence of the defendant;
or
(b) adjourn the hearing and, if it thinks fit, issue a
summons to appear or issue a warrant in the prescribed form for the arrest of
the defendant.
[
4
]
The court is satisfied that the
defendant was personally served with a summons on the offence date of January
15, 2025.  A first appearance date was set for March 18, 2025.  No one attended
to address the matter on the first appearance, and as a result an
ex parte
trial date was set for April 1, 2025.
[
5
]
Given the relatively short period of
time between the offence date and the
ex parte
trial date, the court
inquired as to whether it would be reasonable to make any further efforts to
engage the defendant by sending them a bench summons.  The court was advised by
the crown that following the incident the defendant was turned over to Canada
Border Services Agency (hereinafter CBSA) for the execution of a deportation warrant.
The crown advised that the defendant may no longer be in the country, but they
had no way to confirm the information. The crown indicated it remained their
intention to proceed with the prosecution.
[
6
]
Accordingly, on April 1, 2025, the
court exercised its discretion under
section 54 of the
POA
and proceeded to hear and consider the proceedings in the
absence of the defendant. The trial was conducted, and adjourned to May 20,
2025, for the court’s decision following the trial. On May 20, 2025, the court
provided brief reasons on the record indicating that the evidence at trial
failed to prove each of the essential elements of the offence beyond a
reasonable doubt, and as a result the charge against the defendant was
dismissed. The court noted that written reasons would follow. These are those
reasons.
The Evidence
[
7
]
Police Constable Waanders testified that she was
dispatched to a motor vehicle collision on January 15, 2025, at Concession 8
and Side Road 10. She advised the offence took place in the jurisdiction of Bruce
County. A tow truck operator had been called to the scene of single motor
vehicle collision and in turn requested police attendance. PC Waanders advised
that a 2009 black Hyndi motor vehicle had swerved off the roadway and had
tipped over on its side. The tow truck operator had to place the vehicle in an
upright position before the officer could see the licence plate. The officer
advised that she “ran motor vehicle plates through dispatch and the plate came
back unattached to a vehicle”. PC Waanders advised she also made inquires about
Mr. Josiah with dispatch which is how she learned of the outstanding CBSA
warrant.
[
8
]
At the scene Mr. Josiah was asked to verbally
identify himself which he did. He also provided the officer with an Ontario
drivers license which satisfied the officer with respect to his identity.
[
9
]
A voluntariness
voir dire
was conducted
in relation to the brief conversation that the officer had with the defendant. The
utterances of the defendant were ruled voluntary. Mr. Josiah advised the
officer that he was driving the vehicle when it hit an ice patch and slid off
the road. On learning that the defendant was operating the motor vehicle prior
to the accident PC Waanders charged the defendant with the part III offence
before the court.
[
10
]
Following the evidence of the officer the crown
sought a conviction for the charge before the court based on the
viva voce
evidence of the officer. The crown suggested that each of the elements of the
offence were made out and there was no evidence to the contrary.
[
11
]
The court asked the crown about the absence of any
evidence relating to the actual licence plate number observed by the officer.
The court also noted the absence of any certified copies of ministry documents
under hand and seal of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which would demonstrate
that the plate observed was not authorized for use on the vehicle. In response
the crown suggested that the court could rely upon the
viva voce
evidence of the officer; she conducted a “check” on the vehicle which showed
the licence plate was unattached.
The Legislation
[
12
]
A summary of the relevant sections of the HTA
follows.
[
13
]
Paragraph 12(1)(d) of the Act reads as follows:
Every person who, ... (d) uses or permits the
use of a number plate upon a vehicle other than a number plate authorized for
use on that vehicle; ... is guilty of an offence...
[
14
]
The terms "highway",
"Ministry" and "vehicle", which are relevant to the
offences described above, are defined in subsection 1(1) of the Act as follows:
'highway'
includes a common and public highway, street, avenue, parkway, driveway,
square, place, bridge, viaduct or trestle, any part of which is intended for or
used by the general public for the passage of vehicles and includes the area
between the lateral property lines thereof;
'Ministry'
means the Ministry of Transportation;
'vehicle'
includes a motor vehicle, trailer, traction engine, farm tractor, road-building
machine, bicycle and any vehicle drawn, propelled or driven by any kind of
power, including muscular power, but does not include a motorized snow vehicle
or a street car.
[
15
]
The word "number", relative to the
term "number plate" as contained in the text of paragraph 12(1)(d) of
the Act, is defined in subsection 6(1) of the Act, as follows:
'number', when
it is used in relation to a permit or plate means a number, a series of letters
or a combination of letters and numbers....
[
16
]
The following subsections of section 7 of the
Act are relevant to the offence created by paragraph 12(1)(d):
7(7) The Ministry may issue a permit of any
prescribed class, number plates and evidence of validation to any person who
meets the requirements of this Act and the regulations;
7(8) The
Ministry may authorize number plates in an applicant's possession for use on a
vehicle.
[
17
]
The provisions of subsection 210(7) of the Act
pertaining to the admissibility of certified documentary evidence are relevant
to this proceeding. That subsection reads as follows:
A copy of any
document filed in the Ministry under this Act, or any statement containing
information from the records required to be kept under this Act, that purports
to be certified by the Registrar under the seal of the Ministry as being a true
copy of the original shall be received in evidence in all courts without proof
of the seal, the Registrar's signature or the manner of preparing the copy or
statement, and is proof, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, of the facts
contained in the copy or statement.
Analysis
[
18
]
The offence before the court is a strict
liability offence. The prosecution must prove the commission of the prohibited
offence or the
actus reus
, by the defendant to the standard of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt. The prosecution need not prove any intention or
mens
rea
on the part of the defendant. Once the prosecution has proven the act
was committed by the defendant, beyond a reasonable doubt, they will have met
their burden of proof.
[
19
]
Had the defendant been present for trial they
would have had the opportunity to advance a defence of due diligence to show,
on a balance of probabilities, that they had taken all reasonable steps to avoid
the particular act, or that they reasonably believed in a mistaken set of
facts, which if true would have rendered the act innocent.
[
20
]
The court is left with the task of determining
if the officer’s
viva voce
evidence concerning the licence plate, and
the inquiry she made with dispatch are sufficient for the court to find that
the defendant committed the act beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
21
]
During the trial the numbers and letters
appearing on the licence plate or “number plate” were never mentioned by the
officer during her testimony. The officer advised that on checking with
dispatch she was advised that the plate was unattached to a vehicle. The court
did not have any credibility issues with the officer’s evidence; the only real
issue with her evidence was that it did not include certain necessary details.
[
22
]
The crown seeks to rely upon hearsay evidence to
prove that the licence plate was “unattached”. The officer received this
information from “dispatch”.  The court was not given any further detail about
this information. It is unknown who the officer spoke with, what database that
individual was using to access information, how current or accurate that
database is, etc. There was no evidence before the court of any steps the
officer took to verify the accuracy of the information they were provided from
dispatch. The court is left without any means of assessing the credibility or
reliability of this evidence.
[
23
]
It may be common practice for officers to act or
rely on hearsay provided by dispatch, as they execute their roles in our
communities. The task of the crown is more complex: they must prove each of the
essential elements of an offence beyond a reasonable doubt. Hearsay evidence is
presumptively inadmissible in court:
R v Bradshaw
,
2017 SCC 35
at page
1. The challenges posed by hearsay to the law of evidence were outlined
by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Bradshaw
:
Hearsay is an out-of-court
statement tendered for the truth of its contents. Because hearsay is declared
outside of court, it is often difficult for the trier of fact to assess whether
it is trustworthy. Generally, hearsay is not taken under oath, the trier of
fact cannot observe the declarant’s demeanor as she makes the statement, and
hearsay is not tested through cross-examination (R. v. B. (K.G.),
1993 CanLII
116 (SCC)
, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 740, at p. 764). Allowing a trier of fact to
consider hearsay can therefore compromise trial fairness and the trial’s
truth-seeking process. The hearsay statement may be inaccurately recorded, and
the trier of fact cannot easily investigate the declarant’s perception, memory,
narration, or sincerity (Khelawon, at para. 2). As Fish J. explains in R. v.
Baldree,
2013 SCC 35
, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 520:
First, the declarant may have
misperceived the facts to which the hearsay statement relates; second, even if
correctly perceived, the relevant facts may have been wrongly remembered; third,
the declarant may have narrated the relevant facts in an unintentionally
misleading manner; and finally, the declarant may have knowingly made a false
assertion. The opportunity to fully probe these potential sources of error
arises only if the declarant is present in court and subject to
cross-examination. [Emphasis in original; para. 32.]
[1]
[
24
]
Hearsay may be admitted into evidence, for the
truth of its contents, if it falls into one of the following exceptions to presumptive
inadmissibility, these being: statutory exceptions, common law exceptions, or
principled exceptions. The Supreme Court of Canada in
R. v. Mapara
,
2005 SCC 23
, at para.
15
, set out the following framework for considering the admissibility
of hearsay evidence:
(a) Hearsay evidence is
presumptively inadmissible unless it falls under an exception to the hearsay
rule. The traditional exceptions to the hearsay rule remain presumptively in
place.
(b) A hearsay exception can be
challenged to determine whether it is supported by indicia of necessity and
reliability, required by the principled approach. The exception can be modified
as necessary to bring it into compliance.
(c) In “rare cases”, evidence
falling within an existing exception may be excluded because the indicia of
necessity and reliability are lacking in the particular circumstances of the
case.
(d) If hearsay evidence does
not fall under a hearsay exception, it may still be admitted if indicia of
reliability and necessity are established on a
voir dire
[
25
]
Typically, in cases such as this the prosecution
will tender as an exhibit a document certified by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles of the Province of Ontario. Absent evidence to the contrary, section
210(7) of the HTA allows the court to receive such a document into evidence as
proof of the information contained therein. The document is described as a
“Plate by Date” search and will contain relevant details derived from the
records of the Ministry of Transportation relative the Ontario licence plate in
question as of a particular date. Details on the document would show: the
search date, the licence plate number, who the plate was registered to, the vehicle
identification number (V.I.N.), and whether the plate is attached, or
unattached.
[
26
]
The court did not hear evidence relating to the letters and
numbers appearing on the number plate in question. Nor did the court receive
any certified documentary evidence under the hand and seal of the Registrar of
Motor Vehicle. Given this absence of evidence the crown has
failed to establish the charge on a
prima facie
basis. As the court is
not satisfied that there is some evidence of each of the essential elements of
the offence, it is not possible to find that the prosecution has proven this
charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
[
27
]
The charge against Mr. Josiah is dismissed.
Released:  July
29, 2025
Signed:
Justice of the Peace K Kellough
[1]
At para 20.