Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj215/2025oncj215.html

CITATION:
R. v. Green
, 2025 ONCJ
215
DATE:  April 17, 2025
ONTARIO
COURT OF JUSTICE
(TORONTO
REGION)
BETWEEN:
HIS
MAJESTY THE KING
Applicant
–
And –
CHRISTOPHER
GREEN
Respondent
Heard: February 21, 2023 (Guilty Plea);
September 13, 2024, October 2, 2024, November 7, 2024, January 7, 2025 (Evidence);
January 16, 2025, February 28, 2025 (Submissions); Judgment: April 17, 2025
(176
paras.)
Ruling on Long-Term Offender Application and Sentencing Disposition
WARNING:
This
ruling involves reference to matters governed by a court ordered publication
ban pursuant to
s.486.5
of the
Criminal Code
.
Crown: Patricia Garcia
Defence: Joel Prajs
Libman J.: -
Overview
[
1
] The accused has entered guilty pleas to
the following offences: two counts of possessing child pornography; two counts
of accessing child pornography, failing to comply with a release order, and
failing to comply with a probation order.
[
2
] The Crown has applied under
s.753.1
of
the
Criminal Code
for a finding that the accused be declared a long-term
offender, and placed on a 10-year long-term supervision order. She additionally
seeks that he be sentenced to 8 years’ imprisonment, plus ancillary orders, including:
a lifetime prohibition order under s.161, a weapons prohibition order under
s.109 for life, a DNA order (primary) and lifetime SOIRA order.
[
3
] Defence counsel opposes the imposition
of the long-term supervision order, and submits that Mr. Green is in a
time-served position, due to the considerable length of his pre-trial custody,
and the circumstances in which he has served it. He also takes issue with the
length and breadth of the s.161 prohibition order. The defence submits that the
defendant’s behaviour in the community can be adequately managed by a probation
order, and that any additional restriction on his liberty is not warranted.
Circumstances of Offences and Offender
[
4
] Mr. Green was born on […], 1980. He
will shortly be 45 years old. He is a Canadian citizen.
[
5
] Mr. Green has been previously convicted
and sentenced for child pornography offences.
[
6
] His first conviction occurred when he
was 37 years old. He had no previous criminal record at the time. This
sentencing hearing took place before Justice Borenstein at the Old City Hall
court in Toronto, and concluded at College Park. I have been provided with
transcripts of these proceedings.
[
7
] On May 5, 2017, he entered pleas of
guilty before Justice Borenstein to possessing child pornography and making
available child pornography, as well as possession of crystal methamphetamine.
The offence dates for the pornography offences spanned May 2012 to August 2016.
[
8
] The majority of the child pornography
in Mr. Green’s home was described as being “hardcore in nature”. It involved mostly
male children under the age of 12 years. The running time of all of the unique
child pornography videos in his collection was at least 123 hours in length.
There were 2,662 unique child pornography videos in total. His laptop contained
953 unique images.
[
9
] Sentencing was imposed on February 5,
2018. An expert psychiatric report from Dr. Hy Bloom, written in 2017, was put
before the court. Dr. Bloom opined that the principal risk factors for Mr.
Green were his attraction to a youthful male physique and his drug use. The
Doctor commented on the link between the use of crystal methamphetamine and
offenders who possess child pornography. Mr. Green had been found in bed with
crystal methamphetamine at the time of his arrest. Dr. Bloom was of the opinion
that the accused represented a low risk to re-offend if he engaged in sex
offender and drug counselling and abstained from using crystal methamphetamine
and other street drugs.
[
10
] Justice Borenstein imposed concurrent sentences
of 15 months in jail in addition to the 7 days of pretrial custody served by
Mr. Green on the child pornography charges. A fine of $500.00 was imposed for
the drug offence. The Court also placed him on the maximum period of 3 years
probation. Ancillary orders included: DNA order, a lifetime SOIRA order. The
Court declined to make an order under s.161. Justice Borenstein also made a
recommendation that Mr. Green serve his sentence at Brampton OCI, where he
subsequently did serve his sentence before being released on December 5, 2018,
and placed on probation for three years.
[
11
] Thereafter, Mr. Green was arrested on
the charges, which come before me, on June 29, 2021. He has been incarcerated
at the Toronto South Detention Centre (TSDC) since that date. As of today’s
date (April 17, 2025), that is a total of 1,374 days, or 45.8 months, being 3.8
years. Applying the pre-trial custody credit of 1.5:1 under s.719(3.1), Mr.
Green is credited with 2,061 days of pre-trial custody, or 68.7 months, being
5.7 years. His counsel submits that he is entitled to enhanced pre-trial credit
in addition to that; the Crown differs as to what that amount, if any, should
be.
[
12
] On July 28, 2020, a search warrant had
been executed at the defendant’s home (Mega.nz investigation), which resulted
in 867 images of child pornography being located. Mega is a cloud storage and
file hosting service offered by Mega Limited, an Auckland, New Zealand-based
company. Mega can be used to share files with others by the use of links and
adding other Mega users to a user’s contact list for easy drop and drag
sharing. Mr. Green created a Mega user account on June 13, 2019.
[
13
] There were recovered on 3 of Mr.
Green’s electronic devices: an Apple ipad (51 total images), an Apple iphone
(272 images), and HP Laptop (536 total images). The images included both
prepubescent females and males. The majority of the images captured were male
children, between 5-12 years old. The dominant focus of the images were the
genitals of the child. 3 images included babies involved in sex acts with
adults. Child pornography videos were also recovered on these three electronic
devices. The majority of these videos captured male children, being
predominantly 5-12 years old. There were 78 videos in total. Mr. Green was
arrested for these offences in July 2020, and released on bail the following
day. According to the Information, the defendant appeared in court on July 28,
2020; on July 29, 2020, he was released on bail in the amount of $5,000.00,
with two sureties.
[
14
] A second search of a device in Mr.
Green’s possession (Google investigation) was subsequently executed, in June,
2021. A total of 472 images were categorized as child pornography on an Apple
iphone. The images were of both prepubescent females and males, the majority of
the images captured male children, who were predominantly between 5-12 years
old. 3 images involved babies involved in sex acts with adults, and 3 images
involved images taken while the child appeared to be sleeping. There were also
233 videos of child pornography. The majority of the videos captured male
children. The children were predominantly between 5 and 12 years old. The videos
included children masturbating, sexual acts between children, and sexual acts
with adults, such as an adult placing his penis in the mouth of a child. Upon
being arrested for these offences, Mr. Green has remained detained in custody,
awaiting sentencing and the outcome of these proceedings.
[
15
] The images and videos, in common on
both arrests, depicted children masturbating, vaginal and anal penetration by
adult males of a child, sexual acts between children, and adult fondling and
digitally penetrating a child anally/vaginally.
[
16
] A representative sample of the
contents of these two sets of charges may be found in the Report of Detective
Alexa (Exhibit 13).
[
17
] The summary of the 2020 arrest is:
Image Categorization Report (Exhibit 9); Video Categorization Report (Exhibit
10).
[
18
] The summary of the 2021 arrest is:
Image Categorization Report (Exhibit 11); Video categorization Report (Exhibit
12).
[
19
] Detective Alexa could not speak of the
contents of the entire collection of images and videos seized from Mr. Green,
but did comment that other sexual acts with adults were not in the collection.
[
20
] Mr. Green entered guilty pleas to 6 indictable
offences before me on February 21, 2023. The child pornography offences were: possession
of child pornography and accessing child pornography, the offence dates
spanning July 14 2019 to July 28,2020. The breach of probation count was for
accessing pornographic websites while bound by Justice Borenstein’s 3-year
probation order, imposed on February 5, 2018. A second set of possession child
pornography and accessing child pornography charges contained offence dates of
June 13, 2020 to June 29, 2021. The breach of release offence covered this
period, the breach being not to possess images or videos of persons under the
age of 18-years unless they were family photos or displayed in your home that
did not display nudity.
[
21
] On September 3, 2024, the Crown tendered
written notice of its intention, to have Mr. Green declared a long-term offender,
and detaining him in a penitentiary for a determinate period of incarceration,
followed by a long-term supervision order, pursuant to
s.753.1
of the
Criminal
Code
. The hearing of evidence commenced on September 13, 2024, and took
place over four days, concluding with counsels’ submissions on February 28,
2025.
Evidence on Application
[
22
] In addition to Detective Alexa, the
officer-in-charge, the Crown called witnesses from the provincial and federal
correctional systems to give evidence, along with Dr. Iosif, who provided a
psychiatric assessment of Mr. Green.
[
23
] Brad Tamcsu gave evidence on behalf of
the Ontario Ministry of the Solicitor General. Exhibit 6 is an Overview of
Institutional Services and Community Correctional Services for Dangerous
Offender/Long-Term Offender Hearings. Mr. Tamcsu has been employed with the
Ministry of Solicitor General for 30 years, and has been Superintendent at the
Ontario Correctional Institute.
[
24
] Provincial programs are in place to
provide programing for sexual offenders. These programs (the Ontario
Correctional Institute in Brampton and St Lawrence Valley Correctional and
Treatment Centre in Ottawa) include treatment designed for offenders who commit
sexual offences with children. A number of considerations are taken into
account when considering whether to admit offenders into such programs,
including classification requirements, motivation level and sentence length.
Generally a sentence of at least 9 months is required for admission to OCI.
Space is also quite limited at these institutions. As of October, 2024, there
were 68 beds at OCI. In order to gain admission to these programs where
counselling is provided, the offender must take accountability for their
actions, display motivation for receiving treatment, and have clinical and
institutional support for their application. Stop sexually offending is one
such program specifically offered by the Ontario Correctional Services as a
rehabilitative or treatment program.
[
25
] These provincial programs are aimed
for offenders who are serving sentences within provincial reformatories. They
are not geared for preparing inmates to serve sentences in the federal
penitentiary, although it would give them a sense as to what to expect. Neither
are there specific provincial programs specifically designed for offenders who
are placed on long-term supervision orders. Once the offender is within the
community, the offender is supervised by a probation and parole officer. Core
rehabilitative services include the target area of sexual offending. However,
this would not include supervision of an offender who is placed on a long-term
supervision order, as that form of release is overseen by Correctional Services
Canada, within the federal system. Hence, Mr. Tamcsu explained that a probation
officer could not supervise a condition imposed in a long-term supervision
order, such as a residency condition, or monitor access and use of narcotics or
the internet. Probation officers also have their own caseloads to monitor,
which range between 20 to 40 cases, and vary from intense to basic streams. He
did agree, though, with the defence suggestion that if a person in a provincial
institution was receiving treatment for substance use, this would at least help
prepare them for such a term being imposed in a long-term supervision order.
[
26
] The witness who testified on behalf of
the federal Correctional Service Canada (CSC) was Erin Brennan, a parole
officer supervisor and employee of CSC for 20 years. She has supervised offenders
on long-term supervision orders and worked out of the Keele Correctional Centre
where offenders are also supervised. CSC administers post-sentence supervision
of offenders with long-term supervision orders for up to 10 years. For high-risk
offenders in the federal penitentiary system, which requires a minimum sentence
of 2-years, a correctional plan is formulated by the assessing parole officer,
which commences upon the person’s intake assessment. An offender who receives a
sentence in the provincial system of less than 2 years and is placed on a
long-term supervision offender would be supervised by conditions imposed by the
parole board, but the intake process would be compressed, as the offender had
not entered the federal system previously.
[
27
] The federal system offers programs for
sexual offenders. This includes a specialized sex offender assessment. These
programs are described in Exhibit 8 CSC Community Supervision Information
Package. Programing is offered based on high intensity or moderate intensity,
once the offender is placed within their federal institution, which may be in
Ontario, or anywhere across Canada. No distinction is made based on whether the
offences were committed “hands on” or through accessing sexually explicit
materials. Community programming is also offered to offenders who are placed on
long-term supervision orders once they are released into the community. In
Toronto, this includes programing through the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health (CAMH). Substance use programing is offered in the same way. There is a
community correctional centre in Toronto, located on Keele Street.
[
28
] Dr. Alina Iosif is a forensic
psychiatrist and lecturer at the University of Toronto. She graduated from
medical school in 2001 and is currently a staff psychiatrist at CAMH. Her Curriculum
Vitae (CV) is Exhibit 3. Her expertise was admitted on consent. Dr. Iosif was
the first witness called by the Crown. She spent six hours interviewing Mr.
Green via videoconference, on January 15 and 22, 2024. Her expert report is
Exhibit 4 in the proceedings. It is dated March 25, 2024. In preparing her
report, she also reviewed disclosure materials consisting of the defendant’s
criminal record and transcripts, custodial records, community supervision
records, medical records, psychiatric and treatment records, CRA and ODSP
records, and education records. She additionally spoke to Mr. Green’s mother,
Collen Comer, who lives in Huntsville. Mr. Green lived with her while he was
awaiting sentencing between 2016 and 2018, for a period of 18 months.
[
29
] Dr. Iosif testified that Mr. Green had
a diagnosis as a child of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). His
mother told her that he was easily bored and hyper as a child. He also suffers
from substance use, which was not an issue when he lived with his mother, but
resumed upon his return to Toronto. According to Dr. Tania Stirpe, who
interviewed Mr. Green at the request of the defence (and whose report is dated
September 8, 2024, although not marked as an exhibit in the proceedings), Ms.
Comer told Dr. Stirpe that she no longer has room for the defendant to live
with her on a long-term basis. However, they remain in contact and have a good,
close relationship.
[
30
] The defendant completed high school
and college and obtained employment. However, he has been under disability
payments since 2017. This resulted from Mr. Green suffering a stroke due to
head injuries when he was the victim of a home invasion. His education and work
history demonstrate, the doctor testified, that he can occupy his time in a
constructive fashion and structured activity, which is risk reducing from a
psychiatric perspective.
[
31
] Mr. Green has had several intimate
relationships. They have all been with men. His most significant relationship
was with Robin Swalm, with whom he was in a relationship since 2008. It ended
when he was recently incarcerated. Mr. Swalm is 8 years younger; he is slim and
tall, without body hair. This is the body type favoured by Mr. Green. The two
of them engaged in substance use together; they also watched pornography
together, although not the same type of pornography that is the relevant to the
doctor’s assessment. While this relationship is a protective factor, it also
enabled his offending behaviour. The two of them would use substances together
for long periods of time, would be intoxicated for long periods of time, and
would engage in this type of hypersexual and pursuit of different types of
pornography together for extended periods of time.
[
32
] The defendant told Dr. Iosif that he
was bisexual, however this was not borne out by his history. He had only
exclusively homosexual relationships. He had an overwhelmingly androphilic
interest as manifested over his lifetime, hence women who interested him were
bodybuilders, who were similar in body type to males. He characterized his sex
drive as low unless he was using substances; he would engage in masturbation
mostly when he was intoxicated and for long periods of time. He would stay
sleepless for days on end, during which he would watch pornography and
masturbate almost the entire time. He estimated this to be for approximately 20
hours daily. Mr. Green was adamant that he did not have a sexual interest in
children or adolescents. However, he admitted to being interested in images of
adolescent boys in the pornography he was watching. This consisted of, in his
words, “a tall, smooth, youthful, blonde hair, blue-eyed young man”. By file
information, his report upon intake at OCI, he began using crystal meth and
watching child pornography in 2012. At that time, he was introduced to child
pornography by his drug dealer. To Dr. Iosif, he said this started in 2014. The
former would indicate that Mr. Green’s interest in child pornography began
before his stroke, so it is tied more to an organic preference, as opposed to
somehow originating from a catastrophic brain event.
[
33
] Mr. Green told Dr. Iosif that as part
of his sharing software he was also involved with chats. He stated that
overwhelmingly he was interested in boys and mostly adolescent boys, that he
was not interested in younger children and girls, although the child
pornography he was watching pertained to both sexes and ages from infancy to
adolescence. He informed Dr. Iosif that he was intoxicated with stimulants,
specifically crystal meth, when he was looking at these images, and that the
images consisted of children having sexual contacts with adults or other
children. His interest, however, was in adolescent boys. The doctor also stated
that clearly his level of interest that prompted him to keep such materials,
and retrieve them, occurred when he was no longer intoxicated.
[
34
] The defendant did understand that
these children were victimized and he did not have their consent to view the
materials. He understood about the victimization of children. However, his
understanding and empathy and pro-social makeup was not enough to prevent him
from accessing such materials. This is very relevant to risk assessment: it
speaks to the strength of his interest and draw to these images, even in the
face of the legal sanctions in place and his being in a relationship with a
man. Mr. Green told the doctor collecting child pornography was “almost compulsive
for him”.
[
35
] At the time the defendant committed
the offences before the court he was on bail. He also had a probation officer.
In addition, he had been referred to CAMH for the sexual behaviour clinic and
also for substance relapse prevention programing. He was also seeing Dr.
Pallandi at the Riverdale Clinic for psychiatric care. Despite access to all
these resources, the defendant committed the offences for which he is now
incarcerated. Mr. Green told the doctor that he needed more programing to abstain
from substances; he believe that being sober or abstinent from illicit
substances would automatically take care of the issue of child pornography. Dr.
Iosif disagreed, however, that recovery from addiction would be sufficient.
Previous attendance at substance relapse programming at CAMH revealed he was
removed from the group due to seldom attending. He therefore required risk
management in a more structured way,
[
36
] Dr. Iosif had access to Dr. Bloom’s
2017 assessment which was put before Justice Borenstein. Dr. Bloom had found
Mr. Green to be evasive. His phallometric testing was inconclusive, and
revealed a contra sign. The results of his response to men being equally strong
as his response to women was not compatible with his history.
[
37
] Upon his admission to OCI, the
defendant was given ADHD medications, and did well on them. Dr. Iosif commented
that methamphetamines are themselves stimulants. An individual with a history
of methamphetamines would not therefore be given ADHD medications, as this would
lead to similar symptoms and a high that is produced from consuming crystal
meth. In the defendant’s case, though, the ADHD was so severe and impairing
that treatment with ADHD medications could not be avoided.
[
38
] Dr. Pallandi, who had been treating
Mr. Green following his release from OCI, believed his ADHD was severe and
needed treatment. He was also available for psychiatric care. Mr. Green stated
to Dr. Iosif that he would be willing to participate in psychological
programing related to sex offending and substance abuse, although he was hoping
not to be sentenced to any additional period of imprisonment. He recognized
that he needed supports so that he would not engage in viewing child
pornography again. He was confident that he could control himself, and find
future employment. He was also willing to go to an aftercare group at CAMH, and
attend counselling at the Sherbourne Centre.
[
39
] With respect to the offences before
the Court, the defendant described a pattern of use where he would be abstinent
from substances and child pornography for approximately three days, and then he
would use crystal meth and child pornography for four days; sometimes he would
do this for as long as seven days at a time. His use of material and
masturbation would comprise 20 hours out of 24. He was intoxicated with crystal
meth and could not sleep because of it. He stayed awake for three, four days at
a time. During this time he almost exclusively engaged in sexual activity, much
of which had to do with watching child pornography. Dr. Iosif believed the size
of his collection was directly proportionate to his interest in such images.
This was not a situation where he happened upon some images; his collection
spanned over a hundred hours and showed videos and pictures of children from
infancy to adolescence engaged in various explicit sexual acts with other
children or adults, often of a violent nature. She added, viewing violent child
pornography material is concerning from a risk management perspective: it is
not just an issue of sexual deviance, but also one of violence and the degree
to which the children exposed to these kind of actions are harmed and violated
during their production.
[
40
] Mr. Green admitted to Dr. Iosif that his
attraction was to adolescent boys. However, she noted that pedophilia is rarely
a preference that is so acutely honed to just one age group; it tends to be a
lot more diffuse or amorphous in terms of the ages and the genders that one has
an interest in. Hence, one cannot rest on the defendant’s expressed preference
for adolescent boys and say that all other children are safe otherwise.
Ultimately, the materials that the defendant was watching and collecting
included other ages and other genders. As he committed these offences while on
probation and bail, this indicated that he could not help himself now or in the
future without further intervention. In other words, he cannot control himself.
While he knows crystal meth is bad for him, and it leads to bad things, and
watching child pornography is also bad for him, as it will lead to being
incarcerated and losing his relationship and employment, the pedophilic
preference, and his addiction issues, are such that he cannot overcome them on
his own. His risk in the future will therefore be driven by these two
variables.
[
41
] The defendant was released from OCI in
December of 2018. He returned to Toronto at this point. By June of 2019 he was
using substances and watching child pornography again. He admitted to his
probation officer in August of 2020 that he had been using crystal meth for
several months. Despite the supports in place for him, he had reverted to his
usual behaviours within a period of approximately six months.
[
42
] Phallometric testing was done on the
defendant at CAMH on February 8, 2024. This testing indicates sexual
preference. His responses were similar to his responses in 2017 at the time of
Dr. Bloom’s report, which indicated a contra sign test interference. Stated
simply, Mr. Green cannot have the same interest in women as he does in men, as
this is contrary to his own stated preference. In addition, the phallometric
testing does not replicate his use of methamphetamines, as it is not conducted
with any chemical aids. A not indicative finding does not mean that a person
does not have pedophilia. A phallometric testing does not rule out the presence
of a paraphilia; it can only rule in the presence of a paraphilia. A
non-indicative test simply means that a test is inconclusive.
[
43
] In the case of Mr. Green, while one
cannot make a formal diagnosis of pedophilia in this case because of certain
information that was lacking, such as phallometric testing and the defendant’s
stated preferences, there was no other reasonable medical or psychiatric
explanation for his behaviour with regards to child pornography than the
diagnosis of pedophilia. That is, there was no alternative reason why he would
behave the way that he does. What fuels and prompts Mr. Green’s behaviour is
not just substance use, but his underlying sexual preference, which is one for
children.
[
44
] With respect to risk assessment, Dr.
Iosif stated that for offenders who do not have hands-on offences, only online
child exploitation material offences, the only actuarial risk tool is the
psychopathy checklist revised (the PCL-R). The psychopathy checklist revised is
comprise of 20 items, each one of which is scored from 0 to 2. The defendant
scored a total of 14 points, which is a low moderate score. Such a score is in
keeping with his generally pro-social lifestyle and personality and behavioural
controls in other ways. This score generates a prediction of risk that Mr.
Green would do well with supervision. That said, his history was such that he
actually, while being supervised, went behind those supports and offended
surreptitiously without their knowledge.
[
45
] A clinical checklist of risk factors
for a person, HCR-20 version 3, (historical, clinical and risk management components)
was also employed. It is more of a checklist of things that would drive risk;
it does not produce a score. In the defendant’s case. Historical items of
relevance included substance use problems and prior supervision failure;
clinical items of concern included impulsivity and unresponsiveness to
treatment. If he was released into the community without further intervention,
he is likely to have further problems. His risk on the instrument was therefore
assessed as moderate. Protective factors, such as support from his mother, was
not very extensive in his case. If he had fewer supports, less empathy, if
something happened to his cognitive function, his risk would go up.
[
46
] Dr. Iosif used the CPORT, which is a
child pornography offender risk tool. It measures the degree to which someone
has a pedophilic preference and the risk associated with it based on the
materials they are viewing. The defendant scored a three out of a possible
seven points on this instrument, which suggested a moderate likelihood of any
sexual recidivism. However, this tool does not take into account the offender’s
drug use, nor does it relate exclusively to child pornography offending in
particular. This tool also does not take into account the risk of re-offence if
the offender were to relapse.
[
47
] CASIC, another tool, was employed. It
measures behaviours and correlates them to admitted sexual interest in
children. The defendant’s child pornography included videos but not stories;
his interest in child pornography spanned a decade.
[
48
] Having regard to the defendant’s
overall risk for recidivism, the doctor opined that his risk for recidivism is
low generally, moving to moderate for child pornography offences. Moreover, if
he were to be released and relapsed to stimulant use by using methamphetamines,
his risk for reoffending by accessing or possessing child sexual abuse material
would be high, and very likely to occur. The likelihood of relapse on the part
of the defendant without intensive treatment being offered and a structured
environment outside of a custodial setting would be high.
[
49
] Dr. Iosif also addressed the factor of
burnout. Known as an aging factor, it has been noted to occur for sex offenders
after the fourth decade of life. There is a drop in the frequency of sex
offending for such individuals. However, it does not happen to everyone, and it
happens less in individuals who suffer from pedophilia as opposed to other
deviant sexual preferences. It is even less relevant to child pornography
offences as they do not necessitate any type of physical strength or stamina,
to engage in. Therefore, individuals like Mr. Green, who is currently 44 years
old, and who offend only by way of child pornography, are less likely to
experience burnout than other sex offenders.
[
50
] Consequently, if he were released into
the community, aged 44, with no treatment of any necessary intensity in a
custodial setting and simply put on probation, and even had access to a cell
phone with wifi, the risk of reoffending by consuming child pornography would
be very high. This would be a situation that is very similar to what has
happened in the past.
[
51
] Dr. Iosif also addressed criminogenic
variables, specifically deficient coping mechanisms. She explained that for
many individuals, when they encounter a stressful situation, they may resort to
coping mechanisms that are maladaptive, such as the use of illicit substances.
This is what the defendant has done. When he is bored or has nothing to do, he
will revert to using substances and engaging in sexual behaviour, including
watching child pornography. Conversely, having work and being abstinent from
substances and being in a relationship that does not trigger such issues, would
be  coping mechanisms that would be to his advantage.
[
52
] Risk management for Mr. Green, would
therefore target criminogenic variables specifically for him. Most importantly,
he needs to have programming directed specifically ay his sexual behaviour and
underlying sexual preference for children. He would also have to have programming
directed at managing and leading to abstinence from all illicit substances, as
well as programming that develops his coping mechanisms, his ability to control
himself, to manage these emotions. It would be important for him to engage in
structured activities, such as working or volunteering, and to consider who he
is in a relationship with, and whether these people have children. It was
apparent that he also needed external supervision, given that the supervision
he had in the past, probation and bail and psychiatric treatment, was not
sufficient to manage his risk, or even to catch him while he engaged in his
offending behaviour. The supervision he required, moving forward, must be more
intense, more stringent and more intrusive, such as, for example, taking urine
samples during home visits to determine if he was using substances. In short,
he required “something above and beyond what was offered by probation and
bail”. Given that he reoffended while on probation, this would not be suitable
for such supervision in the future. Mr. Green was planning to return to
Toronto, although there were no specific plans as to where he would be staying
or what he would be doing. While he remained in a custodial setting, higher
intensity programming would be required.
[
53
] Dr. Iosif also addressed the use of
pharmacological options for Mr. Green. While there are sex drive reducing
medications that are available, the value of such medications for one who has
only online offending was questionable, in her opinion. Sex drive reducing
medications have more of a physiological effect on a person; it does not remove
the interest in children. What it does remove is the physical ability to be
able to perform in sexual situations to pursue, for example, children in the community.
This, however, was not Mr. Green’s case. She did agree, though, with Dr. Stirpe’s
recommendation that he should be placed in a high-intensity substance use
program.
[
54
] The recommendations of Dr. Iosif were
that Mr. Green engage in psychotherapy, specifically designed for child
pornography offenders and sexual behaviour relapse. He could receive such
high-intensity programming through Correctional Services Canada. She opined
that if he participated in such programming and was thereafter released to a
structured setting and supervised under a long-term supervision order where
substance use could be monitored, intimate partners could be notified of his
history, access to electronic devices and access to children monitored as well,
all of which could be accomplished in a residential setting at a community
correctional centre or approved residence by CSC, such a scenario would likely
address his likelihood of recidivism, and make him a potentially successful
candidate for therapy and for programming.
[
55
] Given the likelihood of a pedophilia
diagnosis, there will never be a time when Mr. Green will not have a pedophilic
sexual interest. There will never be a time where he is a completely safe adult
to be around children unsupervised, or to present zero risk to reoffend in the
way he has in the past, especially if he is on stimulants.
[
56
] In cross-examination, Dr. Iosif
acknowledged that her risk assessment of Mr. Green was premised on her
diagnosis of pedophilia, which was somewhat unconfirmed. She relied on this
diagnosis to explain Mr. Green’s behaviour, notwithstanding the phallometric
testing which also was inconsistent with her diagnosis of pedophilia. The
witness also agreed that given the vastness of the materials seized from Mr.
Green, she could not comment on the other subjects found therein, outside of
adolescent boys. She was also not in a position to comment on his actual usage
of the materials, as opposed to his being in possession of them. Viewing habits
are, accordingly, very relevant to risk assessment. She was not in a position
to say what he was actually viewing during the time he was intoxicated and
over-stimulated through the use of crystal meth.
[
57
] Phallometric testing is not indicative
of pedophilia. Having a long-term relationship with an adult man is also
relevant, although she noted Mr. Swalm was described as having boyish looks.
She also agreed that during the time Mr. Green stayed with his mother, he did not
reoffend, notwithstanding no rigorous regime of supervision was in place.
[
58
] With respect to risk assessment, Dr.
Iosif agreed that there are not many actuarial risk tools for offenders like
Mr. Green who only have a history of online offending. Dynamic risk factors
fluctuate with the passage of time; a person can change due to treatment
programs and behaviour, which, if successful, can lower their risk. In any
event, Mr. Green’s dynamic risk factors placed him in the moderate range. This
was also his risk level for the CPORT tool measuring risk for persons who have
engaged in child pornography related offences. And, as he had never attended
rehabilitation or addiction services, it was unknown how he would respond to
them.
[
59
] Dr. Iosif also explained that
non-exclusive pedophilia is not uncommon. Mr. Green has had relationships with
adult men, and has a preference for youthful men; however, this does not take
away from his sexual interest in adolescent males.
Statement of Mr. Green and Affidavit
Evidence on Pre-Trial Custody
[
60
] Although the defence did not adduce
evidence on the hearing, Mr. Green addressed the Court at the conclusion of the
evidence. He delivered a lengthy, reflective, written statement, on his own
behalf. In it he commented that over the past number of months he has reflected
on the harm he has caused, and that as he looks back on the choices he has
made, he is filled with “shame and regret”.
[
61
] Mr. Green stated that he takes “full
responsibility” for his actions and that he is “truly sorry”. His substance
abuse was elevated at the time, and this led to him making harmful choices. He
knows that child pornography is “cruel and sadistic”, and he cannot blame his
conduct simply on his substance abuse. He now sees, however, how drugs negatively
effected his lifestyle. He intends to be standfast in living a pro-social
lifestyle. He knows this is his “last chance.”
[
62
] The defendant additionally stated that
he was looking forward to being drug-free moving forward. Under no
circumstances would he describe sharing pornographic material “as fun”. There
were periods of time that he used crystal methamphetamine to get high which was
fun, but he was not making any excuses for it. He sees now what a mistake it
was to do this. There were periods of years, such as 2007 to 2013, that he was
able to be drug free. Mr. Green concluded his statement by saying that in the
immediate future, he is looking forward to joining the work force, and is on
the waiting list for a therapist.
[
63
] An affidavit (Exhibit 14) was also
filed on behalf of Mr. Green, which was not challenged by the Crown, setting
out his conditions of incarceration at the Toronto South Detention Centre
(TSDC), where he has resided since June 29, 2021. Supplementing this evidence
are lockdown records from TSDC over this time period. At the time of submissions
of counsel on January 16, 2025, this amounted to 1298 actual days of custody;
as of the date of judgment on today’s date, April 17, 2025, Mr. Green will have
served 1,388 actual days of pre-sentencing imprisonment.
[
64
] Mr. Green has described in his
affidavit that he has often been under lockdown at TSDC, which is highly
stressful during the numerous outbreaks of COVID-19 that have occurred at the
institution. Additionally, there have been 241 partial or full lockdowns since
his arrival at TSDC. When there are lockdowns, he is often required to stay
within his jail cell for 24 hours or longer; his cell is approximately 7 by 15
feet. It contains a bunk bed, toilet and sink; the frosted window does not
open. He states it basically feels like living in a bathroom. He lacks privacy
and feels degraded.
[
65
] The defendant has been assaulted by
other inmates 4 to 5 times to date. Moreover, from February 20, 2024, to his
last appearance in court (January 16, 2025), he has been triple bunked. When
this occurs, he sleeps on a mattress, on the floor next to the toilet. He is
woken up every time an inmate uses the washroom. Mr. Green experiences
additional hardship due to these conditions, as he requires physical exercise
to manage his symptoms from the stroke he suffered in 2014. In sum, the time he
has spent in custody at TSDC has been “extremely difficult”.
Position of the Parties - Overview
[
66
] Ms. Garcia, for the Crown, seeks a total
sentence of 8 years’ imprisonment, less pre-trial custody at the rate of 1.5
days to 1 day. This is to be followed by a long-term supervision order of 10
years. At the time of making her submissions (January 16, 2025), the defendant
had served 1,298 actual days, or 1,947 days with pretrial custody credit. This
is the equivalent of 63.4 months or 5.32 years, leaving an additional 2.77
years to be served to be the equivalent of an 8-year sentence.
[
67
] The Crown seeks a number of ancillary
orders in addition. These are:
-
A DNA sample, as child pornography offences are primary designated
offences;
-
An Order requiring Mr. Green be subject to the
Sex Offender Registry and comply with a SOIRA Order for life, this Order being
mandatory as the defendant has been convicted of multiple designated offences,
for which the Crown has proceeded by Indictment;
-
A weapons prohibition Order under s.109 for
life;
-
An Order under s.161 that the defendant be prohibited from attending
a public park or public swimming area where persons under the age of 16 are
present or can reasonably be expected to be present, or a daycare centre,
school ground, playground or community centre, specifically (a) seeking,
obtaining or continuing employment, (b) having any contact with a person under
the age of 16, and (c) using the Internet or other digital network, with
exceptions for banking, seeking medical attention, pharmaceutical needs or
grocery needs.
[
68
] On behalf of Mr. Green, the defence
submits that the defendant should be sentenced to time served, allowing for
enhanced credit for his conditions of pre-trial detention. A summary of
lockdown records from the Toronto South Detention Centre has been submitted in
support of his position. The defence also opposes the imposition of a long-term
supervision order, on the basis of Dr. Iosif’s unconfirmed diagnosis of
pedophilia, not being a sufficient basis to authorize same. A period of
probation would be available for further supervision, though not necessary in
the defence view. If required, no long-term supervision order beyond 5 years in
duration would be warranted. The defence also takes issue with the length of
the s.161 order, and the broadness of its terms, such as those restricting Mr.
Green’s use of social media, since there is no evidence of his accessing child
pornography through this medium.
Crown Position
[
69
] Ms. Garcia submits that the basis for
the imposition of a long-term supervision order pursuant to
s.753.1
has been
made out, and should be imposed for 10 years. She states that the defendant has
demonstrated a pattern of repetitive behaviour, by virtue of his offending
behaviour, and that there is therefore a substantial risk that he will
reoffend, as mandated by s.753.1(2)(a), (b). Further, it is appropriate to
impose a sentence of at least two years for his offending conduct, and there is
a reasonable possibility of eventual control of risk in the community.
[
70
] Important in the Crown’s position is
that the defendant was convicted in 2018 of child pornography offences
(possessing and accessing). He received a substantial reformatory sentence of 15
months’ imprisonment, followed by a probation order for 3 years which sought to
prevent him from accessing pornography online. He was released from custody on
December 5, 2018; by June 2019 he resumed his use of child pornography, while
on probation. He was arrested in July, 2020, and released the next day on bail.
Again there were terms of bail prohibiting his involvement in accessing
pornography. However, he resumed watching child pornography by February 21,
2021, while on bail, and was re-arrested in June, 2021.
[
71
] The Crown relies on Dr. Iosif’s expert
opinion that, although a diagnosis of pedophilia cannot be confirmed, the
defendant’s motivation for his repeat offences most likely arises from an
underlying sexual interest in children, specifically adolescent boys. His risk
for re-offending in the low to moderate range increases to moderate risk for
child pornography offences. She notes, further, Mr. Green has yet to
meaningfully address his substance use issues, despite the obvious and
self-acknowledged roles they play in his offence cycle, and the lack of adequate
deterrence through probation and release orders. Simply stated, he is unable to
control himself, despite his pro-social makeup, empathy for the victims, and
realization that his behaviour will have negative repercussions for him.
[
72
] A period of further imprisonment,
then, is not only warranted by the caselaw governing child pornography
offences, such as
R
v
Friesen,
2020 SCC 9
, which supports an
increased sentencing range for such offences, but would additionally allow Mr.
Green to receive high-intensity treatment for sexual offences, before being
released into the community. A long-term supervision order, in turn, will
permit him to reside in a structured environment where his substance use
disorder is likely to remain in remission. This will decrease his risk to
reoffend and protect the community from the risk he poses, which will never be
reduced to zero.
[
73
]
Friesen
,
para.
48
, instructs
that offenders like Mr. Green who possess/distribute child pornography not only
share indirect responsibility for the harms associated with hands-on sexual
violence offences, but they are also directly responsible for the distinct and
unique psychological harm occasioned to victims that flows from having their
abuse available on the Internet. This harm is also described by the Community
Impact Statement on behalf of the Canadian Centre for Child Protection which
speaks to the fear of recognition victims of child sexual abuse fear and face
each day. Offenders with the same deviant interests as the defendant, will seek
them out, and cause them further distress and harm. Many of the images
possessed by Mr. Green shows, in fact, their faces.
[
74
] The ”child-centred” approach mandated
by the Supreme Court in
Friesen
is exemplified, in the Crown’s view, by
the Ontario Court of Appeal’s recent decision in
R
v
Pike
,
2024
ONCA 608
, where the Court raised the upper end range of 3.5 to 4 years’
imprisonment for the child pornography possession offence to 5 years. The Court
also indicated that sentences should not fall to be determined simply by the
size of the offender’s collection of child pornography. The number of victims
involved and degree of organization may also require the imposition of higher
sentences.
[
75
] The Crown acknowledges the principle
of totality is to apply, such that an excessive sentence based on consecutive
sentencing dispositions does not result. That said, the total sentence must not
be reduced to the point where an unfit sentence results: see
R
v
D.G.F.,
2010 ONCA 27
. Applying this principle of sentencing to the offences for
which Mr. Green is being sentenced, she submits that he should receive
consecutive sentences of 5 years (accessing child pornography x 2 counts in
2020), 5 years (possessing child pornography x 2 counts in 2021), 1 year (fail
to comply with release order), and 1 year (fail to comply with a probation
order) for a total sentence of 12 years’ imprisonment; however, applying the
principle of totality, an 8-year sentence is warranted.
[
76
] It is also conceded by the Crown that
Mr. Green is entitled to be given credit for some enhanced pre-trial custody
due to his conditions of incarceration at the TSDC, but not to the point where
he is given double or triple credit, and his sentence is effectively reduced to
time-served, as submitted by the defence.
Defence Position
[
77
] Mr. Prajs, for the defendant, submits
that there is no basis for the imposition of a long-term supervision order in
this case. He relies on the evidence of Dr. Iosif in this regard, noting that there
is no confirmed diagnosis that Mr. Green is a pedophile, much less than what
his actual viewing habits are, or the materials that he actually accessed. The
doctor’s opinion that that there is likely no other explanation than pedophilia
is not the same as an actual diagnosis.
[
78
] The defence further submits in this
regard that Dr. Iosif’s phallometric test results for the defendant also
supports his position. While the witness regarded the test result of Mr. Green
being attracted to women as a contra result, neither does it rule in a
diagnosis of pedophilia.
[
79
] He additionally relies on the evidence
showing that the defendant has abstained for periods of time from anti-social
behaviour, involving drug use and accessing child pornography, as when he lived
with his mother for over one year and followed his conditions of bail.
[
80
] Consequently, the Crown has failed to
establish a pattern of behavior that justifies the imposition of a long-term
offender supervision order. Mr. Green is at low risk to reoffend. It is
unrealistic to consider that there would be a complete absence of supervision
for him in the community, which would thereby elevate his risk behaviour; however,
a probation order would more than adequately address such risk factors.
[
81
] Alternatively, if there needs to be a
long-term supervision order, the defence submits that it does not follow it
must accompany a penitentiary sentence, or itself be for the maximum period of
10-years supervision. Referring to the evidence of Mr. Tamcsu, offenders in the
provincial reformatory system can receive programming in substantially the same
areas that would be offered to them in federal corrections.
[
82
] It is the position of the defence that
if a sentence, instead, in the range of that submitted by the Crown is to be
imposed, there is no value in imposing a further custodial period, given the
lengthy amount of pretrial custody Mr. Green has served. As of the date of the
defence making sentencing submissions (February 28, 2025) from the defendant’s
arrest (June 29, 2021), he has served a total of 1,340 actual days. The defence
breaks down these days into three categories: (1) 1,099 regular days which at
the rate of 1.5 to 1 day totals 1,650 days; (2) 180 lockdown days to be given
double credit for a total of 360 days; and (3) lockdown and triple bunking days
for 61 days, at triple credit, for 180 days. In total, Mr. Green, on this
calculation, should receive credit for 2,190 days which is the equivalent of 73
months, or one month more than a 6-year sentence. This says the defence should
be the effective sentence of the Court, if the Crown’s sentencing range is
accepted.
[
83
] In support of his position for
enhanced credit, Mr. Prajs relies on the case law holding that there is no
fixed or set formula for calculating
Duncan
[
R
v
Duncan,
2016 ONCA 754
] lockdown credit, relying upon the decision of Justice Brown in
R
v
Stevens
,
2020 ONCJ 616
, another case considering the deplorable
conditions of pre-trial detention at TSDC. “Unacceptable jail conditions” have
attracted, in fact, 3:1 credit: see
R
v
Fermah
,
2019 ONSC 3597
at
para.
71
.
[
84
] Post-
Friesen
penitentiary
sentences in the lower range put forth by the defence have, in fact, been
imposed in cases where repeat offenders have committed child pornography
offences, as in the Alberta case of
R
v
Tyndall,
2021 ABPC 232
,
where a 3.5 years’ sentence was imposed for possession of child pornography
while bound by a s.161 order. The Ontario Court of Appeal in
R
v
McCaw
,
2023 ONCA 8
, another case relied upon by the defence, likewise
imposed a 3-year sentence for an offender convicted three previous times for
child pornography offences, setting aside a conditional sentence that had been
granted by the trial judge.
[
85
] Mr. Prajs additionally addressed the
length of any long-term supervision order, and the breadth of the terms of the
s.161 order. With regard to the former, he states that there is no basis to
impose long-term supervision for the maximum length of 10-years. He states that
Dr. Iosif’s report and evidence does not support such a period, due to Mr.
Green’s clear motivation to change and pro-social attributes, such as his being
amendable to therapeutic treatment, and the lack of previous high-intensity
substance use programming. Courts should temper, he notes, the length of
long-term supervision orders, lest they impede an offender’s progress, by being
so long, that they cause the offender to “despair and lose his way”:
R
v
Bluecloud,
2024 ONCJ 242
, at para.
50
.
[
86
] Finally, with respect to the s.161
order, defence counsel cautions against the inclusion of terms that will
frustrate Mr. Green’s prospects for rehabilitation. He notes in this regard
that not permitting him to have access to social media will prevent him from
looking for work, and that there is no evidence the defendant used social media
to commit the offences. Given his disability, the nature of employment would be
in an office setting, where he would not be alone. Neither is there a basis for
prohibiting him form attending parks, as he has never engaged in hands-on
offences. An order under s.161 for a 10-year period would be more than
sufficient he submits; the lifetime order sought by the Crown is manifestly
excessive, and there is no basis for it.
Analysis
A Denunciatory Penitentiary Sentence is
Warranted
[
87
] Child pornography offences are
“extremely serious and are met with sentences that emphasize the sentencing
principles of denunciation (
Criminal Code
, s.718(a)) and general
deterrence (
Criminal Code,
s.718(b))”:
R
v
McCaw
,
para.
19
.
[
88
] This approach to sentencing offenders
like Mr. Green must therefore inform the disposition I impose.
[
89
] In the Supreme Court of Canada’s
seminal decision in
Friesen
, the Court observed:
Protecting
children from wrongful exploitation and harm is the overarching objective of
the legislative scheme of sexual offences against children in the
Criminal
Code
. (
Friesen
,
para.
42
)
[
90
] The fact that the victim is a child,
in other words, increases the degree of responsibility of the offender:
Friesen
,
para.
90
.
[
91
] Parliament has additionally made it
clear through its enactment of
s.718.01
of the
Criminal Code
that
emphasis is to be given to the sentencing principles of denunciation and
deterrence in the case of offences involving child abuse: see
Friesen
,
para.
101
.
[
92
] Applying the “message” from
Friesen
,
para.
114
, then, mid-single digit penitentiary terms for sexual offences
against children are “normal”; upper-single digit and double-digit penitentiary
terms are neither “rare or exceptional circumstances”.
[
93
] In
R
v
Pike
,
2024 ONCA
608
, Chief Justice Tulloch, on behalf of the unanimous court, applied the
child-centred approach from
R
v
Friesen
to child pornography
offences. The Court itemized the distinct wrongs and harms which flow from the
possession offence. This includes consideration that individuals who possess
child pornography violate the dignity of children:
Pike
,
para.
147
.
[
94
] Perpetrators like Mr. Green who
possess images of abused and exploited children “directly invade children’s
privacy”:
Pike
, para.
148
. This inflicts severe emotional harm on
children:
Pike
,
para.
149
. It also creates and fuels a market for child
exploitation (Pike,
para,
151), and incites others to facilitate and
commit other sexual offences against children:
Pike
, para.
152
. Finally,
people who possess child pornography inflict “pernicious messages that attack
children’s humanity and equality”:
Pike
, para.
154
.
[
95
] In sum, possession of child
pornography is “a grave offence”:
Pike
, para.
157
. It calls for an
increase in sentencing by raising the 3.5 to 4 year upper end of the range for
possession of child pornography to 5 years. This sentencing range is warranted,
as it empowers sentencing judges to respond to the “’staggering and systemic
nature’ of the wrongs and harms that people who possess child pornography can
cause in cases involving numerous victims”:
Pike
, para.
177
.
[
96
] It follows that for a repeat offender
like Mr. Green, penitentiary terms for his 2020 and 2021 child pornography set
of charges should each attract respective sentences in the 5-year range.
Indeed, I consider such a sentence to be at the lower end of the range. Mr.
Green had previously served a 15-month sentence for the same type of offence,
and was on both probation and bail at the time of the commission of these
further child pornography offences. The size of his collection was not
insignificant; the duration of the offences was several years. The number of
victims, in the hundreds; the harm and damage inflicted on them, incalculable.
[
97
] In all of the circumstances, I am of
the respectful opinion that a total sentence of 12 years’ imprisonment is
warranted – prior to considering the principle of totality, and apportioning
credit for Mr. Green’s period of pre-trial custody at TSDC.
[
98
] I arrive at the quantum of 12 years’
imprisonment as follows:
- possession of
child pornography (July 14, 2019 – July 28, 2020): 5 years’ imprisonment;
- accessing child
pornography (July 14, 2019 – July 28, 2020): 5 years’ imprisonment, concurrent;
- possession of
child pornography (June 13, 2020 – June 29, 2021): 5 years’ imprisonment,
consecutive;
- accessing child
pornography (June 13, 2020) – June 29, 2021): 5 years’ imprisonment, concurrent;
- breach of
probation order: 1 year consecutive;
- breach of
release order: 1 year consecutive.
Applying the Principle of Totality
[
99
] While I have imposed concurrent
sentences on the set of possession and accessing child pornography offences
that cover the same time period, this reflects the fact that the
delict
for these offences contains an element of overlap, in that both offences
occurred over the same time period, and were committed at the same time as one
another. It is for this reason that concurrent sentences were imposed in
respect of two of the six counts to which Mr. Green has entered guilty pleas.
[
100
] What I have yet to consider, however,
is the principle of totality, which requires as a sentencing principle that
where consecutive sentences are imposed, the combined sentence should not be
“unduly long or harsh”:
Criminal Code,
s.718.2(c).
[
101
] According to this totality principle,
a trial judge who imposes consecutive sentences for multiple offences is to
ensure that the cumulative sentence does not exceed the overall culpability of
the offender: see
R
v
M. (C.A.),
1996 CanLII 230 (SCC)
, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 500.
[
102
] In this case, it is important to
understand, as pointed out by the Supreme Court of Canada, in
R.
v
M.
(L.),
2008 SCC 31
, at para.
31
, the “close relationship” between the
offences, the “overall situation they gave rise to and the need to impose a
global sentence suited to that situation”. In
M. (L.)
,
the offence of
sexual assault was closely connected with three other offences: making,
possessing and distributing child pornography. As LeBel J. explained, “each
aspect of the offender’s conduct could be considered only in light of all of
these charges, viewed as a whole”:
M. (L.)
,
para.
31
.
[
103
] Put another way, then, although the
totality principle must always be considered when sentencing an offender for
multiple offences, the sentence being imposed “cannot thereby become inadequate
to properly recognize the overall gravity of this conduct that victimizes children
in the most horrendous way”: see
R.
v
F. (D.G.),
2010 ONCA  27
,
at para.
27
.
[
104
] Applying the principle of totality to
Mr. Green’s offences, I am the respective opinion that a total sentence of 12
years’ imprisonment would be unduly long. I say this, notwithstanding that the
two separate counts of child pornography offences attracting 5-year sentences
each is well within the increased sentencing range mandated by
Friesen
and
Pike
, respectively.
[
105
] Consecutive sentences are also
warranted on the fail to comply with probation and release order charges, as
these are highly aggravating factors. Mr. Green was bound by a probation order
while he committed the first set of child pornography offences; he was bound by
both the probation order and release order when he committed the second set of
child pornography offences. Concurrent sentences are not warranted for these
breach offences. There must not be a “free-ride” for these aggravating factors
of committing further – and identical – offences while subject to court orders,
designed to prevent the commission of same.
[
106
] In order to give effect to the
totality principle, while at the same time imposing a sentence that reflects
the fundamental principle of proportionality pursuant to
s.718.1
of the
Criminal
Code
,
I sentence Mr. Green to a total sentence of 8 years’ imprisonment. I
do so by imposing sentences as follows:
- possession of child pornography (July 14,
2019 – July 28, 2020): 3.5 years’ imprisonment;
- accessing child pornography (July 14,
2019 – July 28, 2020): 3.5 years’ imprisonment, concurrent;
- possession of child pornography (June 13,
2020 – June 29, 2021): 3.5 years’ imprisonment, consecutive;
- accessing child pornography (June 13,
2020) – June 29, 2021): 3.5 years’ imprisonment, concurrent;
- breach of probation order: 6 months’
imprisonment, consecutive;
- breach of release order: 6 months’
imprisonment, consecutive.
Credit for Pre-Trial Custody
[
107
] The remaining consideration in
determining the sentence to be imposed is the amount of pre-trial custody to
apportion in this case, and to then reduce it from the period of 8-years’
imprisonment that I have determined is a fit and just sentence for the
defendant.
[
108
]
Section 719(3.1)
of the
Criminal
Code
is the starting point of the analysis. It authorizes the granting of
credit of 1.5 days for each day spent in custody.
[
109
] Accordingly, Mr. Green is entitled to
credit on at least this basis, the loss of early release, without anything
more:
R
v
Summers
,
2014 SCC 26
.
[
110
] As noted earlier, he has been in
custody from the time of his arrest on June 29, 2021, to today’s date, April
17, 2025, a total of 1,374 days or 45.8 months (3.8 years). Applying the
pre-trial custody credit of 1.5:1 under s.719(3.1), Mr. Green is credited with
2,061 days of pre-trial custody, or 68.7 months, being 5.7 years.
[
111
] The defence seeks additional credit on
the basis of
R
v
Duncan
,
due to the conditions of his pre-trial
detention at TSDC, which are notoriously deplorable. In addition to having
experienced lock downs, Covid outbreaks and triple bunking, Mr. Green has
additionally suffered physical and psychological upset due to his disability
from his stroke. He was also assaulted by other inmates, a number of times.
[
112
] There is no question, then, that
enhanced credit is warranted in this case. The more difficult question is what
exactly that should be.
[
113
] The Ontario Court of Appeal has made
it clear that “
Duncan”
credit does not lend itself to a mathematical
formula in the same way as “
Summers”
credit. And the two are not the
same, and should not be conflated. The former reflects “particularly difficult
and punitive presentence custody conditions”; the latter already takes into
account “the difficult and restrictive circumstances offenders often encounter
during pretrial custody”:
R
v
Marshall
,
2021 ONCA 344
, at para.
50
.
[
114
] Put another way, the “
Summers”
credit is calculated to “identify and deduct from the appropriate sentence the
amount of sentence the accused has effectively served by virtue of the pretrial
incarceration”:
R
v
Marshall
,
para.
51
. It is statutorily capped
at 1:5 days to 1 day; it is not a mitigating factor. Conversely, the “
Duncan
”
credit is not a deduction from an otherwise appropriate sentence, but one of
the factors to be taken into account in the determination of an appropriate
sentence:
R
v
Marshall
,
para.
52
.
[
115
] A specific number of days or months
may be given as “
Duncan”
credit. However, with respect, such credit does
not lend itself to double or triple credit, as proposed by defence counsel. I
note, further, the triple credit cases relied on by the defence, such as
Fermah
,
pre-date the Court of Appeal’s decision in
R
v
Marshall
.
Such a
credit calculation would risk “skewing” the calculation of the “ultimate
sentence”: see
Marshall
, para.
53
.
[
116
] This very point was recently made in
R
v
Brown,
2025 ONCA  164
, at para.
4
, where it was stated that sentencing
judges “must recognize that where an offender has already experienced
particularly punitive conditions during their pre-sentence custody, the
punishment they receive should be reduced to take this into account, but the
degree of mitigation is a matter of discretion in all the circumstances, and
not a matter of mathematical precision”.
[
117
] I accept the defence submission that
the harsh conditions of incarceration at TSDC are mitigating. Mr. Green was
subject to lockdowns, staff shortages and triple bunking for more than 240
days, as well as Covid outbreaks, assaults, and the added stress arising from
his disability, which requires physical activity and treatment.
[
118
] Giving effect to this “
Duncan”
credit, as further explained in
Marshall
, I have determined that Mr. Green’s
“
Summers
” credit of 2,061 days of pre-trial custody, or 68.7 months,
being 5.7 years, should be rounded up to 72 months, or 6 years.
Conclusion: Penitentiary Sentence for Mr.
Green
[
119
] Having determined that an 8-year (96
months) total sentence for Mr. Green is a fit sentence, and allowing for
pre-trial custody of 6 years (72 months), I today sentence the defendant to 2
years’ imprisonment in the penitentiary.
[
120
] For the purposes of apportioning this
period of imprisonment, and accompanying pre-trial credit, to the six counts in
the information, the sentences for each count are as follows:
- possession of child pornography (July 14,
2019 – July 28, 2020): 3.5 years’ (42 months) imprisonment, less 32 months pre-trial
custody: 10 months’ imprisonment;
- accessing child pornography (July 14,
2019 – July 28, 2020): 10 months’ imprisonment, concurrent
- possession of child pornography (June 13,
2020 – June 29, 2021): 3.5 years’ (42 months) imprisonment, less 32 months
pre-trial custody: 10 months’ imprisonment, consecutive;
- accessing child pornography (June 13,
2020) – June 29, 2021): 10 months’ imprisonment, concurrent;
- breach of probation order: 6 months
imprisonment, less 4 months pre-trial custody: 2 months’ imprisonment,
consecutive;
- breach of release order: 6 months
imprisonment, less 4 months pre-trial custody: 2 months’ imprisonment,
consecutive.
[
121
] In this manner, I have credited Mr.
Green with pre-trial custody, on the basis of
Summers
and
Duncan
,
for a total of 72 months as indicated above, and when subtracted from the 8-year
sentence of 96 months, there is a further period of 24 months or 2 years’
imprisonment being imposed on today’s date.
A Long-Term Supervision Order for the
Maximum Period of 10-years is Made Out
[
122
] Having concluded that a sentence of 2
years in the penitentiary is a fit sentence for Mr. Green, I next consider
whether the defendant should be found to be a long-term offender, and placed on
a long-term supervision order for up to 10 years.
[
123
] I believe that the evidence is
overwhelming that such an order, for the maximum length of time, must be
imposed.
[
124
] To begin, the statutory criteria
pursuant to s.753.1(1)(a) has been satisfied. I have determined that a sentence
of imprisonment of two years or more for the offence for which the offender has
been convicted would be appropriate:
Criminal Code
, s.753.1(1)(a).
[
125
] Section 753.1(1)(b) next requires a
finding that there is a “substantial risk” that the offender will reoffend.
[
126
] Despite being sentenced to 15 months’
imprisonment in 2018 for child pornography offences, and placed on the maximum
length of probation for 3 years, as well as additionally subject to a substantial
release order, $5,000.00, with two sureties, all the while on probation, Mr.
Green again committed child pornography offences. He was also receiving
psychiatric care from Dr. Pallandi at the Riverdale Clinic at the time. There
is evidence, in fact, that his use of pornography resumed within a little more
than 6 months of being released from serving his sentence at OCI.
[
127
] These are very significant factors,
in my respectful opinion, when gauging the defendant’s risk to reoffend, at the
present time.
[
128
] Dr. Iosif places the defendant in the
moderate category of risk for reoffending, especially when substance use is
involved. Moreover, if he were to relapse, upon release, to stimulant use by
resorting to amphetamines, she explained that his risk for reoffending by
accessing or possessing child sexual abuse material would not only be high, it
would “very likely occur”. Hence, it is noteworthy that, to date, the defendant
has not been able to make significant or sustained efforts to address this
underlying substance use issue, which, to his very own knowledge, fuels his
desire to engage in child pornography offences. Moreover, his level of interest
in child pornography, specifically keeping and accessing such materials, as Dr.
Iosif noted, is not limited only to the times when he is intoxicated.
[
129
] I do not consider, then, the issue of
whether Mr. Green is a pedophile, or not, to be a driving factor in the
s.753.1(1)
(b) determination. He has a long-standing and demonstrable attraction
to young boys. His relationship with his former partner, Mr. Swalm, who had
such physical attributes, and women who resemble youthful male body-builders,
substantiates this. He has a preference for youthful men; he has exclusively been
in relationships with men. His collection of child pornography, principally of
adolescent males between the ages of 5-12, dates back to 2012. Hence, as Dr.
Iosif testified, non-exclusive pedophilia is not unheard of: Mr. Green’s relationships
with adult men does not detract from his sexual interest in adolescent males.
[
130
] When sentencing Mr. Green in 2018,
Justice Borenstein made reference to Dr. Bloom’s report, which I find
consistent with that of Dr. Iosif. Dr. Bloom noted that the defendant was
engaged in “impression management” and very much wanted to leave Dr. Bloom with
the impression he was not pedophilic. Dr. Bloom felt, in fact, that in all
likelihood, Mr. Green was not a pedophile. However, the doctor was concerned
that the defendant’s efforts to ensure that he came to that conclusion, as well
as his “almost exclusive blame on crystal methamphetamine for his behaviour,”
raised red flags.
[
131
] With respect to whether the defendant
was likely to reoffend, Dr. Bloom was of the opinion that the principal risk
factors for Mr. Green were his attraction to “a youthful male physique and his
drug use”.
[
132
] It can be seen, then, that moving
forward six years to 2024, the time of Dr. Iosif’s report, the concerns in
respect of the defendant’s risk factors are substantially the same. Indeed,
they may be considered heightened, in that Dr. Bloom’s assessment of Mr. Green
was as a first offender; Dr. Iosif dealt with him as a recidivist.
[
133
] It is also significant, and
particularly relevant from a risk of reoffending perspective, to note that the
defendant is a not unsophisticated consumer of child pornography.  His
collection at the time of his first sentencing was described as being
substantial in size. It was in his possession for four years, between May, 2012
to August, 2016. It was made available through a file sharing or peer-to-peer
network. Justice Borenstein rightly considered these to be serious aggravating
factors.
[
134
] Consequently, the persistent use of
the same sophisticated child pornography access tools is particularly
concerning. Moreover, the size and content of Mr. Green’s collection is not
that of an unsophisticated or neophyte possessor or accessor of such
contraband. He also took active steps to conceal his use of pornography from
his probation officer, regardless of whether this was motivated by shame or
subterfuge, as well as his two sureties, which placed them at considerable risk
of forfeiting the $5,000.00 they pledged to supervise the defendant’s
behaviour, and ensure he would not reoffend.
[
135
] Returning, then, to the assertion by
the defence that Dr. Iosif’s unconfirmed diagnosis of Mr. Green as a pedophile
takes away from the need to impose a long-term supervision order, I
respectfully disagree. Whatever the label, the risk factors of Mr. Green reoffending
and committing the offence of possession of child pornography or accessing
child pornography (enumerated offences under s.753.1(2)(a)) are overwhelming,
let alone substantial. He has had a long-standing interest in young boys which
manifests itself through the use of child pornography; his attraction to young
boys in this medium is exacerbated by his use of crystal methamphetamine, which
he has not been able to control for more than a decade. The latter has played
“a significant role in this offence”, as Justice Borenstein noted when
sentencing Mr. Green in 2018. It remains so, unabated, in 2025. The defendant’s
collection of child pornography dates back to May, 2012. He has yet to stop
offending, on his own accord. The red flags, as first noted by Dr. Bloom in
2017, remain as readily apparent, and obvious, and now considerably more ominous.
[
136
] In the result, I have concluded that
there is a substantial risk Mr. Green will reoffend:
Criminal Code
,
s.753.1(b). Moreover, he has shown a pattern of “repetitive behaviour”, of
which the offence for which he has been convicted forms a part, that shows a
likelihood of the offender’s causing death or injury to other persons or
inflicting severe psychological damage on other persons:
Criminal Code
,
s.753.1(2)(b)(i). What drives this pattern of offending behaviour is not simply
the defendant’s substance use, but his underlying sexual preference, which is
for male children.
[
137
] With respect to the harm caused by
those, such as the defendant, who access and possess child pornography, Trotter
J.A., for the Court, commented in
R
v
Snowden,
2023 ONCA 768
, at
para.
93
:
Applied in the
context of child pornography, the initial harm lies in the sexual assault of
the infant or child. Added to this is the related harm of recording this abuse.
This harm is different in kind, but still an extension of the sexual abuse.
Similarly, the sharing of recordings with others furthers or perpetuates the
harm caused by the initial recording and underlying abuse. Accessing and
possessing child pornography fulfills the objective of the person who shares it
or makes it available. Indeed, this market for child pornography, whether for
purchase, trade or otherwise, may motivate those who make it available, and in
turn, those who create it. Accessing and possessing child pornography may
further harm the children depicted in the child pornography where they become
aware that their image has been accessed or possessed. Thus, cognizable harm
has the potential to extend beyond the initial abuse involved in creating child
pornography. It may not be the same type of harm at each stage, but it need not
be to remain within the ambit of conduct that inflicts or is likely to inflict
severe psychological damage.
[
138
] The nature of such severe
psychological damage is further evidenced by the Community Impact Statement on
behalf of the Canadian Centre for Child Protection, which details the horrific
impact of child pornography on survivors, including attempts to take their own
lives, change or conceal their identifies, and persistent fear of being
recognized, and identified, in public.
[
139
] To return to the requirement of “a
pattern of repetitive behaviour” under
s.753.1
(2(b)(i), Mr. Green has a
criminal history for one type of criminal offence only: possessing and
accessing child pornography. His other convictions are inextricably interwoven
with them: being in possession of drugs – used while possessing and accessing
child pornography, and breach of probation and breach of a release order – by violating
terms prohibiting his accessing and possessing child pornography.
[
140
] The remaining condition precedent to
the imposition of a long-term supervision order is that there is a reasonable
possibility of eventual control of the risk in the community:
Criminal Code
,
s.753.1(1)(c).
[
141
] The parties are in agreement that
this element of the
Code
provision has been made out. Dr. Iosif
considered this to be so, noting that there are pro-social elements in Mr.
Green’s makeup. This includes his having been in a long-term romantic
relationship with an adult male, albeit with boyish features, his previous work
experience, support from his mother, and his ability to remain out of trouble
while residing with his mother, although that living arrangement is no longer
available to him. He is also in his mid-40’s now, although burnout is not a
particularly relevant factor in the case of non hands-on child abuse offenders.
I consider Mr. Green’s stated expression to me of remorse, and wish to lead a
pro-social life, to be genuine. However, he said the same thing to Justice
Borenstein upon being sentenced in 2018.
[
142
] Paramount to the defendant’s ability
to control his risk in the community setting, is the imperative that he seek
counselling for substance use and his well-being, including ADHD. He has yet to
do so, notwithstanding the clear recognition and need for doing so, as Dr.
Bloom noted in 2017.
[
143
] High intensity substance use
programs, and associated support and maintenance programs to assist the
defendant in conducting himself in a pro-social manner, so that he does not
revert to drug use when he is bored or prone to impulsivity and hyperactivity, due
to ADHD, allows for a reasonable possibility of eventual control of the risk in
the community.
[
144
] I have therefore determined that the
defendant should be found to be a long-term offender, and a long-term
supervision order imposed, as the conditions precedent in s.753.1(1) have each
been satisfied.
[
145
] The maximum length of a long-term
supervision order is 10 years:
Criminal Code,
s.753.1(3)(b).
[
146
] In my respectful opinion, the
duration of the order must be for this maximum period. I have arrived at this
conclusion for a number of reasons.
[
147
] First, it is clear on Dr. Iosif’s
evidence that treatment programs for Mr. Green will not be sufficient if they
are short term. He requires structure and supervision. He has yet to take meaningful
treatment for substance use; ADHD remains unaddressed. The institutional
records show that his willingness, voluntarily, to participate in treatment programs
was poor, and he was removed from them. This continued to his post-release
programming, although in fairness, Mr. Green may have taken some steps to
commence treatment, which was not immediately available to him.
[
148
] Particularly relevant, however, is
that he has had made available to him almost five years of correctional
involvement and supervision, in the context of 15-month jail sentence at OCI,
and 3-years probation upon the completion of his jail sentence. He was also on a
substantial release order, two sureties who pledged $5,000.00, for part of this
time. This time period approximates the 5-year length of long-term supervision
order that defence counsel says should now be imposed. To the contrary, this,
in my view, substantiates why a lengthier period of supervision must be imposed
now.
[
149
] It is also clear that Mr. Green’s
involvement with illegal pornographic images has continued unabated, for more
than a decade.
[
150
] This is not a case, then, like
Bluecloud
,
para.
50
, where a long-term supervision order of more than 7-years would be so
long that the offender “despairs and loses his way”, and thwarts his
“significant progress”. In fact, the maximum period of 10 years supervision is
required, if there is to be any prospect of the defendant breaking his offence
cycle, and managing his risk in the community.
[
151
] And in the event that the defendant is,
in fact, a pedophile, which as Dr. Iosif testified, is the most likely
explanation for his conduct, and I also consider to be so, the risk of
re-offending will never be totally eliminated, as there is no treatment for
pedophilia. Mr. Green will remain attracted to male children, regardless; that is
his clear and long-standing preference. The label for this attraction is not crucial.
Other children, as Dr. Iosif explained, remain in potential danger as well.
[
152
] For these reasons, I have determined
that the defendant is a long-term offender, pursuant to
s.753.1
, and that a
long-term supervision order of 10 years should be imposed:
Criminal Code
,
s.753.1(3)(b).
Ancillary Orders
[
153
] There are a number of ancillary
orders that are applicable, and require my consideration, the majority of which
are not in dispute. I propose to deal with them separately below.
DNA
[
154
] Pursuant to s.487.04(1)(b), child
pornography under s.163.1 is a primary designated offence. Accordingly, an
order is authorized under s.487.05(1) for the taking of samples of bodily
substances from Mr. Green that are reasonably required for the purpose of
forensic DNA analysis. It is not contested that such an order should be made in
this case. I note that such an order was previously made by Justice Borenstein.
Weapons Prohibition
[
155
] A weapons prohibition under
s.109(1)
(a)
of the
Criminal Code
is also a mandatory order. Pursuant to this
provision, Mr. Green is prohibited for life from being in possession of
firearms, crossbows, restricted weapons, prohibited devices, a firearm part,
any ammunition, prohibited ammunition or an explosive substance. As he has been
previously convicted of similar offences, the duration of the order is for
life: s.109(3). This order is likewise not opposed.
SOIRA
[
156
] Pursuant to the provisions of
ss.490.012(1)
and
490.013(4)
of the
Criminal Code
,
it is appropriate to order in Form
52 that the defendant is required to comply with the
Sex Offender
Information Registration Act
for life. The lifetime duration is mandatory,
as Mr. Green was previously given a SOIRA order (for life) by Justice
Borenstein.
Section 161 Order of Prohibition
[
157
] In the proceedings before Justice
Borenstein, a s.161 order was not issued, as the Court considered that the
terms in it that were reasonable were incorporated, instead, into the probation
order. This is patently not the case here, as the defendant will be serving his
sentence in the federal system, where probation is not available.
[
158
] The defence resists the terms of s.161
being imposed in their entirety, and that a lifetime order is not required. He
submits that such an order would be excessive, and that limiting Mr. Green’s
use of the Internet and social media, in particular, would impede his prospects
for securing gainful employment. Moreover, he has not attended any of the
enumerated places where children under the age of 16 years frequent, and has
never committed a hands-on child abuse offence. Indeed, he did not use social
media to commit the child pornography offences in question.
[
159
] I consider, with respect, that these
are not sufficient reasons to refrain from restricting the defendant’s whereabouts
and limiting his access to the Internet. His probation order prohibited him
from accessing any child pornography websites; his release order contained a
similar prohibition. Both were proven to be ineffectual. He hid his breaching
conduct from his supervising probation officer, and two sureties, respectively.
As a result, the need for public protection must be paramount at the time of
sentencing the defendant at this juncture of time.
[
160
] Consequently, I agree with the Crown
that the defendant should be bound by a s.161 order prohibiting him from
attending any of the public places enumerated under subs.(1)(a), (a.1), such as
public parks, daycare centres, schoolgrounds and playgrounds, where persons
under 16 years are present or can reasonably be expected to be present.
[
161
] Likewise, the restrictions in
subs.(1)(b) prohibiting the defendant from seeking employment or volunteering
that involves being in a position of trust or authority towards persons under
the age of 16 years is appropriate, as is the prohibition against having
contact, including communication by any means, with a person who is under the
age of 16 years: subs.(1)(c).
[
162
] I turn, lastly to the prohibition
against using the Internet or other digital network, pursuant to s.161(1)(d).
There is good reason to impose this condition as well, subject to limited
exceptions to permit Mr. Green, when supervised by an appropriate adult, to use
the Internet, for the purposes of seeking and maintaining employment only, as
well as for the purposes of banking, seeking medical attention, pharmaceutical
needs or grocery needs.
[
163
] Despite being ordered to forfeit electronic
material by Justice Borenstein, and prohibited under both a probation order and
release order from accessing child pornography websites, it did not take long
for Mr. Green to do so. He did this all the while being supervised by his
probation officer and two sureties. He is, as I have noted, a not
unsophisticated purveyor of child pornography. It is appropriate, therefore,
that a s.161(1)(d) order, for life, be imposed against him, with very specific
terms setting out the parameters of this aspect of the order. A lifetime order
is authorized under s.161(2). I note that should the circumstances change,
after the imposition of the order, which make it desirable to vary this
condition, or any of the other conditions set out in the s.161 order, they may
be varied by the court, upon application by the offender: s.161(3).
[
164
] It is in the interests of all
concerned that the terms of the prohibition order under s.161(1)(d) be reduced,
separately, to writing, and attached to the transmission of materials that will
be sent to CSC, pursuant to
s.760
of the
Criminal Code
.
This will ensure
that there is no confusion or uncertainty as to the limited manner in which Mr.
Green is to have any access to the Internet, or Internet capable devices.
[
165
] The specific items to be addressed by
this part of the order should include, at least, the following six areas: (i) a
prohibition against the use of any encryption software or security program
designed to prevent access to the content of the defendant’s Internet capable
devices; (ii) a prohibition against the use of installing any program or
service designed to allow anonymous use of the Internet; (iii) not being
permitted to directly or indirectly access any peer-to-peer file sharing
networks, such as, but not being limited to, motherless, Lime Wire, Gnutella,
Bearshare, Shareaza; (iv) not being able to use the Internet to access any
social media sites, social networks, or maintain a personal profile on services
such as, but not being limited to, Facebook, Twitter, Tinder, Instagram,
Snapchat, or any equivalent or similar service; any exceptions to this must be
restricted for the purposes of seeking or maintaining employment, while in the
presence of, or under the supervision of, a named party, approved of by his
supervisor (v) a requirement that the defendant identify himself by his full,
real name, and not by any pseudonym, nickname or code to identify himself, in
any communication with anyone while using a computer or electronic device; (vi)
a requirement to provide access upon request by his supervisor to any computer
or electronic device he has used, or is in his possession, including installing
and activating, at his own expense, such programs or hardware as ordered by his
supervisor.
[
166
] In order to finalize the above six terms
and conditions in writing, I direct the parties to re-attend before me, no
later than 14 days from today’s date, for the purpose of crafting the s.161(1)(d)
portion of the Order, in accordance with para. 165 of these Reasons.
Forfeiture Order
[
167
] As noted earlier, Justice Borenstein
ordered forfeiture of the “electronic material” seized from the defendant, when
sentencing him in 2018. A separate forfeiture order was also made for property,
that although not identified, was apparently used by both the defendant and Mr.
Swalm, some of which was suitable for return, as confirmed by the police.
[
168
] In this case, a number of electronic
devices were searched by the police, which contained child pornography. These
included iphones, an ipad and a laptop computer.
Sections 490.1
and
164.2
of
the
Criminal Code
authorize forfeiture of all property seized from the
offender which contain child pornography.
[
169
] It is not clear to me whether the
parties have considered whether a forfeiture order of these devices in the
possession of the defendant would be appropriate in the circumstances of this
case. At first blush, it appears warranted, particularly as a previous
forfeiture order was brought against the offender, when being sentenced in
2018, for similar materials, and appears, in fact, to have been uncontested.
[
170
] In order to provide the parties with
an opportunity to address this issue, I direct that the parties appear before
me, no later than 14 days from today’s date. The parties may present me with a
draft forfeiture order, at this time, if the matter proceeds on consent.
Victim Surcharge
[
171
] Having been convicted of six
indictable offences, Mr. Green is subject to a $200.00 victim surcharge, in
respect of each count, pursuant to s.737(2)(b)(ii). This amounts to a total
victim surcharge of $1,200.00.
[
172
] It is appropriate to waive the victim
surcharge on Mr. Green’s behalf, on the basis of undue hardship, specifically
his disability due to his stroke, which limits his ability to work:
Criminal
Code
, ss.737(2.1)(a),
(2.2)
.
Transmission of Reasons to CSC
[
173
] Pursuant to
s.760
of the
Criminal
Code
,
I order that that a copy of all reports and testimony given by Dr.
Iosif, and other transcripts and reports, including these Reasons, and the
accompanying ancillary orders, be forwarded to the Correctional Service of
Canada for information.
Summary of Sentencing Dispositions and
Ancillary Orders
[
174
] By way of summary, I have imposed the
following sentencing dispositions and orders in respect of Mr. Green:
(i)  a global sentence of 2
years’ imprisonment;
(ii) a long-term offender designation;
(iii) a long-term supervision order
for 10 years;
(iv) DNA Order for Primary
Designated Offences;
(v) Section 109 Weapons
Prohibition Order for life;
(vi) SOIRA Order for life;
(vii) Section 161 Order
of Prohibition for life;
(viii) Hearing to
be arranged within 14 days, in respect of wording of Section 161(1)(d) Order restricting
use of Internet;
(ix) Hearing to be
arranged within 14 days, in respect Forfeiture Order of Devices containing
Child Pornography seized from the offender;
(x) Waiver of
Victim Surcharge in the amount of $1,200.00;
(xi) Transmission
of Reasons and Materials to CSC.
Concluding Comments
[
175
] I wish to conclude by acknowledging
the professionalism and high quality of written and oral advocacy by counsel
for the Crown, and counsel for Mr. Green, over the past 26 months. The
administration of justice is greatly enhanced when counsel conduct themselves
in this manner. In preparing these Reasons, I have reviewed the numerous
materials they have put before me, including their written submissions and
supporting cases and documents. For this I am very grateful and appreciative of
the efforts and diligence of both Ms. Garcia and Mr. Prajs.
[
176
] Finally, to Mr. Green I say the
following. Like Justice Borenstein, who you appeared before eight years ago, on
similar charges, I consider your stated intention to me, to live a pro-social
life, to be genuine. You have, however, not been able to do so to date. As a
result, the stakes have gotten higher, and the greater punishment reflects
this. Previously, you were sent to the reformatory; this time you are being
sent to the penitentiary. The sentencing tools that are available to deal with any
further child sexual abuse conduct in the future are therefore fewer, but do
include, potentially, an indeterminate sentence and dangerous offender
designation. This is the time, then, to redouble your efforts to be the best
version of yourself, and follow the course of treatments that will be made
available to you now, and in the future. It is my hope that, this time, they
will be successful.
R. Libman, J.
Date: April 17, 2025