Source URL: https://www.canlii.org/en/on/oncj/doc/2025/2025oncj138/2025oncj138.html

WARNING
The court hearing this matter directs that the following notice be
attached to the file:
A
non-publication and non-broadcast order in this proceeding has been issued
under
subsection 486.4(1)
of the
Criminal Code
.
This subsection and
subsection 486.6(1)
of the
Criminal Code,
which is concerned with the
consequence of failure to comply with an order made under
subsection 486.4(1)
,
read as follows:
486.4  Order
restricting publication
— sexual offences.
— (1)  Subject to subsection (2), the presiding judge or justice
may make an order directing that any information that could identify the victim
or a witness shall not be published in any document or broadcast or transmitted
in any way, in proceedings in respect of
(
a
)    any
of the following offences:
(i)   an
offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 160, 162, 162.1, 163.1, 170,
171, 171.1,172, 172.1, 172.2, 173, 213, 271, 272, 273, 279.01, 279.011, 279.02,
279.03, 280, 281, 286.1, 286.2, 286.3, 346 or 347, or
(ii)  any
offence under this Act, as it read from time to time before the day on which
this subparagraph comes into force, if the conduct alleged would be an offence referred
to in subparagraph (i) if it occurred on or after that day; or
(
b
)    two
or more offences being dealt with in the same proceeding, at least one of which
is an offence referred to in paragraph
(a)
.
(2)
MANDATORY
ORDER ON APPLICATION
— In proceedings in respect of the offences referred
to in paragraph (1)(
a
) or (
b
), the presiding judge or justice
shall
(
a
)    at
the first reasonable opportunity, inform any witness under the age of eighteen
years and the victim of the right to make an application for the order; and
(
b
)    on
application made by the victim, the prosecutor or any such witness, make the
order.
.   .   .
486.6  OFFENCE
— (1)  Every person who fails to comply with an order made under any
of
subsections 486.4(1)
to (3) or subsection 486.5(1) or (2) is guilty of an
offence punishable on summary conviction.
ONTARIO COURT OF JUSTICE
CITATION:
R. v. R.G.
, 2025 ONCJ 138
DATE: 
2025 03 13
COURT
FILE No.:  Central West Region 998 22 47103224
BETWEEN:
HIS MAJESTY THE KING
— AND —
G.(R.)
Before
Justice J. De Filippis
Heard
on January 8 & 9, 2025
Reasons
for Judgment released on March 13, 2025
Mr. Woloshyn-Chick…………………………………………………counsel
for the Crown
Mr. R. Mohan……………………………………………………….
counsel for the accused
De Filippis,
J.:
INTRODUCTION
[
1
]
The defendant was charged with sexual
interference and sexual assault.  The allegations arose almost 11 years ago. 
The defendant and complainant were in high school at that time.
[
2
]
I heard from three witnesses, including the
defendant.  It is not in dispute that the parties engaged in sexual activity on
the date and place in question.  Moreover, there is no material difference in
the testimony given by the complainant and defendant about the events leading
up to the activity.  They differ about the extent of the sexual activity and
whether the complainant consented to it.
[
3
]
These reasons explain why the charges are
dismissed.
EVIDENCE
[
4
]
In 2014, the complainant was 14 and in grade 9. 
She was dating the defendant’s brother.   On May 15, she met the defendant at a
mall in Hamilton after having had an argument with his brother.  They walked to
a nearby school to talk about the argument.  Classes were not in session.  They
sat in a corner of the building and soon started kissing. The complainant
testified that “it just started” and that she was “okay with the kissing”.  She
added that when the defendant tried to remove her clothes, she said “no” but he
persisted and she “eventually gave up”.  This resulted in oral and vaginal sex.
 They then walked away together.  About one hour elapsed from the time the
parties arrived at the school until they walked away.
[
5
]
The complainant provided the following details: The
parties were seated with their backs against a brick wall. The defendant began
removing her cardigan. She said no, tried to pull it back up, and “let it come
off”. He pulled on her lulu lemon tights.  She said no and tried to pull them
back up.  One pant leg, one sock and one shoe came off.  When she tried to
stand up to put the pant leg back on, the defendant “buckled” her knees causing
her to squat on his lap with her back against the wall.  He inserted his penis
in her vagina, removed it, vagina, “grabbed’ her jaw, kissed her, and put his
penis in her mouth.  All this took about one minute. The defendant then stepped
away and ejaculated.
[
6
]
No words were exchanged between the parties as
the complainant’s cardigan and pant leg were removed.  She did not resist
during the events that quickly followed.  After the vaginal penetration, the
defendant said she was enjoying it.  The complainant testified, “I was not okay
with this, I was zoned out staring at the wall”. She added that, “I was
confused, scared, dissociated and once initially penetrated I zoned out”. The
complainant noted that the defendant seemed agitated during the sexual activity
and believes this was because, “I wasn’t doing anything, I was a dead force”.  She
added that “he was bigger and stronger, and my options were limited”.
[
7
]
When the complainant said she wanted to go home,
the defendant walked her to the bus stop.  She does not recall what they
discussed along the way.  Once on the bus, she urinated.  She went to the home
of TG, a friend she had known for 11 years.  A second friend was also present. 
The complainant went to this home because she wanted their opinion about what
had happened – “because I went silent”. She was also “confused because I had
kissed him and had not resisted”.  Her friends were not supportive.  One of
them said that the fact the complainant had gone to the school with the
defendant “was consent enough”.  Soon after “it was all around the school that
I had lost my virginity”.
[
8
]
The complainant saw the defendant at school
every day after these events. She reported the matter to the police 8 years later.
She explained that until this report she had “wanted to forget about it”.
[
9
]
The complainant confirmed that she was 14 years
old at the time, her boyfriend, the defendant’s brother was 16 and the
defendant was 18. She conceded she was attracted to the defendant but denied
any intent “to hook up” with him on the day in question. She wanted to talk to
him about the argument she had had with his brother. The complainant was “comfortable”
with the defendant in the lead up to the events.  They spent about 1 hour at
the mall and another hour at the school.  She denied touching the defendant’s
arm or leg while they were in the nook at the school.  She did not “flirt” with
him.  The kissing was consensual and its “initiation probably mutual”.
[
10
]
The complainant insisted the defendant removed
her cardigan and one pant leg.  She was not wearing underwear.  After they sat
on the floor, he pulled her on top of him.  When asked if, in doing so, he was
“guiding or aggressive”, she replied, “a little bit of both, I had no
options”.  Defence counsel suggested, “You weren’t forcibly held on top of
him?”.  The complainant replied, “I did nothing, did not get up, I was scared
of repercussions”.  When counsel pressed this point, the complainant conceded
the defendant had not said or done anything aggressive. He did not restrain her
at any time.  She repeated that he seemed agitated, and she felt intimidated and
confused because she had said no while he removed her clothes, and he did not
stop. She said nothing more as the defendant vaginally and orally penetrated
her.
[
11
]
The complainant did not attend for medical
treatment after these events. She testified that her relationship with the two
friends she immediately confided in suffered as she did not feel they supported
her.  She told her family what had happened 3 years later and did not go to the
police for another 5 years because she was confused.  She added that she was
also aware the defendant had started a family and did not want to “mess with
that”.
[
12
]
The complainant was angry with the defendant because
he told others at school he had had sex with her.  When asked if she resented
him for this, she replied, “I resented him for different reasons”.   The
complainant did not see the defendant after high school.  Later, she worked at
McDonald’s restaurant with his mother.
[
13
]
Defence counsel put it to the complainant that,
“you felt different about the encounter in 2014 than years later”.  She
replied, “no, it became clearer what happened to me”.  She added that she considered
going to the police in high school, but she was confused and her friends
suggested what had happened was her fault.
[
14
]
In re-examination, the complainant explained
that what became clearer over time is that the fact she did not resist is not
her fault.  She learned this through therapy and outside resources.  She came
to realize that saying no was enough.  She added that, “my confusion was not
about wanting the sex but about whether I said ‘no’ enough”.
[
15
]
TG is one of the friends that the complainant
spoke to soon after the events in question. She remembers the incident, but not
the date.  She testified that they were in grade nine at the time.  Another
student was present when the complainant arrived to report “what had happened
with [the defendant]”.  TG described the complainant as “emotional”,
“confused”, and “not herself”.
[
16
]
TG does not recall much of the conversation,
explaining that “it was 10 years ago” and we were 14 at the time.  She and the
complainant have since grown apart.  TG recalls the complainant stating she had
had sexual intercourse but does not remember her speaking of sexual assault.  TG
concluded, based on the complainant’s demeanour, that she had not consented.
She conceded she did not tell the police this when interviewed at  the time,
explaining that she has since reflected on the incident and details have come
back to her.
[
17
]
The defendant is 29 years old and married with
three children. At the time of the events in question he was 18 years old and
in grade 12. He acknowledged engaging in sexual activity with the complainant
on the date and place described by her.  They met had known each other for
about one year, having met when she began dating his brother.
[
18
]
The defendant testified that the complainant sent
him a text message asking to meet as she had argued with his brother. He agreed
with the complainant’s narrative about meeting at the mall and walking to the
school and sitting down in a nook, where they continued to talk, started
kissing, and had sexual intercourse.  However, this is the extent of the agreed
facts.
[
19
]
According to the defendant, when they met at the
mall, the complainant was upset, and he was understanding and comforting.  Her
demeanour changed to one of excitement.  As they walked to the school, she kept
trying to hold his hand and that when they arrived at the school, she asked him
to kiss her. She took off her cardigan and pants, sat her on top of him, and
they had intercourse for about two minutes.  He then stood up and ejaculated
into the corner of the nook.  She was happy as they walked to the bus stop. 
They texted each other that night and the next day and it was “all good”.
[
20
]
The defendant testified he did not hear any
rumours about their sexual encounter afterwards.  He had no contact with the
complainant after this final year of his high school.  He met his present wife
the next year.  He was surprised to be arrested as there was no sexual assault
because she consented.
[
21
]
The defendant denied any oral sex. He denied
removing her clothing and grabbing her. He agreed he held her on his lap during
intercourse and that there had been no discussion of the sexual activity in
advance.  He explained that he did not ejaculate during intercourse as he was
not ready for children.  He had no concern about the difference in their ages
or the fact his brother was dating the complainant.
[
22
]
When asked why he thought the complainant had
consented, the defendant replied, “by her body language. When pressed on this
point, he insisted that you “can gage intent by body language”.
SUBMISSIONS
[
23
]
The Defence began submissions by noting the
date of the alleged offences; “Ten years is a long time, memories change, and
circumstances can cause it to change, time does not serve memory any purpose”. 
Counsel added that there is no independent evidence to consider in this case. 
All TG can say is that at the time the complainant reported a sexual encounter,
not a sexual assault.
[
24
]
The Defence pointed out that consent to sexual
activity can be conveyed by word or gesture.  The complainant and defendant
agree that they consented to kissing and the latter adds that she was
flirtatious and initiated the kissing. The sexual intercourse was not
accompanied by physical restraint and occurred in silence.  All this amounts to
non-verbal consent.  Counsel concluded submissions by stating that, in any
event, it cannot be concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that the complainant
did not consent.
[
25
]
The Crown noted that there is no dispute that
sexual activity occurred. Counsel added, however, that the complainant gave
“unequivocal testimony” that she did not consent to such activity beyond
kissing and that the defendant ignored this or was reckless or wilfully blind
to it.  In this regard, the fact that the parties walked together to a bus stop
after the events, as well as the long delay in reporting the matter to police
does not mean the complainant is not credible or reliable.  Similarly, the fact
that the complainant did not resist after saying “no” beyond kissing does not
equate with consent. The difference in age between the parties reflects a power
imbalance.  That the complainant was confused is entirely understandable given
that she was 14 years old.
[
26
]
The Crown submitted that the complainant’s
evidence was fair and candid and that this cannot be said of the defendant’s
testimony. Counsel added that any suggestion of honest and mistaken belief in
consent must fail because the defendant did not take reasonable steps to
ascertain such consent.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
[
27
]
The Crown must prove its case beyond a
reasonable doubt if the defendant is to be found guilty. This means that if the
defendant has called evidence, there must be an acquittal: (i) where the
testimony is believed, (ii) where the testimony is not believed, but leaves the
trier of fact in reasonable doubt, (iii) where testimony is not believed and
does not leave a reasonable doubt, but the remaining evidence fails to
convince, beyond reasonable doubt, that the defendant is guilty:
R v W.D.
(1991),
1991 CanLII 93 (SCC)
, 63 C.C.C. (3d) 397 (S.C.C.). The application of this principle does not
mean the defendant's evidence is to be viewed in isolation, divorced from the
context or other evidence in the case:
F v R.D.,
[2004] O.J. No.
2086(O.C.A)
.
[
28
]
In many cases of sexual interference, consent is
not a defence because a complainant under the age of 16 cannot legally consent,
whatever that person may have said or done.  However, in this case, since the
defendant was less than five years older than the complainant and was not in a
position of trust with respect to her, the defence is available, and the Crown
must prove the complainant did not consent with respect to both charges.
[
29
]
The principles that apply to the issues in the present case were
set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R v Ewanchuk
1999 CanLII 711 (SCC)
, [1999]
S.C.J. No. 10 and again, more recently, in
R v Barton
2019 SCC
33
. I understand the law to be as follows:
Consent to sexual activity must
be communicated by word or deed and cannot be assumed.  There is no
doctrine of implied consent, and it cannot be based on the relationship of the
parties. Moreover, the complainant cannot be deemed to consent because she did
not resist or say “no”.
The defendant can rely on
mistake of fact as a defence; this acknowledges that the complainant did not
consent and rests on the claim that he honestly but mistakenly believed she
did. The defence is based on fact that the Crown has proven the
actus
reus
and negates
mens rea.
The mistaken belief is linked
to “communicated” consent.  This avoids straying into forbidden territory
of assumed or implied consent.
The defendant’s mistaken belief
in communicated consent must be honestly held; it must be based on the
complainant’s words or deeds.  Silence, passivity, or ambiguous conduct by
the complainant is not sufficient.
To rely upon the defence of
honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent, there must be evidence the
defendant took reasonable steps to determine consent.  This is highly fact
specific.
[
30
]
These principles were subsequently discussed by the British
Columbia Court of Appeal in
R. v. Capewell
,
2020 BCCA 82
[citations omitted]:
[52]     
  Consent is relevant to both the
actus reus
and
the
mens rea
of sexual assault. However, consent at the
actus
reus
stage is assessed from the point of view of the complainant,
whereas at the
mens rea
stage, the focus shifts to the accused
and his steps to ascertain consent….
[53]     
  The
actus reus
of sexual assault is met if the accused
“touche[d] another person in a sexual way without her consent”…. Therefore, the
Crown must prove these three elements: (i) touching, (ii) the sexual nature of
the contact, and (iii) the absence of consent:
Ewanchuk
…. The first
two elements are objective; it is sufficient for the Crown to prove that the
accused’s actions were voluntary:
Ewanchuk
at para.
25
.
However, non-consent is subjective from the complainant’s point of view, as set
out in
Barton
…:
Consent is treated differently at each
stage of the analysis. For purposes of the
actus reus
, “consent”
means “that the complainant in her mind wanted the sexual touching to take
place” (
Ewanchuk
, at para.
48
). Thus, at this stage, the focus is placed
squarely on the complainant’s state of mind, and the accused’s perception of
that state of mind is irrelevant. Accordingly, if the complainant testifies
that she did not consent, and the trier of fact accepts this evidence, then
there was no consent — plain and simple…  At this point, the
actus reus
is
complete. The complainant need not express her lack of consent, or revocation
of consent, for the
actus reus
to be established….
[54]     
  It bears emphasizing that at the
actus reus
stage, the
complainant’s state of mind is determinative in establishing non-consent. The
accused’s perception of the complainant’s state of mind is irrelevant, and only
arises when a defence of honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent is
raised at the
mens rea
stage.
[55]     
  The
mens rea
of sexual assault is met if the accused
had the “intention to touch and knowing of, or being reckless of or wilfully
blind to, a lack of consent on the part of the person touched”…. The Supreme
Court of Canada in
Barton
… set out the role of consent at the
mens
rea
stage as follows:
For purposes of the
mens
rea
, and specifically for purposes of the defence of honest but mistaken
belief in communicated consent, “consent” means “that the complainant had
affirmatively communicated by words or conduct her agreement to engage in [the]
sexual activity with the accused”... Hence, the focus at this stage shifts to
the mental state of the accused, and the question becomes whether the accused
honestly believed “the complainant effectively said, ‘yes’ through her words
and/or actions”.
[
31
]
A delay in disclosure has no necessary
implications with respect to the credibility or reliability of the complainant. 
The timing of the allegation is simply one circumstance to consider. This is
assessed in the context of the trial evidence as a whole:
R. v. S.G
.,
2022 ONCA 727
.
CONCLUSION
[
32
]
The complainant and defendant met to discuss a
matter that was troubling her. They began kissing. This was consensual.  This
was followed by sexual intercourse.  She did not physically resist.  He was not
aggressive.  This much is agreed upon.
[
33
]
The testimony given by TG adds little to the
analysis.  All I can take from this witness is that soon after the events in
question, the complainant showed up at her residence in an emotional and
confused state of mind.  She added that, with reflection, over time, the
complainant’s demeanour demonstrated she had not consented to the sexual
activity. I must ignore this additional comment. I do not suggest TG lied to
me.  Clearly, with the passage of time, she has come to this belief. I cannot
act upon this opinion as a basis for fact finding.  That she did not tell the
police this when interviewed in a sexual assault investigation is an
astonishing omission.  It confirms she did not believe it at the time and her
subsequent conclusion, informed by an unknown amount of hearsay, is
inadmissible and irrelevant.
[
34
]
The defendant testified that soon after meeting
the complainant she seemed excited and tried to hold his hand as they walked to
the school.  He added she initiated the kissing, removed her cardigan and pants,
and sat on his lap.  The defendant held her as they had sexual intercourse. She
never said anything after asking to be kissed. He asserts that she consented by
gesture, by her “body language”.  He denies putting his penis in her mouth or
ejaculating.  If these are the facts, the defendant is not guilty.  However, I
am not satisfied I can accept this version of events.
[
35
]
There is reason to doubt the defendant’s
testimony, especially with respect to the oral sex.  As I will explain, I am
confident in the sincerity of the complainant.  As such, is unlikely that she
is mistaken about this, and, if so, that the defendant forgot about it. Nevertheless,
even if this justifies rejection of his testimony, the prosecution fails.
[
36
]
There is nothing in evidence before me to
suggest the complainant fabricated the allegations. She presented as articulate,
calm, candid.  I accept that the sexual acts she described did, in fact,
occur.  The complainant recalls that after consensual kissing, the defendant
began removing her clothing and she said “no”.  After this, the parties said
nothing as further sexual activity occurred.  The defendant pulled her down
upon his lap and penetrated her.  He put his penis in her mouth.  When this was
done, he stood aside and ejaculated.  He was not aggressive.  The complainant
did not physically resist. She believed she had no other options.  If these are
the facts, the defendant is guilty.  However, I am not satisfied the Crown has
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the sexual activity was non-consensual.
[
37
]
The complainant reported this matter to the
police many years later.  This does not necessarily mean her report is false or
inaccurate. But such delay can affect reliability even where, as here, there
are no concerns about credibility.  What happened in that schoolyard caused the
complainant to be emotional and confused.  This is not surprising; she was 14
years old.  With the passage of time, personal research, and therapy, she came
to understand she had not consented.  In these circumstances, I am troubled by
the reasonable possibility that the picture painted upon reflection may not represent
the actual scene.  That image remains blurred.
[
38
]
I have considered the Crown’s argument about the
difference in age between the parties.  In teenage years a 4-year gap in age is
more significant than at later stages of life. Whatever one may think of a
person in grade 12 having sex with another in grade 9, Parliament has
determined that the younger person can consent.  As such, non-consent must be
proven by the Crown.
[
39
]
I appreciate this is a difficult journey for the
complainant.  Her present understanding of what occurred may be true.  However,
I cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that it reflects her state of mind in
that schoolyard and governed her conduct at that time.
[
40
]
The Crown has not discharged its burden of
proof. The charges are dismissed.
Released:  March
13, 2025
Signed:
Justice J. De Filippis