PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 603 U. S. Part 1
                             Pages 369–479




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                                June 28, 2024


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
                         OCTOBER TERM, 2023                              369

                                 Syllabus


LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES et al. v. RAIMONDO,
      SECRETARY OF COMMERCE, et al.

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
          the district of columbia circuit
     No. 22–451. Argued January 17, 2024—Decided June 28, 2024*
The Court granted certiorari in these cases limited to the question
 whether Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council,
 Inc., 467 U. S. 837, should be overruled or clarifed. Under the Chevron
 doctrine, courts have sometimes been required to defer to “permissible”
 agency interpretations of the statutes those agencies administer—even
 when a reviewing court reads the statute differently. Id., at 843. In
 each case below, the reviewing courts applied Chevron's framework to
 resolve in favor of the Government challenges by petitioners to a rule
 promulgated by the National Marine Fisheries Service pursuant to the
 Magnuson-Stevens Act, 16 U. S. C. § 1801 et seq., which incorporates the
 Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. § 551 et seq.
Held: The Administrative Procedure Act requires courts to exercise their
Page
 independentProof
             judgment in Pending
                          deciding whether an Publication
                                               agency has acted within
  its statutory authority, and courts may not defer to an agency interpre-
  tation of the law simply because a statute is ambiguous; Chevron is
  overruled. Pp. 384–413.
     (a) Article III of the Constitution assigns to the Federal Judiciary the
  responsibility and power to adjudicate “Cases” and “Controversies”—
  concrete disputes with consequences for the parties involved. The
  Framers appreciated that the laws judges would necessarily apply in
  resolving those disputes would not always be clear, but envisioned that
  the fnal “interpretation of the laws” would be “the proper and peculiar
  province of the courts.” The Federalist No. 78, p. 525 (A. Hamilton).
  As Chief Justice Marshall declared in the foundational decision of Mar-
  bury v. Madison, “[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of the judi-
  cial department to say what the law is.” 1 Cranch 137, 177. In the
  decades following Marbury, when the meaning of a statute was at issue,
  the judicial role was to “interpret the act of Congress, in order to ascer-
  tain the rights of the parties.” Decatur v. Paulding, 14 Pet. 497, 515.

  *Together with No. 22–1219, Relentless, Inc., et al. v. Department of
Commerce et al., on certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for
the First Circuit.
370        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                                  Syllabus

     The Court recognized from the outset, though, that exercising inde-
  pendent judgment often included according due respect to Executive
  Branch interpretations of federal statutes. Such respect was thought
  especially warranted when an Executive Branch interpretation was is-
  sued roughly contemporaneously with enactment of the statute and re-
  mained consistent over time. The Court also gave “the most respect-
  ful consideration” to Executive Branch interpretations simply because
  “[t]he offcers concerned [were] usually able men, and masters of the
  subject,” who may well have drafted the laws at issue. United States
  v. Moore, 95 U. S. 760, 763. “Respect,” though, was just that. The
  views of the Executive Branch could inform the judgment of the Judi-
  ciary, but did not supersede it. “[I]n cases where [a court's] own judg-
  ment . . . differ[ed] from that of other high functionaries,” the court was
  “not at liberty to surrender, or to waive it.” United States v. Dickson,
  15 Pet. 141, 162.
     During the “rapid expansion of the administrative process” that took
  place during the New Deal era, United States v. Morton Salt Co., 338
  U. S. 632, 644, the Court often treated agency determinations of fact as
  binding on the courts, provided that there was “evidence to support the
  fndings,” St. Joseph Stock Yards Co. v. United States, 298 U. S. 38, 51.
  But the Court did not extend similar deference to agency resolutions of
Page Proof Pending Publication
  questions of law. “The interpretation of the meaning of statutes, as
  applied to justiciable controversies,” remained “exclusively a judicial
  function.” United States v. American Trucking Assns., Inc., 310 U. S.
  534, 544. The Court also continued to note that the informed judgment
  of the Executive Branch could be entitled to “great weight.” Id., at
  549. “The weight of such a judgment in a particular case,” the Court
  observed, would “depend upon the thoroughness evident in its consider-
  ation, the validity of its reasoning, its consistency with earlier and later
  pronouncements, and all those factors which give it power to persuade,
  if lacking power to control.” Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U. S. 134,
  140.
     Occasionally during this period, the Court applied deferential review
  after concluding that a particular statute empowered an agency to de-
  cide how a broad statutory term applied to specifc facts found by the
  agency. See Gray v. Powell, 314 U. S. 402; NLRB v. Hearst Publica-
  tions, Inc., 322 U. S. 111. But such deferential review, which the Court
  was far from consistent in applying, was cabined to factbound determi-
  nations. And the Court did not purport to refashion the longstanding
  judicial approach to questions of law. It instead proclaimed that “[u]n-
  doubtedly questions of statutory interpretation . . . are for the courts to
  resolve, giving appropriate weight to the judgment of those whose spe-
  cial duty is to administer the questioned statute.” Id., at 130–131.
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                    371

                                Syllabus

 Nothing in the New Deal era or before it thus resembled the deference
 rule the Court would begin applying decades later to all varieties of
 agency interpretations of statutes under Chevron. Pp. 384–390.
    (b) Congress in 1946 enacted the APA “as a check upon administra-
 tors whose zeal might otherwise have carried them to excesses not con-
 templated in legislation creating their offces.” Morton Salt, 338 U. S.,
 at 644. The APA prescribes procedures for agency action and delin-
 eates the basic contours of judicial review of such action. And it codi-
 fes for agency cases the unremarkable, yet elemental proposition re-
 fected by judicial practice dating back to Marbury: that courts decide
 legal questions by applying their own judgment. As relevant here, the
 APA specifes that courts, not agencies, will decide “all relevant ques-
 tions of law” arising on review of agency action, 5 U. S. C. § 706 (em-
 phasis added)—even those involving ambiguous laws. It prescribes no
 deferential standard for courts to employ in answering those legal
 questions, despite mandating deferential judicial review of agency poli-
 cymaking and factfnding. See §§ 706(2)(A), (E). And by directing
 courts to “interpret constitutional and statutory provisions” without dif-
 ferentiating between the two, § 706, it makes clear that agency interpre-
 tations of statutes—like agency interpretations of the Constitution—are
 not entitled to deference. The APA's history and the contemporaneous
Page Proof Pending Publication
 views of various respected commentators underscore the plain meaning
 of its text.
    Courts exercising independent judgment in determining the meaning
 of statutory provisions, consistent with the APA, may—as they have
 from the start—seek aid from the interpretations of those responsible
 for implementing particular statutes. See Skidmore, 323 U. S., at 140.
 And when the best reading of a statute is that it delegates discretionary
 authority to an agency, the role of the reviewing court under the APA
 is, as always, to independently interpret the statute and effectuate the
 will of Congress subject to constitutional limits. The court fulflls that
 role by recognizing constitutional delegations, fxing the boundaries of
 the delegated authority, and ensuring the agency has engaged in “ `rea-
 soned decisionmaking' ” within those boundaries. Michigan v. EPA,
 576 U. S. 743, 750 (quoting Allentown Mack Sales & Service, Inc. v.
 NLRB, 522 U. S. 359, 374). By doing so, a court upholds the traditional
 conception of the judicial function that the APA adopts. Pp. 391–396.
    (c) The deference that Chevron requires of courts reviewing agency
 action cannot be squared with the APA. Pp. 396–407.
       (1) Chevron, decided in 1984 by a bare quorum of six Justices, trig-
 gered a marked departure from the traditional judicial approach of inde-
 pendently examining each statute to determine its meaning. The ques-
 tion in the case was whether an Environmental Protection Agency
372        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                                 Syllabus

  (EPA) regulation was consistent with the term “stationary source” as
  used in the Clean Air Act. 467 U. S., at 840. To answer that question,
  the Court articulated and employed a now familiar two-step approach
  broadly applicable to review of agency action. The frst step was to
  discern “whether Congress ha[d] directly spoken to the precise question
  at issue.” Id., at 842. The Court explained that “[i]f the intent of Con-
  gress is clear, that is the end of the matter,” ibid., and courts were
  therefore to “reject administrative constructions which are contrary to
  clear congressional intent,” id., at 843, n. 9. But in a case in which “the
  statute [was] silent or ambiguous with respect to the specifc issue” at
  hand, a reviewing court could not “simply impose its own construction
  on the statute, as would be necessary in the absence of an administrative
  interpretation.” Id., at 843 (footnote omitted). Instead, at Chevron's
  second step, a court had to defer to the agency if it had offered “a per-
  missible construction of the statute,” ibid., even if not “the reading the
  court would have reached if the question initially had arisen in a judicial
  proceeding,” ibid., n. 11. Employing this new test, the Court concluded
  that Congress had not addressed the question at issue with the neces-
  sary “level of specifcity” and that EPA's interpretation was “entitled to
  deference.” Id., at 865.
     Although the Court did not at frst treat Chevron as the watershed
Page Proof Pending Publication
  decision it was fated to become, the Court and the courts of appeals
  were soon routinely invoking its framework as the governing standard
  in cases involving statutory questions of agency authority. The Court
  eventually decided that Chevron rested on “a presumption that Con-
  gress, when it left ambiguity in a statute meant for implementation by
  an agency, understood that the ambiguity would be resolved, frst and
  foremost, by the agency, and desired the agency (rather than the courts)
  to possess whatever degree of discretion the ambiguity allows.” Smi-
  ley v. Citibank (South Dakota), N. A., 517 U. S. 735, 740–741.
  Pp. 396–398.
       (2) Neither Chevron nor any subsequent decision of the Court at-
  tempted to reconcile its framework with the APA. Chevron defes the
  command of the APA that “the reviewing court”—not the agency whose
  action it reviews—is to “decide all relevant questions of law” and “inter-
  pret . . . statutory provisions.” § 706 (emphasis added). It requires a
  court to ignore, not follow, “the reading the court would have reached”
  had it exercised its independent judgment as required by the APA.
  Chevron, 467 U. S., at 843, n. 11. Chevron insists on more than the
  “respect” historically given to Executive Branch interpretations; it de-
  mands that courts mechanically afford binding deference to agency in-
  terpretations, including those that have been inconsistent over time, see
  id., at 863, and even when a pre-existing judicial precedent holds that
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                     373

                                Syllabus

 an ambiguous statute means something else, National Cable & Telecom-
 munications Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services, 545 U. S. 967, 982.
 That regime is the antithesis of the time honored approach the APA
 prescribes.
    Chevron cannot be reconciled with the APA by presuming that statu-
 tory ambiguities are implicit delegations to agencies. That presump-
 tion does not approximate reality. A statutory ambiguity does not nec-
 essarily refect a congressional intent that an agency, as opposed to a
 court, resolve the resulting interpretive question. Many or perhaps
 most statutory ambiguities may be unintentional. And when courts
 confront statutory ambiguities in cases that do not involve agency inter-
 pretations or delegations of authority, they are not somehow relieved
 of their obligation to independently interpret the statutes. Instead of
 declaring a particular party's reading “permissible” in such a case,
 courts use every tool at their disposal to determine the best reading of
 the statute and resolve the ambiguity. But in an agency case as in any
 other, there is a best reading all the same—“the reading the court would
 have reached” if no agency were involved. Chevron, 467 U. S., at 843,
 n. 11. It therefore makes no sense to speak of a “permissible” interpre-
 tation that is not the one the court, after applying all relevant interpre-
 tive tools, concludes is best.
Page Proof Pending Publication
    Perhaps most fundamentally, Chevron's presumption is misguided be-
 cause agencies have no special competence in resolving statutory ambi-
 guities. Courts do. The Framers anticipated that courts would often
 confront statutory ambiguities and expected that courts would resolve
 them by exercising independent legal judgment. Chevron gravely
 erred in concluding that the inquiry is fundamentally different just be-
 cause an administrative interpretation is in play. The very point of
 the traditional tools of statutory construction is to resolve statutory
 ambiguities. That is no less true when the ambiguity is about the scope
 of an agency's own power—perhaps the occasion on which abdication in
 favor of the agency is least appropriate. Pp. 398–401.
      (3) The Government responds that Congress must generally intend
 for agencies to resolve statutory ambiguities because agencies have sub-
 ject matter expertise regarding the statutes they administer; because
 deferring to agencies purportedly promotes the uniform construction
 of federal law; and because resolving statutory ambiguities can involve
 policymaking best left to political actors, rather than courts. See Brief
 for Respondents in No. 22–1219, pp. 16–19. But none of these con-
 siderations justifes Chevron's sweeping presumption of congressional
 intent.
    As the Court recently noted, interpretive issues arising in connection
 with a regulatory scheme “may fall more naturally into a judge's baili-
374       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                                 Syllabus

  wick” than an agency's. Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U. S. 558, 578. Under
  Chevron's broad rule of deference, though, ambiguities of all stripes
  trigger deference, even in cases having little to do with an agency's
  technical subject matter expertise. And even when an ambiguity hap-
  pens to implicate a technical matter, it does not follow that Congress
  has taken the power to authoritatively interpret the statute from the
  courts and given it to the agency. Congress expects courts to handle
  technical statutory questions, and courts did so without issue in agency
  cases before Chevron. After all, in an agency case in particular, the
  reviewing court will go about its task with the agency's “body of experi-
  ence and informed judgment,” among other information, at its disposal.
  Skidmore, 323 U. S., at 140. An agency's interpretation of a statute
  “cannot bind a court,” but may be especially informative “to the extent
  it rests on factual premises within [the agency's] expertise.” Bureau
  of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms v. FLRA, 464 U. S. 89, 98, n. 8. Dele-
  gating ultimate interpretive authority to agencies is simply not neces-
  sary to ensure that the resolution of statutory ambiguities is well in-
  formed by subject matter expertise.
     Nor does a desire for the uniform construction of federal law justify
  Chevron. It is unclear how much the Chevron doctrine as a whole actu-
  ally promotes such uniformity, and in any event, we see no reason to
Page Proof Pending Publication
  presume that Congress prefers uniformity for uniformity's sake over the
  correct interpretation of the laws it enacts.
     Finally, the view that interpretation of ambiguous statutory provi-
  sions amounts to policymaking suited for political actors rather than
  courts is especially mistaken because it rests on a profound misconcep-
  tion of the judicial role. Resolution of statutory ambiguities involves
  legal interpretation, and that task does not suddenly become policymak-
  ing just because a court has an “agency to fall back on.” Kisor, 588
  U. S., at 575. Courts interpret statutes, no matter the context, based
  on the traditional tools of statutory construction, not individual policy
  preferences. To stay out of discretionary policymaking left to the polit-
  ical branches, judges need only fulfll their obligations under the APA
  to independently identify and respect such delegations of authority, po-
  lice the outer statutory boundaries of those delegations, and ensure that
  agencies exercise their discretion consistent with the APA. By forcing
  courts to instead pretend that ambiguities are necessarily delegations,
  Chevron prevents judges from judging. Pp. 401–404.
        (4) Because Chevron's justifying presumption is, as Members of the
  Court have often recognized, a fction, the Court has spent the better
  part of four decades imposing one limitation on Chevron after another.
  Confronted with the byzantine set of preconditions and exceptions that
  has resulted, some courts have simply bypassed Chevron or failed to
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                      375

                                 Syllabus

 heed its various steps and nuances. The Court, for its part, has not
 deferred to an agency interpretation under Chevron since 2016. But
 because Chevron remains on the books, litigants must continue to wres-
 tle with it, and lower courts—bound by even the Court's crumbling prec-
 edents—understandably continue to apply it. At best, Chevron has
 been a distraction from the question that matters: Does the statute au-
 thorize the challenged agency action? And at worst, it has required
 courts to violate the APA by yielding to an agency the express responsi-
 bility, vested in “the reviewing court,” to “decide all relevant questions
 of law” and “interpret . . . statutory provisions.” § 706 (emphasis
 added). Pp. 404–407.
    (d) Stare decisis, the doctrine governing judicial adherence to prece-
 dent, does not require the Court to persist in the Chevron project. The
 stare decisis considerations most relevant here—“the quality of [the
 precedent's] reasoning, the workability of the rule it established, . . . and
 reliance on the decision,” Knick v. Township of Scott, 588 U. S. 180, 203
 (quoting Janus v. State, County, and Municipal Employees, 585 U. S.
 878, 917)—all weigh in favor of letting Chevron go.
    Chevron has proved to be fundamentally misguided. It reshaped ju-
 dicial review of agency action without grappling with the APA, the stat-

Page Proof Pending Publication
 ute that lays out how such review works. And its faws were apparent
 from the start, prompting the Court to revise its foundations and contin-
 ually limit its application.
    Experience has also shown that Chevron is unworkable. The defn-
 ing feature of its framework is the identifcation of statutory ambiguity,
 but the concept of ambiguity has always evaded meaningful defnition.
 Such an impressionistic and malleable concept “cannot stand as an
 every-day test for allocating” interpretive authority between courts and
 agencies. Swift & Co. v. Wickham, 382 U. S. 111, 125. The Court has
 also been forced to clarify the doctrine again and again, only adding to
 Chevron's unworkability, and the doctrine continues to spawn diffcult
 threshold questions that promise to further complicate the inquiry
 should Chevron be retained. And its continuing import is far from
 clear, as courts have often declined to engage with the doctrine, saying
 it makes no difference.
    Nor has Chevron fostered meaningful reliance. Given the Court's
 constant tinkering with and eventual turn away from Chevron, it is hard
 to see how anyone could reasonably expect a court to rely on Chevron in
 any particular case or expect it to produce readily foreseeable outcomes.
 And rather than safeguarding reliance interests, Chevron affrmatively
 destroys them by allowing agencies to change course even when Con-
 gress has given them no power to do so.
376        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                                  Syllabus

    The only way to “ensure that the law will not merely change errati-
 cally, but will develop in a principled and intelligible fashion,” Vasquez
 v. Hillery, 474 U. S. 254, 265, is for the Court to leave Chevron behind.
 By overruling Chevron, though, the Court does not call into question
 prior cases that relied on the Chevron framework. The holdings of
 those cases that specifc agency actions are lawful—including the Clean
 Air Act holding of Chevron itself—are still subject to statutory stare
 decisis despite the Court's change in interpretive methodology. See
 CBOCS West, Inc. v. Humphries, 553 U. S. 442, 457. Mere reliance on
 Chevron cannot constitute a “ `special justifcation' ” for overruling such
 a holding. Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John Fund, Inc., 573 U. S. 258,
 266 (quoting Dickerson v. United States, 530 U. S. 428, 443). Pp. 407–412.
No. 22–451, 45 F. 4th 359; and No. 22–1219, 62 F. 4th 621, vacated and
 remanded.

  Roberts, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Thomas,
Alito, Gorsuch, Kavanaugh, and Barrett, JJ., joined. Thomas, J.,
post, p. 413, and Gorsuch, J., post, p. 416, fled concurring opinions.
Kagan, J., fled a dissenting opinion, in which Sotomayor, J., joined, and
in which Jackson, J., joined as it applies to No. 22–1219, post, p. 448.
Jackson, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case in
Page Proof Pending Publication
No. 22–451.

  Paul D. Clement argued the cause for petitioners. With
him on the briefs were Andrew C. Lawrence, Ryan P. Mul-
vey, Eric R. Bolinder, and R. James Valvo III.
  Solicitor General Prelogar argued the cause for respond-
ents. With her on the brief were Assistant Attorney Gen-
eral Kim, Deputy Solicitor General Kneedler, Matthew
Guarnieri, Rachel Heron, and Dina B. Mishra.†

   †Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were fled for the State of West
Virginia et al. by Lindsay S. See, Solicitor General of West Virginia, Pat-
rick Morrisey, Attorney General, Michael R. Williams, Principal Deputy
Solicitor General, and Grant A. Newman, Assistant Solicitor General, by
Angela Colmenero, Provisional Attorney General of Texas, and by the At-
torneys General for their respective States as follows: Steve Marshall of Al-
abama, Treg Taylor of Alaska, Tim Griffn of Arkansas, Ashley Moody of
Florida, Chris Carr of Georgia, Raúl Labrador of Idaho, Theodore E. Rok-
ita of Indiana, Brenna Bird of Iowa, Kris Kobach of Kansas, Daniel Cam-
eron of Kentucky, Jeff Landry of Louisiana, Lynn Fitch of Mississippi,
Andrew Bailey of Missouri, Austin Knudsen of Montana, Michael T. Hil-
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                   377

                          Opinion of the Court

  Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the
Court.
  Since our decision in Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Re-
sources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837 (1984), we have

gers of Nebraska, John M. Formella of New Hampshire, Drew Wrigley of
North Dakota, Dave Yost of Ohio, Gentner Drummond of Oklahoma, Alan
Wilson of South Carolina, Marty Jackley of South Dakota, Jonathan
Skrmetti of Tennessee, Sean D. Reyes of Utah, Jason Miyares of Virginia,
and Bridget Hill of Wyoming; for the Advance Colorado Institute by Kris-
tine L. Brown; for Advancing American Freedom et al. by J. Marc Wheat;
for the America First Legal Foundation by Christopher E. Mills, Gene
P. Hamilton, and Reed D. Rubinstein; for the America First Policy Insti-
tute by Matthew J. Conigliaro, Jessica Hart Steinmann, and Richard
P. Lawson; for the American Center for Law and Justice by Jay Alan
Sekulow, Stuart J. Roth, Jordan A. Sekulow, Colby M. May, and Laura
B. Hernandez; for the American Cornerstone Institute by Edward M.
Wenger, Andrew Pardue, and Kenneth C. Daines; for The Buckeye Insti-
tute et al. by David C. Tryon and Elizabeth Milito; for the Cato Institute
et al. by Anastasia P. Boden, Thomas A. Berry, and Curt A. Levey; for
Page Proof Pending Publication
the Center for Constitutional Jurisprudence by John C. Eastman and An-
thony T. Caso; for the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of
America by Helgi C. Walker, Russell B. Balikian, Daryl L. Joseffer, and
Andrew R. Varcoe; for the Christian Employers Alliance by Matthew S.
Bowman, Julie Marie Blake, John J. Bursch, James A. Campbell, and
Erin Morrow Hawley; for the Competitive Enterprise Institute by Dan
Greenberg; for the DRI Center for Law and Public Policy by Melinda S.
Kollross and Don R. Sampen; for Eight National Business Organizations
by Timothy S. Bishop, Brett E. Legner, Richard Gupton, Ellen Steen,
Travis Cushman, and Michael C. Formica; for the Foundation for Govern-
ment Accountability by Stewart L. Whitson; for the FPC Action Founda-
tion et al. by Joseph G. S. Greenlee and Cody J. Wisniewski; for the Gold-
water Institute by Timothy Sandefur; for Gun Owners of America, Inc.,
et al. by William J. Olson, Jeremiah L. Morgan, Robert J. Olson, and
John I. Harris III; for the Independent Women's Law Center et al. by
Kathryn E. Tarbert, Gene C. Schaerr, Cory L. Andrews, and John M. Mas-
slon II; for the Landmark Legal Foundation by Michael J. O'Neill, Mat-
thew C. Forys, and Richard P. Hutchison; for the Liberty Justice Center
by Loren A. Seehase; for the Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter and
Paul Home by Eric C. Rassbach and William J. Haun; for the Manhattan
Institute et al. by Ilya Shapiro; for the Mountain States Legal Foundation
by Ivan L. London and David C. McDonald; for the National Right to
378       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                         Opinion of the Court

sometimes required courts to defer to “permissible” agency
interpretations of the statutes those agencies administer—
even when a reviewing court reads the statute differently.
In these cases we consider whether that doctrine should be
overruled.

Work Legal Defense Foundation, Inc., by W. James Young; for the Na-
tional Sports Shooting Foundation, Inc., by H. Christopher Bartolomucci,
Brian J. Field, and Kenneth A. Klukowski; for the National Taxpayers
Union Foundation by Joseph D. Henchman and Tyler Martinez; for the
New Civil Liberties Alliance by John J. Vecchione, Mark Chenoweth, and
Kara Rollins; for the New England Legal Foundation by Benjamin G.
Robbins and Daniel B. Winslow; for the Ohio Chamber of Commerce by
Larry J. Obhof, Jr.; for the Pacifc Legal Foundation by Aditya Dynar;
for the Southeastern Legal Foundation et al. by Thomas R. McCarthy, J.
Michael Connolly, Braden H. Boucek, Kimberly S. Hermann, Karen
Harned, Robert Henneke, Chance Weldon, and Donald A. Daugherty, Jr.;
for Strive Asset Management by Jonathan Berry; for TechFreedom by
Corbin K. Barthold; for the U. S. House of Representatives by Matthew
B. Berry, Todd B. Tatelman, Brooks M. Hanner, and Sarah E. Clouse; for
Page Proof Pending Publication
Sen. Ted Cruz et al. by Jennifer L. Mascott and R. Trent McCotter; for
David Goethel et al. by Andrew M. Grossman; and for Gov. Brian P. Kemp
by David B. Dove. Briefs of amici curiae urging vacatur were fled for
the American Free Enterprise Chamber of Commerce by Steven A. Engel,
Michael H. McGinley, and William P. Barr; and for the Third Party Pay-
ment Processors Association by Misha Tseytlin, Kevin M. LeRoy, and
Sean T. H. Dutton.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance were fled for Administrative
and Federal Regulatory Law Professors by Daniel M. Sullivan and Brian
T. Goldman; for the American Association for the Advancement of Science
et al. by D. Alicia Hickok; for the American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations by Harold C. Becker, Matthew Gins-
burg, and Andrew Lyubarsky; for the Conservation Law Foundation et al.
by Kirti Datla and Andrea A. Treece; for the Environmental Defense
Fund by Sean H. Donahue, David T. Goldberg, Megan M. Herzog, Vickie
L. Patton, and Peter Zalzal; for the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights
Under Law by James P. McLoughlin, Jr., Mary Katherine Stukes, Pierce
Werner, Damon Hewitt, Jon Greenbaum, and Thomas Silverstein; for
PTAAARMIGAN, LLC, et al. by David E. Boundy; for Public Citizen by
Scott L. Nelson and Allison M. Zieve; for Small Business Associations by
Jeffrey B. Dubner, Kaitlyn Golden, and Skye L. Perryman; for Thomas
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                   379

                          Opinion of the Court

                                    I
   Our Chevron doctrine requires courts to use a two-step
framework to interpret statutes administered by federal
agencies. After determining that a case satisfes the vari-
ous preconditions we have set for Chevron to apply, a review-
ing court must frst assess “whether Congress has directly
spoken to the precise question at issue.” Id., at 842. If,
and only if, congressional intent is “clear,” that is the end of
the inquiry. Ibid. But if the court determines that “the
statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specifc
issue” at hand, the court must, at Chevron's second step,
defer to the agency's interpretation if it “is based on a per-

W. Merrill by Joseph D. Kearney; and for Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse et al.
by Erwin Chemerinsky.
   Briefs of amici curiae were fled for the District of Columbia et al. by
Brian L. Schwalb, Attorney General of the District of Columbia, Caroline
S. Van Zile, Solicitor General, Ashwin P. Phatak, Principal Deputy Solici-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tor General, and Alexandra Lichtenstein, Assistant Attorney General, and
by the Attorneys General for their respective States as follows: Rob Bonta
of California, Philip J. Weiser of Colorado, William Tong of Connecticut,
Kathleen Jennings of Delaware, Anne E. Lopez of Hawaii, Kwame Raoul
of Illinois, Anthony G. Brown of Maryland, Andrea Joy Campbell of Mas-
sachusetts, Dana Nessel of Michigan, Keith Ellison of Minnesota, Aaron
D. Ford of Nevada, Matthew J. Platkin of New Jersey, Raúl Torrez of
New Mexico, Letitia James of New York, Joshua H. Stein of North Caro-
lina, Ellen F. Rosenblum of Oregon, Michelle A. Henry of Pennsylvania,
Peter F. Neronha of Rhode Island, Charity R. Clark of Vermont, Robert
W. Ferguson of Washington, and Joshua L. Kaul of Wisconsin; for the
American Cancer Society et al. by Scott P. Lewis, Mary Rouvelas, and
Jane Perkins; for the Atlantic Legal Foundation by Lawrence S. Ebner
and Herbert L. Fenster; for the Coalition for a Democratic Workplace et al.
by Elbert Lin and Kurt G. Larkin; for the Electronic Nicotine Delivery
System Industry Stakeholders by Eric P. Gotting, Azim Chowdhury, and
J. Gregory Troutman; for the LONANG Institute by Kerry Lee Morgan
and Randall A. Pentiuk; for the Natural Resources Defense Council by
Ian Fein and David Doniger; for Scholars of Administrative Law et al. by
Elizabeth B. Wydra and Brianne J. Gorod; for Aditya Bamzai, pro se; and
for Kent Barnett et al. by Christopher J. Walker, pro se.
380      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

missible construction of the statute.” Id., at 843. The re-
viewing courts in each of the cases before us applied Chev-
ron's framework to resolve in favor of the Government chal-
lenges to the same agency rule.

                              A
   Before 1976, unregulated foreign vessels dominated fshing
in the international waters off the U. S. coast, which began
just 12 nautical miles offshore. See, e. g., S. Rep. No. 94–
459, pp. 2–3 (1975). Recognizing the resultant overfshing
and the need for sound management of fshery resources,
Congress enacted the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conserva-
tion and Management Act (MSA). See 90 Stat. 331 (codifed
as amended at 16 U. S. C. § 1801 et seq.). The MSA and sub-
sequent amendments extended the jurisdiction of the United
States to 200 nautical miles beyond the U. S. territorial sea
and claimed “exclusive fshery management authority over
Page Proof Pending Publication
all fsh” within that area, known as the “exclusive economic
zone.” § 1811(a); see Presidential Proclamation No. 5030,
3 CFR 22 (1983 Comp.); §§ 101, 102, 90 Stat. 336. The
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) administers
the MSA under a delegation from the Secretary of
Commerce.
   The MSA established eight regional fshery management
councils composed of representatives from the coastal States,
fshery stakeholders, and NMFS. See 16 U. S. C. §§ 1852(a),
(b). The councils develop fshery management plans, which
NMFS approves and promulgates as fnal regulations. See
§§ 1852(h), 1854(a). In service of the statute's fshery con-
servation and management goals, see § 1851(a), the MSA re-
quires that certain provisions—such as “a mechanism for
specifying annual catch limits . . . at a level such that over-
fshing does not occur,” § 1853(a)(15)—be included in these
plans, see § 1853(a). The plans may also include additional
discretionary provisions. See § 1853(b). For example,
plans may “prohibit, limit, condition, or require the use of
                    Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)              381

                        Opinion of the Court

specifed types and quantities of fshing gear, fshing vessels,
or equipment,” § 1853(b)(4); “reserve a portion of the allow-
able biological catch of the fshery for use in scientifc re-
search,” § 1853(b)(11); and “prescribe such other measures,
requirements, or conditions and restrictions as are deter-
mined to be necessary and appropriate for the conservation
and management of the fshery,” § 1853(b)(14).
   Relevant here, a plan may also require that “one or more
observers be carried on board” domestic vessels “for the pur-
pose of collecting data necessary for the conservation and
management of the fshery.” § 1853(b)(8). The MSA speci-
fes three groups that must cover costs associated with ob-
servers: (1) foreign fshing vessels operating within the ex-
clusive economic zone (which must carry observers), see
§§ 1821(h)(1)(A), (h)(4), (h)(6); (2) vessels participating in cer-
tain limited access privilege programs, which impose quotas
permitting fshermen to harvest only specifc quantities of a
Page Proof Pending Publication
fshery's total allowable catch, see §§ 1802(26), 1853a(c)(1)(H),
(e)(2), 1854(d)(2); and (3) vessels within the jurisdiction of the
North Pacifc Council, where many of the largest and most
successful commercial fshing enterprises in the Nation oper-
ate, see § 1862(a). In the latter two cases, the MSA ex-
pressly caps the relevant fees at two or three percent of the
value of fsh harvested on the vessels. See §§ 1854(d)(2)(B),
1862(b)(2)(E). And in general, it authorizes the Secretary
to impose “sanctions” when “any payment required for ob-
server services provided to or contracted by an owner or
operator . . . has not been paid.” § 1858(g)(1)(D).
   The MSA does not contain similar terms addressing
whether Atlantic herring fshermen may be required to bear
costs associated with any observers a plan may mandate.
And at one point, NMFS fully funded the observer coverage
the New England Fishery Management Council required in
its plan for the Atlantic herring fshery. See 79 Fed. Reg.
8792 (2014). In 2013, however, the council proposed amend-
ing its fshery management plans to empower it to require
382     LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Opinion of the Court

fshermen to pay for observers if federal funding became un-
available. Several years later, NMFS promulgated a rule
approving the amendment. See 85 Fed. Reg. 7414 (2020).
  With respect to the Atlantic herring fshery, the Rule cre-
ated an industry funded program that aims to ensure ob-
server coverage on 50 percent of trips undertaken by vessels
with certain types of permits. Under that program, vessel
representatives must “declare into” a fshery before begin-
ning a trip by notifying NMFS of the trip and announcing
the species the vessel intends to harvest. If NMFS deter-
mines that an observer is required, but declines to assign a
Government-paid one, the vessel must contract with and pay
for a Government-certifed third-party observer. NMFS es-
timated that the cost of such an observer would be up to
$710 per day, reducing annual returns to the vessel owner
by up to 20 percent. See id., at 7417–7418.

                          B
Page      Proof     Pending         Publication
 Petitioners Loper Bright Enterprises, Inc., H&L Axels-
son, Inc., Lund Marr Trawlers LLC, and Scombrus One LLC
are family businesses that operate in the Atlantic herring
fshery. In February 2020, they challenged the Rule under
the MSA, 16 U. S. C. § 1855(f), which incorporates the Admin-
istrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. § 551 et seq. In
relevant part, they argued that the MSA does not authorize
NMFS to mandate that they pay for observers required by
a fshery management plan. The District Court granted
summary judgment to the Government. It concluded that
the MSA authorized the Rule, but noted that even if these
petitioners' “arguments were enough to raise an ambiguity
in the statutory text,” deference to the agency's interpreta-
tion would be warranted under Chevron. 544 F. Supp. 3d
82, 107 (DC 2021); see id., at 103–107.
   A divided panel of the D. C. Circuit affrmed. See 45
F. 4th 359 (2022). The majority addressed various provi-
sions of the MSA and concluded that it was not “wholly un-
                     Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)              383

                        Opinion of the Court

ambiguous” whether NMFS may require Atlantic herring
fshermen to pay for observers. Id., at 366. Because there
remained “some question” as to Congress's intent, id., at 369,
the court proceeded to Chevron's second step and deferred
to the agency's interpretation as a “reasonable” construction
of the MSA, 45 F. 4th, at 370. In dissent, Judge Walker
concluded that Congress's silence on industry funded observ-
ers for the Atlantic herring fshery—coupled with the ex-
press provision for such observers in other fsheries and on
foreign vessels—unambiguously indicated that NMFS lacked
the authority to “require [Atlantic herring] fshermen to pay
the wages of at-sea monitors.” Id., at 375.

                                  C
   Petitioners Relentless Inc., Huntress Inc., and Seafreeze
Fleet LLC own two vessels that operate in the Atlantic her-
ring fshery: the F/V Relentless and the F/V Persistence.1
Page Proof Pending Publication
These vessels use small-mesh bottom-trawl gear and can
freeze fsh at sea, so they can catch more species of fsh and
take longer trips than other vessels (about 10 to 14 days, as
opposed to the more typical 2 to 4). As a result, they gener-
ally declare into multiple fsheries per trip so they can catch
whatever the ocean offers up. If the vessels declare into the
Atlantic herring fshery for a particular trip, they must carry
an observer for that trip if NMFS selects the trip for cover-
age, even if they end up harvesting fewer herring than other
vessels—or no herring at all.
   This set of petitioners, like those in the D. C. Circuit case,
fled a suit challenging the Rule as unauthorized by the MSA.
The District Court, like the D. C. Circuit, deferred to
NMFS's contrary interpretation under Chevron and thus
granted summary judgment to the Government. See 561
F. Supp. 3d 226, 234–238 (RI 2021).

  1
   For any landlubbers, “F/V” is simply the designation for a fshing
vessel.
384       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                         Opinion of the Court

   The First Circuit affrmed. See 62 F. 4th 621 (2023). It
relied on a “default norm” that regulated entities must bear
compliance costs, as well as the MSA's sanctions provision,
Section 1858(g)(1)(D). See id., at 629–631. And it rejected
petitioners' argument that the express statutory authoriza-
tion of three industry funding programs demonstrated that
NMFS lacked the broad implicit authority it asserted to im-
pose such a program for the Atlantic herring fshery. See
id., at 631–633. The court ultimately concluded that the
“[a]gency's interpretation of its authority to require at-sea
monitors who are paid for by owners of regulated vessels
does not `exceed[ ] the bounds of the permissible.' ” Id., at
633–634 (quoting Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U. S. 212, 218
(2002); alteration in original). In reaching that conclusion,
the First Circuit stated that it was applying Chevron's two-
step framework. 62 F. 4th, at 628. But it did not explain
which aspects of its analysis were relevant to which of Chev-
ron's two steps. Similarly, it declined to decide whether the
Page Proof Pending Publication
result was “a product of Chevron step one or step two.” Id.,
at 634.
   We granted certiorari in both cases, limited to the question
whether Chevron should be overruled or clarifed. See 601
U. S. 883 (2023); 598 U. S. 1270 (2023).2

                                  II
                                  A
   Article III of the Constitution assigns to the Federal Judi-
ciary the responsibility and power to adjudicate “Cases” and
“Controversies”—concrete disputes with consequences for
the parties involved. The Framers appreciated that the
laws judges would necessarily apply in resolving those dis-

  2
    Both petitions also presented questions regarding the consistency of
the Rule with the MSA. See Pet. for Cert. in No. 22–451, p. i; Pet. for
Cert. in No. 22–1219, p. ii. We did not grant certiorari with respect to
those questions and thus do not reach them.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           385

                      Opinion of the Court

putes would not always be clear. Cognizant of the limits of
human language and foresight, they anticipated that “[a]ll
new laws, though penned with the greatest technical skill,
and passed on the fullest and most mature deliberation,”
would be “more or less obscure and equivocal, until their
meaning” was settled “by a series of particular discussions
and adjudications.” The Federalist No. 37, p. 236 (J. Cooke
ed. 1961) (J. Madison).
   The Framers also envisioned that the fnal “interpretation
of the laws” would be “the proper and peculiar province of
the courts.” Id., No. 78, at 525 (A. Hamilton). Unlike the
political branches, the courts would by design exercise “nei-
ther Force nor Will, but merely judgment.” Id., at 523. To
ensure the “steady, upright and impartial administration of
the laws,” the Framers structured the Constitution to allow
judges to exercise that judgment independent of infuence
from the political branches. Id., at 522; see id., at 522–524;
Page Proof Pending Publication
Stern v. Marshall, 564 U. S. 462, 484 (2011).
   This Court embraced the Framers' understanding of the
judicial function early on. In the foundational decision of
Marbury v. Madison, Chief Justice Marshall famously de-
clared that “[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of the
judicial department to say what the law is.” 1 Cranch 137,
177 (1803). And in the following decades, the Court under-
stood “interpret[ing] the laws, in the last resort,” to be a
“solemn duty” of the Judiciary. United States v. Dickson,
15 Pet. 141, 162 (1841) (Story, J., for the Court). When the
meaning of a statute was at issue, the judicial role was to
“interpret the act of Congress, in order to ascertain the
rights of the parties.” Decatur v. Paulding, 14 Pet. 497,
515 (1840).
   The Court also recognized from the outset, though, that
exercising independent judgment often included according
due respect to Executive Branch interpretations of federal
statutes. For example, in Edwards' Lessee v. Darby, 12
Wheat. 206 (1827), the Court explained that “[i]n the con-
386      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

struction of a doubtful and ambiguous law, the contempora-
neous construction of those who were called upon to act
under the law, and were appointed to carry its provisions
into effect, is entitled to very great respect.” Id., at 210;
see also United States v. Vowell, 5 Cranch 368, 372 (1809)
(Marshall, C. J., for the Court).
   Such respect was thought especially warranted when an
Executive Branch interpretation was issued roughly contem-
poraneously with enactment of the statute and remained con-
sistent over time. See Dickson, 15 Pet., at 161; United
States v. Alabama Great Southern R. Co., 142 U. S. 615, 621
(1892); National Lead Co. v. United States, 252 U. S. 140,
145–146 (1920). That is because “the longstanding `practice
of the government' ”—like any other interpretive aid—“can
inform [a court's] determination of `what the law is. ' ”
NLRB v. Noel Canning, 573 U. S. 513, 525 (2014) (frst quot-
ing McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 401 (1819); then
Page Proof Pending Publication
quoting Marbury, 1 Cranch, at 177). The Court also gave
“the most respectful consideration” to Executive Branch in-
terpretations simply because “[t]he offcers concerned [were]
usually able men, and masters of the subject,” who were
“[n]ot unfrequently . . . the draftsmen of the laws they [were]
afterwards called upon to interpret.” United States v.
Moore, 95 U. S. 760, 763 (1878); see also Jacobs v. Prichard,
223 U. S. 200, 214 (1912).
   “Respect,” though, was just that. The views of the Exec-
utive Branch could inform the judgment of the Judiciary,
but did not supersede it. Whatever respect an Executive
Branch interpretation was due, a judge “certainly would not
be bound to adopt the construction given by the head of a
department.” Decatur, 14 Pet., at 515; see also Burnet v.
Chicago Portrait Co., 285 U. S. 1, 16 (1932). Otherwise, judi-
cial judgment would not be independent at all. As Justice
Story put it, “in cases where [a court's] own judgment . . .
differ[ed] from that of other high functionaries,” the court
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            387

                      Opinion of the Court

was “not at liberty to surrender, or to waive it.” Dickson,
15 Pet., at 162.
                             B
   The New Deal ushered in a “rapid expansion of the admin-
istrative process.” United States v. Morton Salt Co., 338
U. S. 632, 644 (1950). But as new agencies with new powers
proliferated, the Court continued to adhere to the traditional
understanding that questions of law were for courts to de-
cide, exercising independent judgment.
   During this period, the Court often treated agency deter-
minations of fact as binding on the courts, provided that
there was “evidence to support the fndings.” St. Joseph
Stock Yards Co. v. United States, 298 U. S. 38, 51 (1936).
“When the legislature itself acts within the broad feld
of legislative discretion,” the Court reasoned, “its determina-
tions are conclusive.” Ibid. Congress could therefore
“appoint[ ] an agent to act within that sphere of legisla-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tive authority” and “endow the agent with power to make
fndings of fact which are conclusive, provided the require-
ments of due process which are specially applicable to such
an agency are met, as in according a fair hearing and act-
ing upon evidence and not arbitrarily.” Ibid. (emphasis
added).
   But the Court did not extend similar deference to agency
resolutions of questions of law. It instead made clear, re-
peatedly, that “[t]he interpretation of the meaning of stat-
utes, as applied to justiciable controversies,” was “exclu-
sively a judicial function.” United States v. American
Trucking Assns., Inc., 310 U. S. 534, 544 (1940); see also So-
cial Security Bd. v. Nierotko, 327 U. S. 358, 369 (1946); Medo
Photo Supply Corp. v. NLRB, 321 U. S. 678, 681–682, n. 1
(1944). The Court understood, in the words of Justice Bran-
deis, that “[t]he supremacy of law demands that there shall
be opportunity to have some court decide whether an errone-
ous rule of law was applied.” St. Joseph Stock Yards, 298
388      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

U. S., at 84 (concurring opinion). It also continued to note,
as it long had, that the informed judgment of the Executive
Branch—especially in the form of an interpretation issued
contemporaneously with the enactment of the statute—could
be entitled to “great weight.” American Trucking Assns.,
310 U. S., at 549.
   Perhaps most notably along those lines, in Skidmore v.
Swift & Co., 323 U. S. 134 (1944), the Court explained that
the “interpretations and opinions” of the relevant agency,
“made in pursuance of offcial duty” and “based upon . . .
specialized experience,” “constitute[d] a body of experience
and informed judgment to which courts and litigants [could]
properly resort for guidance,” even on legal questions. Id.,
at 139–140. “The weight of such a judgment in a particular
case,” the Court observed, would “depend upon the thor-
oughness evident in its consideration, the validity of its rea-
soning, its consistency with earlier and later pronounce-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ments, and all those factors which give it power to persuade,
if lacking power to control.” Id., at 140.
   On occasion, to be sure, the Court applied deferential re-
view upon concluding that a particular statute empowered
an agency to decide how a broad statutory term applied to
specifc facts found by the agency. For example, in Gray v.
Powell, 314 U. S. 402 (1941), the Court deferred to an admin-
istrative conclusion that a coal-burning railroad that had ar-
rangements with several coal mines was not a coal “pro-
ducer” under the Bituminous Coal Act of 1937. Congress
had “specifcally” granted the agency the authority to make
that determination. Id., at 411. The Court thus reasoned
that “[w]here, as here, a determination has been left to an
administrative body, this delegation will be respected and
the administrative conclusion left untouched” so long as the
agency's decision constituted “a sensible exercise of judg-
ment.” Id., at 412–413. Similarly, in NLRB v. Hearst Pub-
lications, Inc., 322 U. S. 111 (1944), the Court deferred to the
determination of the National Labor Relations Board that
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             389

                      Opinion of the Court

newsboys were “employee[s]” within the meaning of the Na-
tional Labor Relations Act. The Act had, in the Court's
judgment, “assigned primarily” to the Board the task of
marking a “defnitive limitation around the term `em-
ployee.' ” Id., at 130. The Court accordingly viewed its
own role as “limited” to assessing whether the Board's deter-
mination had a “ `warrant in the record' and a reasonable
basis in law.” Id., at 131.
   Such deferential review, though, was cabined to factbound
determinations like those at issue in Gray and Hearst. Nei-
ther Gray nor Hearst purported to refashion the longstand-
ing judicial approach to questions of law. In Gray, after de-
ferring to the agency's determination that a particular entity
was not a “producer” of coal, the Court went on to discern,
based on its own reading of the text, whether another statu-
tory term—“other disposal” of coal—encompassed a transac-
tion lacking a transfer of title. See 314 U. S., at 416–417.
Page Proof Pending Publication
The Court evidently perceived no basis for deference to the
agency with respect to that pure legal question. And in
Hearst, the Court proclaimed that “[u]ndoubtedly questions
of statutory interpretation . . . are for the courts to resolve,
giving appropriate weight to the judgment of those whose
special duty is to administer the questioned statute.” 322
U. S., at 130–131. At least with respect to questions it re-
garded as involving “statutory interpretation,” the Court
thus did not disturb the traditional rule. It merely thought
that a different approach should apply where application of
a statutory term was suffciently intertwined with the
agency's factfnding.
   In any event, the Court was far from consistent in review-
ing deferentially even such factbound statutory determina-
tions. Often the Court simply interpreted and applied the
statute before it. See K. Davis, Administrative Law § 248,
p. 893 (1951) (“The one statement that can be made with
confdence about applicability of the doctrine of Gray v. Pow-
ell is that sometimes the Supreme Court applies it and some-
390        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                           Opinion of the Court

times it does not.”); B. Schwartz, Gray vs. Powell and the
Scope of Review, 54 Mich. L. Rev. 1, 68 (1955) (noting an
“embarrassingly large number of Supreme Court decisions
that do not adhere to the doctrine of Gray v. Powell”). In
one illustrative example, the Court rejected the U. S. Price
Administrator's determination that a particular warehouse
was a “public utility” entitled to an exemption from the Ad-
ministrator's General Maximum Price Regulation. Despite
the striking resemblance of that administrative determina-
tion to those that triggered deference in Gray and Hearst,
the Court declined to “accept the Administrator's view in
deference to administrative construction.” Davies Ware-
house Co. v. Bowles, 321 U. S. 144, 156 (1944). The Adminis-
trator's view, the Court explained, had “hardly seasoned or
broadened into a settled administrative practice,” and thus
did not “overweigh the considerations” the Court had “set
forth as to the proper construction of the statute.” Ibid.
   Nothing in the New Deal era or before it thus resembled
Page Proof Pending Publication
the deference rule the Court would begin applying decades
later to all varieties of agency interpretations of statutes.
Instead, just fve years after Gray and two after Hearst,
Congress codifed the opposite rule: the traditional under-
standing that courts must “decide all relevant questions of
law.” 5 U. S. C. § 706.3

  3
    The dissent plucks out Gray, Hearst, and—to “gild the lily,” in its tell-
ing—three more 1940s decisions, claiming they refect the relevant histori-
cal tradition of judicial review. Post, at 468–469, and n. 6 (opinion of
Kagan, J.). But it has no substantial response to the fact that Gray and
Hearst themselves endorsed, implicitly in one case and explicitly in the next,
the traditional rule that “questions of statutory interpretation . . . are for
the courts to resolve, giving appropriate weight”—not outright defer-
ence—“to the judgment of those whose special duty is to administer the
questioned statute.” Hearst, 322 U. S., at 130–131. And it fails to recog-
nize the deep roots that this rule has in our Nation's judicial tradition, to
the limited extent it engages with that tradition at all. See post, at 467–
468, n. 5. Instead, like the Government, it strains to equate the “respect” or
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                  391

                          Opinion of the Court

                                   C
   Congress in 1946 enacted the APA “as a check upon admin-
istrators whose zeal might otherwise have carried them to
excesses not contemplated in legislation creating their of-
fces.” Morton Salt, 338 U. S., at 644. It was the culmina-
tion of a “comprehensive rethinking of the place of adminis-
trative agencies in a regime of separate and divided powers.”
Bowen v. Michigan Academy of Family Physicians, 476
U. S. 667, 670–671 (1986).
   In addition to prescribing procedures for agency action,
the APA delineates the basic contours of judicial review of
such action. As relevant here, Section 706 directs that “[t]o
the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the
reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law,
interpret constitutional and statutory provisions, and deter-
mine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an agency
action.” 5 U. S. C. § 706. It further requires courts to
Page Proof Pending Publication
“hold unlawful and set aside agency action, fndings, and
conclusions found to be . . . not in accordance with law.”
§ 706(2)(A).
   The APA thus codifes for agency cases the unremarkable,
yet elemental proposition refected by judicial practice dat-

“weight” traditionally afforded to Executive Branch interpretations with
binding deference. See ibid.; Brief for Respondents in No. 22–1219,
pp. 21–24. That supposed equivalence is a fction. The dissent's cases
establish that a “contemporaneous construction” shared by “not only . . .
the courts” but also “the departments” could be “controlling,” Schell's
Executors v. Fauché, 138 U. S. 562, 572 (1891) (emphasis added), and that
courts might “lean in favor” of a “contemporaneous” and “continued” con-
struction of the Executive Branch as strong evidence of a statute's mean-
ing, United States v. Alabama Great Southern R. Co., 142 U. S. 615, 621
(1892). They do not establish that Executive Branch interpretations of
ambiguous statutes—no matter how inconsistent, late breaking, or
fawed—always bound the courts. In reality, a judge was never “bound
to adopt the construction given by the head of a department.” Decatur
v. Paulding, 14 Pet. 497, 515 (1840).
392       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Opinion of the Court

ing back to Marbury: that courts decide legal questions by
applying their own judgment. It specifes that courts, not
agencies, will decide “all relevant questions of law” arising
on review of agency action, § 706 (emphasis added)—even
those involving ambiguous laws—and set aside any such ac-
tion inconsistent with the law as they interpret it. And it
prescribes no deferential standard for courts to employ in
answering those legal questions. That omission is telling,
because Section 706 does mandate that judicial review of
agency policymaking and factfnding be deferential. See
§ 706(2)(A) (agency action to be set aside if “arbitrary, capri-
cious, [or] an abuse of discretion”); § 706(2)(E) (agency fact-
fnding in formal proceedings to be set aside if “unsupported
by substantial evidence”).
   In a statute designed to “serve as the fundamental charter
of the administrative state,” Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U. S. 558,
580 (2019) (plurality opinion) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted), Congress surely would have articulated a similarly def-
Page Proof Pending Publication
erential standard applicable to questions of law had it in-
tended to depart from the settled pre-APA understanding
that deciding such questions was “exclusively a judicial func-
tion,” American Trucking Assns., 310 U. S., at 544. But
nothing in the APA hints at such a dramatic departure. On
the contrary, by directing courts to “interpret constitutional
and statutory provisions” without differentiating between
the two, Section 706 makes clear that agency interpretations
of statutes—like agency interpretations of the Constitu-
tion—are not entitled to deference. Under the APA, it thus
“remains the responsibility of the court to decide whether
the law means what the agency says.” Perez v. Mortgage
Bankers Assn., 575 U. S. 92, 109 (2015) (Scalia, J., concurring
in judgment).4
  4
    The dissent observes that Section 706 does not say expressly that
courts are to decide legal questions using “a de novo standard of review.”
Post, at 463. That much is true. But statutes can be sensibly understood
only “by reviewing text in context.” Pulsifer v. United States, 601
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                    393

                           Opinion of the Court

   The text of the APA means what it says. And a look at
its history if anything only underscores that plain meaning.
According to both the House and Senate Reports on the leg-
islation, Section 706 “provide[d] that questions of law are for
courts rather than agencies to decide in the last analysis.”
H. R. Rep. No. 1980, 79th Cong., 2d Sess., 44 (1946) (emphasis
added); accord, S. Rep. No. 752, 79th Cong., 1st Sess., 28
(1945). Some of the legislation's most prominent supporters
articulated the same view. See 92 Cong. Rec. 5654 (1946)
(statement of Rep. Walter); P. McCarran, Improving “Admin-
istrative Justice”: Hearings and Evidence; Scope of Judicial
Review, 32 A. B. A. J. 827, 831 (1946). Even the Department
of Justice—an agency with every incentive to endorse a view
of the APA favorable to the Executive Branch—opined after
its enactment that Section 706 merely “restate[d] the present
law as to the scope of judicial review.” Dept. of Justice, At-
torney General's Manual on the Administrative Procedure
Act 108 (1947); see also Kisor, 588 U. S., at 582 (plurality
Page Proof Pending Publication
opinion) (same). That “present law,” as we have described,
adhered to the traditional conception of the judicial function.
See supra, at 387–390.
   Various respected commentators contemporaneously
maintained that the APA required reviewing courts to exer-
cise independent judgment on questions of law. Professor
John Dickinson, for example, read the APA to “impose a
clear mandate that all [questions of law] shall be decided by
the reviewing Court for itself, and in the exercise of its own

U. S. 124, 133 (2024). Since the start of our Republic, courts have “de-
cide[d] . . . questions of law” and “interpret[ed] constitutional and statu-
tory provisions” by applying their own legal judgment. § 706. Setting
aside its misplaced reliance on Gray and Hearst, the dissent does not and
could not deny that tradition. But it nonetheless insists that to codify
that tradition, Congress needed to expressly reject a sort of deference the
courts had never before applied—and would not apply for several decades
to come. It did not. “The notion that some things `go without saying'
applies to legislation just as it does to everyday life.” Bond v. United
States, 572 U. S. 844, 857 (2014).
394      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

independent judgment.” Administrative Procedure Act:
Scope and Grounds of Broadened Judicial Review, 33
A. B. A. J. 434, 516 (1947). Professor Bernard Schwartz
noted that § 706 “would seem . . . to be merely a legislative
restatement of the familiar review principle that questions
of law are for the reviewing court, at the same time leaving
to the courts the task of determining in each case what are
questions of law.” Mixed Questions of Law and Fact and
the Administrative Procedure Act, 19 Ford. L. Rev. 73, 84–
85 (1950). And Professor Louis Jaffe, who had served in
several agencies at the advent of the New Deal, thought that
§ 706 leaves it up to the reviewing “court” to “decide as a
`question of law' whether there is `discretion' in the prem-
ises”—that is, whether the statute at issue delegates particu-
lar discretionary authority to an agency. Judicial Control of
Administrative Action 570 (1965).
   The APA, in short, incorporates the traditional under-
Page Proof Pending Publication
standing of the judicial function, under which courts must
exercise independent judgment in determining the mean-
ing of statutory provisions. In exercising such judgment,
though, courts may—as they have from the start—seek aid
from the interpretations of those responsible for implement-
ing particular statutes. Such interpretations “constitute a
body of experience and informed judgment to which courts
and litigants may properly resort for guidance” consistent
with the APA. Skidmore, 323 U. S., at 140. And interpre-
tations issued contemporaneously with the statute at issue,
and which have remained consistent over time, may be espe-
cially useful in determining the statute's meaning. See
ibid.; American Trucking Assns., 310 U. S., at 549.
   In a case involving an agency, of course, the statute's
meaning may well be that the agency is authorized to ex-
ercise a degree of discretion. Congress has often enacted
such statutes. For example, some statutes “expressly dele-
gate[ ]” to an agency the authority to give meaning to a par-
ticular statutory term. Batterton v. Francis, 432 U. S. 416,
                        Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                       395

                            Opinion of the Court

425 (1977) (emphasis deleted).5 Others empower an agency
to prescribe rules to “fll up the details” of a statutory
scheme, Wayman v. Southard, 10 Wheat. 1, 43 (1825), or to
regulate subject to the limits imposed by a term or phrase
that “leaves agencies with fexibility,” Michigan v. EPA, 576
U. S. 743, 752 (2015), such as “appropriate” or “reasonable.” 6
  When the best reading of a statute is that it delegates
discretionary authority to an agency, the role of the review-
ing court under the APA is, as always, to independently in-
terpret the statute and effectuate the will of Congress sub-
ject to constitutional limits. The court fulflls that role by
recognizing constitutional delegations, “fx[ing] the bound-
aries of [the] delegated authority,” H. Monaghan, Marbury
and the Administrative State, 83 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 27 (1983),
and ensuring the agency has engaged in “ `reasoned decision-
making' ” within those boundaries, Michigan, 576 U. S., at
750 (quoting Allentown Mack Sales & Service, Inc. v. NLRB,
522 U. S. 359, 374 (1998)); see also Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn.
Page Proof Pending Publication
of United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins.
Co., 463 U. S. 29 (1983). By doing so, a court upholds the

  5
     See, e. g., 29 U. S. C. § 213(a)(15) (exempting from provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act “any employee employed on a casual basis in domes-
tic service employment to provide companionship services for individuals
who (because of age or infrmity) are unable to care for themselves (as
such terms are defned and delimited by regulations of the Secretary)”
(emphasis added)); 42 U. S. C. § 5846(a)(2) (requiring notifcation to Nuclear
Regulatory Commission when a facility or activity licensed or regulated
pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act “contains a defect which could create
a substantial safety hazard, as defned by regulations which the Commis-
sion shall promulgate” (emphasis added)).
   6
     See, e. g., 33 U. S. C. § 1312(a) (requiring establishment of effuent limi-
tations “[w]henever, in the judgment of the [Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA)] Administrator . . . , discharges of pollutants from a point
source or group of point sources . . . would interfere with the attainment
or maintenance of that water quality . . . which shall assure” various out-
comes, such as the “protection of public health” and “public water sup-
plies”); 42 U. S. C. § 7412(n)(1)(A) (directing EPA to regulate power plants
“if the Administrator fnds such regulation is appropriate and necessary”).
396      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

traditional conception of the judicial function that the APA
adopts.
                             III
  The deference that Chevron requires of courts reviewing
agency action cannot be squared with the APA.

                               A
   In the decades between the enactment of the APA and this
Court's decision in Chevron, courts generally continued to
review agency interpretations of the statutes they adminis-
ter by independently examining each statute to determine
its meaning. Cf. T. Merrill, Judicial Deference to Executive
Precedent, 101 Yale L. J. 969, 972–975 (1992). As an early
proponent (and later critic) of Chevron recounted, courts
during this period thus identifed delegations of discretion-
ary authority to agencies on a “statute-by-statute basis.”
Page Proof Pending Publication
A. Scalia, Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpreta-
tions of Law, 1989 Duke L. J. 511, 516.
   Chevron, decided in 1984 by a bare quorum of six Justices,
triggered a marked departure from the traditional approach.
The question in the case was whether an EPA regulation
“allow[ing] States to treat all of the pollution-emitting de-
vices within the same industrial grouping as though they
were encased within a single `bubble' ” was consistent with
the term “stationary source” as used in the Clean Air Act.
467 U. S., at 840. To answer that question of statutory in-
terpretation, the Court articulated and employed a now fa-
miliar two-step approach broadly applicable to review of
agency action.
   The frst step was to discern “whether Congress ha[d] di-
rectly spoken to the precise question at issue.” Id., at 842.
The Court explained that “[i]f the intent of Congress is clear,
that is the end of the matter,” ibid., and courts were there-
fore to “reject administrative constructions which are con-
trary to clear congressional intent,” id., at 843, n. 9. To dis-
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            397

                      Opinion of the Court

cern such intent, the Court noted, a reviewing court was to
“employ[ ] traditional tools of statutory construction.” Ibid.
   Without mentioning the APA, or acknowledging any doc-
trinal shift, the Court articulated a second step applicable
when “Congress ha[d] not directly addressed the precise
question at issue.” Id., at 843. In such a case—that is, a
case in which “the statute [was] silent or ambiguous with
respect to the specifc issue” at hand—a reviewing court
could not “simply impose its own construction on the statute,
as would be necessary in the absence of an administrative
interpretation.” Ibid. (footnote omitted). A court instead
had to set aside the traditional interpretive tools and defer
to the agency if it had offered “a permissible construction of
the statute,” ibid., even if not “the reading the court would
have reached if the question initially had arisen in a judicial
proceeding,” ibid., n. 11. That directive was justifed, ac-
cording to the Court, by the understanding that administer-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ing statutes “requires the formulation of policy” to fll statu-
tory “gap[s]”; by the long judicial tradition of according
“considerable weight” to Executive Branch interpretations;
and by a host of other considerations, including the complex-
ity of the regulatory scheme, EPA's “detailed and reasoned”
consideration, the policy-laden nature of the judgment sup-
posedly required, and the agency's indirect accountability to
the people through the President. Id., at 843, 844, and
n. 14, 865.
   Employing this new test, the Court concluded that Con-
gress had not addressed the question at issue with the neces-
sary “level of specifcity” and that EPA's interpretation was
“entitled to deference.” Id., at 865. It did not matter why
Congress, as the Court saw it, had not squarely addressed
the question, see ibid., or that “the agency ha[d] from time
to time changed its interpretation,” id., at 863. The latest
EPA interpretation was a permissible reading of the Clean
Air Act, so under the Court's new rule, that reading
controlled.
398      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                       Opinion of the Court

   Initially, Chevron “seemed destined to obscurity.” T.
Merrill, The Story of Chevron: The Making of an Accidental
Landmark, 66 Admin. L. Rev. 253, 276 (2014). The Court
did not at frst treat it as the watershed decision it was fated
to become; it was hardly cited in cases involving statutory
questions of agency authority. See ibid. But within a few
years, both this Court and the courts of appeals were rou-
tinely invoking its two-step framework as the governing
standard in such cases. See id., at 276–277. As the Court
did so, it revisited the doctrine's justifcations. Eventually,
the Court decided that Chevron rested on “a presumption
that Congress, when it left ambiguity in a statute meant for
implementation by an agency, understood that the ambiguity
would be resolved, frst and foremost, by the agency, and
desired the agency (rather than the courts) to possess what-
ever degree of discretion the ambiguity allows.” Smiley v.
Citibank (South Dakota), N. A., 517 U. S. 735, 740–741
Page Proof Pending Publication
(1996); see also, e. g., Cuozzo Speed Technologies, LLC v. Lee,
579 U. S. 261, 276–277 (2016); Utility Air Regulatory Group
v. EPA, 573 U. S. 302, 315 (2014); National Cable & Telecom-
munications Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services, 545 U. S.
967, 982 (2005).
                                 B
   Neither Chevron nor any subsequent decision of this Court
attempted to reconcile its framework with the APA. The
“law of deference” that this Court has built on the foundation
laid in Chevron has instead been “[h]eedless of the original
design” of the APA. Perez, 575 U. S., at 109 (Scalia, J., con-
curring in judgment).
                              1
  Chevron defes the command of the APA that “the review-
ing court”—not the agency whose action it reviews—is to
“decide all relevant questions of law” and “interpret . . . stat-
utory provisions.” § 706 (emphasis added). It requires a
court to ignore, not follow, “the reading the court would have
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             399

                      Opinion of the Court

reached” had it exercised its independent judgment as re-
quired by the APA. Chevron, 467 U. S., at 843, n. 11. And
although exercising independent judgment is consistent with
the “respect” historically given to Executive Branch inter-
pretations, see, e. g., Edwards' Lessee, 12 Wheat., at 210;
Skidmore, 323 U. S., at 140, Chevron insists on much more.
It demands that courts mechanically afford binding defer-
ence to agency interpretations, including those that have
been inconsistent over time. See 467 U. S., at 863. Still
worse, it forces courts to do so even when a pre-existing
judicial precedent holds that the statute means something
else—unless the prior court happened to also say that the
statute is “unambiguous. ” Brand X, 545 U. S., at 982.
That regime is the antithesis of the time honored approach
the APA prescribes. In fretting over the prospect of
“allow[ing]” a judicial interpretation of a statute “to override
an agency's” in a dispute before a court, ibid., Chevron turns
Page Proof Pending Publication
the statutory scheme for judicial review of agency action up-
side down.
   Chevron cannot be reconciled with the APA, as the Gov-
ernment and the dissent contend, by presuming that statu-
tory ambiguities are implicit delegations to agencies. See
Brief for Respondents in No. 22–1219, pp. 13, 37–38; post,
at 451–462 (opinion of Kagan, J.). Presumptions have their
place in statutory interpretation, but only to the extent that
they approximate reality. Chevron's presumption does not,
because “[a]n ambiguity is simply not a delegation of law-
interpreting power. Chevron confuses the two.” C. Sun-
stein, Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103
Harv. L. Rev. 405, 445 (1989). As Chevron itself noted, am-
biguities may result from an inability on the part of Congress
to squarely answer the question at hand, or from a failure to
even “consider the question” with the requisite precision.
467 U. S., at 865. In neither case does an ambiguity neces-
sarily refect a congressional intent that an agency, as op-
posed to a court, resolve the resulting interpretive question.
400      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

And many or perhaps most statutory ambiguities may be
unintentional. As the Framers recognized, ambiguities will
inevitably follow from “the complexity of objects, . . . the
imperfection of the human faculties,” and the simple fact that
“no language is so copious as to supply words and phrases
for every complex idea.” The Federalist No. 37, at 236.
   Courts, after all, routinely confront statutory ambiguities
in cases having nothing to do with Chevron—cases that do
not involve agency interpretations or delegations of author-
ity. Of course, when faced with a statutory ambiguity in
such a case, the ambiguity is not a delegation to anybody,
and a court is not somehow relieved of its obligation to in-
dependently interpret the statute. Courts in that situation
do not throw up their hands because “Congress's instruc-
tions have” supposedly “run out,” leaving a statutory “gap.”
Post, at 449 (opinion of Kagan, J.). Courts instead under-
stand that such statutes, no matter how impenetrable, do—
Page Proof Pending Publication
in fact, must—have a single, best meaning. That is the
whole point of having written statutes; “every statute's
meaning is fxed at the time of enactment.” Wisconsin Cen-
tral Ltd. v. United States, 585 U. S. 274, 284 (2018) (emphasis
deleted). So instead of declaring a particular party's read-
ing “permissible” in such a case, courts use every tool at
their disposal to determine the best reading of the statute
and resolve the ambiguity.
   In an agency case as in any other, though, even if some
judges might (or might not) consider the statute ambiguous,
there is a best reading all the same—“the reading the court
would have reached” if no agency were involved. Chevron,
467 U. S., at 843, n. 11. It therefore makes no sense to speak
of a “permissible” interpretation that is not the one the
court, after applying all relevant interpretive tools, con-
cludes is best. In the business of statutory interpretation,
if it is not the best, it is not permissible.
   Perhaps most fundamentally, Chevron's presumption is
misguided because agencies have no special competence in
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           401

                      Opinion of the Court

resolving statutory ambiguities. Courts do. The Framers,
as noted, anticipated that courts would often confront statu-
tory ambiguities and expected that courts would resolve
them by exercising independent legal judgment. And even
Chevron itself reaffrmed that “[t]he judiciary is the fnal au-
thority on issues of statutory construction” and recognized
that “in the absence of an administrative interpretation,” it
is “necessary” for a court to “impose its own construction on
the statute.” Id., at 843, and n. 9. Chevron gravely erred,
though, in concluding that the inquiry is fundamentally dif-
ferent just because an administrative interpretation is in
play. The very point of the traditional tools of statutory
construction—the tools courts use every day—is to resolve
statutory ambiguities. That is no less true when the ambi-
guity is about the scope of an agency's own power—perhaps
the occasion on which abdication in favor of the agency is
least appropriate.
                               2
Page    Proof Pending Publication
 The Government responds that Congress must generally
intend for agencies to resolve statutory ambiguities because
agencies have subject matter expertise regarding the stat-
utes they administer; because deferring to agencies purport-
edly promotes the uniform construction of federal law; and
because resolving statutory ambiguities can involve policy-
making best left to political actors, rather than courts. See
Brief for Respondents in No. 22–1219, pp. 16–19. The dis-
sent offers more of the same. See post, at 456–461. But
none of these considerations justifes Chevron's sweeping
presumption of congressional intent.
   Beginning with expertise, we recently noted that interpre-
tive issues arising in connection with a regulatory scheme
often “may fall more naturally into a judge's bailiwick” than
an agency's. Kisor, 588 U. S., at 578 (opinion of the Court).
We thus observed that “[w]hen the agency has no compar-
ative expertise in resolving a regulatory ambiguity, Con-
gress presumably would not grant it that authority.” Ibid.
402      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

Chevron's broad rule of deference, though, demands that
courts presume just the opposite. Under that rule, ambigu-
ities of all stripes trigger deference. Indeed, the Govern-
ment and, seemingly, the dissent continue to defend the prop-
osition that Chevron applies even in cases having little to
do with an agency's technical subject matter expertise. See
Brief for Respondents in No. 22–1219, p. 17; post, at 457.
   But even when an ambiguity happens to implicate a techni-
cal matter, it does not follow that Congress has taken the
power to authoritatively interpret the statute from the
courts and given it to the agency. Congress expects courts
to handle technical statutory questions. “[M]any statutory
cases” call upon “courts [to] interpret the mass of technical
detail that is the ordinary diet of the law,” Egelhoff v. Egel-
hoff, 532 U. S. 141, 161 (2001) (Breyer, J., dissenting), and
courts did so without issue in agency cases before Chevron,
see post, at 444–445 (Gorsuch, J., concurring). Courts, after
Page Proof Pending Publication
all, do not decide such questions blindly. The parties and
amici in such cases are steeped in the subject matter, and re-
viewing courts have the beneft of their perspectives. In an
agency case in particular, the court will go about its task
with the agency's “body of experience and informed judg-
ment,” among other information, at its disposal. Skidmore,
323 U. S., at 140. And although an agency's interpretation
of a statute “cannot bind a court,” it may be especially infor-
mative “to the extent it rests on factual premises within [the
agency's] expertise.” Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Fire-
arms v. FLRA, 464 U. S. 89, 98, n. 8 (1983). Such expertise
has always been one of the factors which may give an Execu-
tive Branch interpretation particular “power to persuade, if
lacking power to control.” Skidmore, 323 U. S., at 140; see,
e. g., County of Maui v. Hawaii Wildlife Fund, 590 U. S. 165,
180 (2020); Moore, 95 U. S., at 763.
   For those reasons, delegating ultimate interpretive au-
thority to agencies is simply not necessary to ensure that the
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            403

                      Opinion of the Court

resolution of statutory ambiguities is well informed by sub-
ject matter expertise. The better presumption is therefore
that Congress expects courts to do their ordinary job of in-
terpreting statutes, with due respect for the views of the
Executive Branch. And to the extent that Congress and the
Executive Branch may disagree with how the courts have
performed that job in a particular case, they are of course
always free to act by revising the statute.
   Nor does a desire for the uniform construction of federal
law justify Chevron. Given inconsistencies in how judges
apply Chevron, see infra, at 407–410, it is unclear how much
the doctrine as a whole (as opposed to its highly deferential
second step) actually promotes such uniformity. In any
event, there is little value in imposing a uniform interpreta-
tion of a statute if that interpretation is wrong. We see no
reason to presume that Congress prefers uniformity for uni-
formity's sake over the correct interpretation of the laws it
Page Proof Pending Publication
enacts.
   The view that interpretation of ambiguous statutory pro-
visions amounts to policymaking suited for political actors
rather than courts is especially mistaken, for it rests on a
profound misconception of the judicial role. It is reasonable
to assume that Congress intends to leave policymaking to
political actors. But resolution of statutory ambiguities in-
volves legal interpretation. That task does not suddenly be-
come policymaking just because a court has an “agency to
fall back on.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 575 (opinion of the Court).
Courts interpret statutes, no matter the context, based on
the traditional tools of statutory construction, not individual
policy preferences. Indeed, the Framers crafted the Consti-
tution to ensure that federal judges could exercise judg-
ment free from the infuence of the political branches. See
The Federalist No. 78, at 522–525. They were to construe
the law with “[c]lear heads . . . and honest hearts,” not
with an eye to policy preferences that had not made it into
404      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

the statute. 1 Works of James Wilson 363 (J. Andrews ed.
1896).
   That is not to say that Congress cannot or does not confer
discretionary authority on agencies. Congress may do so,
subject to constitutional limits, and it often has. But to stay
out of discretionary policymaking left to the political
branches, judges need only fulfll their obligations under the
APA to independently identify and respect such delegations
of authority, police the outer statutory boundaries of those
delegations, and ensure that agencies exercise their discre-
tion consistent with the APA. By forcing courts to instead
pretend that ambiguities are necessarily delegations, Chev-
ron does not prevent judges from making policy. It pre-
vents them from judging.
                                3
   In truth, Chevron's justifying presumption is, as Members
of this Court have often recognized, a fction. See Buffng-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ton v. McDonough, 598 U. S. 1021, 1029–1030 (2022) (Gor-
such, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari); Cuozzo, 579
U. S., at 286 (Thomas, J., concurring); Scalia, 1989 Duke L. J.,
at 517; see also post, at 462 (opinion of Kagan, J.). So we
have spent the better part of four decades imposing one limi-
tation on Chevron after another, pruning its presumption on
the understanding that “where it is in doubt that Congress
actually intended to delegate particular interpretive author-
ity to an agency, Chevron is `inapplicable.' ” United States
v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 230 (2001) (quoting Christensen
v. Harris County, 529 U. S. 576, 597 (2000) (Breyer, J., dis-
senting)); see also Adams Fruit Co. v. Barrett, 494 U. S. 638,
649 (1990).
   Consider the many refnements we have made in an effort
to match Chevron's presumption to reality. We have said
that Chevron applies only “when it appears that Congress
delegated authority to the agency generally to make rules
carrying the force of law, and that the agency interpretation
claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                 405

                         Opinion of the Court

authority.” Mead, 533 U. S., at 226–227. In practice, that
threshold requirement—sometimes called Chevron “step
zero”—largely limits Chevron to “the fruits of notice-and-
comment rulemaking or formal adjudication.” 533 U. S., at
230. But even when those processes are used, deference is
still not warranted “where the regulation is `procedurally de-
fective'—that is, where the agency errs by failing to follow
the correct procedures in issuing the regulation.” Encino
Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 579 U. S. 211, 220 (2016) (quot-
ing Mead, 533 U. S., at 227).
   Even where those procedural hurdles are cleared, substan-
tive ones remain. Most notably, Chevron does not apply if
the question at issue is one of “deep `economic and political
signifcance.' ” King v. Burwell, 576 U. S. 473, 486 (2015).
We have instead expected Congress to delegate such author-
ity “expressly” if at all, ibid., for “[e]xtraordinary grants of
regulatory authority are rarely accomplished through `mod-
est words,' `vague terms,' or `subtle device[s],' ” West Vir-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ginia v. EPA, 597 U. S. 697, 723 (2022) (quoting Whitman v.
American Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 468 (2001);
alteration in original). Nor have we applied Chevron to
agency interpretations of judicial review provisions, see
Adams Fruit Co., 494 U. S., at 649–650, or to statutory
schemes not administered by the agency seeking deference,
see Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U. S. 497, 519–520
(2018). And we have sent mixed signals on whether Chev-
ron applies when a statute has criminal applications. Com-
pare Abramski v. United States, 573 U. S. 169, 191 (2014),
with Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter, Communities for
Great Ore., 515 U. S. 687, 704, n. 18 (1995).
   Confronted with this byzantine set of preconditions and
exceptions, some courts have simply bypassed Chevron, say-
ing it makes no difference for one reason or another.7 And
  7
    See, e.g., Guedes v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explo-
sives, 45 F. 4th 306, 313–314 (CADC 2022), abrogated by Garland v. Car-
gill, 602 U. S. 406 (2024); County of Amador v. United States Dept. of
406       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Opinion of the Court

even when they do invoke Chevron, courts do not always
heed the various steps and nuances of that evolving doctrine.
In one of the cases before us today, for example, the First
Circuit both skipped “step zero,” see 62 F. 4th, at 628, and
refused to “classify [its] conclusion as a product of Chevron
step one or step two”—though it ultimately appears to have
deferred under step two, id., at 634.
   This Court, for its part, has not deferred to an agency in-
terpretation under Chevron since 2016. See Cuozzo, 579
U. S., at 280 (most recent occasion). But Chevron remains
on the books. So litigants must continue to wrestle with it,
and lower courts—bound by even our crumbling precedents,
see Agostini v. Felton, 521 U. S. 203, 238 (1997)—understand-
ably continue to apply it.
   The experience of the last 40 years has thus done little to
rehabilitate Chevron. It has only made clear that Chevron's
fctional presumption of congressional intent was always un-
moored from the APA's demand that courts exercise inde-
Page Proof Pending Publication
pendent judgment in construing statutes administered by
agencies. At best, our intricate Chevron doctrine has been
nothing more than a distraction from the question that mat-
ters: Does the statute authorize the challenged agency ac-
tion? And at worst, it has required courts to violate the
APA by yielding to an agency the express responsibility,
vested in “the reviewing court,” to “decide all relevant ques-

Interior, 872 F. 3d 1012, 1021–1022 (CA9 2017); Estrada-Rodriguez v.
Lynch, 825 F. 3d 397, 403–404 (CA8 2016); Nielsen v. AECOM Tech. Corp.,
762 F. 3d 214, 220 (CA2 2014); Alaska Stock, LLC v. Houghton Miffin
Harcourt Publishing Co., 747 F. 3d 673, 685, n. 52 (CA9 2014); Jurado-
Delgado v. Attorney Gen. of U. S., 498 Fed. Appx. 107, 117 (CA3 2009); see
also D. Brookins, Confusion in the Circuit Courts: How the Circuit Courts
Are Solving the Mead-Puzzle by Avoiding It Altogether, 85 Geo. Wash.
L. Rev. 1484, 1496–1499 (2017) (documenting Chevron avoidance by the
lower courts); A. Vermeule, Our Schmittian Administrative Law, 122 Harv.
L. Rev. 1095, 1127–1129 (2009) (same); L. Bressman, How Mead Has Mud-
dled Judicial Review of Agency Action, 58 Vand. L. Rev. 1443, 1464–1466
(2005) (same).
                    Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)              407

                        Opinion of the Court

tions of law” and “interpret . . . statutory provisions.” § 706
(emphasis added).
                              IV
   The only question left is whether stare decisis, the doc-
trine governing judicial adherence to precedent, requires us
to persist in the Chevron project. It does not. Stare deci-
sis is not an “inexorable command,” Payne v. Tennessee, 501
U. S. 808, 828 (1991), and the stare decisis considerations
most relevant here—“the quality of [the precedent's] reason-
ing, the workability of the rule it established, . . . and reliance
on the decision,” Knick v. Township of Scott, 588 U. S. 180,
203 (2019) (quoting Janus v. State, County, and Municipal
Employees, 585 U. S. 878, 917 (2018))—all weigh in favor of
letting Chevron go.
   Chevron has proved to be fundamentally misguided. De-
spite reshaping judicial review of agency action, neither it
nor any case of ours applying it grappled with the APA—the
Page Proof Pending Publication
statute that lays out how such review works. Its faws were
nonetheless apparent from the start, prompting this Court
to revise its foundations and continually limit its application.
It has launched and sustained a cottage industry of scholars
attempting to decipher its basis and meaning. And Mem-
bers of this Court have long questioned its premises. See,
e. g., Pereira v. Sessions, 585 U. S. 198, 219–221 (2018)
(Kennedy, J., concurring); Michigan, 576 U. S., at 760–764
(Thomas, J., concurring); Buffngton, 598 U. S. 1021 (opinion
of Gorsuch, J.); B. Kavanaugh, Fixing Statutory Interpreta-
tion, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 2118, 2150–2154 (2016). Even Justice
Scalia, an early champion of Chevron, came to seriously
doubt whether it could be reconciled with the APA. See
Perez, 575 U. S., at 109–110 (opinion concurring in judgment).
For its entire existence, Chevron has been a “rule in search
of a justifcation,” Knick, 588 U. S., at 204, if it was ever
coherent enough to be called a rule at all.
   Experience has also shown that Chevron is unworkable.
The defning feature of its framework is the identifcation of
408      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

statutory ambiguity, which requires deference at the doc-
trine's second step. But the concept of ambiguity has al-
ways evaded meaningful defnition. As Justice Scalia put
the dilemma just fve years after Chevron was decided: “How
clear is clear?” 1989 Duke L. J., at 521.
   We are no closer to an answer to that question than we
were four decades ago. “ `[A]mbiguity' is a term that may
have different meanings for different judges.” Exxon Mobil
Corp. v. Allapattah Services, Inc., 545 U. S. 546, 572 (2005)
(Stevens, J., dissenting). One judge might see ambiguity ev-
erywhere; another might never encounter it. Compare L.
Silberman, Chevron—The Intersection of Law & Policy, 58
Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 821, 822 (1990), with R. Kethledge, Ambi-
guities and Agency Cases: Refections After (Almost) Ten
Years on the Bench, 70 Vand. L. Rev. En Banc 315, 323
(2017). A rule of law that is so wholly “in the eye of the
beholder,” Exxon Mobil Corp., 545 U. S., at 572 (Stevens,
Page Proof Pending Publication
J., dissenting), invites different results in like cases and is
therefore “arbitrary in practice,” Gulfstream Aerospace
Corp. v. Mayacamas Corp., 485 U. S. 271, 283 (1988). Such
an impressionistic and malleable concept “cannot stand as an
every-day test for allocating” interpretive authority be-
tween courts and agencies. Swift & Co. v. Wickham, 382
U. S. 111, 125 (1965).
   The dissent proves the point. It tells us that a court
should reach Chevron's second step when it fnds, “at the end
of its interpretive work,” that “Congress has left an ambigu-
ity or gap.” Post, at 449. (The Government offers a similar
test. See Brief for Respondents in No. 22–1219, pp. 7, 10,
14; Tr. of Oral Arg. 113–114, 116.) That is no guide at all.
Once more, the basic nature and meaning of a statute does
not change when an agency happens to be involved. Nor
does it change just because the agency has happened to offer
its interpretation through the sort of procedures necessary
to obtain deference, or because the other preconditions for
Chevron happen to be satisfed. The statute still has a best
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                   409

                          Opinion of the Court

meaning, necessarily discernible by a court deploying its full
interpretive toolkit. So for the dissent's test to have any
meaning, it must think that in an agency case (unlike in any
other), a court should give up on its “interpretive work” be-
fore it has identifed that best meaning. But how does a
court know when to do so? On that point, the dissent leaves
a gap of its own. It protests only that some other interpre-
tive tools—all with pedigrees more robust than Chevron's,
and all designed to help courts identify the meaning of a text
rather than allow the Executive Branch to displace it—also
apply to ambiguous texts. See post, at 474. That this is all
the dissent can come up with, after four decades of judicial
experience attempting to identify ambiguity under Chevron,
reveals the futility of the exercise.8
   Because Chevron in its original, two-step form was so in-
determinate and sweeping, we have instead been forced to
clarify the doctrine again and again. Our attempts to do
so have only added to Chevron's unworkability, transform-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ing the original two-step into a dizzying breakdance. See
Adams Fruit Co., 494 U. S., at 649–650; Mead, 533 U. S., at
226–227; King, 576 U. S., at 486; Encino Motorcars, 579 U. S.,
at 220; Epic Systems, 584 U. S., at 519–520; on and on. And
the doctrine continues to spawn diffcult threshold questions
that promise to further complicate the inquiry should Chev-
ron be retained. See, e. g., Cargill v. Garland, 57 F. 4th
447, 465–468 (CA5 2023) (plurality opinion) (May the Govern-
ment waive reliance on Chevron? Does Chevron apply to
agency interpretations of statutes imposing criminal penal-
ties? Does Chevron displace the rule of lenity?), aff'd, 602
U. S. 406 (2024).

  8
   Citing an empirical study, the dissent adds that Chevron “fosters agree-
ment among judges.” Post, at 474. It is hardly surprising that a study
might fnd as much; Chevron's second step is supposed to be hospitable to
agency interpretations. So when judges get there, they tend to agree
that the agency wins. That proves nothing about the supposed ease or
predictability of identifying ambiguity in the frst place.
410      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Opinion of the Court

   Four decades after its inception, Chevron has thus become
an impediment, rather than an aid, to accomplishing the basic
judicial task of “say[ing] what the law is.” Marbury, 1
Cranch, at 177. And its continuing import is far from clear.
Courts have often declined to engage with the doctrine, say-
ing it makes no difference. See n. 7, supra. And as noted,
we have avoided deferring under Chevron since 2016. That
trend is nothing new; for decades, we have often declined to
invoke Chevron even in those cases where it might appear
to be applicable. See W. Eskridge & L. Baer, The Contin-
uum of Deference: Supreme Court Treatment of Agency
Statutory Interpretations From Chevron to Hamdan, 96
Geo. L. J. 1083, 1125 (2008). At this point, all that remains
of Chevron is a decaying husk with bold pretensions.
   Nor has Chevron been the sort of “ `stable background'
rule” that fosters meaningful reliance. Post, at 455, n. 1
(opinion of Kagan, J.) (quoting Morrison v. National Aus-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tralia Bank Ltd., 561 U. S. 247, 261 (2010)). Given our con-
stant tinkering with and eventual turn away from Chevron,
and its inconsistent application by the lower courts, it instead
is hard to see how anyone—Congress included—could rea-
sonably expect a court to rely on Chevron in any particular
case. And even if it were possible to predict accurately
when courts will apply Chevron, the doctrine “does not pro-
vide `a clear or easily applicable standard, so arguments for
reliance based on its clarity are misplaced.' ” Janus, 585
U. S., at 927 (quoting South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc., 585 U. S.
162, 186 (2018)). To plan on Chevron yielding a particular
result is to gamble not only that the doctrine will be invoked,
but also that it will produce readily foreseeable outcomes
and the stability that comes with them. History has proved
neither bet to be a winning proposition.
   Rather than safeguarding reliance interests, Chevron af-
frmatively destroys them. Under Chevron, a statutory am-
biguity, no matter why it is there, becomes a license authoriz-
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             411

                      Opinion of the Court

ing an agency to change positions as much as it likes, with
“[u]nexplained inconsistency” being “at most . . . a reason for
holding an interpretation to be . . . arbitrary and capricious.”
Brand X, 545 U. S., at 981. But statutory ambiguity, as we
have explained, is not a reliable indicator of actual delegation
of discretionary authority to agencies. Chevron thus allows
agencies to change course even when Congress has given
them no power to do so. By its sheer breadth, Chevron fos-
ters unwarranted instability in the law, leaving those at-
tempting to plan around agency action in an eternal fog of
uncertainty.
   Chevron accordingly has undermined the very “rule of
law” values that stare decisis exists to secure. Michigan v.
Bay Mills Indian Community, 572 U. S. 782, 798 (2014).
And it cannot be constrained by admonishing courts to be
extra careful, or by tacking on a new batch of conditions.
We would need to once again “revis[e] its theoretical basis
Page Proof Pending Publication
. . . in order to cure its practical defciencies.” Montejo v.
Louisiana, 556 U. S. 778, 792 (2009). Stare decisis does not
require us to do so, especially because any refnements we
might make would only point courts back to their duties
under the APA to “decide all relevant questions of law” and
“interpret . . . statutory provisions.” § 706. Nor is there
any reason to wait helplessly for Congress to correct our
mistake. The Court has jettisoned many precedents that
Congress likewise could have legislatively overruled. See,
e. g., Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 485 U. S. 617, 618
(1988) (per curiam) (collecting cases). And part of “judicial
humility,” post, at 450, 471 (opinion of Kagan, J.), is admit-
ting and in certain cases correcting our own mistakes, espe-
cially when those mistakes are serious, see post, at 423–424
(opinion of Gorsuch, J.).
   This is one of those cases. Chevron was a judicial inven-
tion that required judges to disregard their statutory duties.
And the only way to “ensure that the law will not merely
412      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                       Opinion of the Court

change erratically, but will develop in a principled and intelli-
gible fashion,” Vasquez v. Hillery, 474 U. S. 254, 265 (1986),
is for us to leave Chevron behind.
   By doing so, however, we do not call into question prior
cases that relied on the Chevron framework. The holdings
of those cases that specifc agency actions are lawful—includ-
ing the Clean Air Act holding of Chevron itself—are still
subject to statutory stare decisis despite our change in inter-
pretive methodology. See CBOCS West, Inc. v. Humphries,
553 U. S. 442, 457 (2008). Mere reliance on Chevron cannot
constitute a “ `special justifcation' ” for overruling such a
holding, because to say a precedent relied on Chevron is, at
best, “just an argument that the precedent was wrongly de-
cided.” Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John Fund, Inc., 573
U. S. 258, 266 (2014) (quoting Dickerson v. United States, 530
U. S. 428, 443 (2000)). That is not enough to justify overrul-
ing a statutory precedent.

Page Proof Pending
           *  *  * Publication
   The dissent ends by quoting Chevron: “ `Judges are not
experts in the feld.' ” Post, at 478 (quoting 467 U. S., at
865). That depends, of course, on what the “feld” is. If it
is legal interpretation, that has been, “emphatically,” “the
province and duty of the judicial department” for at least 221
years. Marbury, 1 Cranch, at 177. The rest of the dissent's
selected epigraph is that judges “ `are not part of either polit-
ical branch.' ” Post, at 478 (quoting Chevron, 467 U. S., at
865). Indeed. Judges have always been expected to apply
their “judgment” independent of the political branches when
interpreting the laws those branches enact. The Federalist
No. 78, at 523. And one of those laws, the APA, bars judges
from disregarding that responsibility just because an Execu-
tive Branch agency views a statute differently.
   Chevron is overruled. Courts must exercise their inde-
pendent judgment in deciding whether an agency has acted
within its statutory authority, as the APA requires. Careful
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            413

                     Thomas, J., concurring

attention to the judgment of the Executive Branch may help
inform that inquiry. And when a particular statute dele-
gates authority to an agency consistent with constitutional
limits, courts must respect the delegation, while ensuring
that the agency acts within it. But courts need not and
under the APA may not defer to an agency interpretation of
the law simply because a statute is ambiguous.
  Because the D. C. and First Circuits relied on Chevron in
deciding whether to uphold the Rule, their judgments are
vacated, and the cases are remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
                                            It is so ordered.

  Justice Thomas, concurring.
   I join the Court's opinion in full because it correctly con-
cludes that Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources De-
fense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837 (1984), must fnally be over-
ruled. Under Chevron, a judge was required to adopt
Page Proof Pending Publication
an agency's interpretation of an ambiguous statute, so long
as the agency had a “permissible construction of the statute.”
See id., at 843. As the Court explains, that deference does
not comport with the Administrative Procedure Act, which
requires judges to decide “all relevant questions of law” and
“interpret constitutional and statutory provisions” when
reviewing an agency action. 5 U. S. C. § 706; see also
ante, at 396–401; Baldwin v. United States, 589 U. S. 1237,
1240–1241 (2020) (Thomas, J., dissenting from denial of
certiorari).
  I write separately to underscore a more fundamental prob-
lem: Chevron deference also violates our Constitution's sepa-
ration of powers, as I have previously explained at length.
See Baldwin, 589 U. S., at 1239–1240 (dissenting opinion);
Michigan v. EPA, 576 U. S. 743, 761–763 (2015) (concurring
opinion); see also Perez v. Mortgage Bankers Assn., 575 U. S.
92, 115–118 (2015) (opinion concurring in judgment). And, I
agree with Justice Gorsuch that we should not overlook
414        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Thomas, J., concurring

Chevron's constitutional defects in overruling it.* Post, at
429–435 (concurring opinion). To provide “practical and real
protections for individual liberty,” the Framers drafted a
Constitution that divides the legislative, executive, and judi-
cial powers between three branches of Government. Perez,
575 U. S., at 118 (opinion of Thomas, J.). Chevron deference
compromises this separation of powers in two ways. It
curbs the judicial power afforded to courts, and simultane-
ously expands agencies' executive power beyond constitu-
tional limits.
   Chevron compels judges to abdicate their Article III “ju-
dicial Power.” § 1. “[T]he judicial power, as originally
understood, requires a court to exercise its independent judg-
ment in interpreting and expounding upon the laws.” Perez,
575 U. S., at 119 (opinion of Thomas, J.); accord, post, at 432–
433 (opinion of Gorsuch, J.). The Framers understood that
“legal texts . . . often contain ambiguities,” and that the judicial
power included “the power to resolve these ambiguities over
Page Proof Pending Publication
time.” Perez, 575 U. S., at 119 (opinion of Thomas, J.); accord,
ante, at 384–387. But, under Chevron, a judge must accept an
agency's interpretation of an ambiguous law, even if he thinks
another interpretation is correct. Ante, at 397. Chevron
deference thus prevents judges from exercising their inde-
pendent judgment to resolve ambiguities. Baldwin, 589
U. S., at 1239 (opinion of Thomas, J.); see also Michigan, 576
U. S., at 761 (opinion of Thomas, J.); see also Perez, 575 U. S.,
at 123 (opinion of Thomas, J.). By tying a judge's hands,
Chevron prevents the Judiciary from serving as a constitu-
tional check on the Executive. It allows “the Executive . . .
to dictate the outcome of cases through erroneous interpre-
tations.” Baldwin, 589 U. S., at 1240 (opinion of Thomas,
J.); Michigan, 576 U. S., at 763, n. 1 (opinion of Thomas, J.);

  *There is much to be commended in Justice Gorsuch's careful consid-
eration from frst principles of the weight we should afford to our prece-
dent. I agree with the lion's share of his concurrence. See generally
Gamble v. United States, 587 U. S. 678, 710 (2019) (Thomas, J., concurring).
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           415

                     Thomas, J., concurring

see also Perez, 575 U. S., at 124 (opinion of Thomas, J.). Be-
cause the judicial power requires judges to exercise their
independent judgment, the deference that Chevron requires
contravenes Article III's mandate.
   Chevron deference also permits the Executive Branch to
exercise powers not given to it. “When the Government is
called upon to perform a function that requires an exercise
of legislative, executive, or judicial power, only the vested
recipient of that power can perform it.” Department of
Transportation v. Association of American Railroads, 575
U. S. 43, 68 (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment).
Because the Constitution gives the Executive Branch only
“[t]he executive Power,” executive agencies may constitu-
tionally exercise only that power. Art. II, § 1, cl. 1. But,
Chevron gives agencies license to exercise judicial power.
By allowing agencies to defnitively interpret laws so long
as they are ambiguous, Chevron “transfer[s]” the Judiciary's
Page Proof Pending Publication
“interpretive judgment to the agency.” Perez, 575 U. S., at
124 (opinion of Thomas, J.); see also Baldwin, 589 U. S., at
1240 (opinion of Thomas, J.); Michigan, 576 U. S., at
761–762 (opinion of Thomas, J.); post, at 18 (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring).
   Chevron deference “cannot be salvaged” by recasting it as
deference to an agency's “formulation of policy.” Baldwin,
589 U. S., at 1239 (opinion of Thomas, J.) (internal quotation
marks omitted). If that were true, Chevron would mean
that “agencies are unconstitutionally exercising `legislative
Powers' vested in Congress.” Baldwin, 589 U. S., at 1239
(opinion of Thomas, J.) (quoting Art. I, § 1). By “giv[ing]
the force of law to agency pronouncements on matters of
private conduct as to which Congress did not actually have
an intent,” Chevron “permit[s] a body other than Congress
to perform a function that requires an exercise of legislative
power.” Michigan, 576 U. S., at 762 (opinion of Thomas, J.)
(internal quotation marks omitted). No matter the gloss
put on it, Chevron expands agencies' power beyond the
416     LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                    Gorsuch, J., concurring

bounds of Article II by permitting them to exercise powers
reserved to another branch of Government.
   Chevron deference was “not a harmless transfer of power.”
Baldwin, 589 U. S., at 1239 (opinion of Thomas, J.). “The
Constitution carefully imposes structural constraints on all
three branches, and the exercise of power free of those ac-
companying restraints subverts the design of the Constitu-
tion's ratifers.” Id., at 1239–1240. In particular, the
Founders envisioned that “the courts [would] check the Ex-
ecutive by applying the correct interpretation of the law.”
Id., at 1240. Chevron was thus a fundamental disruption
of our separation of powers. It improperly strips courts of
judicial power by simultaneously increasing the power of ex-
ecutive agencies. By overruling Chevron, we restore this
aspect of our separation of powers. To safeguard individual
liberty, “[s]tructure is everything.” A. Scalia, Foreword:
The Importance of Structure in Constitutional Interpreta-
tion, 83 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1417, 1418 (2008). Although the
Page Proof Pending Publication
Court fnally ends our 40-year misadventure with Chevron
deference, its more profound problems should not be over-
looked. Regardless of what a statute says, the type of def-
erence required by Chevron violates the Constitution.

  Justice Gorsuch, concurring.
   In disputes between individuals and the government about
the meaning of a federal law, federal courts have tradition-
ally sought to offer independent judgments about “what the
law is” without favor to either side. Marbury v. Madison,
1 Cranch 137, 177 (1803). Beginning in the mid-1980s, how-
ever, this Court experimented with a radically different ap-
proach. Applying Chevron deference, judges began defer-
ring to the views of executive agency offcials about the
meaning of federal statutes. See Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v.
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837
(1984). With time, the error of this approach became widely
appreciated. So much so that this Court has refused to
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             417

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

apply Chevron deference since 2016. Today, the Court
places a tombstone on Chevron no one can miss. In doing
so, the Court returns judges to interpretive rules that have
guided federal courts since the Nation's founding. I write
separately to address why the proper application of the doc-
trine of stare decisis supports that course.

                                I
                                A
   Today, the phrase “common law judge” may call to mind a
judicial titan of the past who brilliantly devised new legal
rules on his own. The phrase “stare decisis” might conjure
up a sense that judges who come later in time are strictly
bound to follow the work of their predecessors. But neither
of those intuitions fairly describes the traditional common-
law understanding of the judge's role or the doctrine of
stare decisis.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   At common law, a judge's charge to decide cases was not
usually understood as a license to make new law. For much
of England's early history, different rulers and different legal
systems prevailed in different regions. As England consoli-
dated into a single kingdom governed by a single legal sys-
tem, the judge's task was to examine those pre-existing legal
traditions and apply in the disputes that came to him those
legal rules that were “common to the whole land and to all
Englishmen.” F. Maitland, Equity, Also the Forms of Ac-
tion at Common Law 2 (1929). That was “common law”
judging.
   This view of the judge's role had consequences for the au-
thority due judicial decisions. Because a judge's job was to
fnd and apply the law, not make it, the “opinion of the judge”
and “the law” were not considered “one and the same thing.”
1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 71
(1765) (Blackstone) (emphasis deleted). A judge's decision
might bind the parties to the case at hand. M. Hale, The
History and Analysis of the Common Law of England 68
418      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

(1713) (Hale). But none of that meant the judge had the
power to “make a Law properly so called” for society at
large, “for that only the King and Parliament can do.” Ibid.
   Other consequences followed for the role precedent played
in future judicial proceedings. Because past decisions rep-
resented something “less than a Law,” they did not bind fu-
ture judges. Ibid. At the same time, as Matthew Hale put
it, a future judge could give a past decision “Weight” as “Evi-
dence” of the law. Ibid. Expressing the same idea, Wil-
liam Blackstone conceived of judicial precedents as “evi-
dence” of “the common law.” 1 Blackstone 69, 71. And
much like other forms of evidence, precedents at common
law were thought to vary in the weight due them. Some
past decisions might supply future courts with considerable
guidance. But others might be entitled to lesser weight, not
least because judges are no less prone to error than anyone
else and they may sometimes “mistake” what the law de-
Page Proof Pending Publication
mands. Id., at 71 (emphasis deleted). In cases like that,
both men thought, a future judge should not rotely repeat a
past mistake but instead “vindicate” the law “from misrepre-
sentation.” Id., at 70.
   When examining past decisions as evidence of the law,
common law judges did not, broadly speaking, afford over-
whelming weight to any “single precedent.” J. Baker, An
Introduction to English Legal History 209–210 (5th ed.
2019). Instead, a prior decision's persuasive force depended
in large measure on its “Consonancy and Congruity with
Resolutions and Decisions of former Times.” Hale 68. An
individual decision might refect the views of one court at
one moment in time, but a consistent line of decisions repre-
senting the wisdom of many minds across many generations
was generally considered stronger evidence of the law's
meaning. Ibid.
   With this conception of precedent in mind, Lord Mansfeld
cautioned against elevating “particular cases” above the
“general principles” that “run through the cases, and govern
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            419

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

the decision of them.” Rust v. Cooper, 2 Cowp. 629, 632, 98
Eng. Rep. 1277, 1279 (K. B. 1777). By discarding aberra-
tional rulings and pursuing instead the mainstream of past
decisions, he observed, the common law tended over time to
“wor[k] itself pure.” Omychund v. Barker, 1 Atk. 22, 33, 26
Eng. Rep. 15, 23 (Ch. 1744) (emphasis deleted). Refecting
similar thinking, Edmund Burke offered fve principles for
the evaluation of past judicial decisions: “They ought to be
shewn; frst, to be numerous and not scattered here and
there;—secondly, concurrent and not contradictory and mu-
tually destructive;—thirdly, to be made in good and constitu-
tional times;—fourthly, not to be made to serve an occa-
sion;—and ffthly, to be agreeable to the general tenor of
legal principles.” Speech of Dec. 23, 1790, in 3 The Speeches
of the Right Honourable Edmund Burke 513 (1816).
   Not only did different decisions carry different weight, so
did different language within a decision. An opinion's hold-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ing and the reasoning essential to it (the ratio decidendi)
merited careful attention. Dicta, stray remarks, and digres-
sions warranted less weight. See N. Duxbury, The Intrica-
cies of Dicta and Dissent 19–24 (2021) (Duxbury). These
were no more than “the vapours and fumes of law.” F.
Bacon, The Lord Keeper's Speech in the Exchequer (1617),
in 2 The Works of Francis Bacon 478 (B. Montagu ed. 1887)
(Bacon).
   That is not to say those “vapours” were worthless. Often
dicta might provide the parties to a particular dispute a “ful-
ler understanding of the court's decisional path or related
areas of concern.” B. Garner et al., The Law of Judicial
Precedent 65 (2016) (Precedent). Dicta might also provide
future courts with a source of “thoughtful advice.” Ibid.
But future courts had to be careful not to treat every “hasty
expression . . . as a serious and deliberate opinion.” Steel v.
Houghton, 1 Bl. H. 51, 53, 126 Eng. Rep. 32, 33 (C. P. 1788).
To do so would work an “injustice to [the] memory” of their
predecessors who could not expect judicial remarks issued in
420      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

one context to apply perfectly in others, perhaps especially
ones they could not foresee. Ibid. Also, the limits of the
adversarial process, a distinctive feature of English law, had
to be borne in mind. When a single judge or a small panel
reached a decision in a case, they did so based on the factual
record and legal arguments the parties at hand have chosen
to develop. Attuned to those constraints, future judges had
to proceed with an open mind to the possibility that different
facts and different legal arguments might dictate different
outcomes in later disputes. See Duxbury 19–24.

                               B
   Necessarily, this represents just a quick sketch of tradi-
tional common-law understandings of the judge's role and the
place of precedent in it. It focuses, too, on the horizontal,
not vertical, force of judicial precedents. But there are good
reasons to think that the common law's understandings of
Page Proof Pending Publication
judges and precedent outlined above crossed the Atlantic and
informed the nature of the “judicial Power” the Constitution
vests in federal courts. Art. III, § 1.
   Not only was the Constitution adopted against the back-
drop of these understandings and, in light of that alone, they
may provide evidence of what the framers meant when they
spoke of the “judicial Power.” Many other, more specifc
provisions in the Constitution refect much the same distinc-
tion between lawmaking and lawfnding functions the com-
mon law did. The Constitution provides that its terms may
be amended only through certain prescribed democratic
processes. Art. V. It vests the power to enact federal leg-
islation exclusively in the people's elected representatives in
Congress. Art. I, § 1. Meanwhile, the Constitution de-
scribes the judicial power as the power to resolve cases and
controversies. Art. III, § 2, cl. 1. As well, it delegates that
authority to life-tenured judges, see § 1, an assignment that
would have made little sense if judges could usurp lawmak-
ing powers vested in periodically elected representatives.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            421

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

But one that makes perfect sense if what is sought is a neu-
tral party “to interpret and apply” the law without fear or
favor in a dispute between others. 2 The Works of James
Wilson 161 (J. Andrews ed. 1896) (Wilson); see Osborn v.
Bank of United States, 9 Wheat. 738, 866 (1824).
   The constrained view of the judicial power that runs
through our Constitution carries with it familiar implica-
tions, ones the framers readily acknowledged. James Madi-
son, for example, proclaimed that it would be a “fallacy” to
suggest that judges or their precedents could “repeal or
alter” the Constitution or the laws of the United States.
Letter to N. Trist (Dec. 1831), in 9 The Writings of James
Madison 477 (G. Hunt ed. 1910). A court's opinion, James
Wilson added, may be thought of as “effective la[w]” “[a]s to
the parties.” Wilson 160–161. But as in England, Wilson
said, a prior judicial decision could serve in a future dispute
only as “evidence” of the law's proper construction. Id., at
Page Proof Pending Publication
160; accord, 1 J. Kent, Commentaries on American Law 442–
443 (1826).
   The framers also recognized that the judicial power de-
scribed in our Constitution implies, as the judicial power did
in England, a power (and duty) of discrimination when it
comes to assessing the “evidence” embodied in past deci-
sions. So, for example, Madison observed that judicial rul-
ings “repeatedly confrmed” may supply better evidence of
the law's meaning than isolated or aberrant ones. Letter to
C. Ingersoll (June 1831), in 4 Letters and Other Writings of
James Madison 184 (1867) (emphasis added). Extending the
thought, Thomas Jefferson believed it would often take “nu-
merous decisions” for the meaning of new statutes to become
truly “settled.” Letter to S. Jones (July 1809), in 12 The
Writings of Thomas Jefferson 299 (A. Bergh ed. 1907).
   From the start, too, American courts recognized that not
everything found in a prior decision was entitled to equal
weight. As Chief Justice Marshall warned, “It is a maxim
not to be disregarded, that general expressions, in every
422      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

opinion, are to be taken in connection with the case in which
those expressions are used.” Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat.
264, 399 (1821). To the extent a past court offered views
“beyond the case,” those expressions “may be respected” in
a later case “but ought not to control the judgment.” Ibid.
One “obvious” reason for this, Marshall continued, had to do
with the limits of the adversarial process we inherited from
England: Only “[t]he question actually before the Court is
investigated with care, and considered in its full extent.
Other principles which may serve to illustrate it, are consid-
ered in their relation to the case decided, but their possible
bearing on all other cases is seldom completely investigated.”
Id., at 399–400.
   Abraham Lincoln championed these traditional under-
standings in his debates with Stephen Douglas. Douglas
took the view that a single decision of this Court—no matter
how fawed—could defnitively resolve a contested issue for
Page Proof Pending Publication
everyone and all time. Those who thought otherwise, he
said, “aim[ed] a deadly blow to our whole Republican system
of government.” Speech at Springfeld, Ill. (June 26, 1857),
in 2 The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln 401 (R. Bas-
ler ed. 1953) (Lincoln Speech). But Lincoln knew better.
While accepting that judicial decisions “absolutely deter-
mine” the rights of the parties to a court's judgment, he re-
fused to accept that any single judicial decision could “fully
settl[e]” an issue, particularly when that decision departs
from the Constitution. Id., at 400–401. In cases such as
these, Lincoln explained, “it is not resistance, it is not fac-
tious, it is not even disrespectful, to treat [the decision] as
not having yet quite established a settled doctrine for the
country.” Id., at 401.
   After the Civil War, the Court echoed some of these same
points. It stressed that every statement in a judicial opin-
ion “must be taken in connection with its immediate con-
text,” In re Ayers, 123 U. S. 443, 488 (1887), and stray “re-
marks” must not be elevated above the written law, see The
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             423

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

Belfast, 7 Wall. 624, 641 (1869); see also, e. g., Trebilcock v.
Wilson, 12 Wall. 687, 692–693 (1872); Mason v. Eldred, 6
Wall. 231, 236–238 (1868). During Chief Justice Chase's ten-
ure, it seems a Justice writing the Court's majority opinion
would generally work alone and present his work orally and
in summary form to his colleagues at conference, which
meant that other Justices often did not even review the opin-
ion prior to publication. 6 C. Fairman, History of the Su-
preme Court of the United States 69–70 (1971). The Court
could proceed in this way because it understood that a single
judicial opinion may resolve a “case or controversy,” and in
so doing it may make “effective law” for the parties, but it
does not legislate for the whole of the country and is not to
be confused with laws that do.

                                C
  From all this, I see at least three lessons about the doc-
Page Proof Pending Publication
trine of stare decisis relevant to the decision before us today.
Each concerns a form of judicial humility.
  First, a past decision may bind the parties to a dispute,
but it provides this Court no authority in future cases to
depart from what the Constitution or laws of the United
States ordain. Instead, the Constitution promises, the
American people are sovereign and they alone may, through
democratically responsive processes, amend our foundational
charter or revise federal legislation. Unelected judges
enjoy no such power. Part I–B, supra.
  Recognizing as much, this Court has often said that stare
decisis is not an “ `inexorable command.' ” State Oil Co. v.
Khan, 522 U. S. 3, 20 (1997). And from time to time it has
found it necessary to correct its past mistakes. When it
comes to correcting errors of constitutional interpretation,
the Court has stressed the importance of doing so, for they
can be corrected otherwise only through the amendment
process. See, e. g., Franchise Tax Bd. of Cal. v. Hyatt, 587
U. S. 230, 248 (2019). When it comes to fxing errors of stat-
424       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                        Gorsuch, J., concurring

utory interpretation, the Court has proceeded perhaps more
circumspectly. But in that feld, too, it has overruled even
longstanding but “fawed” decisions. See, e. g., Leegin Cre-
ative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc., 551 U. S. 877,
904, 907 (2007).
   Recent history illustrates all this. During the tenures of
Chief Justices Warren and Burger, it seems this Court over-
ruled an average of around three cases per Term, includ-
ing roughly 50 statutory precedents between the 1960s and
1980s alone. See W. Eskridge, Overruling Statutory Prece-
dents, 76 Geo. L. J. 1361, 1427–1434 (1988) (collecting cases).
Many of these decisions came in settings no less consequen-
tial than today's. In recent years, we have not approached
the pace set by our predecessors, overruling an average of
just one or two prior decisions each Term.1 But the point
remains: Judicial decisions inconsistent with the written
law do not inexorably control.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Second, another lesson tempers the frst. While judicial
decisions may not supersede or revise the Constitution or
federal statutory law, they merit our “respect as embody-
ing the considered views of those who have come before.”
Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U. S. 83, 105 (2020). As a matter
of professional responsibility, a judge must not only avoid
confusing his writings with the law. When a case comes be-
fore him, he must also weigh his view of what the law de-
mands against the thoughtful views of his predecessors.
After all, “[p]recedent is a way of accumulating and passing
down the learning of past generations, a font of established
wisdom richer than what can be found in any single judge or
panel of judges.” Precedent 9.

   1
     For relevant databases of decisions, see Congressional Research Serv-
ice, Table of Supreme Court Decisions Overruled by Subsequent Decisions,
Constitution Annotated, https://constitution.congress.gov/resources/
decisions-overruled/; see also H. Spaeth et al., 2023 Supreme Court Data-
base, http://supremecourtdatabase.org.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           425

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

   Doubtless, past judicial decisions may, as they always
have, command “greater or less authority as precedents, ac-
cording to circumstances.” Lincoln Speech 401. But, like
English judges before us, we have long turned to familiar
considerations to guide our assessment of the weight due a
past decision. So, for example, as this Court has put it, the
weight due a precedent may depend on the quality of its
reasoning, its consistency with related decisions, its work-
ability, and reliance interests that have formed around it.
See Ramos, 590 U. S., at 106. The frst factor recognizes
that the primary power of any precedent lies in its power to
persuade—and poorly reasoned decisions may not provide
reliable evidence of the law's meaning. The second factor
refects the fact that a precedent is more likely to be correct
and worthy of respect when it refects the time-tested wis-
dom of generations than when it sits “unmoored” from sur-
rounding law. Ibid. The remaining factors, like workabil-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ity and reliance, do not often supply reason enough on their
own to abide a fawed decision, for almost any past decision
is likely to beneft some group eager to keep things as they
are and content with how things work. See, e. g., id., at 108.
But these factors can sometimes serve functions similar to
the others, by pointing to clues that may suggest a past deci-
sion is right in ways not immediately obvious to the individ-
ual judge.
   When asking whether to follow or depart from a prece-
dent, some judges deploy adverbs. They speak of whether
or not a precedent qualifes as “demonstrably erroneous,”
Gamble v. United States, 587 U. S. 678, 711 (2019) (Thomas,
J., concurring), or “egregiously wrong,” Ramos, 590 U. S., at
121 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part). But the emphasis
the adverb imparts is not meant for dramatic effect. It
seeks to serve instead as a reminder of a more substantive
lesson. The lesson that, in assessing the weight due a past
decision, a judge is not to be guided by his own impression
alone, but must self-consciously test his views against those
426      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                    Gorsuch, J., concurring

who have come before, open to the possibility that a prece-
dent might be correct in ways not initially apparent to him.
   Third, it would be a mistake to read judicial opinions like
statutes. Adopted through a robust and democratic process,
statutes often apply in all their particulars to all persons.
By contrast, when judges reach a decision in our adversarial
system, they render a judgment based only on the factual
record and legal arguments the parties at hand have chosen
to develop. A later court assessing a past decision must
therefore appreciate the possibility that different facts and
different legal arguments may dictate a different outcome.
They must appreciate, too, that, like anyone else, judges are
“innately digressive,” and their opinions may sometimes
offer stray asides about a wider topic that may sound nearly
like legislative commands. Duxbury 4. Often, enterprising
counsel seek to exploit such statements to maximum effect.
See id., at 25. But while these digressions may sometimes
Page Proof Pending Publication
contain valuable counsel, they remain “vapours and fumes
of law,” Bacon 478, and cannot “control the judgment in a
subsequent suit,” Cohens, 6 Wheat., at 399.
   These principles, too, have long guided this Court and oth-
ers. As Judge Easterbrook has put it, an “opinion is not a
comprehensive code; it is just an explanation for the Court's
disposition. Judicial opinions must not be confused with
statutes, and general expressions must be read in light of
the subject under consideration.” United States v. Skoien,
614 F. 3d 638, 640 (CA7 2010) (en banc); see also Reiter v.
Sonotone Corp., 442 U. S. 330, 341 (1979) (stressing that
an opinion is not “a statute,” and its language should not
“be parsed” as if it were); Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U. S. 353,
372 (2001) (same). If stare decisis counsels respect for the
thinking of those who have come before, it also counsels
against doing an “injustice to [their] memory” by overreli-
ance on their every word. Steel, 1 Bl. H., at 53, 126 Eng.
Rep., at 33. As judges, “[w]e neither expect nor hope that
our successors will comb” through our opinions, searching
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             427

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

for delphic answers to matters we never fully explored.
Brown v. Davenport, 596 U. S. 118, 141 (2022). To proceed
otherwise risks “turn[ing] stare decisis from a tool of judicial
humility into one of judicial hubris.” Ibid.

                                II
   Turning now directly to the question what stare decisis
effect Chevron deference warrants, each of these lessons
seem to me to weigh frmly in favor of the course the Court
charts today: Lesson 1, because Chevron deference contra-
venes the law Congress prescribed in the Administrative
Procedure Act. Lesson 2, because Chevron deference runs
against mainstream currents in our law regarding the sepa-
ration of powers, due process, and centuries-old interpretive
rules that fortify those constitutional commitments. And
Lesson 3, because to hold otherwise would effectively re-
quire us to endow stray statements in Chevron with the au-
thority of statutory language, all while ignoring more consid-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ered language in that same decision and the teachings of
experience.
                              A
   Start with Lesson 1. The Administrative Procedure Act
of 1946 (APA) directs a “reviewing court” to “decide all rele-
vant questions of law” and “interpret” relevant “constitu-
tional and statutory provisions.” 5 U. S. C. § 706. When
applying Chevron deference, reviewing courts do not inter-
pret all relevant statutory provisions and decide all relevant
questions of law. Instead, judges abdicate a large measure
of that responsibility in favor of agency offcials. Their in-
terpretations of “ambiguous” laws control even when those
interpretations are at odds with the fairest reading of the
law an independent “reviewing court” can muster. Agency
offcials, too, may change their minds about the law's mean-
ing at any time, even when Congress has not amended the
relevant statutory language in any way. National Cable &
Telecommunications Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services,
428        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                         Gorsuch, J., concurring

545 U. S. 967, 982–983 (2005). And those offcials may even
disagree with and effectively overrule not only their own
past interpretations of a law but a court's past interpretation
as well. Ibid. None of that is consistent with the APA's
clear mandate.
   The hard fact is Chevron “did not even bother to cite” the
APA, let alone seek to apply its terms. United States v.
Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 241 (2001) (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Instead, as even its most ardent defenders have conceded,
Chevron deference rests upon a “fctionalized statement of
legislative desire,” namely, a judicial supposition that Con-
gress implicitly wishes judges to defer to executive agencies'
interpretations of the law even when it has said nothing of
the kind. D. Barron & E. Kagan, Chevron's Nondelegation
Doctrine, 2001 S. Ct. Rev. 201, 212 (Kagan) (emphasis added).
As proponents see it, that fction represents a “policy judg-
men[t] about what . . . make[s] for good government.” Ibid.2
But in our democracy unelected judges possess no authority
Page Proof Pending Publication
to elevate their own fctions over the laws adopted by the
Nation's elected representatives. Some might think the
legal directive Congress provided in the APA unwise; some
might think a different arrangement preferable. See, e. g.,
post, at 456–458 (Kagan, J., dissenting). But it is Con-
gress's view of “good government,” not ours, that controls.
   Much more could be said about Chevron's inconsistency
with the APA. But I have said it in the past. See Buffng-
ton v. McDonough, 598 U. S. 1021, 1025 (2022) (opinion dis-
senting from denial of certiorari); Gutierrez-Brizuela v.
Lynch, 834 F. 3d 1142, 1151–1153 (CA10 2016) (concurring

  2
     See also A. Scalia, Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations
of Law, 1989 Duke L. J. 511, 516–517 (1989) (describing Chevron's theory
that Congress “delegat[ed]” interpretive authority to agencies as “fc-
tional”); S. Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38
Admin. L. Rev. 363, 370 (1986) (describing the notion that there exists a
“ `legislative intent to delegate the law-interpreting function' as a kind of
legal fction”).
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                   429

                        Gorsuch, J., concurring

opinion). And the Court makes many of the same points at
length today. See ante, at 391–394. For present purposes,
the short of it is that continuing to abide Chevron deference
would require us to transgress the frst lesson of stare deci-
sis—the humility required of judges to recognize that our
decisions must yield to the laws adopted by the people's
elected representatives.3
                               B
   Lesson 2 cannot rescue Chevron deference. If stare deci-
sis calls for judicial humility in the face of the written law,
it also cautions us to test our present conclusions carefully
against the work of our predecessors. At the same time and
as we have seen, this second form of humility counsels us to
remember that precedents that have won the endorsement
of judges across many generations, demonstrated coherence
with our broader law, and weathered the tests of time and
experience are entitled to greater consideration than those
Page Proof Pending Publication
that have not. See Part I, supra. Viewed by each of these
lights, the case for Chevron deference only grows weaker
still.
                                1
  Start with a look to how our predecessors traditionally
understood the judicial role in disputes over a law's meaning.
From the Nation's founding, they considered “[t]he interpre-
tation of the laws” in cases and controversies “the proper

  3
    The dissent suggests that we need not take the APA's directions quite
so seriously because the “fnest administrative law scholars” from Harvard
claim to see in them some wiggle room. Post, at 464 (opinion of Kagan,
J.). But nothing in the APA commands deference to the views of profes-
sors any more than it does the government. Nor is the dissent's list of
Harvard's fnest administrative law scholars entirely complete. See S.
Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 288 (7th ed. 2011)
(acknowledging that Chevron deference “seems in confict with . . . the
apparently contrary language of § 706”); Kagan 212 (likewise acknowledg-
ing Chevron deference rests upon a “fctionalized statement of legislative
desire”).
430       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                        Gorsuch, J., concurring

and peculiar province of the courts.” The Federalist No. 78,
p. 467 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (A. Hamilton). Perhaps the
Court's most famous early decision refected exactly that
view. There, Chief Justice Marshall declared it “emphati-
cally the province and duty of the judicial department to say
what the law is.” Marbury, 1 Cranch, at 177. For judges
“have neither FORCE nor WILL but merely judgment”—
and an obligation to exercise that judgment independently.
The Federalist No. 78, at 465. No matter how “disagreeable
that duty may be,” this Court has said, a judge “is not at
liberty to surrender, or to waive it.” United States v. Dick-
son, 15 Pet. 141, 162 (1841) (Story, J.). This duty of inde-
pendent judgment is perhaps “the defning characteristi[c] of
Article III judges.” Stern v. Marshall, 564 U. S. 462, 483
(2011).
   To be sure, this Court has also long extended “great re-
spect” to the “contemporaneous” and consistent views of the
coordinate branches about the meaning of a statute's terms.
Page Proof Pending Publication
Edwards' Lessee v. Darby, 12 Wheat. 206, 210 (1827); see also
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 401 (1819); Stuart v.
Laird, 1 Cranch 299, 309 (1803).4 But traditionally, that did
not mean a court had to “defer” to any “reasonable” con-
struction of an “ambiguous” law that an executive agency
might offer. It did not mean that the government could pro-
pound a “reasonable” view of the law's meaning one day, a
different one the next, and bind the judiciary always to its
latest word. Nor did it mean the executive could displace a
pre-existing judicial construction of a statute's terms, replace
  4
    Accord, National Lead Co. v. United States, 252 U. S. 140, 145–146
(1920) (affording “great weight” to a “contemporaneous construction” by
the executive that had “been long continued”); Jacobs v. Prichard, 223
U. S. 200, 214 (1912) (“fnd[ing] no ambiguity in the act” but also fnding
“strength” for the Court's interpretation in the executive's “immediate
and continued construction of the act”); Schell's Executors v. Fauché, 138
U. S. 562, 572 (1891) (treating as “controlling” a “contemporaneous con-
struction” of a law endorsed “not only [by] the courts but [also by] the
departments”).
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             431

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

it with its own, and effectively overrule a judicial precedent
in the process. Put simply, this Court was “not bound” by
any and all reasonable “administrative construction[s]” of
ambiguous statutes when resolving cases and controversies.
Burnet v. Chicago Portrait Co., 285 U. S. 1, 16 (1932). While
the executive's consistent and contemporaneous views war-
ranted respect, they “by no means control[led] the action or
the opinion of this court in expounding the law with refer-
ence to the rights of parties litigant before them.” Irvine
v. Marshall, 20 How. 558, 567 (1858); see also A. Bamzai, The
Origins of Judicial Deference to Executive Interpretation,
126 Yale L. J. 908, 987 (2017).
   Sensing how jarringly inconsistent Chevron is with this
Court's many longstanding precedents discussing the nature
of the judicial role in disputes over the law's meaning, the
government and dissent struggle for a response. The best
they can muster is a handful of cases from the early 1940s in
Page Proof Pending Publication
which, they say, this Court frst “put [deference] principles
into action.” Post, at 468 (Kagan, J., dissenting). And, ad-
mittedly, for a period this Court toyed with a form of defer-
ence akin to Chevron, at least for so-called mixed questions
of law and fact. See, e. g., Gray v. Powell, 314 U. S. 402, 411–
412 (1941); NLRB v. Hearst Publications, Inc., 322 U. S. 111,
131 (1944). But, as the Court details, even that limited ex-
periment did not last. See ante, at 387–389. Justice Rob-
erts, in his Gray dissent, decried these decisions for “abdicat-
[ing our] function as a court of review” and “complete[ly]
revers[ing] . . . the normal and usual method of construing a
statute.” 314 U. S., at 420–421. And just a few years later,
in Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U. S. 134 (1944), the Court
returned to its time-worn path.
   Echoing themes that had run throughout our law from its
start, Justice Robert H. Jackson wrote for the Court in
Skidmore. There, he said, courts may extend respectful
consideration to another branch's interpretation of the law,
but the weight due those interpretations must always “de-
432      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

pend upon the[ir] thoroughness . . . , the validity of [their]
reasoning, [their] consistency with earlier and later pro-
nouncements, and all those factors which give [them] power
to persuade.” Id., at 140. In another case the same year,
and again writing for the Court, Justice Jackson expressly
rejected a call for a judge-made doctrine of deference much
like Chevron, offering that, “[i]f Congress had deemed it nec-
essary or even appropriate” for courts to “defe[r] to adminis-
trative construction[,] . . . it would not have been at a loss
for words to say so.” Davies Warehouse Co. v. Bowles, 321
U. S. 144, 156 (1944).
   To the extent proper respect for precedent demands, as it
always has, special respect for longstanding and mainstream
decisions, Chevron scores badly. It represented not a con-
tinuation of a long line of decisions but a break from them.
Worse, it did not merely depart from our precedents. More
nearly, Chevron defed them.

Page Proof Pending
              2    Publication
   Consider next how uneasily Chevron deference sits along-
side so many other settled aspects of our law. Having wit-
nessed frst-hand King George's efforts to gain infuence and
control over colonial judges, see Declaration of Independence
¶11, the framers made a considered judgment to build ju-
dicial independence into the Constitution's design. They
vested the judicial power in decisionmakers with life tenure.
Art. III, § 1. They placed the judicial salary beyond political
control during a judge's tenure. Ibid. And they rejected
any proposal that would subject judicial decisions to review
by political actors. The Federalist No. 81, at 482; United
States v. Hansen, 599 U. S. 762, 786–791 (2023) (Thomas, J.,
concurring). All of this served to ensure the same thing: “A
fair trial in a fair tribunal.” In re Murchison, 349 U. S. 133,
136 (1955). One in which impartial judges, not those cur-
rently wielding power in the political branches, would “say
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            433

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

what the law is” in cases coming to court. Marbury, 1
Cranch, at 177.
   Chevron deference undermines all that. It precludes
courts from exercising the judicial power vested in them by
Article III to say what the law is. It forces judges to aban-
don the best reading of the law in favor of views of those
presently holding the reins of the Executive Branch. It re-
quires judges to change, and change again, their interpreta-
tions of the law as and when the government demands. And
that transfer of power has exactly the sort of consequences
one might expect. Rather than insulate adjudication from
power and politics to ensure a fair hearing “without respect
to persons” as the federal judicial oath demands, 28 U. S. C.
§ 453, Chevron deference requires courts to “place a fn-
ger on the scales of justice in favor of the most powerful of
litigants, the federal government.” Buffngton, 598 U. S., at
1028. Along the way, Chevron deference guarantees “sys-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tematic bias” in favor of whichever political party currently
holds the levers of executive power. P. Hamburger, Chev-
ron Bias, 84 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 1187, 1212 (2016).
   Chevron deference undermines other aspects of our settled
law, too. In this country, we often boast that the Constitu-
tion's promise of due process of law, see Amdts. 5, 14, means
that “ `no man can be a judge in his own case.' ” Williams
v. Pennsylvania, 579 U. S. 1, 8–9 (2016); Calder v. Bull, 3
Dall. 386, 388 (1798) (opinion of Chase, J.). That principle,
of course, has even deeper roots, tracing far back into the
common law where it was known by the Latin maxim nemo
iudex in causa sua. See 1 E. Coke, Institutes of the Laws
of England § 212, *141a. Yet, under the Chevron regime, all
that means little, for executive agencies may effectively
judge the scope of their own lawful powers. See, e. g., Ar-
lington v. FCC, 569 U. S. 290, 296–297 (2013).
   Traditionally, as well, courts have sought to construe stat-
utes as a reasonable reader would “when the law was made.”
434      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

Blackstone 59; see United States v. Fisher, 2 Cranch 358,
386 (1805). Today, some call this “textualism.” But really
it's a very old idea, one that constrains judges to a lawfnding
rather than lawmaking role by focusing their work on the
statutory text, its linguistic context, and various canons
of construction. In that way, textualism serves as an essen-
tial guardian of the due process promise of fair notice. If
a judge could discard an old meaning and assign a new
one to a law's terms, all without any legislative revision,
how could people ever be sure of the rules that bind them?
New Prime Inc. v. Oliveira, 586 U. S. 105, 113 (2019). Were
the rules otherwise, Blackstone warned, the people would
be rendered “slaves to their magistrates.” 4 Blackstone
371.
   Yet, replace “magistrates” with “bureaucrats,” and Black-
stone's fear becomes reality when courts employ Chevron
deference. Whenever we confront an ambiguity in the law,
Page Proof Pending Publication
judges do not seek to resolve it impartially according to the
best evidence of the law's original meaning. Instead, we re-
sort to a far cruder heuristic: “The reasonable bureaucrat
always wins.” And because the reasonable bureaucrat may
change his mind year-to-year and election-to-election, the
people can never know with certainty what new “interpreta-
tions” might be used against them. This “fuid” approach to
statutory interpretation is “as much of a trap for the inno-
cent as the ancient laws of Caligula,” which were posted so
high up on the walls and in print so small that ordinary peo-
ple could never be sure what they required. United States
v. Cardiff, 344 U. S. 174, 176 (1952).
   The ancient rule of lenity is still another of Chevron's vic-
tims. Since the founding, American courts have construed
ambiguities in penal laws against the government and with
lenity toward affected persons. Wooden v. United States,
595 U. S. 360, 388–390 (2022) (Gorsuch, J., concurring in
judgment). That principle upholds due process by safe-
guarding individual liberty in the face of ambiguous laws.
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                     435

                         Gorsuch, J., concurring

Ibid. And it fortifes the separation of powers by keeping
the power of punishment frmly “ `in the legislative, not in the
judicial department.' ” Id., at 391 (quoting United States v.
Wiltberger, 5 Wheat. 76, 95 (1820)). But power begets
power. And pressing Chevron deference as far as it can go,
the government has sometimes managed to leverage “ambi-
guities” in the written law to penalize conduct Congress
never clearly proscribed. Compare Guedes v. ATF, 920
F. 3d 1, 27–28, 31 (CADC 2019), with Garland v. Cargill, 602
U. S. 406 (2024).
   In all these ways, Chevron's fction has led us to a strange
place. One where authorities long thought reserved for Ar-
ticle III are transferred to Article II, where the scales of
justice are tilted systematically in favor of the most power-
ful, where legal demands can change with every election
even though the laws do not, and where the people are left to
guess about their legal rights and responsibilities. So much
tension with so many foundational features of our legal order
Page Proof Pending Publication
is surely one more sign that we have “taken a wrong turn
along the way.” Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U. S. 558, 607 (2019)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring in judgment).5
  5
    The dissent suggests that Chevron deference bears at least something
in common with surrounding law because it resembles a presumption or
traditional canon of construction, and both “are common.” Post, at 455, n. 1,
473–474 (opinion of Kagan, J.). But even that thin reed wavers at a glance.
Many of the presumptions and interpretive canons the dissent cites—in-
cluding lenity, contra proferentem, and others besides—“ `embod[y] . . .
legal doctrine[s] centuries older than our Republic.' ” Opati v. Republic
of Sudan, 590 U. S. 418, 425 (2020). Chevron deference can make no such
boast. Many of the presumptions and canons the dissent cites also serve
the Constitution, protecting the lines of authority it draws. Take just two
examples: The federalism canon tells courts to presume federal statutes
do not preempt state laws because of the sovereignty States enjoy under
the Constitution. Bond v. United States, 572 U. S. 844, 858 (2014). The
presumption against retroactivity serves as guardian of the Constitution's
promise of due process and its ban on ex post facto laws, Landgraf v. USI
Film Products, 511 U. S. 244, 265 (1994). Once more, however, Chevron
deference can make no similar claim. Rather than serve the Constitu-
436       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                        Gorsuch, J., concurring

                                    3
   Finally, consider workability and reliance. If, as I have
sought to suggest, these factors may sometimes serve as use-
ful proxies for the question whether a precedent comports
with the historic tide of judicial practice or represents an
aberrational mistake, see Part I–C, supra, they certainly
do here.
   Take Chevron's “workability.” Throughout its short life,
this Court has been forced to supplement and revise Chevron
so many times that no one can agree on how many “steps” it
requires, nor even what each of those “steps” entails. Some
suggest that the analysis begins with “step zero” (perhaps
itself a tell), an innovation that traces to United States v.
Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218. Mead held that, before even con-
sidering whether Chevron applies, a court must determine
whether Congress meant to delegate to the agency authority
to interpret the law in a given feld. 533 U. S., at 226–227.
Page Proof Pending Publication
But that exercise faces an immediate challenge: Because
Chevron depends on a judicially implied, rather than a legis-
latively expressed, delegation of interpretive authority to an
executive agency, Part II–A, supra, when should the fction
apply and when not? Mead fashioned a multifactor test for
judges to use. 533 U. S., at 229–231. But that test has
proved as indeterminate in application as it was contrived in
origin. Perhaps for these reasons, perhaps for others, this
Court has sometimes applied Mead and often ignored it.
See Brand X, 545 U. S., at 1014, n. 8 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
   Things do not improve as we move up the Chevron ladder.
At “step one,” a judge must defer to an executive offcial's
interpretation when the statute at hand is “ambiguous.”

tion's usual rule that litigants are entitled to have an independent judge
interpret disputed legal terms, Chevron deference works to undermine
that promise. As explored above, too, Chevron deference sits in tension
with many traditional legal presumptions and interpretive principles, rep-
resenting nearly the inverse of the rules of lenity, nemo iudex, and con-
tra proferentem.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           437

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

But even today, Chevron's principal benefciary—the federal
government—still cannot say when a statute is suffciently
ambiguous to trigger deference. See, e. g., Tr. of Oral Arg.
in American Hospital Assn. v. Becerra, O. T. 2021, No. 20–
1114, pp. 71–72. Perhaps thanks to this particular confusion,
the search for ambiguity has devolved into a sort of Snark
hunt: Some judges claim to spot it almost everywhere, while
other equally fne judges claim never to have seen it. Com-
pare L. Silberman, Chevron—The Intersection of Law & Pol-
icy, 58 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 821, 826 (1990), with R. Kethledge,
Ambiguities and Agency Cases: Refections After (Almost)
Ten Years on the Bench, 70 Vand. L. Rev. En Banc 315, 323
(2017).
   Nor do courts agree when it comes to “step two.” There,
a judge must assess whether an executive agency's interpre-
tation of an ambiguous statute is “reasonable.” But what
does that inquiry demand? Some courts engage in a com-
Page Proof Pending Publication
paratively searching review; others almost refexively defer
to an agency's views. Here again, courts have pursued “wil-
dly different” approaches and reached wildly different con-
clusions in similar cases. See B. Kavanaugh, Fixing Statu-
tory Interpretation, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 2118, 2152 (2016)
(Kavanaugh).
   Today's cases exemplify some of these problems. We
have before us two circuit decisions, three opinions, and at
least as many interpretive options on the Chevron menu.
On the one hand, we have the D. C. Circuit majority, which
deemed the Magnuson-Stevens Act “ambiguous” and upheld
the agency's regulation as “ `permissible.' ” 45 F. 4th 359,
365 (2022). On the other hand, we have the D. C. Circuit
dissent, which argues the statute is “unambiguou[s]” and
that it plainly forecloses the agency's new rule. Id., at 372
(opinion of Walker, J.). And on yet a third hand, we have the
First Circuit, which claimed to have identifed “clear textual
support” for the regulation, yet refused to say whether it
would “classify [its] conclusion as a product of Chevron step
438      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

one or step two.” 62 F. 4th 621, 631, 634 (2023). As these
cases illustrate, Chevron has turned statutory interpretation
into a game of bingo under blindfold, with parties guessing
at how many boxes there are and which one their case might
ultimately fall in.
   Turn now from workability to reliance. Far from engen-
dering reliance interests, the whole point of Chevron defer-
ence is to upset them. Under Chevron, executive offcials
can replace one “reasonable” interpretation with another at
any time, all without any change in the law itself. The re-
sult: Affected individuals “can never be sure of their legal
rights and duties.” Buffngton, 598 U. S., at 1030.
   How bad is the problem? Take just one example. Brand
X concerned a law regulating broadband internet services.
There, the Court upheld an agency rule adopted by the ad-
ministration of President George W. Bush because it was
premised on a “reasonable” interpretation of the statute.
Page Proof Pending Publication
Later, President Barack Obama's administration rescinded
the rule and replaced it with another. Later still, during
President Donald J. Trump's administration, offcials re-
placed that rule with a different one, all before President
Joseph R. Biden, Jr.'s administration declared its intention to
reverse course for yet a fourth time. See Safeguarding and
Securing the Open Internet, 88 Fed. Reg. 76048 (2023);
Brand X, 545 U. S., at 981–982. Each time, the government
claimed its new rule was just as “reasonable” as the last.
Rather than promoting reliance by fxing the meaning of the
law, Chevron deference engenders constant uncertainty and
convulsive change even when the statute at issue itself re-
mains unchanged.
   Nor are these antireliance harms distributed equally. So-
phisticated entities and their lawyers may be able to keep
pace with rule changes affecting their rights and responsibil-
ities. They may be able to lobby for new “ `reasonable' ” agen-
cy interpretations and even capture the agencies that issue
them. Buffngton, 598 U. S., at 1027, 1031. But ordinary
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            439

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

people can do none of those things. They are the ones who
suffer the worst kind of regulatory whiplash Chevron invites.
  Consider a couple of examples. Thomas Buffngton, a vet-
eran of the U. S. Air Force, was injured in the line of duty.
For a time after he left the Air Force, the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) paid disability benefts due him by law.
But later the government called on Mr. Buffngton to reenter
active service. During that period, everyone agreed, the
VA could (as it did) suspend his disability payments. After
he left active service for a second time, however, the VA
turned his patriotism against him. By law, Congress per-
mitted the VA to suspend disability pay only “for any period
for which [a servicemember] receives active service pay.”
38 U. S. C. § 5304(c). But the VA had adopted a self-serving
regulation requiring veterans to fle a form asking for the
resumption of their disability pay after a second (or subse-
quent) stint in active service. 38 CFR § 3.654(b)(2) (2021).
Page Proof Pending Publication
Unaware of the regulation, Mr. Buffngton failed to reapply
immediately. When he fnally fgured out what had hap-
pened and reapplied, the VA agreed to resume payments
going forward but refused to give Mr. Buffngton all of the
past disability payments it had withheld. Buffngton, 598
U. S., at 1022–1024.
  Mr. Buffngton challenged the agency's action as inconsist-
ent with Congress's direction that the VA may suspend dis-
ability payments only for those periods when a veteran re-
turns to active service. But armed with Chevron, the
agency defeated Mr. Buffngton's claim. Maybe the self-
serving regulation the VA cited as justifcation for its action
was not premised on the best reading of the law, courts said,
but it represented a “ `permissible' ” one. 598 U. S., at 1026.
In that way, the Executive Branch was able to evade Con-
gress's promises to someone who took the feld repeatedly in
the Nation's defense.
  In another case, one which I heard as a court of appeals
judge, De Niz Robles v. Lynch, 803 F. 3d 1165 (CA10 2015),
440      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                    Gorsuch, J., concurring

the Board of Immigration Appeals invoked Chevron to over-
rule a judicial precedent on which many immigrants had re-
lied, see In re Briones, 24 I. & N. Dec. 355, 370 (BIA 2007)
(purporting to overrule Padilla–Caldera v. Gonzales, 426
F. 3d 1294 (CA10 2005)). The agency then sought to
apply its new interpretation retroactively to punish those
immigrants—including Alfonzo De Niz Robles, who had re-
lied on that judicial precedent as authority to remain in this
country with his U. S. wife and four children. See 803 F. 3d,
at 1168–1169. Our court ruled that this retrospective appli-
cation of the BIA's new interpretation of the law violated
Mr. De Niz Robles's due process rights. Id., at 1172. But
as a lower court, we could treat only the symptom, not the
disease. So Chevron permitted the agency going forward to
overrule a judicial decision about the best reading of the law
with its own different “reasonable” one and in that way deny
relief to countless future immigrants.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Those are just two stories among so many that federal
judges could tell (and have told) about what Chevron defer-
ence has meant for ordinary people interacting with the fed-
eral government. See, e. g., Lambert v. Saul, 980 F. 3d 1266,
1268–1276 (CA9 2020); Valent v. Commissioner of Social Se-
curity, 918 F. 3d 516, 525–527 (CA6 2019) (Kethledge, J., dis-
senting); Gonzalez v. United States Atty. Gen., 820 F. 3d 399,
402–405 (CA11 2016) (per curiam).
   What does the federal government have to say about this?
It acknowledges that Chevron sits as a heavy weight on the
scale in favor of the government, “oppositional” to many
“categories of individuals.” Tr. of Oral Arg. in No. 22–1219,
p. 133 (Relentless Tr.). But, according to the government,
Chevron deference is too important an innovation to undo.
In its brief reign, the government says, it has become a “fun-
damenta[l] . . . ground rul[e] for how all three branches of
the government are operating together.” Relentless Tr.
102. But, in truth, the Constitution, the APA, and our long-
standing precedents set those ground rules some time ago.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            441

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

And under them, agencies cannot invoke a judge-made fction
to unsettle our Nation's promise to individuals that they are
entitled to make their arguments about the law's demands
on them in a fair hearing, one in which they stand on equal
footing with the government before an independent judge.

                                C
   How could a Court, guided for 200 years by Chief Justice
Marshall's example, come to embrace a counter-Marbury
revolution, one at war with the APA, time honored prece-
dents, and so much surrounding law? To answer these ques-
tions, turn to Lesson 3 and witness the temptation to endow
a stray passage in a judicial decision with extraordinary au-
thority. Call it “power quoting.”
   Chevron was an unlikely place for a revolution to begin.
The case concerned the Clean Air Act's requirement that
States regulate “stationary sources” of air pollution in their
Page Proof Pending Publication
borders. See 42 U. S. C. § 7401 et seq. At the time, it was
an open question whether entire industrial plants or their
constituent polluting parts counted as “stationary sources.”
The Environmental Protection Agency had defned entire
plants as sources, an approach that allowed companies to re-
place individual plant parts without automatically triggering
the permitting requirements that apply to new sources.
Chevron, 467 U. S., at 840.
   This Court upheld the EPA's defnition as consistent with
the governing statute. Id., at 866. The decision, issued by
a bare quorum of the Court, without concurrence or dissent,
purported to apply “well-settled principles.” Id., at 845.
“If a court, employing traditional tools of statutory construc-
tion, ascertains that Congress had an intention on the precise
question at issue,” Chevron provided, then “that intention is
the law and must be given effect.” Id., at 843, n. 9. Many
of the cases Chevron cited to support its judgment stood for
the traditional proposition that courts afford respectful con-
sideration, not deference, to executive interpretations of the
442      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                     Gorsuch, J., concurring

law. See, e. g., Burnet, 285 U. S., at 16; United States v.
Moore, 95 U. S. 760, 763 (1878). And the decision's sole cita-
tion to legal scholarship was to Roscoe Pound, who long
championed de novo judicial review. 467 U. S., at 843, n. 10;
see R. Pound, The Place of the Judiciary in a Democratic
Polity, 27 A. B. A. J. 133, 136–137 (1941).
   At the same time, of course, the opinion contained bits and
pieces that spoke differently. The decision also said that, “if
[a] statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to [a] specifc
issue, the question for the court is whether the agency's
answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute.”
467 U. S., at 843. But it seems the government didn't
advance this formulation in its brief, so there was no adver-
sarial engagement on it. T. Merrill, The Story of Chevron:
The Making of an Accidental Landmark, 66 Admin. L.
Rev. 253, 268 (2014) (Merrill). As we have seen, too,
the Court did not pause to consider (or even mention)
the APA. See Part II–A, supra. It did not discuss con-
Page Proof Pending Publication
trary precedents issued by the Court since the founding,
let alone purport to overrule any of them. See Part II–
B–1, supra. Nor did the Court seek to address how its
novel rule of deference might be squared with so much sur-
rounding law. See Part II–B–2, supra. As even its defend-
ers have acknowledged, “Chevron barely bothered to justify
its rule of deference, and the few brief passages on this mat-
ter pointed in disparate directions. ” Kagan 212–213.
“[T]he quality of the reasoning,” they acknowledge, “was not
high,” C. Sunstein, Chevron as Law, 107 Geo. L. J. 1613,
1669 (2019).
   If Chevron meant to usher in a revolution in how judges
interpret laws, no one appears to have realized it at the time.
Chevron's author, Justice Stevens, characterized the decision
as a “simpl[e] . . . restatement of existing law, nothing more
or less.” Merrill 255, 275. In the “19 argued cases” in the
following Term “that presented some kind of question about
whether the Court should defer to an agency interpretation
of statutory law,” this Court cited Chevron just once. Mer-
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                   443

                        Gorsuch, J., concurring

rill 276. By some accounts, the decision seemed “destined
to obscurity.” Ibid.
   It was only three years later when Justice Scalia wrote a
concurrence that a revolution began to take shape. Buffng-
ton, 598 U. S., at 1027. There, he argued for a new rule
requiring courts to defer to executive agency interpretations
of the law whenever a “ `statute is silent or ambiguous.' ”
NLRB v. Food & Commercial Workers, 484 U. S. 112, 133–
134 (1987) (opinion of Scalia, J.). Eventually, a majority of
the Court followed his lead. Buffngton, 598 U. S., at 1027.
But from the start, Justice Scalia made no secret about the
scope of his ambitions. See Judicial Deference to Adminis-
trative Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L. J. 511, 521
(1989) (Scalia). The rule he advocated for represented such
a sharp break from prior practice, he explained, that many
judges of his day didn't yet “understand” the “old criteria”
were “no longer relevant.” Ibid. Still, he said, overthrow-
ing the past was worth it because a new deferential rule
Page Proof Pending Publication
would be “easier to follow.” Ibid.
   Events proved otherwise. As the years wore on and the
Court's new and aggressive reading of Chevron gradually
exposed itself as unworkable, unfair, and at odds with our
separation of powers, Justice Scalia could have doubled down
on the project. But he didn't. He appreciated that stare
decisis is not a rule of “if I thought it yesterday, I must think
it tomorrow.” And rather than cling to the pride of personal
precedent, the Justice began to express doubts over the very
project that he had worked to build. See Perez v. Mortgage
Bankers Assn., 575 U. S. 92, 109–110 (2015) (opinion concur-
ring in judgment); cf. Decker v. Northwest Environmental
Defense Center, 568 U. S. 597, 617–618, 621 (2013) (opinion
concurring in part and dissenting in part). If Chevron's as-
cent is a testament to the Justice's ingenuity, its demise is
an even greater tribute to his humility.6
  6
   It should be recalled that, when Justice Scalia launched the Chevron
revolution, there were many judges who “abhor[red] . . . `plain meaning' ”
and preferred instead to elevate “legislative history” and their own cu-
444       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                        Gorsuch, J., concurring

   Justice Scalia was not alone in his reconsideration. After
years spent laboring under Chevron, trying to make sense of
it and make it work, Member after Member of this Court
came to question the project. See, e. g., Pereira v. Sessions,
585 U. S. 198, 219–221 (2018) (Kennedy, J., concurring); Mich-
igan v. EPA, 576 U. S. 743, 760–764 (2015) (Thomas, J., con-
curring); Kisor, 588 U. S., at 591 (Roberts, C. J., concurring
in part); Gutierrez-Brizuela, 834 F. 3d, at 1153; Buffngton,
598 U. S., at 1032–1033; Kavanaugh 2150–2154. Ultimately,
the Court gave up. Despite repeated invitations, it has not
applied Chevron deference since 2016. Relentless Tr. 81;
App. to Brief for Respondents in No. 22–1219, p. 68a. So an
experiment that began only in the mid-1980s effectively
ended eight years ago. Along the way, an unusually large
number of federal appellate judges voiced their own thought-
ful and extensive criticisms of Chevron. Buffngton, 598
U. S., at 1032–1033 (collecting examples). A number of state
Page Proof Pending Publication
courts did, too, refusing to import Chevron deference into
their own administrative law jurisprudence. See 598 U. S.,
at 1032.
   Even if all that and everything else laid out above is true,
the government suggests we should retain Chevron de-
ference because judges simply cannot live without it; some
statutes are just too “technical” for courts to interpret “in-
telligently.” Post, at 456, 478–479 (dissenting opinion). But
that objection is no answer to Chevron's inconsistency with
Congress's directions in the APA, so much surrounding law, or
the challenges its multistep regime have posed in practice.

rated accounts of a law's “purpose[s]” over enacted statutory text. Scalia
515, 521. Chevron, he predicted, would provide a new guardrail against
that practice. Scalia 515, 521. As the Justice's later writings show, he
had the right diagnosis, just the wrong cure. The answer for judges elid-
ing statutory terms is not deference to agencies that may seek to do the
same, but a demand that all return to a more faithful adherence to the
written law. That was, of course, another project Justice Scalia champi-
oned. And as we like to say, “we're all textualists now.”
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                    445

                         Gorsuch, J., concurring

Nor does history counsel such defeatism. Surely, it would
be a mistake to suggest our predecessors before Chevron's
rise in the mid-1980s were unable to make their way intel-
ligently through technical statutory disputes. Following
their lead, over the past eight years this Court has managed
to resolve even highly complex cases without Chevron defer-
ence, and done so even when the government sought defer-
ence. Nor, as far as I am aware, did any Member of the
Court suggest Chevron deference was necessary to an intelli-
gent resolution of any of those matters.7 If anything, by
affording Chevron deference a period of repose before ad-
dressing whether it should be retained, the Court has en-
abled its Members to test the propriety of that precedent
and refect more deeply on how well it fts into the broader
architecture of our law. Others may see things differently,
see post, at 473 (dissenting opinion), but the caution the
Court has exhibited before overruling Chevron may illus-
trate one of the reasons why the current Court has been
Page Proof Pending Publication
slower to overrule precedents than some of its predecessors,
see Part I–C, supra.
   None of this, of course, discharges any Member of this
Court from the task of deciding for himself or herself today
whether Chevron deference itself warrants deference. But
when so many past and current judicial colleagues in this
Court and across the country tell us our doctrine is mis-
guided, and when we ourselves managed without Chevron
for centuries and manage to do so today, the humility at the
core of stare decisis compels us to pause and refect carefully
on the wisdom embodied in that experience. And, in the
end, to my mind the lessons of experience counsel wisely

  7
    See, e. g., Becerra v. Empire Health Foundation, for Valley Hospital
Medical Center, 597 U. S. 424, 434 (2022) (resolving intricate Medicare
dispute by reference solely to “text,” “context,” and “structure”); see also
Sackett v. EPA, 598 U. S. 651 (2023) (same in a complex Clean Water Act
dispute); Johnson v. Guzman Chavez, 594 U. S. 523 (2021) (same in techni-
cal immigration case).
446        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                         Gorsuch, J., concurring

against continued reliance on Chevron's stray and unconsid-
ered digression. This Court's opinions fll over 500 volumes,
and perhaps “some printed judicial word may be found to
support almost any plausible proposition.” R. Jackson, De-
cisional Law and Stare Decisis, 30 A. B. A. J. 334 (1944). It
is not for us to pick and choose passages we happen to like
and demand total obedience to them in perpetuity. That
would turn stare decisis from a doctrine of humility into a
tool for judicial opportunism. Brown, 596 U. S., at 141.

                                    III
   Proper respect for precedent helps “keep the scale of jus-
tice even and steady,” by reinforcing decisional rules consist-
ent with the law upon which all can rely. 1 Blackstone 69.
But that respect does not require, nor does it readily toler-
ate, a steadfast refusal to correct mistakes. As early as
1810, this Court had already overruled one of its cases. See
Page Proof Pending Publication
Hudson v. Guestier, 6 Cranch 281, 284 (overruling Rose v.
Himely, 4 Cranch 241 (1808)). In recent years, the Court
may have overruled precedents less frequently than it did
during the Warren and Burger Courts. See Part I–C,
supra. But the job of reconsidering past decisions re-
mains one every Member of this Court faces from time to
time.8
  8
    Today's dissenters are no exceptions. They have voted to overrule
precedents that they consider “wrong,” Hurst v. Florida, 577 U. S. 92, 101
(2016) (opinion for the Court by Sotomayor, J., joined by, inter alios,
Kagan, J.); Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U. S. 644, 665, 675 (2015) (opinion for
the Court, joined by, inter alios, Sotomayor and Kagan, JJ.); that confict
with the Constitution's “original meaning,” Alleyne v. United States, 570
U. S. 99, 118 (2013) (Sotomayor, J., joined by, inter alios, Kagan, J., con-
curring); and that have proved “unworkable,” Johnson v. United States,
576 U. S. 591, 605 (2015) (opinion for the Court, joined by, inter alios,
Sotomayor and Kagan, JJ.); see also Erlinger v. United States, 602
U. S. 821, 872 (2024) (Jackson, J., dissenting) (arguing Apprendi v. New
Jersey, 530 U. S. 466 (2000), and the many cases applying it were all
“wrongly decided”).
                  Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           447

                    Gorsuch, J., concurring

   Justice William O. Douglas served longer on this Court
than any other person in the Nation's history. During his
tenure, he observed how a new colleague might be inclined
initially to “revere” every word written in an opinion issued
before he arrived. W. Douglas, Stare Decisis, 49 Colum. L.
Rev. 735, 736 (1949). But, over time, Justice Douglas re-
fected, his new colleague would “remembe[r] . . . that it is
the Constitution which he swore to support and defend, not
the gloss which his predecessors may have put on it.” Ibid.
And “[s]o he [would] com[e] to formulate his own views, re-
jecting some earlier ones as false and embracing others.”
Ibid. This process of reexamination, Justice Douglas ex-
plained, is a “necessary consequence of our system” in which
each judge takes an oath—both “personal” and binding—to
discern the law's meaning for himself and apply it faithfully
in the cases that come before him. Id., at 736–737.
   Justice Douglas saw, too, how appeals to precedent could
Page Proof Pending Publication
be overstated and sometimes even overwrought. Judges, he
refected, would sometimes frst issue “new and startling de-
cision[s],” and then later spin around and “acquire an acute
conservatism” in their aggressive defense of “their new sta-
tus quo.” Id., at 737. In that way, even the most novel and
unlikely decisions became “coveted anchorage[s],” defended
heatedly, if ironically, under the banner of “stare decisis.”
Ibid.; see also Edwards v. Vannoy, 593 U. S. 255, 294, n. 7
(2021) (Gorsuch, J., concurring).
   That is Chevron's story: A revolution masquerading as the
status quo. And the defense of it follows the same course
Justice Douglas described. Though our dissenting col-
leagues have not hesitated to question other precedents in
the past, they today manifest what Justice Douglas called an
“acute conservatism” for Chevron's “startling” development,
insisting that if this “coveted anchorage” is abandoned the
heavens will fall. But the Nation managed to live with busy
executive agencies of all sorts long before the Chevron revo-
lution began to take shape in the mid-1980s. And all today's
448       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Kagan, J., dissenting

decision means is that, going forward, federal courts will do
exactly as this Court has since 2016, exactly as it did before
the mid-1980s, and exactly as it had done since the founding:
resolve cases and controversies without any systemic bias in
the government's favor.
   Proper respect for precedent does not begin to suggest
otherwise. Instead, it counsels respect for the written law,
adherence to consistent teachings over aberrations, and re-
sistance to the temptation of treating our own stray remarks
as if they were statutes. And each of those lessons points
toward the same conclusion today: Chevron deference is in-
consistent with the directions Congress gave us in the APA.
It represents a grave anomaly when viewed against the
sweep of historic judicial practice. The decision undermines
core rule-of-law values ranging from the promise of fair no-
tice to the promise of a fair hearing. Even on its own terms,
it has proved unworkable and operated to undermine rather
than advance reliance interests, often to the detriment of
Page Proof Pending Publication
ordinary Americans. And from the start, the whole project
has relied on the overaggressive use of snippets and stray
remarks from an opinion that carried mixed messages.
Stare decisis's true lesson today is not that we are bound
to respect Chevron's “startling development,” but bound to
inter it.
  Justice Kagan, with whom Justice Sotomayor and
Justice Jackson join,* dissenting.
  For 40 years, Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837 (1984), has served as a
cornerstone of administrative law, allocating responsibility
for statutory construction between courts and agencies.
Under Chevron, a court uses all its normal interpretive tools
to determine whether Congress has spoken to an issue. If

  *Justice Jackson did not participate in the consideration or decision
of the case in No. 22–451 and joins this opinion only as it applies to the
case in No. 22–1219.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           449

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

the court fnds Congress has done so, that is the end of the
matter; the agency's views make no difference. But if the
court fnds, at the end of its interpretive work, that Congress
has left an ambiguity or gap, then a choice must be made.
Who should give content to a statute when Congress's in-
structions have run out? Should it be a court? Or should
it be the agency Congress has charged with administering
the statute? The answer Chevron gives is that it should
usually be the agency, within the bounds of reasonableness.
That rule has formed the backdrop against which Congress,
courts, and agencies—as well as regulated parties and the
public—all have operated for decades. It has been applied
in thousands of judicial decisions. It has become part of the
warp and woof of modern government, supporting regula-
tory efforts of all kinds—to name a few, keeping air and
water clean, food and drugs safe, and fnancial markets
honest.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   And the rule is right. This Court has long understood
Chevron deference to refect what Congress would want, and
so to be rooted in a presumption of legislative intent. Con-
gress knows that it does not—in fact cannot—write perfectly
complete regulatory statutes. It knows that those statutes
will inevitably contain ambiguities that some other actor will
have to resolve, and gaps that some other actor will have to
fll. And it would usually prefer that actor to be the respon-
sible agency, not a court. Some interpretive issues arising
in the regulatory context involve scientifc or technical sub-
ject matter. Agencies have expertise in those areas; courts
do not. Some demand a detailed understanding of complex
and interdependent regulatory programs. Agencies know
those programs inside-out; again, courts do not. And some
present policy choices, including trade-offs between compet-
ing goods. Agencies report to a President, who in turn an-
swers to the public for his policy calls; courts have no such
accountability and no proper basis for making policy. And
of course Congress has conferred on that expert, experi-
450      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                       Kagan, J., dissenting

enced, and politically accountable agency the authority to ad-
minister—to make rules about and otherwise implement—
the statute giving rise to the ambiguity or gap. Put all that
together and deference to the agency is the almost obvious
choice, based on an implicit congressional delegation of inter-
pretive authority. We defer, the Court has explained, “be-
cause of a presumption that Congress” would have “desired
the agency (rather than the courts)” to exercise “whatever
degree of discretion” the statute allows. Smiley v. Citibank
(South Dakota), N. A., 517 U. S. 735, 740–741 (1996).
   Today, the Court fips the script: It is now “the courts
(rather than the agency)” that will wield power when Con-
gress has left an area of interpretive discretion. A rule of
judicial humility gives way to a rule of judicial hubris. In
recent years, this Court has too often taken for itself
decision-making authority Congress assigned to agencies.
The Court has substituted its own judgment on workplace
Page Proof Pending Publication
health for that of the Occupational Safety and Health Admin-
istration; its own judgment on climate change for that of the
Environmental Protection Agency; and its own judgment on
student loans for that of the Department of Education. See,
e. g., National Federation of Independent Business v.
OSHA, 595 U. S. 109 (2022); West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U. S.
697 (2022); Biden v. Nebraska, 600 U. S. 477 (2023). But evi-
dently that was, for this Court, all too piecemeal. In one
fell swoop, the majority today gives itself exclusive power
over every open issue—no matter how expertise-driven or
policy-laden—involving the meaning of regulatory law. As
if it did not have enough on its plate, the majority turns itself
into the country's administrative czar. It defends that move
as one (suddenly) required by the (nearly 80-year-old) Ad-
ministrative Procedure Act. But the Act makes no such de-
mand. Today's decision is not one Congress directed. It is
entirely the majority's choice.
   And the majority cannot destroy one doctrine of judicial
humility without making a laughing-stock of a second. (If
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           451

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

opinions had titles, a good candidate for today's would be
Hubris Squared.) Stare decisis is, among other things, a
way to remind judges that wisdom often lies in what prior
judges have done. It is a brake on the urge to convert
“every new judge's opinion” into a new legal rule or regime.
Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, 597 U. S.
215, 388 (2022) ( joint opinion of Breyer, Sotomayor, and
Kagan, JJ., dissenting) (quoting 1 W. Blackstone, Commen-
taries on the Laws of England 69 (7th ed. 1775)). Chevron
is entrenched precedent, entitled to the protection of stare
decisis, as even the majority acknowledges. In fact, Chev-
ron is entitled to the supercharged version of that doctrine
because Congress could always overrule the decision, and
because so many governmental and private actors have re-
lied on it for so long. Because that is so, the majority needs
a “particularly special justifcation” for its action. Kisor v.
Wilkie, 588 U. S. 558, 588 (2019) (opinion of the Court). But
the majority has nothing that would qualify. It barely tries
Page Proof Pending Publication
to advance the usual factors this Court invokes for overrul-
ing precedent. Its justifcation comes down, in the end, to
this: Courts must have more say over regulation—over the
provision of health care, the protection of the environment,
the safety of consumer products, the effcacy of transporta-
tion systems, and so on. A longstanding precedent at the
crux of administrative governance thus falls victim to a bald
assertion of judicial authority. The majority disdains re-
straint, and grasps for power.

                                I
  Begin with the problem that gave rise to Chevron (and
also to its older precursors): The regulatory statutes Con-
gress passes often contain ambiguities and gaps. Some-
times they are intentional. Perhaps Congress “consciously
desired” the administering agency to fll in aspects of the
legislative scheme, believing that regulatory experts would
be “in a better position” than legislators to do so. Chevron,
452      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

467 U. S., at 865. Or “perhaps Congress was unable to forge
a coalition on either side” of a question, and the contending
parties “decided to take their chances with” the agency's res-
olution. Ibid. Sometimes, though, the gaps or ambiguities
are what might be thought of as predictable accidents.
They may be the result of sloppy drafting, a not infrequent
legislative occurrence. Or they may arise from the well-
known limits of language or foresight. Accord, ante, at 385,
399–400. “The subject matter” of a statutory provision may
be too “specialized and varying” to “capture in its every de-
tail.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 566 (plurality opinion). Or the pro-
vision may give rise, years or decades down the road, to an
issue the enacting Congress could not have anticipated.
Whichever the case—whatever the reason—the result is to
create uncertainty about some aspect of a provision's meaning.
   Consider a few examples from the caselaw. They will
help show what a typical Chevron question looks like—or
Page Proof Pending Publication
really, what a typical Chevron question is. Because when
choosing whether to send some class of questions mainly to
a court, or mainly to an agency, abstract analysis can only go
so far; indeed, it may obscure what matters most. So I
begin with the concrete:
  • Under   the Public Health Service Act, the Food and
    Drug Administration (FDA) regulates “biological prod-
    uct[s],” including “protein[s].” 42 U. S. C. § 262(i)(1).
    When does an alpha amino acid polymer qualify as such a
    “protein”? Must it have a specifc, defned sequence of
    amino acids? See Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc. v.
    FDA, 514 F. Supp. 3d 66, 79–80, 93–106 (DC 2020).
  • Under the Endangered Species Act, the Fish and Wild-
    life Service must designate endangered “vertebrate fsh
    or wildlife” species, including “distinct population seg-
    ment[s]” of those species. 16 U. S. C. § 1532(16); see
    § 1533. What makes one population segment “distinct”
    from another? Must the Service treat the Washington
    State population of western gray squirrels as “distinct”
                  Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            453

                     Kagan, J., dissenting

   because it is geographically separated from other west-
   ern gray squirrels? Or can the Service take into ac-
   count that the genetic makeup of the Washington popu-
   lation does not differ markedly from the rest? See
   Northwest Ecosystem Alliance v. United States Fish
   and Wildlife Serv., 475 F. 3d 1136, 1140–1145, 1149
   (CA9 2007).
 • Under the Medicare program, reimbursements to hos-
   pitals are adjusted to refect “differences in hospital
   wage levels” across “geographic area[s].” 42 U. S. C.
   § 1395ww(d)(3)(E)(i). How should the Department of
   Health and Human Services measure a “geographic
   area”? By city? By county? By metropolitan area?
   See Bellevue Hospital Center v. Leavitt, 443 F. 3d 163,
   174–176 (CA2 2006).
 • Congress directed the Department of the Interior and
   the Federal Aviation Administration to reduce noise
Page Proof Pending Publication
   from aircraft fying over Grand Canyon National Park—
   specifcally, to “provide for substantial restoration of the
   natural quiet.” § 3(b)(1), 101 Stat. 676; see § 3(b)(2).
   How much noise is consistent with “the natural quiet”?
   And how much of the park, for how many hours a day,
   must be that quiet for the “substantial restoration” re-
   quirement to be met? See Grand Canyon Air Tour Co-
   alition v. FAA, 154 F. 3d 455, 466–467, 474–475 (CADC
   1998).
 • Or take Chevron itself. In amendments to the Clean
   Air Act, Congress told States to require permits for
   modifying or constructing “stationary sources” of air pol-
   lution. 42 U. S. C. § 7502(c)(5). Does the term “station-
   ary source[ ]” refer to each pollution-emitting piece of
   equipment within a plant? Or does it refer to the entire
   plant, and thus allow escape from the permitting re-
   quirement when increased emissions from one piece of
   equipment are offset by reductions from another? See
   467 U. S., at 857, 859.
454      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

In each case, a statutory phrase has more than one reason-
able reading. And Congress has not chosen among them:
It has not, in any real-world sense, “fxed” the “single, best
meaning” at “the time of enactment” (to use the majority's
phrase). Ante, at 400. A question thus arises: Who decides
which of the possible readings should govern?
   This Court has long thought that the choice should usually
fall to agencies, with courts broadly deferring to their judg-
ments. For the last 40 years, that doctrine has gone by the
name of Chevron deference, after the 1984 decision that for-
malized and canonized it. In Chevron, the Court set out a
simple two-part framework for reviewing an agency's inter-
pretation of a statute that it administers. First, the review-
ing court must determine whether Congress has “directly
spoken to the precise question at issue.” 467 U. S., at 842.
That inquiry is rigorous: A court must exhaust all the “tradi-
tional tools of statutory construction” to divine statutory
Page Proof Pending Publication
meaning. Id., at 843, n. 9. And when it can fnd that mean-
ing—a “single right answer”—that is “the end of the mat-
ter”: The court cannot defer because it “must give effect to
the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress.” Kisor,
588 U. S., at 575 (opinion of the Court); Chevron, 467 U. S., at
842–843. But if the court, after using its whole legal toolkit,
concludes that “the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect
to the specifc issue” in dispute—for any of the not-uncommon
reasons discussed above—then the court must cede the pri-
mary interpretive role. Ibid.; see supra, at 451–452. At
that second step, the court asks only whether the agency
construction is within the sphere of “reasonable” readings.
Chevron, 467 U. S., at 844. If it is, the agency's interpreta-
tion of the statute that it every day implements will control.
   That rule, the Court has long explained, rests on a pre-
sumption about legislative intent—about what Congress
wants when a statute it has charged an agency with imple-
menting contains an ambiguity or a gap. See id., at 843–
845; Smiley, 517 U. S., at 740–741. An enacting Congress,
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                     455

                           Kagan, J., dissenting

as noted above, knows those uncertainties will arise, even if
it does not know what they will turn out to be. See supra,
at 451–452. And every once in a while, Congress provides
an explicit instruction for dealing with that contingency—
assigning primary responsibility to the courts, or else to an
agency. But much more often, Congress does not say.
Thus arises the need for a presumption—really, a default
rule—for what should happen in that event. Does a statu-
tory silence or ambiguity then go to a court for resolution?
Or to an agency? This Court has long thought Congress
would choose an agency, with courts serving only as a back-
stop to make sure the agency makes a reasonable choice
among the possible readings. Or said otherwise, Congress
would select the agency it has put in control of a regulatory
scheme to exercise the “degree of discretion” that the stat-
ute's lack of clarity or completeness allows. Smiley, 517 U. S.,
at 741. Of course, Congress can always refute that presump-
tive choice—can say that, really, it would prefer courts to
Page Proof Pending Publication
wield that discretionary power. But until then, the presump-
tion cuts in the agency's favor.1 The next question is why.

  1
    Note that presumptions of this kind are common in the law. In other
contexts, too, the Court responds to a congressional lack of direction by
adopting a presumption about what Congress wants, rather than trying
to fgure that out in every case. And then Congress can legislate, with
“predictable effects,” against that “stable background” rule. Morrison v.
National Australia Bank Ltd., 561 U. S. 247, 261 (2010). Take the pre-
sumption against extraterritoriality: The Court assumes Congress means
for its statutes to apply only within the United States, absent a “clear
indication” to the contrary. Id., at 255. Or the presumption against ret-
roactivity: The Court assumes Congress wants its laws to apply only
prospectively, unless it “unambiguously instruct[s]” something different.
Vartelas v. Holder, 566 U. S. 257, 266 (2012). Or the presumption against
repeal of statutes by implication: The Court assumes Congress does not
intend a later statute to displace an earlier one unless it makes that inten-
tion “clear and manifest.” Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U. S. 497,
510 (2018). Or the (so far unnamed) presumption against treating a proce-
dural requirement as “jurisdictional” unless “Congress clearly states that
it is.” Boechler v. Commissioner, 596 U. S. 199, 203 (2022). I could con-
456        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Kagan, J., dissenting

   For one, because agencies often know things about a stat-
ute's subject matter that courts could not hope to. The
point is especially stark when the statute is of a “scientifc
or technical nature.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 571 (plurality opin-
ion). Agencies are staffed with “experts in the feld” who
can bring their training and knowledge to bear on open stat-
utory questions. Chevron, 467 U. S., at 865. Consider, for
example, the frst bulleted case above. When does an alpha
amino acid polymer qualify as a “protein”? See supra, at
452. I don't know many judges who would feel confdent
resolving that issue. (First question: What even is an alpha
amino acid polymer?) But the FDA likely has scores of sci-
entists on staff who can think intelligently about it, maybe
collaborate with each other on its fner points, and arrive
at a sensible answer. Or take the perhaps more accessible-
sounding second case, involving the Endangered Species Act.
See supra, at 452–453. Deciding when one squirrel popula-
tion is “distinct” from another (and thus warrants protection)
Page Proof Pending Publication
requires knowing about species more than it does consulting
a dictionary. How much variation of what kind—geographic,
genetic, morphological, or behavioral—should be required?
A court could, if forced to, muddle through that issue and an-
nounce a result. But wouldn't the Fish and Wildlife Service,
with all its specialized expertise, do a better job of the task—
of saying what, in the context of species protection, the open-
ended term “distinct” means? One idea behind the Chevron
presumption is that Congress—the same Congress that
charged the Service with implementing the Act—would an-
swer that question with a resounding “yes.”

tinue, except that this footnote is long enough. The Chevron deference
rule is to the same effect: The Court generally assumes that Congress
intends to confer discretion on agencies to handle statutory ambiguities or
gaps, absent a direction to the contrary. The majority calls that presump-
tion a “fction,” ante, at 404, but it is no more so than any of the presump-
tions listed above. They all are best guesses—and usually quite good
guesses—by courts about congressional intent.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           457

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

   A second idea is that Congress would value the agency's
experience with how a complex regulatory regime functions,
and with what is needed to make it effective. Let's stick
with squirrels for a moment, except broaden the lens. In
construing a term like “distinct” in a case about squirrels,
the Service likely would beneft from its “historical familiar-
ity” with how the term has covered the population segments
of other species. Martin v. Occupational Safety and Health
Review Comm'n, 499 U. S. 144, 153 (1991); see, e. g., Center
for Biological Diversity v. Zinke, 900 F. 3d 1053, 1060–1062
(CA9 2018) (arctic grayling); Center for Biological Diversity
v. Zinke, 868 F. 3d 1054, 1056 (CA9 2017) (desert eagle).
Just as a common-law court makes better decisions as it sees
multiple variations on a theme, an agency's construction of a
statutory term benefts from its unique exposure to all the
related ways the term comes into play. Or consider, for an-
other way regulatory familiarity matters, the example about
Page Proof Pending Publication
adjusting Medicare reimbursement for geographic wage dif-
ferences. See supra, at 453. According to a dictionary, the
term “geographic area” could be as large as a multi-state
region or as small as a census tract. How to choose? It
would make sense to gather hard information about what
reimbursement levels each approach will produce, to explore
the ease of administering each on a nationwide basis, to sur-
vey how regulators have dealt with similar questions in the
past, and to confer with the hospitals themselves about what
makes sense. See Kisor, 588 U. S., at 571 (plurality opinion)
(noting that agencies are able to “conduct factual investiga-
tions” and “consult with affected parties”). Congress knows
the Department of Health and Human Services can do all
those things—and that courts cannot.
   Still more, Chevron's presumption refects that resolving
statutory ambiguities, as Congress well knows, is “often
more a question of policy than of law.” Pauley v. BethEn-
ergy Mines, Inc., 501 U. S. 680, 696 (1991). The task is less
one of construing a text than of balancing competing goals
458      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

and values. Consider the statutory directive to achieve
“substantial restoration of the [Grand Canyon's] natural
quiet.” See supra, at 453. Someone is going to have to de-
cide exactly what that statute means for air traffc over the
canyon. How many fights, in what places and at what
times, are consistent with restoring enough natural quiet on
the ground? That is a policy trade-off of a kind familiar to
agencies—but peculiarly unsuited to judges. Or consider
Chevron itself. As the Court there understood, the choice
between defning a “stationary source” as a whole plant or
as a pollution-emitting device is a choice about how to “rec-
oncile” two “manifestly competing interests.” 467 U. S., at
865. The plantwide defnition relaxes the permitting re-
quirement in the interest of promoting economic growth; the
device-specifc defnition strengthens that requirement to
better reduce air pollution. See id., at 851, 863, 866.
Again, that is a choice a judge should not be making, but
Page Proof Pending Publication
one an agency properly can. Agencies are “subject to the
supervision of the President, who in turn answers to the pub-
lic.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 571–572 (plurality opinion). So
when faced with a statutory ambiguity, “an agency to which
Congress has delegated policymaking responsibilities” may
rely on an accountable actor's “views of wise policy to inform
its judgments.” Chevron, 467 U. S., at 865.
   None of this is to say that deference to agencies is always
appropriate. The Court over time has fne-tuned the Chev-
ron regime to deny deference in classes of cases in which
Congress has no reason to prefer an agency to a court. The
majority treats those “refnements” as a faw in the scheme,
ante, at 404, but they are anything but. Consider the rule
that an agency gets no deference when construing a statute
it is not responsible for administering. See Epic Systems
Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U. S. 497, 519–520 (2018). Well, of course
not—if Congress has not put an agency in charge of im-
plementing a statute, Congress would not have given the
agency a special role in its construction. Or take the rule
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            459

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

that an agency will not receive deference if it has reached
its decision without using—or without using properly—its
rulemaking or adjudicatory authority. See United States v.
Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 226–227 (2001); Encino Motorcars,
LLC v. Navarro, 579 U. S. 211, 220 (2016). Again, that
should not be surprising: Congress expects that authorita-
tive pronouncements on a law's meaning will come from the
procedures it has enacted to foster “fairness and delibera-
tion” in agency decision-making. Mead, 533 U. S., at 230.
Or fnally, think of the “extraordinary cases” involving ques-
tions of vast “economic and political signifcance” in which
the Court has declined to defer. King v. Burwell, 576 U. S.
473, 485–486 (2015). The theory is that Congress would not
have left matters of such import to an agency, but would
instead have insisted on maintaining control. So the Chev-
ron refnements proceed from the same place as the original
doctrine. Taken together, they give interpretive primacy to
Page Proof Pending Publication
the agency when—but only when—it is acting, as Congress
specifed, in the heartland of its delegated authority.
   That carefully calibrated framework “refects a sensitivity
to the proper roles of the political and judicial branches.”
Pauley, 501 U. S., at 696. Where Congress has spoken, Con-
gress has spoken; only its judgments matter. And courts
alone determine when that has happened: Using all their
normal interpretive tools, they decide whether Congress has
addressed a given issue. But when courts have decided that
Congress has not done so, a choice arises. Absent a legisla-
tive directive, either the administering agency or a court
must take the lead. And the matter is more ft for the
agency. The decision is likely to involve the agency's
subject-matter expertise; to fall within its sphere of regula-
tory experience; and to involve policy choices, including cost-
beneft assessments and trade-offs between conficting val-
ues. So a court without relevant expertise or experience,
and without warrant to make policy calls, appropriately
steps back. The court still has a role to play: It polices the
460      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

agency to ensure that it acts within the zone of reasonable
options. But the court does not insert itself into an agency's
expertise-driven, policy-laden functions. That is the ar-
rangement best suited to keep every actor in its proper lane.
And it is the one best suited to ensure that Congress's stat-
utes work in the way Congress intended.
  The majority makes two points in reply, neither convinc-
ing. First, it insists that “agencies have no special compe-
tence” in flling gaps or resolving ambiguities in regulatory
statutes; rather, “[c]ourts do.” Ante, at 400–401. Score
one for self-confdence; maybe not so high for self-refection
or -knowledge. Of course courts often construe legal texts,
hopefully well. And Chevron's frst step takes full advan-
tage of that talent: There, a court tries to divine what Con-
gress meant, even in the most complicated or abstruse statu-
tory schemes. The deference comes in only if the court
cannot do so—if the court must admit that standard legal
Page Proof Pending Publication
tools will not avail to fll a statutory silence or give content
to an ambiguous term. That is when the issues look like the
ones I started off with: When does an alpha amino acid poly-
mer qualify as a “protein”? How distinct is “distinct” for
squirrel populations? What size “geographic area” will
ensure appropriate hospital reimbursement? As between
two equally feasible understandings of “stationary source,”
should one choose the one more protective of the environ-
ment or the one more favorable to economic growth? The
idea that courts have “special competence” in deciding such
questions whereas agencies have “no[ne]” is, if I may say,
malarkey. Answering those questions right does not mainly
demand the interpretive skills courts possess. Instead, it de-
mands one or more of: subject-matter expertise, long engage-
ment with a regulatory scheme, and policy choice. It is courts
(not agencies) that “have no special competence”—or even
legitimacy—when those are the things a decision calls for.
  Second, the majority complains that an ambiguity or gap
does not “necessarily refect a congressional intent that an
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           461

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

agency” should have primary interpretive authority. Ante,
at 399. On that score, I'll agree with the premise: It doesn't
“necessarily” do so. Chevron is built on a presumption.
The decision does not maintain that Congress in every case
wants the agency, rather than a court, to fll in gaps. The
decision maintains that when Congress does not expressly
pick one or the other, we need a default rule; and the best
default rule—agency or court?—is the one we think Con-
gress would generally want. As to why Congress would
generally want the agency: The answer lies in everything
said above about Congress's delegation of regulatory power
to the agency and the agency's special competencies. See
supra, at 456–458. The majority appears to think it is a
showstopping rejoinder to note that many statutory gaps
and ambiguities are “unintentional.” Ante, at 400. But to
begin, many are not; the ratio between the two is uncertain.
See supra, at 451–452. And to end, why should that matter
Page Proof Pending Publication
in any event? Congress may not have deliberately intro-
duced a gap or ambiguity into the statute; but it knows that
pretty much everything it drafts will someday be found to
contain such a “faw.” Given that knowledge, Chevron asks,
what would Congress want? The presumed answer is again
the same (for the same reasons): The agency. And as with
any default rule, if Congress decides otherwise, all it need
do is say.
   In that respect, the proof really is in the pudding: Con-
gress basically never says otherwise, suggesting that Chev-
ron chose the presumption aligning with legislative intent
(or, in the majority's words, “approximat[ing] reality,” ante,
at 399). Over the last four decades, Congress has authorized
or reauthorized hundreds of statutes. The drafters of those
statutes knew all about Chevron. See A. Gluck & L. Bress-
man, Statutory Interpretation From the Inside—An Empiri-
cal Study of Congressional Drafting, Delegation, and the
Canons: Part I, 65 Stan. L. Rev. 901, 928 (fg. 2), 994 (2013).
So if they had wanted a different assignment of interpretive
462      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                       Kagan, J., dissenting

responsibility, they would have inserted a provision to that
effect. With just a pair of exceptions I know of, they did
not. See 12 U. S. C. § 25b(b)(5)(A) (exception #1); 15 U. S. C.
§ 8302(c)(3)(A) (exception #2). Similarly, Congress has de-
clined to enact proposed legislation that would abolish Chev-
ron across the board. See S. 909, 116th Cong., 1st Sess., § 2
(2019) (still a bill, not a law); H. R. 5, 115th Cong., 1st Sess.,
§ 202 (2017) (same). So to the extent the majority is worried
that the Chevron presumption is “fction[al],” ante, at 404—as
all legal presumptions in some sense are—it has gotten less
and less so every day for 40 years. The congressional reac-
tion shows as well as anything could that the Chevron Court
read Congress right.
                                  II
   The majority's principal arguments are in a different vein.
Around 80 years after the APA was enacted and 40 years
after Chevron, the majority has decided that the former pre-
Page Proof Pending Publication
cludes the latter. The APA's Section 706, the majority says,
“makes clear” that agency interpretations of statutes “are
not entitled to deference.” Ante, at 392 (emphasis in origi-
nal). And that provision, the majority continues, codifed
the contemporaneous law, which likewise did not allow for
deference. See ante, at 387–390, 393–394. But neither the
APA nor the pre-APA state of the law does the work that
the majority claims. Both are perfectly compatible with
Chevron deference.
   Section 706, enacted with the rest of the APA in 1946,
provides for judicial review of agency action. It states: “To
the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the
reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law,
interpret constitutional and statutory provisions, and deter-
mine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an agency
action.” 5 U. S. C. § 706.
   That text, contra the majority, “does not resolve the Chev-
ron question.” C. Sunstein, Chevron As Law, 107 Geo. L. J.
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                   463

                          Kagan, J., dissenting

1613, 1642 (2019) (Sunstein). Or said a bit differently, Sec-
tion 706 is “generally indeterminate” on the matter of defer-
ence. A. Vermeule, Judging Under Uncertainty 207 (2006)
(Vermeule). The majority highlights the phrase “decide all
relevant questions of law” (italicizing the “all”), and notes
that the provision “prescribes no deferential standard” for
answering those questions. Ante, at 392. But just as the
provision does not prescribe a deferential standard of review,
so too it does not prescribe a de novo standard of review (in
which the court starts from scratch, without giving defer-
ence). In point of fact, Section 706 does not specify any
standard of review for construing statutes. See Kisor, 588
U. S., at 581 (plurality opinion). And when a court uses a
deferential standard—here, by deciding whether an agency
reading is reasonable—it just as much “decide[s]” a “relevant
question[ ] of law” as when it uses a de novo standard. § 706.
The deferring court then conforms to Section 706 “by deter-
mining whether the agency has stayed within the bounds
Page Proof Pending Publication
of its assigned discretion—that is, whether the agency has
construed [the statute it administers] reasonably.” J. Man-
ning, Chevron and the Reasonable Legislator, 128 Harv.
L. Rev. 457, 459 (2014); see Arlington v. FCC, 569 U. S. 290,
317 (2013) (Roberts, C. J., dissenting) (“We do not ignore
[Section 706's] command when we afford an agency's statu-
tory interpretation Chevron deference; we respect it”).2

  2
   The majority tries to buttress its argument with a stray sentence or
two from the APA's legislative history, but the same response holds. As
the majority notes, see ante, at 393, the House and Senate Reports each
stated that Section 706 “provid[ed] that questions of law are for courts
rather than agencies to decide in the last analysis.” H. R. Rep. No. 1980,
79th Cong., 2d Sess., 44 (1946); S. Rep. No. 752, 79th Cong., 1st Sess., 28
(1945). But that statement also does not address the standard of review
that courts should then use. When a court defers under Chevron, it re-
views the agency's construction for reasonableness “in the last analysis.”
The views of Representative Walter, which the majority also cites, further
demonstrate my point. He stated that the APA would require courts to
464        LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Kagan, J., dissenting

   Section 706's references to standards of review in other
contexts only further undercut the majority's argument.
The majority notes that Section 706 requires deferential re-
view for agency fact-fnding and policy-making (under, re-
spectively, a substantial-evidence standard and an arbitrary-
and-capricious standard). See ante, at 392. Congress, the
majority claims, “surely would have articulated a similarly
deferential standard applicable to questions of law had it in-
tended to depart” from de novo review. Ibid. Surely? In
another part of Section 706, Congress explicitly referred to
de novo review. § 706(2)(F). With all those references to
standards of review—both deferential and not—running
around Section 706, what is “telling” (ante, at 392) is the
absence of any standard for reviewing an agency's statutory
constructions. That silence left the matter, as noted above,
“generally indeterminate”: Section 706 neither mandates nor
forbids Chevron-style deference. Vermeule 207.3
   And contra the majority, most “respected commentators”
Page Proof Pending Publication
understood Section 706 in that way—as allowing, even if not
requiring, deference. Ante, at 393. The fnest administra-
tive law scholars of the time (call them that generation's
Manning, Sunstein, and Vermeule) certainly did. Professor

“determine independently all relevant questions of law,” but he also stated
that courts would be required to “exercise . . . independent judgment” in
applying the substantial-evidence standard (a deferential standard if ever
there were one). 92 Cong. Rec. 5654 (1946). He therefore did not equate
“independent” review with de novo review; he thought that a court could
conduct independent review of agency action using a deferential standard.
  3
    In a footnote responding to the last two paragraphs, the majority raises
the white fag on Section 706's text. See ante, at 392–393, n. 4. Yes, it
fnally concedes, Section 706 does not say that de novo review is required
for an agency's statutory construction. Rather, the majority says, “some
things go without saying,” and de novo review is such a thing. See ibid.
But why? What extra-textual considerations force us to read Section 706
the majority's way? In its footnote, the majority repairs only to history.
But as I will explain below, the majority also gets wrong the most relevant
history, pertaining to how judicial review of agency interpretations oper-
ated in the years before the APA was enacted. See infra, at 466–470.
                      Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                  465

                         Kagan, J., dissenting

Louis Jaffe described something very like the Chevron two-
step as the preferred method of reviewing agency interpre-
tations under the APA. A court, he said, frst “must decide
as a `question of law' whether there is `discretion' in the
premises.” Judicial Control of Administrative Action 570
(1965). That is akin to step 1: Did Congress speak to the
issue, or did it leave openness? And if the latter, Jaffe con-
tinued, the agency's view “if `reasonable' is free of control.”
Ibid. That of course looks like step 2: defer if reasonable.
And just in case that description was too complicated, Jaffe
conveyed his main point this way: The argument that courts
“must decide all questions of law”—as if there were no
agency in the picture—“is, in my opinion, unsound.” Id., at
569. Similarly, Professor Kenneth Culp Davis, author of the
then-preeminent treatise on administrative law, noted with
approval that “reasonableness” review of agency interpreta-
tions—in which courts “refused to substitute judgment”—
had “survived the APA.” Administrative Law 880, 883, 885
Page Proof Pending Publication
(1951) (Davis). Other contemporaneous scholars and ex-
perts agreed. See R. Levin, The APA and the Assault on
Deference, 106 Minn. L. Rev. 125, 181–183 (2021) (Levin)
(listing many of them). They did not see in their own time
what the majority fnds there today.4
   Nor, evidently, did the Supreme Court. In the years after
the APA was enacted, the Court “never indicated that sec-
tion 706 rejected the idea that courts might defer to agency

  4
   I concede one exception (whose view was “almost completely isolated,”
Levin 181), but his comments on Section 706 refute a different aspect of
the majority's argument. Professor John Dickinson, as the majority
notes, thought that Section 706 precluded courts from deferring to agency
interpretations. See Administrative Procedure Act: Scope and Grounds
of Broadened Judicial Review, 33 A. B. A. J. 434, 516 (1947) (Dickinson);
ante, at 393–394. But unlike the majority, he viewed that bar as “a
change” to, not a restatement of, pre-APA law. Compare Dickinson 516
with ante, at 393–394. So if the majority really wants to rely on Profes-
sor Dickinson, it will have to give up the claim, which I address below,
that the law before the APA forbade deference. See infra, at 466–470.
466      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

interpretations of law.” Sunstein 1654. Indeed, not a sin-
gle Justice so much as foated that view of the APA. To the
contrary, the Court issued a number of decisions in those
years deferring to an agency's statutory interpretation.
See, e. g., Unemployment Compensation Comm'n of Alaska
v. Aragon, 329 U. S. 143, 153–154 (1946); NLRB v. E. C. At-
kins & Co., 331 U. S. 398, 403 (1947); Cardillo v. Liberty Mut.
Ins. Co., 330 U. S. 469, 478–479 (1947). And that continued
right up until Chevron. See, e. g., Mitchell v. Budd, 350
U. S. 473, 480 (1956); Zenith Radio Corp. v. United States,
437 U. S. 443, 450 (1978). To be clear: Deference in those
years was not always given to interpretations that would
receive it under Chevron. The practice then was more in-
consistent and less fully elaborated than it later became.
The point here is only that the Court came nowhere close to
accepting the majority's view of the APA. Take the lan-
guage from Section 706 that the majority most relies on: “de-
Page Proof Pending Publication
cide all relevant questions of law.” See ante, at 391. In the
decade after the APA's enactment, those words were used
only four times in Supreme Court opinions (all in foot-
notes)—and never to suggest that courts could not defer to
agency interpretations. See Sunstein 1656.
   The majority's view of Section 706 likewise gets no sup-
port from how judicial review operated in the years leading
up to the APA. That prior history matters: As the majority
recognizes, Section 706 was generally understood to “re-
state[ ] the present law as to the scope of judicial review.”
Dept. of Justice, Attorney General's Manual on the Adminis-
trative Procedure Act 108 (1947); ante, at 393. The problem
for the majority is that in the years preceding the APA,
courts became ever more deferential to agencies. New Deal
administrative programs had by that point come into their
own. And this Court and others, in a fairly short time,
had abandoned their initial resistance and gotten on board.
Justice Breyer, wearing his administrative-law-scholar hat,
characterized the pre-APA period this way: “[J]udicial re-
                       Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                    467

                          Kagan, J., dissenting

view of administrative action was curtailed, and particular
agency decisions were frequently sustained with judicial
obeisance to the mysteries of administrative expertise.” S.
Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 21
(7th ed. 2011). And that description extends to review of
an agency's statutory constructions. An infuential study
of administrative practice, published fve years before the
APA's enactment, described the state of play: Judicial “re-
view may, in some instances at least, be limited to the in-
quiry whether the administrative construction is a permissi-
ble one.” Final Report of Attorney General's Committee on
Administrative Procedure (1941), reprinted in Administra-
tive Procedure in Government Agencies, S. Doc. No. 8, 77th
Cong., 1st Sess., 78 (1941). Or again: “[W]here the statute
is reasonably susceptible of more than one interpretation, the
court may accept that of the administrative body.” Id., at
90–91.5
Page
  5
          Proof Pending Publication
 Because the APA was meant to “restate[ ] the present law,” the judicial
review practices of the 1940s are more important to understanding the
statute than is any earlier tradition (such as the majority dwells on). But
before I expand on those APA-contemporaneous practices, I pause to note
that they were “not built on sand.” Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U. S. 558, 568–
569 (2019) (plurality opinion). Since the early days of the Republic, this
Court has given signifcant weight to offcial interpretations of “ambiguous
law[s].” Edwards' Lessee v. Darby, 12 Wheat. 206, 210 (1827). With the
passage of time—and the growth of the administrative sphere—those “ju-
dicial expressions of deference increased.” H. Monaghan, Marbury and
the Administrative State, 83 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 15 (1983). By the early
20th century, the Court stated that it would afford “great weight” to an
agency construction in the face of statutory “uncertainty or ambiguity.”
National Lead Co. v. United States, 252 U. S. 140, 145 (1920); see Schell's
Executors v. Fauché, 138 U. S. 562, 572 (1891) (“controlling” weight in “all
cases of ambiguity”); United States v. Alabama Great Southern R. Co.,
142 U. S. 615, 621 (1892) (“decisive” weight “in case of ambiguity”); Jacobs
v. Prichard, 223 U. S. 200, 214 (1912) (referring to the “rule which gives
strength” to offcial interpretations if “ambiguity exist[s]”). So even be-
fore the New Deal, a strand of this Court's cases exemplifed deference to
executive constructions of ambiguous statutes. And then, as I show in
468       LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                          Kagan, J., dissenting

   Two prominent Supreme Court decisions of the 1940s put
those principles into action. Gray v. Powell, 314 U. S. 402
(1941), was then widely understood as “the leading case” on
review of agency interpretations. Davis 882; see ibid. (not-
ing that it “establish[ed] what is known as `the doctrine of
Gray v. Powell' ”). There, the Court deferred to an agency
construction of the term “producer” as used in a statutory
exemption from price controls. Congress, the Court ex-
plained, had committed the scope of the exemption to the
agency because its “experience in [the] feld gave promise of
a better informed, more equitable, adjustment of the con-
ficting interests.” Gray, 314 U. S., at 412. Accordingly,
the Court concluded that it was “not the province of a court”
to “substitute its judgment” for the agency's. Ibid. Three
years later, the Court decided NLRB v. Hearst Publications,
Inc., 322 U. S. 111 (1944), another acknowledged “leading
case.” Davis 882; see id., at 884. The Court again de-
ferred, this time to an agency's construction of the term “em-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ployee” in the National Labor Relations Act. The scope of
that term, the Court explained, “belong[ed] to” the agency
to answer based on its “[e]veryday experience in the admin-
istration of the statute.” Hearst, 322 U. S., at 130. The
Court therefore “limited” its review to whether the agency's
reading had “warrant in the record and a reasonable basis in
law.” Id., at 131.6 Recall here that even the majority ac-

the text, the New Deal arrived and deference surged—creating the “pres-
ent law” that the APA “restated.”
   6
     The majority says that I have “pluck[ed] out” Gray and Hearst, im-
pliedly from a vast number of not-so-helpful cases. Ante, at 390, n. 3. It
would make as much sense to say that a judge “plucked out” Universal
Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U. S. 474 (1951), to discuss substantial-
evidence review or “plucked out” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United
States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 463 U. S. 29 (1983),
to discuss arbitrary-and-capricious review. Gray and Hearst, as noted
above, were the leading cases about agency interpretations in the years
before the APA's enactment. But just to gild the lily, here are a number
of other Supreme Court decisions from the fve years prior to the APA's
                        Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)                      469

                            Kagan, J., dissenting

cepts that Section 706 was meant to “restate[ ] the present
law” as to judicial review. See ante, at 393; supra, at 466–
467. Well then? It sure would seem that the provision
allows a deference regime.
   The majority has no way around those two noteworthy
decisions. It frst appears to distinguish between “pure
legal question[s]” and the so-called mixed questions in Gray
and Hearst, involving the application of a legal standard to a
set of facts. Ante, at 389. If in drawing that distinction,
the majority intends to confne its holding to the pure type
of legal issue—thus enabling courts to defer when law and
facts are entwined—I'd be glad. But I suspect the majority
has no such intent, because that approach would preserve
Chevron in a substantial part of its current domain. Cf.
Wilkinson v. Garland, 601 U. S. 209, 230 (2024) (Alito, J.,
dissenting) (noting, in the immigration context, that the uni-
verse of mixed questions swamps that of pure legal ones).
It is frequently in the consideration of mixed questions that
Page Proof Pending Publication
the scope of statutory terms is established and their meaning
defned. See H. Monaghan, Marbury and the Administra-
tive State, 83 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 29 (1983) (“Administrative
application of law is administrative formulation of law when-
ever it involves elaboration of the statutory norm”). How
does a statutory interpreter decide, as in Hearst, what an
“employee” is? In large part through cases asking whether
the term covers people performing specifc jobs, like (in that
case) “newsboys.” 322 U. S., at 120. Or consider one of the
examples I offered above. How does an interpreter decide
when one population segment of a species is “distinct” from
another? Often by considering that requirement with re-

enactment that were of a piece: United States v. Pierce Auto Freight
Lines, Inc., 327 U. S. 515, 536 (1946); ICC v. Parker, 326 U. S. 60, 65 (1945);
Federal Security Administrator v. Quaker Oats Co., 318 U. S. 218, 227–
228 (1943). The real “pluck[ing]” offense is the majority's—for taking a
stray sentence from Hearst (ante, at 390, n. 3) to suggest that both Hearst
and Gray stand for the opposite of what they actually do.
470      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

spect to particular species, like western gray squirrels. So
the distinction the majority offers makes no real-world (or
even theoretical) sense. If the Hearst Court was deferring
to an agency on whether the term “employee” covered news-
boys, it was deferring to the agency on the scope and mean-
ing of the term “employee.”
  The majority's next rejoinder—that “the Court was far
from consistent” in deferring—falls equally fat. Ante, at
389. I am perfectly ready to acknowledge that in the pre-
APA period, a deference regime had not yet taken complete
hold. I'll go even further: Let's assume that deference was
then an on-again, off-again function (as the majority seems
to suggest, see ante, at 389–390, and n. 3). Even on that
assumption, the majority's main argument—that Section 706
prohibited deferential review—collapses. Once again, the
majority agrees that Section 706 was not meant to change
the then-prevailing law. See ante, at 393. And even if in-
consistent, that law cannot possibly be thought to have pro-
Page Proof Pending Publication
hibited deference. Or otherwise said: “If Section 706 did
not change the law of judicial review (as we have long rec-
ognized), then it did not proscribe a deferential standard
then known and in use.” Kisor, 588 U. S., at 583 (plurality
opinion).
  The majority's whole argument for overturning Chevron
relies on Section 706. But the text of Section 706 does not
support that result. And neither does the contemporaneous
practice, which that text was supposed to refect. So today's
decision has no basis in the only law the majority deems rele-
vant. It is grounded on air.

                              III
   And still there is worse, because abandoning Chevron sub-
verts every known principle of stare decisis. Of course, re-
specting precedent is not an “inexorable command.” Payne
v. Tennessee, 501 U. S. 808, 828 (1991). But overthrowing
it requires far more than the majority has offered up here.
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             471

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

Chevron is entitled to stare decisis's strongest form of pro-
tection. The majority thus needs an exceptionally strong
reason to overturn the decision, above and beyond thinking
it wrong. And it has nothing approaching such a justifca-
tion, proposing only a bewildering theory about Chevron's
“unworkability.” Ante, at 409. Just fve years ago, this
Court in Kisor rejected a plea to overrule Auer v. Robbins,
519 U. S. 452 (1997), which requires judicial deference to
agencies' interpretations of their own regulations. See 588
U. S., at 586–589 (opinion of the Court). The case against
overruling Chevron is at least as strong. In particular, the
majority's decision today will cause a massive shock to the
legal system, “cast[ing] doubt on many settled constructions”
of statutes and threatening the interests of many parties who
have relied on them for years. 588 U. S., at 587 (opinion of
the Court).
   Adherence to precedent is “a foundation stone of the rule
Page Proof Pending Publication
of law.” Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian Community, 572
U. S. 782, 798 (2014). Stare decisis “promotes the even-
handed, predictable, and consistent development of legal
principles.” Payne, 501 U. S., at 827. It enables people to
order their lives in reliance on judicial decisions. And it
“contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judi-
cial process,” by ensuring that those decisions are founded
in the law, and not in the “personal preferences” of judges.
Id., at 828; Dobbs, 597 U. S., at 388 (dissenting opinion).
Perhaps above all else, stare decisis is a “doctrine of judicial
modesty.” Id., at 363. In that, it shares something impor-
tant with Chevron. Both tell judges that they do not know
everything, and would do well to attend to the views of oth-
ers. So today, the majority rejects what judicial humility
counsels not just once but twice over.
   And Chevron is entitled to a particularly strong form of
stare decisis, for two separate reasons. First, it matters
that “Congress remains free to alter what we have done.”
Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 491 U. S. 164, 173 (1989);
472      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

see Kisor, 588 U. S., at 587 (opinion of the Court) (making
the same point for Auer deference). In a constitutional
case, the Court alone can correct an error. But that is not
so here. “Our deference decisions are balls tossed into Con-
gress's court, for acceptance or not as that branch elects.”
588 U. S., at 587–588 (opinion of the Court). And for genera-
tions now, Congress has chosen acceptance. Throughout
those years, Congress could have abolished Chevron across
the board, most easily by amending the APA. Or it could
have eliminated deferential review in discrete areas, by
amending old laws or drafting new laws to include an anti-
Chevron provision. Instead, Congress has “spurned multi-
ple opportunities” to do a comprehensive rejection of Chev-
ron, and has hardly ever done a targeted one. Kimble v.
Marvel Entertainment, LLC, 576 U. S. 446, 456 (2015); see
supra, at 461–462. Or to put the point more affrmatively,
Congress has kept Chevron as is for 40 years. It maintained
Page Proof Pending Publication
that position even as Members of this Court began to call
Chevron into question. See ante, at 407. From all it ap-
pears, Congress has not agreed with the view of some Jus-
tices that they and other judges should have more power.
   Second, Chevron is by now much more than a single de-
cision. This Court alone, acting as Chevron allows, has
upheld an agency's reasonable interpretation of a statute at
least 70 times. See Brief for United States in No. 22–1219,
p. 27; App. to id., at 68a–72a (collecting cases). Lower
courts have applied the Chevron framework on thousands
upon thousands of occasions. See K. Barnett & C. Walker,
Chevron and Stare Decisis, 31 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 475, 477,
and n. 11 (2024) (noting that at last count, Chevron was cited
in more than 18,000 federal-court decisions). The Kisor
Court observed, when upholding Auer, that “[d]eference to
reasonable agency interpretations of ambiguous rules per-
vades the whole corpus of administrative law.” 588 U. S., at
587 (opinion of the Court). So too does deference to reason-
able agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes—except
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             473

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

more so. Chevron is as embedded as embedded gets in the
law.
   The majority says differently, because this Court has ig-
nored Chevron lately; all that is left of the decision is a “de-
caying husk with bold pretensions.” Ante, at 410. Tell
that to the D. C. Circuit, the court that reviews a large share
of agency interpretations, where Chevron remains alive and
well. See, e. g., Lissack v. Commissioner, 68 F. 4th 1312,
1321–1322 (2023); Solar Energy Industries Assn. v. FERC,
59 F. 4th 1287, 1291–1294 (2023). But more to the point:
The majority's argument is a bootstrap. This Court has
“avoided deferring under Chevron since 2016” (ante, at 410)
because it has been preparing to overrule Chevron since
around that time. That kind of self-help on the way to re-
versing precedent has become almost routine at this Court.
Stop applying a decision where one should; “throw some gra-
tuitous criticisms into a couple of opinions”; issue a few sepa-
Page Proof Pending Publication
rate writings “question[ing the decision's] premises” (ante, at
407); give the whole process a few years . . . and voila!—you
have a justifcation for overruling the decision. Janus v.
State, County, and Municipal Employees, 585 U. S. 878, 950
(2018) (Kagan, J., dissenting) (discussing the overruling of
Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Ed., 431 U. S. 209 (1977)); see also,
e. g., Kennedy v. Bremerton School Dist., 597 U. S. 507, 571–
572 (2022) (Sotomayor, J., dissenting) (similar for Lemon v.
Kurtzman, 403 U. S. 602 (1971)); Shelby County v. Holder,
570 U. S. 529, 587–588 (2013) (Ginsburg, J., dissenting) (simi-
lar for South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U. S. 301 (1966)).
I once remarked that this overruling-through-enfeeblement
technique “mock[ed] stare decisis.” Janus, 585 U. S., at 950
(dissenting opinion). I have seen no reason to change my
mind.
   The majority does no better in its main justifcation for
overruling Chevron—that the decision is “unworkable.”
Ante, at 407. The majority's frst theory on that score is that
there is no single “answer” about what “ambiguity” means:
474      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

Some judges turn out to see more of it than others do, lead-
ing to “different results.” Ante, at 408. But even if so, the
legal system has for many years, in many contexts, dealt
perfectly well with that variation. Take contract law. It
is hornbook stuff that when (but only when) a contract is
ambiguous, a court interpreting it can consult extrinsic evi-
dence. See CNH Industrial N.V. v. Reese, 583 U. S. 133, 139
(2018) (per curiam). And when all interpretive tools still
leave ambiguity, the contract is construed against the
drafter. See Lamps Plus, Inc. v. Varela, 587 U. S. 176, 186–
187 (2019). So I guess the contract rules of the 50 States
are unworkable now. Or look closer to home, to doctrines
this Court regularly applies. In deciding whether a govern-
ment has waived sovereign immunity, we construe “[a]ny am-
biguities in the statutory language” in “favor of immunity.”
FAA v. Cooper, 566 U. S. 284, 290 (2012). Similarly, the rule
of lenity tells us to construe ambiguous statutes in favor of
Page Proof Pending Publication
criminal defendants. See United States v. Castleman, 572
U. S. 157, 172–173 (2014). And the canon of constitutional
avoidance instructs us to construe ambiguous laws to avoid
diffcult constitutional questions. See United States v. Oak-
land Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative, 532 U. S. 483, 494
(2001). I could go on, but the point is made. There are
ambiguity triggers all over the law. Somehow everyone
seems to get by.
   And Chevron is an especially puzzling decision to criticize
on the ground of generating too much judicial divergence.
There's good empirical—meaning, non-impressionistic—evi-
dence on exactly that subject. And it shows that, as com-
pared with de novo review, use of the Chevron two-step
framework fosters agreement among judges. See K. Bar-
nett, C. Boyd, & C. Walker, Administrative Law's Political
Dynamics, 71 Vand. L. Rev. 1463, 1502 (2018) (Barnett).
More particularly, Chevron has a “powerful constraining ef-
fect on partisanship in judicial decisionmaking.” Barnett
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)             475

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

1463 (italics deleted); see Sunstein 1672 (“[A] predictable ef-
fect of overruling Chevron would be to ensure a far greater
role for judicial policy preferences in statutory interpreta-
tion and far more common splits along ideological lines”).
So if consistency among judges is the majority's lodestar,
then the Court should not overrule Chevron, but return to
using it.
   The majority's second theory on workability is likewise a
makeweight. Chevron, the majority complains, has some
exceptions, which (so the majority says) are “diffcult” and
“complicate[d]” to apply. Ante, at 409. Recall that courts
are not supposed to defer when the agency construing a stat-
ute (1) has not been charged with administering that law; (2)
has not used deliberative procedures—i. e., notice-and-
comment rulemaking or adjudication; or (3) is intervening in
a “major question,” of great economic and political signif-
cance. See supra, at 458–459; ante, at 405. As I've ex-
Page Proof Pending Publication
plained, those exceptions—the majority also aptly calls them
“refnements”—ft with Chevron's rationale: They defne cir-
cumstances in which Congress is unlikely to have wanted
agency views to govern. Ante, at 404; see supra, at 458–
459. And on the diffculty scale, they are nothing much.
Has Congress put the agency in charge of administering the
statute? In 99 of 100 cases, everyone will agree on the an-
swer with scarcely a moment's thought. Did the agency use
notice-and-comment or an adjudication before rendering an
interpretation? Once again, I could stretch my mind and
think up a few edge cases, but for the most part, the answer
is an easy yes or no. The major questions exception is, I
acknowledge, different: There, many judges have indeed dis-
puted its nature and scope. Compare, e. g., West Virginia,
597 U. S., at 721–724, with id., at 764–770 (Kagan, J., dissent-
ing). But that disagreement concerns, on everyone's view,
a tiny subset of all agency interpretations. For the most
part, the exceptions that so upset the majority require
476      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

merely a rote, check-the-box inquiry. If that is the majori-
ty's idea of a “dizzying breakdance,” ante, at 409, the major-
ity needs to get out more.
   And anyway, diffcult as compared to what? The majori-
ty's prescribed way of proceeding is no walk in the park.
First, the majority makes clear that what is usually called
Skidmore deference continues to apply. See ante, at 394.
Under that decision, agency interpretations “constitute a
body of experience and informed judgment” that may be
“entitled to respect.” Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U. S.
134, 140 (1944). If the majority thinks that the same judges
who argue today about where “ambiguity” resides (see ante,
at 408) are not going to argue tomorrow about what “re-
spect” requires, I fear it will be gravely disappointed. Sec-
ond, the majority directs courts to comply with the varied
ways in which Congress in fact “delegates discretionary au-
thority” to agencies. Ante, at 395–396. For example, Con-
Page Proof Pending Publication
gress may authorize an agency to “defne[ ]” or “delimit[ ]”
statutory terms or concepts, or to “fll up the details” of a
statutory scheme. Ante, at 395, and n. 5. Or Congress may
use, in describing an agency's regulatory authority, inher-
ently “fexib[le]” language like “appropriate” or “reason-
able.” Ibid., n. 6. Attending to every such delegation,
as the majority says, is necessary in a world without Chev-
ron. But that task involves complexities of its own. In-
deed, one reason Justice Scalia supported Chevron was that
it replaced such a “statute-by-statute evaluation (which was
assuredly a font of uncertainty and litigation) with an across-
the-board presumption.” A. Scalia, Judicial Deference to
Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L. J. 511,
516. As a lover of the predictability that rules create, Jus-
tice Scalia thought the latter “unquestionably better.” Id.,
at 517.
   On the other side of the balance, the most important stare
decisis factor—call it the “jolt to the legal system” issue—
weighs heavily against overruling Chevron. Dobbs, 597
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)            477

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

U. S., at 357 (Roberts, C. J., concurring in judgment). Con-
gress and agencies alike have relied on Chevron—have as-
sumed its existence—in much of their work for the last 40
years. Statutes passed during that time refect the expecta-
tion that Chevron would allocate interpretive authority be-
tween agencies and courts. Rules issued during the period
likewise presuppose that statutory ambiguities were the
agencies' to (reasonably) resolve. Those agency interpreta-
tions may have benefted regulated entities; or they may
have protected members of the broader public. Either way,
private parties have ordered their affairs—their business
and fnancial decisions, their health-care decisions, their edu-
cational decisions—around agency actions that are suddenly
now subject to challenge. In Kisor, this Court refused to
overrule Auer because doing so would “cast doubt on” many
longstanding constructions of rules, and thereby upset set-
tled expectations. 588 U. S., at 587 (opinion of the Court).
Page Proof Pending Publication
Overruling Chevron, and thus raising new doubts about
agency constructions of statutes, will be far more disruptive.
   The majority tries to alleviate concerns about a piece of
that problem: It states that judicial decisions that have up-
held agency action as reasonable under Chevron should not
be overruled on that account alone. See ante, at 412. That
is all to the good: There are thousands of such decisions,
many settled for decades. See supra, at 472. But frst, rea-
sonable reliance need not be predicated on a prior judicial
decision. Some agency interpretations never challenged
under Chevron now will be; expectations formed around
those constructions thus could be upset, in a way the majori-
ty's assurance does not touch. And anyway, how good is
that assurance, really? The majority says that a decision's
“[m]ere reliance on Chevron” is not enough to counter the
force of stare decisis; a challenger will need an additional
“special justifcation.” Ante, at 412. The majority is san-
guine; I am not so much. Courts motivated to overrule an
old Chevron-based decision can always come up with some-
478      LOPER BRIGHT ENTERPRISES v. RAIMONDO

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

thing to label a “special justifcation.” Maybe a court will
say “the quality of [the precedent's] reasoning” was poor.
Ante, at 407. Or maybe the court will discover something
“unworkable” in the decision—like some exception that has
to be applied. Ibid. All a court need do is look to today's
opinion to see how it is done.

                              IV
  Judges are not experts in the feld, and are not part of
  either political branch of the Government.

         —Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources
         Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, 865 (1984)

   Those were the days, when we knew what we are not.
When we knew that as between courts and agencies, Con-
gress would usually think agencies the better choice to re-
Page Proof Pending Publication
solve the ambiguities and fll the gaps in regulatory statutes.
Because agencies are “experts in the feld.” And because
they are part of a political branch, with a claim to making
interstitial policy. And because Congress has charged them,
not us, with administering the statutes containing the open
questions. At its core, Chevron is about respecting that al-
location of responsibility—the conferral of primary authority
over regulatory matters to agencies, not courts.
   Today, the majority does not respect that judgment. It
gives courts the power to make all manner of scientifc and
technical judgments. It gives courts the power to make all
manner of policy calls, including about how to weigh compet-
ing goods and values. (See Chevron itself.) It puts courts
at the apex of the administrative process as to every conceiv-
able subject—because there are always gaps and ambiguities
in regulatory statutes, and often of great import. What ac-
tions can be taken to address climate change or other envi-
ronmental challenges? What will the Nation's health-care
system look like in the coming decades? Or the fnancial or
                   Cite as: 603 U. S. 369 (2024)           479

                      Kagan, J., dissenting

transportation systems? What rules are going to constrain
the development of A.I.? In every sphere of current or fu-
ture federal regulation, expect courts from now on to play a
commanding role. It is not a role Congress has given to
them, in the APA or any other statute. It is a role this
Court has now claimed for itself, as well as for other judges.
   And that claim requires disrespecting, too, this Court's
precedent. There are no special reasons, of the kind usually
invoked for overturning precedent, to eliminate Chevron def-
erence. And given Chevron's pervasiveness, the decision to
do so is likely to produce large-scale disruption. All that
backs today's decision is the majority's belief that Chevron
was wrong—that it gave agencies too much power and courts
not enough. But shifting views about the worth of regula-
tory actors and their work do not justify overhauling a cor-
nerstone of administrative law. In that sense too, today's
majority has lost sight of its proper role.
   And it is impossible to pretend that today's decision is a
Page Proof Pending Publication
one-off, in either its treatment of agencies or its treatment
of precedent. As to the frst, this very Term presents yet
another example of the Court's resolve to roll back agency
authority, despite congressional direction to the contrary.
See SEC v. Jarkesy, 603 U. S. 109 (2024); see also supra, at
450. As to the second, just my own defenses of stare deci-
sis—my own dissents to this Court's reversals of settled
law—by now fll a small volume. See Dobbs, 597 U. S., at
363–364 ( joint opinion of Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan,
JJ.); Edwards v. Vannoy, 593 U. S. 255, 296–297 (2021); Knick
v. Township of Scott, 588 U. S. 180, 207–208 (2019); Janus,
585 U. S., at 931–932. Once again, with respect, I dissent.
                            Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
Page Proof Pending Publication
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

p. 393, last line: “for” is inserted before “itself ”
p. 434, line 12 from bottom: “of ” is inserted after “much”