PRELIMINARY PRINT

             Volume 602 U. S. Part 1
                             Pages 286–338




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                    OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                               June 13, 2024


Page Proof Pending Publication


                   REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D.C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
286                      OCTOBER TERM, 2023

                                  Syllabus


 VIDAL, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR
   INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND DIRECTOR,
   UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK
             OFFICE v. ELSTER

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                the federal circuit
      No. 22–704. Argued November 1, 2023—Decided June 13, 2024
Drawing on a 2016 Presidential primary debate exchange between then-
  candidate Donald Trump and Senator Marco Rubio, respondent Steve
  Elster sought to federally register the trademark “Trump too small” to
  use on shirts and hats. An examiner from the Patent and Trademark
  Offce refused registration based on the “names clause,” a Lanham Act
  prohibition on the registration of a mark that “[c]onsists of or comprises
  a name . . . identifying a particular living individual except by his writ-
  ten consent,” 15 U. S. C. § 1052(c). The Trademark Trial and Appeal
  Board affrmed, rejecting Elster's argument that the names clause vio-
  lates his First Amendment right to free speech. The Federal Circuit
Page Proof Pending Publication
  reversed.
Held: The Lanham Act's names clause does not violate the First Amend-
 ment. Pp. 292–311.
    (a) When enforcing the First Amendment's prohibition against abridg-
 ing freedom of speech, this Court “distinguish[es] between content-
 based and content-neutral regulations of speech.” National Institute
 of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra, 585 U. S. 755, 766. A content-
 based regulation “target[s] speech based on its communicative content,”
 Reed v. Town of Gilbert, 576 U. S. 155, 163, and is “ `presumptively un-
 constitutional,' ” National Institute of Family and Life Advocates, 585
 U. S., at 766. Viewpoint discrimination is a particularly “egregious
 form of content discrimination” that targets not merely a subject matter
 “but particular views taken by speakers on a subject.” Rosenberger v.
 Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 829. This Court has
 twice concluded that trademark restrictions that discriminate based on
 viewpoint violate the First Amendment. See Matal v. Tam, 582 U. S.
 218; Iancu v. Brunetti, 588 U. S. 388.
    Because the names clause does not single out a trademark “based on
 the specifc motivating ideology or the opinion or perspective of the
 speaker,” Reed, 576 U. S., at 168, it does not facially discriminate against
 any viewpoint. But a law that does not facially discriminate based on
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                    287

                                Syllabus

 viewpoint may still be found to discriminate based on viewpoint in its
 practical operation. See Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc., 564 U. S. 552, 565.
 Elster suggests that is the case here because obtaining consent for a
 trademark under the names clause is easier if it fatters rather than
 mocks a subject. But there are many reasons why a person may wish
 to withhold consent to register a trademark bearing his name.
    Although the names clause is not viewpoint based, it is content based
 because it “applies to particular speech because of the topic discussed
 or the idea or message expressed,” Reed, 576 U. S., at 163—i. e., it turns
 on whether the proposed trademark contains a person's name. Thus,
 the Court confronts a situation not addressed in Tam and Brunetti.
 Pp. 292–295.
    (b) Although a content-based regulation of speech is presumptively
 unconstitutional, this Court has not decided whether heightened scru-
 tiny extends to a content-based—but viewpoint-neutral—trademark re-
 striction. Several features of trademark counsel against a per se rule
 of applying heightened scrutiny in such cases. Most importantly, trade-
 mark rights have always coexisted with the First Amendment, and the
 inherently content-based nature of trademark law has never been a
 cause for constitutional concern.

Page Proof Pending Publication
    This country has recognized trademark rights since the founding.
 Much of early American trademark law came by way of English law,
 where the protection of trademarks was an inherently content-based
 endeavor. For most of the 18th and 19th centuries, trademark law fell
 largely within the “province of the States,” Tam, 582 U. S., at 224, and
 went largely unrecorded. The frst reported decisions in state and fed-
 eral courts revolved around a trademark's content. See Thomson v.
 Winchester, 36 Mass. 214, 216; Taylor v. Carpenter, 23 F. Cas. 742
 (No. 13,784). And as recorded trademark law began to take off in the
 last decades of the 19th century, its established content-based nature
 continued. In 1870, Congress enacted the frst federal trademark law,
 containing prohibitions on what could be protected as a trademark. It
 restricted a trademark based upon its content. And as trademark dis-
 putes increased, courts continued to assess trademarks based on their
 content. The content-based nature of trademark law did not change
 when Congress enacted the Lanham Act in 1946. The Act's comprehen-
 sive system for federal registration of trademarks continues to distin-
 guish based on a mark's content. This history demonstrates that re-
 strictions on trademarks have always turned on a mark's content and
 have existed harmoniously alongside the First Amendment from the
 beginning. That relationship suggests that heightened scrutiny need
 not always apply in this unique context.
288                       VIDAL v. ELSTER

                                 Syllabus

     The content-based nature of trademark protection is compelled by the
  historical rationales of trademark law—to prohibit confusion by identify-
  ing the ownership and source of goods. Indicating ownership and the
  manufacturing source touch on the content of the mark, i. e., from whom
  the product came. And policing trademarks so as to prevent confusion
  over the source of goods requires looking to the mark's content. Be-
  cause of the uniquely content-based nature of trademark regulation and
  the longstanding coexistence of trademark regulation with the First
  Amendment, a solely content-based restriction of trademark regis-
  tration need not be evaluated under heightened scrutiny. R. A. V. v.
  St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 387. Pp. 295–300.
     (c) The history and tradition of restricting trademarks containing
  names is suffcient to conclude that the names clause is compatible with
  the First Amendment. Pp. 300–308.
        (1) Restrictions on trademarking names have historically been
  grounded in the notion that a person has ownership over his own name,
  and that he may not be excluded from using that name by another's
  trademark. See Brown Chemical Co. v. Meyer, 139 U. S. 540, 544. The
  common law prevented a person from trademarking any name—even his
  own—by itself. It did, however, allow a person to obtain a trademark
  containing his own name, provided that he could not use the mark con-
Page Proof Pending Publication
  taining his name to the exclusion of a person with the same name. The
  common-law approach thus protected only a person's right to use his
  own name, an understanding that was carried over into federal statu-
  tory law and included in the names clause. The Court fnds no evidence
  that the common law afforded protection to a person seeking a trade-
  mark of another living person's name. This common-law understanding
  is refected in federal statutory law, and its requirement that a trade-
  mark contain more than merely a name remains largely intact. See
  § 1052(e)(4). It is thus unsurprising that the Lanham Act included the
  names clause.
     The restriction on trademarking names also refects trademark law's
  historical rationale of identifying the source of goods and thus ensuring
  that consumers know the source of a product and can evaluate it based
  upon the manufacturer's reputation and goodwill. Moreover, the clause
  respects the established connection between a trademark and its protec-
  tion of the markholder's reputation. This Court has long recognized
  that a trademark protects the markholder's reputation, and the connec-
  tion is even stronger when the mark contains a person's name.
     Applying these principles, the Court has also recognized that a party
  has no First Amendment right to piggyback off the goodwill another
  entity has built in its name. See San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc.
                       Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                    289

                                 Syllabus

  v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U. S. 522, 528. By protecting a
  person's use of his name, the names clause “secur[es] to the producer
  the benefts of [his] good reputation.” Park 'N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar
  Park & Fly, Inc., 469 U. S. 189, 198. Pp. 301–307.
        (2) A tradition of restricting the trademarking of names has coex-
  isted with the First Amendment, and the names clause fts within that
  tradition. The names clause refects the common-law tradition by pro-
  hibiting a person from obtaining a trademark of another living person's
  name without consent, thereby protecting the other's reputation and
  goodwill. A frm grounding in traditional trademark law is suffcient
  to justify the content-based trademark restriction here, but a case pre-
  senting a content-based trademark restriction without a historical ana-
  logue may require a different approach. In this case, the Court sees no
  reason to disturb this longstanding tradition, which supports the restric-
  tion of the use of another's name in a trademark. Pp. 307–308.
     (d) This decision is narrow. It does not set forth a comprehensive
  framework for judging whether all content-based but viewpoint-neutral
  trademark restrictions are constitutional. Nor does it suggest that an
  equivalent history and tradition is required to uphold every content-
  based trademark restriction. The Court holds only that history and
  tradition establish that the particular restriction here, the names clause
Page Proof Pending Publication
  in § 1052(c), does not violate the First Amendment. P. 310.
26 F. 4th 1328, reversed.

   Thomas, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the
opinion of the Court, except as to Part III. Alito and Gorsuch, JJ.,
joined that opinion in full; Roberts, C. J., and Kavanaugh, J., joined all
but Part III; and Barrett, J., joined Parts I, II–A, and II–B. Kava-
naugh, J., fled an opinion concurring in part, in which Roberts, C. J.,
joined, post, p. 311. Barrett, J., fled an opinion concurring in part, in
which Kagan, J., joined, in which Sotomayor, J., joined as to Parts I, II,
and III–B, and in which Jackson, J., joined as to Parts I and II, post,
p. 311. Sotomayor, J., fled an opinion concurring in the judgment, in
which Kagan and Jackson, JJ., joined, post, p. 325.

  Deputy Solicitor General Stewart argued the cause for
petitioner. With him on the briefs were Solicitor General
Prelogar, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General
Boynton, Frederick Liu, Daniel Tenny, Joshua M. Salzman,
Thomas W. Krause, Christina J. Hieber, and Mary Beth
Walker.
290                       VIDAL v. ELSTER

                          Opinion of the Court

  Jonathan E. Taylor argued the cause for respondent.
With him on the brief were Deepak Gupta and Gregory A.
Beck.*
   Justice Thomas announced the judgment of the Court
and delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts
I, II, and IV, and an opinion with respect to Part III, in
which Justice Alito and Justice Gorsuch join.†
   Steve Elster sought to register the trademark “Trump too
small.” But, the Patent and Trademark Offce (PTO) re-
fused to register the mark because the Lanham Act prohibits
registration of a trademark that “[c]onsists of or comprises
a name . . . identifying a particular living individual except
by his written consent.” 60 Stat. 428, 15 U. S. C. § 1052(c).
Elster contends that this prohibition violates his First
Amendment right to free speech. We hold that it does not.

                          I
Page    Proof       Pending         Publication
 A trademark is “a symbol or a device to distinguish the
goods or property made or sold by the person whose mark it
is, to the exclusion of use by all other persons.” Trade-
Mark Cases, 100 U. S. 82, 92 (1879); see also § 1127. As we
have explained, “[t]he principle underlying trademark pro-
tection is that distinctive marks—words, names, symbols,
and the like—can help distinguish a particular artisan's

   *Briefs of amici curiae urging reversal were fled for the International
Trademark Association by Jonathan E. Moskin and Jennifer L. Gregor;
for Public Citizen by Paul Alan Levy and Scott L. Nelson; and for Mat-
thew A. Handal by Brian A. Ross and Polina L. Ross.
   Briefs of amici curiae urging affrmance were fled for the American
Intellectual Property Law Association by James D. Crowne; for the Foun-
dation for Individual Rights and Expression et al. by Christopher G. Mi-
chel, Todd Anten, Jessica A. Rose, J. T. Morris, and Ilya Shapiro; and for
Samuel F. Ernst, pro se.
   Susan J. Kohlmann and Adam G. Unikowsky fled a brief for the Mo-
tion Picture Association, Inc., as amicus curiae.
   †Justice Barrett joins Parts I, II–A, and II–B of this opinion.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            291

                      Opinion of the Court

goods from those of others.” B&B Hardware, Inc. v. Hargis
Industries, Inc., 575 U. S. 138, 142 (2015). So “[o]ne who
frst uses a distinct mark in commerce thus acquires rights
to that mark,” which “include preventing others from using
the mark.” Ibid.
   Trademark rights are primarily a matter of state law, but
an owner can obtain important rights through federal regis-
tration. The Lanham Act creates a federal trademark-
registration system administered by the PTO. Federal
“[r]egistration of a mark is not mandatory,” and “[t]he owner
of an unregistered mark may still use it in commerce and
enforce it against infringers.” Iancu v. Brunetti, 588 U. S.
388, 391 (2019). Federal registration, however, “confers im-
portant legal rights and benefts.” B&B Hardware, 575
U. S., at 142 (internal quotation marks omitted). For exam-
ple, a registrant may rely on registration in litigation as
prima facie evidence of his exclusive right to use the mark.
Page Proof Pending Publication
§ 1115(a). And, registration provides nationwide construc-
tive notice of the registrant's claim of ownership of the
mark. § 1072.
   Only marks that meet certain criteria are federally regis-
terable. Among other criteria, the Lanham Act contains
what we will call the “names clause”—a prohibition on the
registration of a mark that “[c]onsists of or comprises a
name . . . identifying a particular living individual except by
his written consent.” § 1052(c). The names clause excludes
from registration “not only full names but also surnames,
shortened names, and nicknames, so long as the name does in
fact identify a particular living individual.” 2 J. McCarthy,
Trademarks and Unfair Competition § 13:37, p. 311 (5th ed.
2024) (McCarthy).
   Steve Elster sought to register the trademark “Trump too
small,” accompanied by an illustration of a hand gesture, to
use on shirts and hats. The mark draws on an exchange
between then-candidate Donald Trump and Senator Marco
Rubio during a 2016 Presidential primary debate.
292                       VIDAL v. ELSTER

                          Opinion of the Court

   The PTO examiner refused registration under the names
clause because the mark used President Trump's name with-
out his consent. The Trademark Trial and Appeal Board
affrmed, and it also rejected Elster's argument that the
names clause violates his First Amendment right to free
speech.1 The Federal Circuit reversed, holding that the
names clause violated the First Amendment. In re Elster,
26 F. 4th 1328 (CA Fed. 2022). The court frst concluded
that the names clause is a viewpoint-neutral, content-based
restriction on speech subject to at least intermediate scru-
tiny. See id., at 1331, 1333–1334. It next concluded that
the Government could not satisfy even intermediate scrutiny
because the names clause does not advance any substantial
governmental interest. See id., at 1339.
   We granted certiorari to resolve whether the Lanham
Act's names clause violates the First Amendment. 598
U. S. ––– (2023).
                             II
Page Proof Pending
              A
                   Publication
  The First Amendment provides that “Congress shall make
no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech.” In general,
we have held that the First Amendment prohibits the Gov-
ernment from restricting or burdening “expression because
of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or its content.”
Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 535 U. S. 564,
573 (2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). “When en-
forcing this prohibition, our precedents distinguish between
content-based and content-neutral regulations of speech.”
National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra,
585 U. S. 755, 766 (2018). A content-based regulation “tar-

   1
     The Board declined to reach the PTO examiner's alternative ground
for refusing registration—that Elster's mark “falsely suggest[s] a connec-
tion with persons, living or dead.” 15 U. S. C. § 1052(a). We focus only
on the names clause and express no opinion about whether Elster's mark
fails to meet other requirements for federal registration.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)             293

                      Opinion of the Court

get[s] speech based on its communicative content,” restrict-
ing discussion of a subject matter or topic. Reed v. Town of
Gilbert, 576 U. S. 155, 163 (2015). “As a general matter,” a
content-based regulation is “ `presumptively unconstitutional
and may be justifed only if the government proves that [it
is] narrowly tailored to serve compelling state interests.' ”
National Institute of Family and Life Advocates, 585 U. S.,
at 766. Our precedents distinguish further a particularly
“egregious form of content discrimination”—viewpoint dis-
crimination. Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of
Va., 515 U. S. 819, 829 (1995). A viewpoint-based regulation
targets not merely a subject matter, “but particular views
taken by speakers on a subject.” Ibid. It is also generally
subject to heightened scrutiny, though viewpoint discrimina-
tion's “violation of the First Amendment is . . . more blatant.”
Ibid. Because our precedents dictate that these distinctions
inform our assessment under the First Amendment, we start
Page Proof Pending Publication
with them to evaluate the names clause.
   In the trademark context, we have twice concluded that
trademark restrictions that discriminate based on viewpoint
violate the First Amendment. In Matal v. Tam, 582 U. S.
218, 223 (2017), we held that the Lanham Act's bar on dispar-
aging trademarks violated the First Amendment. All Jus-
tices in Tam agreed that this bar was viewpoint based be-
cause it prohibited trademarks based only on one viewpoint:
“[g]iving offense.” Id., at 243 (plurality opinion); see also
id., at 248–249 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concur-
ring in judgment). And, in Brunetti, we held that the Lan-
ham Act's bar on trademarks containing immoral or scan-
dalous matter likewise violated the First Amendment. 588
U. S., at 390. We concluded that the bar was viewpoint
based because it prohibited trademarks based only on one
viewpoint, immoral or scandalous matter, while permitting
trademarks based on other viewpoints. Id., at 393–394.
   The names clause does not facially discriminate against
any viewpoint. No matter the message a registrant wants
294                        VIDAL v. ELSTER

                          Opinion of the Court

to convey, the names clause prohibits marks that use another
person's name without consent. It does not matter
“whether the use of [the] name is fattering, critical or neu-
tral.” 2 McCarthy § 13:37.50. The Government is thus not
singling out a trademark “based on the specifc motivat-
ing ideology or the opinion or perspective of the speaker.”
Reed, 576 U. S., at 168 (internal quotation marks omitted);
accord, Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 394 (explaining that a
viewpoint-based trademark law “distinguishes between two
opposed sets of ideas”).
   Elster suggests that the names clause verges on viewpoint
discrimination in practice. According to Elster, it is easier
to obtain consent for a trademark that fatters a person
rather than mocks him. This Court has found that a law
can discriminate based on viewpoint in its practical opera-
tion. See Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc., 564 U. S. 552, 565
(2011); R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 391 (1992). But,
here, there are many reasons why a person may be unable
Page Proof Pending Publication
to secure another's consent to register a trademark bearing
his name. Even when the trademark's message is neutral
or complimentary, a person may withhold consent to avoid
any association with the goods, or to prevent his name from
being exploited for another's gain.2
   Although the names clause is not viewpoint based, it is
content based. As we have explained, a restriction on
speech is content based if the “law applies to particular
speech because of the topic discussed or the idea or message
expressed.” Reed, 576 U. S., at 163. The names clause
turns on the content of the proposed trademark—whether it

  2
    It is also hard to see the viewpoint discrimination that Elster alleges
in practice. The PTO has refused registration of trademarks such as
“Welcome President Biden,” “I Stump for Trump,” and “Obama Pajama”—
all because they contained another's name without his consent, not because
of the viewpoint conveyed. See PTO, Offce Action of Dec. 8, 2020, Serial
No. 90226753; PTO, Offce Action of Oct. 15, 2015, Serial No. 86728410; In
re Hoeffin, 97 USPQ 2d 1174, 1177–1178 (TTAB 2010).
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)           295

                      Opinion of the Court

contains a person's name. If the trademark does contain a
person's name, and the registrant lacks that person's consent,
then the names clause prohibits registration. Because
trademarks containing names “are treated differently from
[trademarks] conveying other types of ideas,” the names
clause is content based. Id., at 164.
   We thus confront a situation we did not address in Tam
or Brunetti. In Tam, we were careful to “leave open” the
framework “for deciding free speech challenges to provisions
of the Lanham Act.” 582 U. S., at 245, n. 17 (plurality opin-
ion); see id., at 244, n. 16. And, in Brunetti, we declined
to “say anything about how to evaluate viewpoint-neutral
restrictions on trademark registration.” 588 U. S., at 398, n.

                                B
   Because we must now consider for the frst time the con-
stitutionality of a content-based—but viewpoint-neutral—
Page Proof Pending Publication
trademark restriction, we begin by addressing how the na-
ture of trademark law informs the applicable constitutional
scrutiny. Although a content-based regulation of speech
is presumptively unconstitutional as a general matter, we
have not decided whether heightened scrutiny extends to a
viewpoint-neutral trademark restriction. Several features
of trademark counsel against a per se rule of applying height-
ened scrutiny to viewpoint-neutral, but content-based trade-
mark regulations.
   Most importantly, trademark rights have always coexisted
with the First Amendment, despite the fact that trademark
protection necessarily requires content-based distinctions.
See generally Tam, 582 U. S., at 223–224; Trade-Mark Cases,
100 U. S., at 92. Trademark rights “ha[ve] been long recog-
nized by the common law and the chancery courts of England
and of this country, and by the statutes of some of the
States,” and that protection continues today. Id., at 92. As
we all agree, this “[h]istory informs the understanding that
content-based distinctions are an intrinsic feature of trade-
296                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

                      Opinion of the Court

marks.” Post, at 330 (Sotomayor, J., concurring in judg-
ment); accord, post, at 312–317 (Barrett, J., concurring in
part). And, for the duration of that history, the inherently
content-based nature of trademark law has never been a
cause for constitutional concern.
   Our country has recognized trademark rights since the
founding. See B. Pattishall, The Constitutional Foundations
of American Trademark Law, 78 Trademark Rep. 456, 457–
459 (1988). At the outset, there were few recorded deci-
sions, and the law developed slowly. Much of early Ameri-
can trademark law “was lifted essentially from that of
England.” Id., at 457. The protection of trademarks under
English law was an inherently content-based endeavor. For
example, an early English law made it “lawful to and for
every Trader, Dealer and Weaver of Linen Manufacture, to
weave his Name, or fx some known Mark in any Piece of
Linen Manufacture by him made.” 13 Geo. I, c. 26, p. 458
Page Proof Pending Publication
(1726). And, a person could be liable for fraud if he sold a
product under another person's mark. See, e. g., id., at 459;
Singleton v. Bolton, 3 Dougl. 293, 99 Eng. Rep. 661 (K. B.
1783); Southern v. How, Pop. 143, 144, 79 Eng. Rep. 1243,
1244 (K. B. 1618) (mentioning that an “action did well lie” if a
clothier “used the same mark” as another); J. Baker, Sources
of English Legal History: Private Law to 1750, p. 675 (2d ed.
2010) (discussing J. G. v. Samford, also known as Sandforth's
Case, which held in 1584 that an action could lie when a cloth-
ier “used another [clothier's] mark”); see also G. Jacob, A
New-Law Dictionary (1729) (defning “Mark to Goods” as
“what ascertains the Property or Goodness thereof . . . And
if one Man shall use the Mark of another, to the Intent to do
him Damage, Action upon the Case lieth”). So, the content
of the mark (whether it was the same as another person's)
triggered the restriction.
   Although there was an early push for federal legislation
to protect trademarks, no such law was enacted during our
country's infancy. See B. Paster, Trademarks—Their Early
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)             297

                      Opinion of the Court

History, 59 Trademark Rep. 551, 565–566 (1969); see also F.
Schechter, Historical Foundations of the Law Relating to
Trade-Marks 131 (1925) (Schechter). Instead, trademark
law fell largely within “the province of the States” for the
18th and most of the 19th century. Tam, 582 U. S., at 224.
For example, Massachusetts passed a private bill incorporat-
ing a cotton corporation on the condition that it affx a label
to its goods “with the seal of the said Corporation.” 1 Mass.
Private and Special Laws, 1789, § 5, p. 226 (1805). The law
also prevented others from “us[ing] a like seal or label” by
subjecting them to treble damages. Ibid. To be sure, for
most of our frst century, most commerce was local and most
consumers therefore knew the source of the goods they pur-
chased. See R. Bone, Hunting Goodwill: A History of the
Concept of Goodwill in Trademark Law, 86 B. U. L. Rev. 547,
575 (2006). “[E]ven as late as 1860 the term `trademark'
really denoted only the name of the manufacturer.” B. Pat-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tishall, Two Hundred Years of American Trademark Law, 68
Trademark Rep. 121, 128 (1978). There was nonetheless “a
certain amount of litigation in the state courts in the early
nineteenth century, ” though it went unrecorded.
Schechter 133.
   The “frst reported American decision that may be de-
scribed as a trademark case” involved a dispute over the con-
tent of a mark—and in particular, the use of a person's name.
Pattishall, Constitutional Foundations, at 460. In Thomson
v. Winchester, 36 Mass. 214, 216 (1837), Samuel Thomson—
who sold a medicine under the name “Thomsonian
Medicines”—brought suit against another Massachusetts
druggist who sold an allegedly inferior product under the
same name. The court held that the druggist could be liable
for fraud if he passed the medicine off as that of Thomson.
Ibid.
   In a similar vein, the frst reported trademark case in fed-
eral court revolved around a trademark's content. Justice
Story, sitting as Circuit Justice, granted an injunction to pro-
298                        VIDAL v. ELSTER

                          Opinion of the Court

hibit a seller of spools from infringing on the plaintiff's trade-
mark of “Taylor's Persian Thread.” Taylor v. Carpenter, 23
F. Cas. 742 (No. 13,784) (CC Mass. 1844). Justice Story ex-
plained that, by using the trademark, the seller “imitated . . .
both descriptions of spools and labels, red and black, of the
plaintiff 's,” and that the principles prohibiting such infringe-
ment were at that time “very familiar to the profession” and
not “susceptible of any judicial doubt.” Id., at 744.
  Recorded trademark law began to take off in the last
decades of the 19th century—after the ratifcation of the
Fourteenth Amendment in 1868—and its established
content-based nature continued. See Schechter 134; Pattis-
hall, Two Hundred Years, at 133. American commerce be-
came more national in character, and, perhaps because of this
shift, Congress enacted the frst federal trademark law in
1870. Although States retained their important role, “Con-
gress stepped in to provide a degree of national uniformity”
for trademark protection. Tam, 582 U. S., at 224 (citing Act
Page Proof Pending Publication
of July 8, 1870, §§ 77–84, 16 Stat. 210–212).3
  This frst law contained prohibitions on what could be pro-
tected as a trademark. For example, the law would not
protect a trademark that contained “merely the name of a
person . . . only, unaccompanied by a mark suffcient to distin-
guish it from the same name when used by other persons.”
Id., at 211. It thus restricted a trademark based upon its
content (i.e., whether it contained more than a name). As
trademark disputes increased, courts continued to assess
trademarks based on their content. For example, this
Court's frst trademark decision explained that a trademark
cannot consist of a purely geographical name, rejecting an

  3
   This frst federal trademark law “provided for the registration of trade-
marks generally without regard to whether they were used in interstate
or foreign commerce.” 1 McCarthy § 5:3, at 188. This Court held that
the law exceeded Congress's power under the Commerce Clause. See
Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U. S. 82, 99 (1879). The law drew no challenge
under the First Amendment.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            299

                      Opinion of the Court

attempt by one of several coal producers in Pennsylvania's
Lackawanna Valley to trademark “Lackawanna coal. ”
Canal Co. v. Clark, 13 Wall. 311, 321 (1872). Throughout
its development, trademark law has required content-based
distinctions.
   That did not change when Congress enacted the Lanham
Act in 1946. The Act's comprehensive system for federal
registration of trademarks continues to distinguish based on
a mark's content. See Restatement (Third) of Unfair Com-
petition § 9, Comment e (1993) (Restatement) (“The Lanham
Act is generally declarative of existing law, incorporating the
principal features of common law trademark protection”).
The Act defnes a trademark to include “any word, name,
symbol, or device, or any combination thereof ” that a person
uses “to identify and distinguish his or her goods . . . from
those manufactured or sold by others and to indicate the
source of the goods.” § 1127. When the Government de-
Page Proof Pending Publication
fnes what may be registered as a trademark, it necessarily
decides that some words or images cannot be used in a mark.
To take one example, the Lanham Act bars the registration
of “a mark which so resembles [another's] mark . . . as to be
likely . . . to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to de-
ceive.” § 1052(d). It is impossible to determine whether
one trademark is the same as (or confusingly similar to) an-
other without looking at the content of the two marks.
   This history, refected in the Lanham Act still today,
demonstrates that restrictions on trademarks have always
turned on a mark's content. But, despite its content-based
nature, trademark law has existed alongside the First
Amendment from the beginning. That longstanding, har-
monious relationship suggests that heightened scrutiny need
not always apply in this unique context.
   The content-based nature of trademark protection is com-
pelled by the historical rationales of trademark law. A
trademark has generally served two functions: “indicating
ownership of the goods to which it [is] affxed” and “indicat-
300                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

                      Opinion of the Court

ing the source or origin of manufacture.” Schechter 122.
Indicating ownership of a good was needed in part to “f[x]
responsibility for defective merchandise.” Restatement § 9,
Comment b. And, indicating the source of the good helped
“prospective purchasers . . . make their selections based upon
the reputation, not merely of the immediate vendor, but also
of the manufacturer.” Ibid. Both goals thus refect that
trademarks developed historically to identify for consumers
who sold the goods (the vendor) and who made the goods
(the manufacturer). See ibid. In that vein, a basic function
of trademark law has always been to “prohibi[t] confusion as
to the source of good or services.” Pattishall, Constitutional
Foundations, at 458; see also Jack Daniel's Properties, Inc.
v. VIP Products LLC, 599 U. S. 140, 147 (2023) (“Confusion
as to source is the bête noire of trademark law”). Indicating
ownership and the manufacturing source touch on the con-
tent of the mark—i.e., from whom the product came. And,
as we have explained, policing trademarks so as to prevent
Page Proof Pending Publication
confusion over the source of goods requires looking to the
mark's content. Supra, at 299.
   Because of the uniquely content-based nature of trade-
mark regulation and the longstanding coexistence of trade-
mark regulation with the First Amendment, we need not
evaluate a solely content-based restriction on trademark reg-
istration under heightened scrutiny. See R. A. V., 505 U. S.,
at 387 (“Even the prohibition against content discrimination
that we assert the First Amendment requires is not abso-
lute”); Jack Daniel's, 599 U. S., at 159 (explaining that,
in some circumstances, “trademark law [can] prevai[l] over
the First Amendment” (internal quotation marks omitted));
post, at 330 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.); post, at 316–317 (opin-
ion of Barrett, J.).
                                C
   We have acknowledged that trademark rights and restric-
tions can “play well with the First Amendment.” Jack
Daniel's, 599 U. S., at 159 (internal quotation marks omit-
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)           301

                      Opinion of the Court

ted). In this case, we do not delineate an exhaustive frame-
work for when a content-based trademark restriction passes
muster under the First Amendment. But, in evaluating a
solely content-based trademark restriction, we can consider
its history and tradition, as we have done before when con-
sidering the scope of the First Amendment. See City of
Austin v. Reagan Nat. Advertising of Austin, LLC, 596 U. S.
61, 75 (2022); id., at 101 (Thomas, J., dissenting); R. A. V.,
505 U. S., at 382–383; Roth v. United States, 354 U. S. 476,
482–483 (1957).
   The Lanham Act's names clause has deep roots in our
legal tradition. Our courts have long recognized that trade-
marks containing names may be restricted. And, these
name restrictions served established principles. This his-
tory and tradition is suffcient to conclude that the names
clause—a content-based, but viewpoint-neutral, trademark
restriction—is compatible with the First Amendment. We
need look no further in this case.
Page Proof Pending Publication
                                1
   Restrictions on trademarking names have a long history.
See generally 2 McCarthy § 13:5. Such restrictions have
historically been grounded in the notion that a person has
ownership over his own name, and that he may not be ex-
cluded from using that name by another's trademark. As
the Court has explained, “[a] man's name is his own property,
and he has the same right to its use and enjoyment as he has
to that of any other species of property.” Brown Chemical
Co. v. Meyer, 139 U. S. 540, 544 (1891). It is therefore “an
elementary principle that every man is entitled to the use of
his own name in his own business.” F. Treadway, Personal
Trade-Names, 6 Yale L. J. 141, 143–144 (1897) (Treadway);
see also A. Greeley, Foreign Patent and Trademark Laws
§ 138, p. 135 (1899) (“The right of any one to place his own
name on goods sold by him is recognized as a natural right
and cannot be interfered with”). “The notion that people
302                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

                     Opinion of the Court

should be able to use their own name to identify their
goods or business is deeply rooted in American mores.” B.
Pattishall, D. Hilliard, & J. Welch, Trademarks and Unfair
Competition § 2.06 (2001).
   Recognizing a person's ownership over his name, the com-
mon law restricted the trademarking of names. It pre-
vented a person from trademarking any name—even his
own—by itself. In “the early years of trademark law,”
courts recognized that “there can be no trade-mark in the
name of a person, because . . . every person has the right to
use his own name for the purposes of trade.” 2 McCarthy
§ 13:5 (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Restate-
ment § 14, Comment e (“[A]t early common law, the recogni-
tion of an unencumbered right to use one's name in trade
effectively precluded the existence of trademark or trade
name rights in personal names”); W. Browne, Law of Trade-
Marks § 206, p. 219 (2d ed. 1885) (“The rule is, that a man
Page Proof Pending Publication
cannot turn his mere name into a trade-mark”); McLean v.
Fleming, 96 U. S. 245, 252 (1878) (explaining that a person
cannot obtain “the exclusive use of a name, merely as such,
without more”).
   The common law did, however, allow a person to obtain a
trademark containing his own name—with a caveat: A per-
son could not use a mark containing his name to the exclusion
of a person with the same name. “A corollary of the right
to use one's own name and identity in trade is the right to
stop others from doing so—at least those who don't share
the same name.” J. Rothman, Navigating the Identity
Thicket, 135 Harv. L. Rev. 1271, 1306 (2022); see also Tread-
way 143–144. In other words, a person's right to his name
cannot be exclusive as to other people bearing the same
name: John Smith cannot acquire a trademark that prohibits
other John Smiths from using their own names. See
McLean, 96 U. S., at 252 (“[H]e cannot have such a right,
even in his own name, as against another person of the same
name, unless such other person uses a form of stamp or label
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            303

                      Opinion of the Court

so like that used by the complaining party as to represent
that the goods of the former are of the latter's manufac-
ture”); accord, Brown Chemical, 139 U. S., at 542; Meneely
v. Meneely, 62 N. Y. 427, 432 (1875); see also Treadway 143;
accord, post, at 319–320 (opinion of Barrett, J.). Consider
the case of John L. Faber and John H. Faber, two men who
independently manufactured lead pencils near Nuremberg,
Germany. Both men stamped the pencils they manufac-
tured with their shared surname. After recognizing that
each man “had the right to put his own name on his own
pencils,” the New York Supreme Court declined to allow one
man to effectively trademark the other man's name. Faber
v. Faber, 3 Abb. Pr. (N. S.) 115, 116 (1867).
   We see no evidence that the common law afforded protec-
tion to a person seeking a trademark of another living per-
son's name. To the contrary, English courts recognized that
selling a product under another person's name could be ac-
Page Proof Pending Publication
tionable fraud. See, e. g., Singleton, 3 Dougl. 293, 99 Eng.
Rep. 661; Croft v. Day, 7 Beav. 84, 88, 49 Eng. Rep. 994, 996
(1843) (“[N]o man has a right to sell his own goods as the
goods of another”). This recognition carried over to our
country. See McLean, 96 U. S., at 252 (“[I]t is doubtless cor-
rect to say that a person may have a right in his own name
as a trade-mark as against a trader or dealer of a different
name”); see also Faber, 3 Abb. Pr. (N. S.), at 116. Even in
the absence of fraud, it would be diffcult, if not impossible,
to square such a right to trademark another person's name
with our established understanding that “[a] person may have
a right in his own name as a trade-mark, as against a person
of a different name.” Gilman v. Hunnewell, 122 Mass. 139,
148 (1877); see also Thaddeus Davids Co. v. Davids Mfg. Co.,
233 U. S. 461, 472 (1914) (highlighting persons' “right to use
their own name in trade”); Faber, 3 Abb. Pr. (N. S.), at 116
(“[T]he maker had the right to put his own name on his own
pencils”). Relatedly, one could contract for the use of another
person's name in his business. See, e. g., McLean, 96 U. S.,
304                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

                      Opinion of the Court

at 249 (explaining that a “physician whose name the pills
bear . . . sold the right to use the same” to another); see also
L. E. Waterman Co. v. Modern Pen Co., 235 U. S. 88, 96
(1914); Meriden Britannia Co. v. Parker, 39 Conn. 450,
453 (1872) (“[T]hey made a contract with the petitioners,
by which, and by subsequent contracts, the petitioners ac-
quired the right . . . to manufacture and sell plated spoons
and forks with the name `Rogers' stamped thereon as a com-
ponent part of a trade mark”). Such contracts would make
little sense if one could use another living person's name in
business at will. The common-law approach to trademark-
ing names thus protected only a person's right to use his
own name.
   This common-law understanding carried over into federal
statutory law. The frst federal trademark law contained a
requirement that a trademark contain more than merely a
name. See Act of July 8, 1870, § 79, 16 Stat. 211. That re-
Page Proof Pending Publication
quirement remains largely intact. See § 1052(e)(4) (prohibit-
ing registration of a trademark if it “is primarily merely a
surname”). A few decades later, federal trademark law em-
phasized “ `[t]hat nothing herein shall prevent the registra-
tion of a trade-mark otherwise registerable because of its
being the name of the applicant.' ” Act of Feb. 18, 1911, ch.
113, 36 Stat. 918 (emphasis added). And, the Lanham Act
later “incorporat[ed] the principal features of common law
trademark protection,” thereby “declar[ing] . . . existing law”
rather than writing trademark law from scratch. Restate-
ment § 9, Comment e; see also W. Derenberg, Trade-Mark
Protection and Unfair Trading 22 (1936) (explaining that the
“function [of federal trademark law] is essentially an eviden-
tial one, refecting the underlying common law trade-mark
right with the existence of which it rises and falls”). It is
thus unsurprising that the Lanham Act included the names
clause, prohibiting the registration of a mark containing “a
name . . . identifying a particular living individual except by
his written consent.” § 1052(c). The names clause refects
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)           305

                      Opinion of the Court

the common law's careful treatment of names when it comes
to trademarks.
   The restriction on trademarking names also refects trade-
mark law's historical rationale of identifying the source of
goods. See Hanover Star Milling Co. v. Metcalf, 240 U. S.
403, 412 (1916) (“The primary and proper function of a trade-
mark is to identify the origin or ownership of the article to
which it is affxed”); accord, post, at 318 (opinion of Bar-
rett, J.). Trademark protection ensures that consumers
know the source of a product and can thus evaluate it based
upon the manufacturer's reputation and goodwill. See Re-
statement § 9, Comment b; see also Powell v. Birmingham
Vinegar Brewery Co., 13 Rep. Pat. Cas. 235, 250 (Ct. App.
1896) (Lindley, L. J.) (“His mark, as used by him, has given a
reputation to his goods. His trade depends greatly on such
reputation. His mark sells his goods”). By barring a per-
son from using another's name, the names clause refects the
Page Proof Pending Publication
traditional rationale of ensuring that consumers make no
mistake about who is responsible for a product. See also
Hanover Star Milling Co., 240 U. S., at 412–413 (“The es-
sence of the wrong [for trademark infringement] consists in
the sale of the goods of one manufacturer or vendor for those
of another”).
   Moreover, the names clause respects the established con-
nection between a trademark and its protection of the mark-
holder's reputation. We have long recognized that a trade-
mark protects the markholder's reputation. See McLean,
96 U. S., at 254 (explaining that a trademark “enable[s a
mark-holder] to secure such profts as result from his reputa-
tion for skill, industry, and fdelity”); see also Hanover Star
Milling Co., 240 U. S., at 412–413, 414; Celluloid Mfg. Co. v.
Cellonite Mfg. Co., 32 F. 94, 97 (CC NJ 1887) (Bradley, J.).
This protection refects that a mark may “acquir[e] value”
from a person's “expenditure of labor, skill, and money.”
San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olym-
pic Comm., 483 U. S. 522, 532 (1987) (internal quotation
306                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

                      Opinion of the Court

marks omitted); accord, McLean, 96 U. S., at 251. Accord-
ingly, when a person uses another's mark, “the owner is
robbed of the fruits of the reputation that he had successfully
labored to earn.” Amoskeag Mfg. Co. v. Spear & Ripley, 2
Sandf. 599, 606 (N.Y. Super. Ct. 1849). A person's trademark
is “his authentic seal,” and “[i]f another uses it, he borrows
the owner's reputation, whose quality no longer lies within
his own control.” Yale Elec. Corp. v. Robertson, 26 F. 2d
972, 974 (CA2 1928) (Hand, J.). “This is an injury, even
though the borrower does not tarnish it, or divert any sales
by its use; for a reputation, like a face, is the symbol of its
possessor and creator, and another can use it only as a
mask.” Ibid.
   This connection between a trademark and reputation is
even stronger when the mark contains a person's name.
“[I]s not a man's name as strong an instance of trade-mark
as can be suggested?” Ainsworth v. Walmsley, 1 L. R. Eq.
518, 525 (1866). In fact, the English common law of trade-
Page Proof Pending Publication
marks arose from the fact that “those who sold goods . . . that
were the fruit of their own labor or craftsmanship [began to]
identif[y] those products . . . with their own names.” Pat-
tishall, Constitutional Foundations, at 457. As we have ex-
plained, virtually up until the Fourteenth Amendment's
adoption, a trademark “really denoted only the name of
the manufacturer.” Pattishall, Two Hundred Years, at 128.
And, this Court has long associated names with the good will
they may bear. See McLean, 96 U. S., at 252; L. E. Water-
man Co., 235 U. S., at 96 (“He purported to transfer to the
partnership the good will attaching to his name”). The
names clause thus protects “the reputation of the named in-
dividual” by preventing another person from using his name.
Post, at 319 (opinion of Barrett, J.).
   Applying these principles, we have recognized that a party
has no First Amendment right to piggyback off the goodwill
another entity has built in its name. In San Francisco
Arts & Athletics, Inc., the Court upheld a provision of the
Amateur Sports Act of 1978 that prohibited “ `any person' ”
                       Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                   307

                          Opinion of the Court

from using the word “ `Olympic' ” for certain purposes
“ `[w]ithout the consent' ” of the U. S. Olympic Committee
(USOC), and subjected violations to “ `the remedies provided
in the Lanham Act.' ” 483 U. S., at 528 (quoting 36 U. S. C.
§ 380(a); alteration omitted). The Court rejected the ar-
gument that the consent requirement violated the First
Amendment because “Congress reasonably could conclude”
that the value of the word “ `Olympic' was the product of the
USOC's `own talents and energy.' ” 483 U. S., at 532–533
(quoting Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co., 433
U. S. 562, 575 (1977)). Although the petitioner certainly had
a First Amendment right to speak on political matters, it
lacked the right to “exploit the commercial magnetism” of
the word “Olympic” and the USOC's hard-won efforts in giv-
ing that word value. 483 U. S., at 539 (internal quotation
marks omitted). The names clause guards a similar inter-
est. By protecting a person's use of his name, the names
clause “secur[es] to the producer the benefts of [his] good
Page Proof Pending Publication
reputation.” Park 'N Fly, Inc. v. Dollar Park & Fly, Inc.,
469 U. S. 189, 198 (1985); see also Pattishall, Two Hundred
Years, at 121 (explaining how trademark law protects a per-
son's “commercial identity, thereby [allowing him] to enjoy
the fruits of his own labor”).
                               2
   We conclude that a tradition of restricting the trademark-
ing of names has coexisted with the First Amendment, and
the names clause fts within that tradition. Though the par-
ticulars of the doctrine have shifted over time, the consistent
through line is that a person generally had a claim only to
his own name. The names clause refects this common-law
tradition by prohibiting a person from obtaining a trademark
of another living person's name without consent, thereby
protecting the other's reputation and goodwill.4
  4
    Justice Barrett takes a different approach, suggesting that a histor-
ical rule that mirrors the names clause is required. See post, at 321. But,
history-focused approaches to constitutional scrutiny do not typically re-
308                        VIDAL v. ELSTER

                          Opinion of Thomas, J.

   None of this is to say that the Government cannot innovate
when it comes to trademark law. A frm grounding in tradi-
tional trademark law is suffcient to justify the content-based
trademark restriction before us, but we do not opine on what
may be required or suffcient in other cases. To be sure, as
Justice Barrett observes, a case presenting a content-
based trademark restriction without a historical analogue
may require a different approach. Post, at 324. But, we
need not develop such a comprehensive theory to address
the relatively simple case before us today. See post, at 311
(Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part).
   We conclude that the names clause is of a piece with a
common-law tradition regarding the trademarking of names.
We see no reason to disturb this longstanding tradition,
which supports the restriction of the use of another's name
in a trademark.
                                III
Page      Proof
 Our colleagues     Pending
                would               Publication
                      address the names clause with two
analogies. Neither is compelling in this case. Under both
analogies, the test would boil down to what a judge believes
is “reasonable in light of the purpose” of trademark law.

quire a historical twin. Cf. New York State Rife & Pistol Assn., Inc. v.
Bruen, 597 U. S. 1, 30 (2022). Nor do Justice Barrett's examples
undercut the names clause's historical grounding, as they raise different
aspects of trademarking names. For example, she relies upon cases that
concern trademarks containing “the name of a famous person, long since
dead.” Barrows v. Knight, 6 R. I. 434, 438 (1860); see also Stephano Bros.,
Inc. v. Stamatopoulos, 238 F. 89, 93 (CA2 1916) (“In this case the name
adopted is a famous Egyptian historical character, who lived at least 1,000
years before the Christian era”). The part of the names clause that we
address concerns only “a particular living individual['s]” name. § 1052(c)
(emphasis added). And, her other examples concern names that had be-
come generic or descriptive words. See Messerole v. Tynberg, 4 Abb. Pr.
(N. S.) 410, 414 (N.Y. Ct. Com. Pl. 1868) (treating “the word `Bismarck' ”
as “a popular term and one in general use”); Medlar & Holmes Shoe Co.
v. Delsarte Mfg. Co., 46 A. 1089, 1091 (CC NJ 1900) (treating the name of
the deceased French artist Delsarte as “a generic or descriptive term”).
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            309

                      Opinion of Thomas, J.

Post, at 329 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.); see post, at 318–319
(opinion of Barrett, J.). But, no matter the approach
taken, we all agree that the names clause does not violate
the First Amendment.
   Justice Sotomayor would pull “strands of precedent” to-
gether to conclude that heightened scrutiny does not apply
to trademark registration because it is a Government initia-
tive or beneft. Post, at 331. This conclusion rests primar-
ily upon cases in which the Government provides a cash sub-
sidy or conditions the use of a public payroll to collect union
dues. See post, at 331–332. But, those cases “occupy a spe-
cial area of First Amendment case law, and they are far re-
moved from the registration of trademarks.” Tam, 582 U. S.,
at 241 (plurality opinion). The Government-beneft cases are
an ill ft for the names clause, and we would not graft this
precedent, which Justice Sotomayor acknowledges is not
controlling, onto this trademark dispute. Post, at 332.
Page Proof Pending Publication
   Justice Barrett, echoed by Justice Sotomayor, would
import the test that we have used for a “limited public
forum.” Our precedents hold that the Government “may
create a forum that is limited to use by certain groups or
dedicated solely to the discussion of certain subjects.”
Pleasant Grove City v. Summum, 555 U. S. 460, 470 (2009).
Justice Barrett provides little explanation for why that
approach makes sense in the trademark context—she simply
declares that the limited public forum framework “is apt”
due to the content-based nature of trademark law. Post,
at 317. Although she attempts to cabin the analogy to the
content-based nature, the limited public forum test is quite
obviously about creating a forum. And, there is reason to
doubt that the federal trademark register is analogous to a
limited public forum. To start, unlike a speaker in a limited
public forum, a markholder does not communicate with cus-
tomers on the register. Rather, as the Government ac-
knowledges, the register “is a way of warning potential in-
fringers that they risk liability if they use the same or
310                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

                      Opinion of the Court

confusingly similar marks.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 19. The Gov-
ernment has also previously asserted that it did not create a
forum for speech by providing for the federal registration of
trademarks. See Reply Brief in Matal v. Tam, O. T. 2016,
No. 15–1293, p. 4 (“[T]he government has not created a forum
here”); Tr. of Oral Arg. in Iancu v. Brunetti, O. T. 2018,
No. 18–302, p. 27 (“[W]e don't regard it as a limited public
forum”). Without an analogous forum, it is hard to see why
the test for a limited public forum should apply. We see no
need to adopt a potentially fraught analogy to resolve the
names clause's constitutionality.
  Despite the differences in methodology, both Justice So-
tomayor and Justice Barrett reach the same conclusion
that the names clause does not violate the First Amendment.
On the bottom line, there is no dispute. Rather than adopt
a reasonableness test premised upon loose analogies, how-
ever, we conclude that the names clause is grounded in a
historical tradition suffcient to demonstrate that it does not
Page Proof Pending Publication
run afoul of the First Amendment.

                              IV
   Our decision today is narrow. We do not set forth a com-
prehensive framework for judging whether all content-based
but viewpoint-neutral trademark restrictions are constitu-
tional. Nor do we suggest that an equivalent history and
tradition is required to uphold every content-based trade-
mark restriction. We hold only that history and tradition
establish that the particular restriction before us, the names
clause in § 1052(c), does not violate the First Amendment.
Although an occasion may arise when history and tradition
cannot alone answer whether a trademark restriction vio-
lates the First Amendment, that occasion is not today. In a
future case, we can address the “distinct question” whether
“a viewpoint-neutral, content-based trademark restriction”
is constitutional without “such a historical pedigree.” Post,
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            311

                 Barrett, J., concurring in part

at 311 (opinion of Kavanaugh, J.). The judgment of the
Court of Appeals is
                                             Reversed.

   Justice Kavanaugh, with whom The Chief Justice
joins, concurring in part.
  I join all but Part III of the Court's opinion. I agree with
the Court that the names clause is constitutional, particu-
larly in light of the long history of restricting the use of
another's name in a trademark. In my view, a viewpoint-
neutral, content-based trademark restriction might well be
constitutional even absent such a historical pedigree. We can
address that distinct question as appropriate in a future case.
Cf., e. g., post, at 317–319 (Barrett, J., concurring in part).

  Justice Barrett, with whom Justice Kagan joins, with
whom Justice Sotomayor joins as to Parts I, II, and III–
B, and with whom Justice Jackson joins as to Parts I and
Page Proof Pending Publication
II, concurring in part.
   While I agree with the Court that the names clause does
not violate the First Amendment, I disagree with some of
its reasoning. The Court claims that “history and tradition”
settle the constitutionality of the names clause, rendering
it unnecessary to adopt a standard for gauging whether a
content-based trademark registration restriction abridges
the right to free speech. That is wrong twice over. First,
the Court's evidence, consisting of loosely related cases from
the late-19th and early-20th centuries, does not establish a
historical analogue for the names clause. Second, the Court
never explains why hunting for historical forebears on a
restriction-by-restriction basis is the right way to analyze
the constitutional question. I would adopt a standard,
grounded in both trademark law and First Amendment prec-
edent, that refects the relationship between content-based
trademark registration restrictions and free speech. In my
312                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

                  Barrett, J., concurring in part

view, such restrictions, whether new or old, are permissible
so long as they are reasonable in light of the trademark sys-
tem's purpose of facilitating source identifcation.

                                I
   Content-based speech regulations are, as a general matter,
“presumptively unconstitutional.” Reed v. Town of Gilbert,
576 U. S. 155, 163 (2015). “The rationale of the general pro-
hibition,” we have explained, “is that content discrimination
`raises the specter that the Government may effectively
drive certain ideas or viewpoints from the marketplace.' ”
R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 387 (1992) (quoting
Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N. Y. State Crime
Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 116 (1991)). But we have also
recognized that in certain situations, this presumption is in-
applicable, as “ `there is no realistic possibility that offcial
suppression of ideas is afoot.' ” Davenport v. Washington
Page Proof Pending Publication
Ed. Assn., 551 U. S. 177, 189 (2007) (quoting R. A. V., 505
U. S., at 390).
   I agree with the Court that content-based trademark reg-
istration restrictions do not trigger the presumption of un-
constitutionality. See ante, at 295. Because federal trade-
mark law did not exist at the founding—and American
trademark law did not develop in earnest until the mid-19th
century—I do not take the Court to be making a claim about
the original meaning of the Free Speech Clause. But, as
the Court implicitly recognizes, the absence of founding-era
evidence does not mean that content-based trademark regis-
tration restrictions are inherently suspect. More than a
century's worth of precedent refects that trademark law has
always been content based without functioning as a ready
tool of Government censorship. The First Amendment does
not require us to upend this longstanding, stable system by
treating trademark restrictions as “presumptively unconsti-
tutional.” Reed, 576 U. S., at 163.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)           313

                 Barrett, J., concurring in part

                                A
   As the Court explains, trademark law existed at the found-
ing, albeit in nascent form. Ante, at 296; B. Pattishall, The
Constitutional Foundations of American Trademark Law,
78 Trademark Rep. 456, 457–459 (1988). From the outset,
trademark protection “was an inherently content-based en-
deavor.” Ante, at 296. Early English and American laws
prohibited producers from placing another producer's trade-
mark on their goods—a prohibition that depended on com-
paring the content of the mark with the content of the al-
legedly infringing use. Ante, at 296–297. That alone does
not prove that every type of content-based trademark regu-
lation should escape heightened scrutiny. More relevant is
that courts and legislatures, in identifying the marks that
merit legal protection, have long discriminated on the basis
of content. Ante, at 298–299. This history, in my view, is
key to understanding why we need not evaluate content-
Page Proof Pending Publication
based trademark registration restrictions under heightened
scrutiny.
   Once trademark law got off the ground in the mid-19th
century, it had an unmistakably content-based character.
Thomson v. Winchester, the frst reported American trade-
mark case, involved two parties who both sold medicine
under the name “ `Thomsonian Medicines.' ” 36 Mass. 214,
216 (1837). See E. Rogers, Some Historical Matter Con-
cerning Trade-Marks, 9 Mich. L. Rev. 29, 42 (1910). The
Court cites this case as refective of the content-based nature
of trademark protection. Ante, at 297. True, Thomson ex-
plained that the defendant could be liable if he had sold his
goods under the plaintiff's name as an attempted fraud. 36
Mass., at 216. But the court explained that the result would
be different if the defendant “call[ed his goods] Thomsonian
as a generic term designating their general character.”
Ibid. That was because Thomson, the plaintiff, could not
claim an exclusive right to use the name “if [the] term had
314                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

                  Barrett, J., concurring in part

acquired a generic meaning, descriptive of a general kind,
quality and class of medicines.” Ibid. In other words,
whether a word or phrase could qualify for trademark pro-
tection depended on “its communicative content.” Reed,
576 U. S., at 163.
   Roughly 10 years later, the New York Superior Court fur-
ther developed this content-based principle in Amoskeag
Mfg. Co. v. Spear & Ripley, 2 Sandf. 599 (1849), long “ `re-
garded as the leading American adjudication' ” of a trade-
mark dispute. B. Pattishall, Two Hundred Years of Ameri-
can Trademark Law, 68 Trademark Rep. 121, 125 (1978).
The court agreed that “[e]very manufacturer . . . has an un-
questionable right to distinguish the goods that he manufac-
tures or sells, by a peculiar mark or device, in order that
they may be known as his.” Amoskeag, 2 Sandf., at 605.
But the law will only “protec[t him] in the exclusive use” of
marks that “designat[e] the true origin or ownership”—i.e.,
Page Proof Pending Publication
the source—of the goods. Id., at 606. The manufacturer
cannot claim a protectable trademark in “words, letters, fg-
ures or symbols” that indicate only the “name or quality”—
i.e., not the source—of the goods. Ibid. After all, those
who produce similar goods could use the same words or sym-
bols “with equal truth”—thus, they should have “an equal
right to employ [them], for the same purpose.” Id., at 607.
   Courts repeated and applied this rule for decades. See,
e. g., Wolfe v. Goulard, 18 How. Pr. 64, 67 (N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1859);
Falkinburg v. Lucy, 35 Cal. 52, 64 (1868); Filley v. Fassett, 44
Mo. 168, 176–177 (1869); Congress Spring Co. v. High Rock
Spring Co., 45 N. Y. 291, 295 (1871). For instance, a gin
manufacturer could not claim an exclusive right to the term
“Schiedam Schnapps” if it already served as a common de-
scriptor of gin. Wolfe, 18 How. Pr., at 67. But a stove man-
ufacturer could trademark the term “ `Charter Oak,' ” as a
distinctive phrase not “merely descriptive of the style, qual-
ity, or character” of the product. Filley, 44 Mo., at 176–177.
Then, as now, courts understood that a mark merits protec-
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                 315

                    Barrett, J., concurring in part

tion only so far as it “identif[ies] the article to which it is
affxed as that of the person adopting it, and distinguish[es]
it from others.” Gillott v. Esterbrook, 47 Barb. 455, 462
(N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1867), aff'd, 48 N. Y. 374 (1872); see also Matal
v. Tam, 582 U. S. 218, 223 (2017). This inquiry is inherently
content based.
   The ratifcation of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868,
which incorporated the First Amendment against the States,
did not prompt courts to change course.1 They continued to
scrutinize proposed marks based on their content. Like-
wise, this Court's frst trademark decision, issued in 1871,
invoked Amoskeag's content-based criteria to defne those
trademarks “entitled to legal protection.” Canal Co. v.
Clark, 13 Wall. 311, 323–324 (1872) (concluding that “geo-
graphical names,” including “ `Pennsylvania wheat' ” and
“ `Virginia tobacco,' ” could not be protected as trademarks,
as they “point only at the place of production, not to the
producer”). See ante, at 298–299. Thus, at the earliest
Page Proof Pending Publication
point at which the First Amendment could have applied to
trademark law, content discrimination, particularly with re-
spect to the very defnition of a trademark, was the norm.
   Trademark registration restrictions followed suit. Fed-
eral registration, though not required to enforce a trade-
mark, “confers important legal rights and benefts on trade-
mark owners” and thus “helps to ensure that trademarks are
fully protected.” Matal, 582 U. S., at 225–226 (internal quo-
tation marks omitted). Unsurprisingly, as the Court notes,
Congress's frst trademark statute included certain content-
based restrictions for federal registration. See Act of July
8, 1870, §§ 77, 79, 16 Stat. 210–211; ante, at 298. And today,
each of the Lanham Act's registration criteria refers to the

  1
    There would have been no reason for courts to consider the relation-
ship between the First Amendment and trademark law before 1868. Be-
fore incorporation, the First Amendment applied only to the Federal Gov-
ernment, and there was no federal trademark law until 1870. Ante, at
297–298.
316                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

                 Barrett, J., concurring in part

content of the applicant's mark. See 15 U. S. C. § 1052.
Thus, just as courts have long identifed the criteria for
trademark protection along content-based lines, Congress
has defned the rules for enhanced trademark protection
along content-based lines.
                           B
   The upshot is that content discrimination has long been
“necessary for [trademark's] purposes and limitations.” See
Legal Services Corporation v. Velazquez, 531 U. S. 533, 543
(2001) (considering the “accepted usage” of a “particular me-
dium” to determine the constitutionality of speech restric-
tions within that medium). The law protects trademarks
because they help consumers identify the goods that they
intend to purchase and allow producers to “reap the fnancial
rewards associated with the[ir] product's good reputation.”
Jack Daniel's Properties, Inc. v. VIP Products LLC, 599
U. S. 140, 146 (2023); see also Falkinburg, 35 Cal., at 64.
Page Proof Pending Publication
But trademarks can only fulfll these twin goals if they actu-
ally serve as source identifers, see Jack Daniel's, 599 U. S.,
at 146, which, as explained above, is a content-based ques-
tion, see supra, at 314–315.
   These content-based trademark rules have long coexisted
with the Free Speech Clause, and their function is generally
compatible with it. Courts have applied content-based rules
not to “suppres[s] . . . ideas,” but simply to serve trademark
law's purposes. See Davenport, 551 U. S., at 189 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Indeed, these trademark restric-
tions can actually help prevent “interfere[nce] with the mar-
ketplace of ideas,” id., at 188, insofar as they ensure that
a single producer cannot exclusively appropriate words or
phrases in the general domain, see Wolfe, 18 How. Pr., at
67. This is not to say that the Government could not abuse
content-based trademark registration restrictions—as I ex-
plain below, such restrictions are not insulated from scrutiny.
But they do not set off alarm bells signaling the likelihood
that “ `offcial suppression of ideas is afoot.' ” Davenport,
551 U. S., at 189 (quoting R. A. V., 505 U. S., at 390). There-
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                 317

                    Barrett, J., concurring in part

fore, I agree with the Court that we need not treat content-
based trademark registration restrictions as presumptively
unconstitutional. Ante, at 295.

                                   II
   Though content-based registration restrictions do not trig-
ger strict scrutiny, they are still subject to judicial review.
Thus, we must decide how to evaluate Elster's challenge to
the names clause.
   The Solicitor General suggests that we draw an analogy
to another area that is inherently content based: the limited
public forum. When the government opens its property to
speech for a particular purpose, creating a limited public
forum, it necessarily must “reserv[e the property] for certain
groups or for the discussion of certain topics.” Rosenberger
v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 829
(1995). Content-based restrictions are “inherent and ines-
Page Proof Pending Publication
capable” in maintaining a forum for speech “compatible with
the intended purpose of the property.” Perry Ed. Assn. v.
Perry Local Educators' Assn., 460 U. S. 37, 49 (1983). It is
therefore inappropriate to view these restrictions as pre-
sumptively unconstitutional and apply strict scrutiny. Still,
not every restriction is permissible. To evaluate these
rules, we ask “whether they are reasonable in light of the
purpose which the forum at issue serves.” Ibid. This en-
sures that the government “respect[s] the lawful boundaries
it has itself set.” Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 829.
   Though I would not shoehorn the trademark registration
system into the defnition of a “limited public forum,” the
Solicitor General's analogy is apt.2 Content discrimination
  2
    Justice Thomas mistakenly suggests that I present the federal trade-
mark register as a limited public forum. Ante, at 309. That is not my
position. Rather, I view the content-based nature of the limited public
forum as analogous to the trademark registration system. Moreover, by
characterizing my argument as a conclusory statement that the limited
public forum framework is “ `apt,' ” Justice Thomas ignores my reasons
for drawing the analogy. Ibid.
318                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

                  Barrett, J., concurring in part

is “[i]mplicit in the concept of ” the trademark registration
system much like it is in a limited public forum. Perry, 460
U. S., at 49. Federal registration “help[s] protect marks” by
conferring strong legal rights on markowners who register
them. B&B Hardware, Inc. v. Hargis Industries, Inc., 575
U. S. 138, 142 (2015). Congress provided for “national pro-
tection of trademarks in order to secure to the owner of the
mark the goodwill of his business and to protect the ability
of consumers to distinguish among competing producers,”
matching trademark's historical goals. Park 'N Fly, Inc. v.
Dollar Park & Fly, Inc., 469 U. S. 189, 198 (1985); see supra,
at 314–315. A mark can only fulfll those goals to the extent
that it “tells the public who is responsible for [the] product.”
Jack Daniel's, 599 U. S., at 146. This is a content-based
requirement.
   Content-based criteria for trademark registration do not
abridge the right to free speech so long as they reasonably
Page Proof Pending Publication
relate to the preservation of the markowner's goodwill and
the prevention of consumer confusion. A particular restric-
tion will serve those goals if it helps ensure that registered
marks actually function as source identifers. Notably, “the
lead criterion for registration is that the mark `in fact serve
as a “trademark” to identify and distinguish goods.' ” Ibid.
(quoting 3 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition
§ 19:10 (5th ed. 2023) (McCarthy)). Other registration crite-
ria help to carry out that threshold requirement. For in-
stance, the Lanham Act prohibits the registration of marks
that are “merely descriptive” of the applicant's goods. 15
U. S. C. § 1052(e)(1). As courts frequently explained in the
early years of trademark, marks that simply describe the
kind and quality of the good do not necessarily identify
its source. See supra, at 314–315. The bar on registering
“deceptive” marks likewise prevents registered marks from
misidentifying the source of the goods. § 1052(a).
   The names clause passes muster under this test. A trade-
mark that includes another living person's name without her
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)             319

                  Barrett, J., concurring in part

consent has the obvious potential to create source confusion.
Further, the clause helps protect producer goodwill. By
freely using another person's name in her mark, the markow-
ner can unfairly capitalize on the reputation of the named
individual, who may be a producer in her own right. Con-
versely, if the markowner's goods or services are shoddy, she
might jeopardize the named individual's reputation.
  Elster protests that consumers would not assume that
Donald Trump is responsible for the mark “ `Trump too
small.' ” Brief for Respondent 35. Thus, he argues that
even if the names clause generally guards against source con-
fusion, refusing to register his proposed mark does not. But
Congress is entitled to make categorical judgments, particu-
larly where heightened scrutiny does not apply. The Gov-
ernment can reasonably determine that, on the whole, pro-
tecting marks that include another living person's name
without consent risks undermining the goals of trademark.
The names clause is therefore constitutional, both facially
Page Proof Pending Publication
and as applied to Elster's mark.

                               III
   Rather than adopt a generally applicable principle, the
Court assesses the names clause in isolation, treating the
supposed history and tradition of the clause as determina-
tive. In my view, the historical record does not alone suffce
to demonstrate the clause's constitutionality. For one thing,
the record does not support the Court's conclusion. For an-
other, I disagree with its choice to treat tradition as disposi-
tive of the First Amendment issue.

                                A
  First, the Court's history. It is true that “a tradition of
restricting the trademarking of names” arose in the late 19th
century. Ante, at 307. As the Court says, a personal name
by itself, without any accompanying words or symbols, did
not typically qualify as a trademark. See McLean v. Flem-
320                       VIDAL v. ELSTER

                    Barrett, J., concurring in part

ing, 96 U. S. 245, 252–253 (1878); ante, at 302. And a person
could not always enforce a trademark including her own
name against another with the same name. See Brown
Chemical Co. v. Meyer, 139 U. S. 540, 542 (1891); ante, at 302–
303.3 The frst federal trademark statute refected these
principles, prohibiting the registration of a mark that was
“merely the name of a person, frm, or corporation only, unac-
companied by a mark suffcient to distinguish it from the
same name when used by other persons.” § 79, 16 Stat. 211.
Today, the Lanham Act continues to bar the registration of
a mark that is “primarily merely a surname.” 15 U. S. C.
§ 1052(e)(4).
   But the Court also claims that the common law did not
afford protection to a person seeking a trademark including
another living person's name (in other words, a rule akin to
the names clause). Ante, at 303. I am less sure. In Thad-
deus Davids Co. v. Davids Mfg. Co., 233 U. S. 461 (1914),
this Court explained that the 1905 federal trademark statute
Page Proof Pending Publication
contained “a fairly complete list of the marks used by dealers
in selling their goods, which are not valid trademarks at com-
mon law.” Id., at 467 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Notably, this statute did not include the names clause or any
rough equivalent.4 And if such a common-law rule existed,
the majority opinion does not identify it. Instead, the Court
draws from sources suggesting that a person could not en-
force a trademark with another individual's name against
that individual. See ante, at 303. Nor could she fraudu-
  3
    By the early-20th century, however, courts enforced personal-name
marks even against “newcomer[s] with the same name when confusion
over source [was] the likely result.” 2 McCarthy § 13:8; see L. E. Water-
man Co. v. Modern Pen Co., 235 U. S. 88, 94 (1914).
  4
    The Thaddeus Court referred specifcally to the statute's prohibition
on the registration of marks that “consis[t] merely of individual, frm or
corporate names, not written or printed in a distinctive manner, or of
designations descriptive of the character or quality of the goods with
which they are used, or of geographical names or terms.” 233 U. S., at
467.
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                  321

                    Barrett, J., concurring in part

lently attempt to pass off her goods as those of another per-
son, using that person's name. Ibid. So far, so good. Yet
the names clause prevents other uses of someone else's name
that the common law may have allowed. And on that score,
the Court does not fully grapple with countervailing
evidence.
   In 1860, the Supreme Court of Rhode Island concluded
that the phrase “ `Roger Williams Long Cloth' ” was “capable
of distinguishing” the manufacturer's goods and thus quali-
fed as a trademark. Barrows v. Knight, 6 R. I. 434, 438.
“ `Roger Williams,' though the name of a famous person,”
the Court explained, was, “as applied to cotton cloth, a fancy
name,” as would be the case with “any other her[o], living
or dead.” Ibid. (emphasis added). Likewise, a New York
court upheld the plaintiffs' exclusive right to use the name
“Bismarck” to designate their paper collars, as they were the
frst to “appropriate” the name for that purpose. Messerole
v. Tynberg, 4 Abb. Pr. (N. S.) 410, 414 (Ct. Com. Pl. 1868).
Page Proof Pending Publication
The court thus rejected the defendant's argument that the
plaintiffs could not adopt “the name of a distinguished Ger-
man citizen” as a trademark. Id., at 412. Summarizing, the
Second Circuit explained that “[t]he law permits the adoption
as a trade-mark of the name of a person who has achieved
fame and distinction, provided the name is not descriptive of
the quality or the character of the article or a geographical
name.” Stephano Bros., Inc. v. Stamatopoulos, 238 F. 89,
93 (1916). See also Medlar & Holmes Shoe Co. v. Delsarte
Mfg. Co., 46 A. 1089 (N. J. Ch. Ct. 1900) (“The name of a
famous person, used merely as a fancy name, may become an
exclusive trade-mark”); W. Browne, Law of Trade-Marks
§ 216, pp. 225–226 (2d ed. 1885) (same).5

  5
    The Court dismisses my examples as irrelevant because several involve
the names of dead individuals. Ante, at 307, n. 4. But “[t]he exclusive
right to grace paper collars with Bismarck's name was granted while he
was still alive.” J. Pike, Personal Names as Trade Symbols, 3 Mo. L. Rev.
93, 101 (1938) (Pike). And the other authorities either expressly recog-
322                        VIDAL v. ELSTER

                     Barrett, J., concurring in part

   The legislative history of the Lanham Act also undercuts
the Court's conclusion. If the names clause codifed an ex-
isting common-law tradition, one might expect to see some
reference to that tradition when the names clause was
adopted. But proponents of the clause offered a different
justifcation. Discussing a predecessor version of the clause,
Edward Rogers, the Lanham Act's primary drafter, re-
marked that “[t]he idea of prostituting great names by stick-
ing them on all kinds of goods is very distasteful to me.”
Trade-Marks: Hearings on H. R. 9041 before the Subcommit-
tee on Trade-Marks, House Committee on Patents, 75th
Cong., 3d Sess., 79 (1938) (H. R. 9041); see J. Litman, Keynote
Address, 39 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L. J. 855, 856 (2021). The
Commissioner of the Patent Offce agreed, noting the “shock
to [his] sense of propriety to see liberty taken . . . with the
names of celebrities of private life.” H. R. 9041, at 79. He
then referred to the attempted registration of “the name of
the Duchess of Windsor for brassieres and ladies' under-
Page Proof Pending Publication
wear.” Ibid. They did not suggest that the common law
would already prevent those uses of another's name as a
trademark. On the contrary, they seemed most concerned
about the types of marks that the common law appeared to
allow. See supra, at 321.
   It is thus diffcult to say that the names clause is constitu-
tional solely because of its historical pedigree.6 Perhaps

nized that the names of famous living persons could be trademarked, see
Barrows, 6 R. I., at 438, or did not indicate whether the rule differed for
dead versus living individuals, see Stephano Bros., 238 F., at 92–93. In-
deed, “[t]he authorities [were] somewhat meagre” as to “the rule . . . .
where the notable person [was] still alive,” Pike 100, undercutting the
notion that the common law contained a clear rule one way or the other.
   6
     The Court characterizes my critique as a demand for a “historical
twin.” Ante, at 308, n. 4. On the contrary, my point is that the Court has
not cleared the “historical analogue” bar it sets for itself. The existence
of closely analogous historical counterexamples surely complicates the ar-
gument that “history and tradition” alone establish the clause's constitu-
                      Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                 323

                    Barrett, J., concurring in part

recognizing that reality, the Court relies not only on the pur-
ported common-law tradition restricting the trademarking
of names, but also points to the names clause's relation to
trademark's historical purposes. Ante, at 305–306. The
latter argument is quite similar to my own—I agree that the
names clause helps to ensure that the proposed mark func-
tions as a source identifer and to guard against reputational
consequences, serving trademark's historical goals.

                                   B
   But I cannot agree with the Court that the existence of a
“common-law tradition” and a “historical analogue” is suff-
cient to resolve this case. Ante, at 307–308. Even if the
Court's evidence were rock solid, I still would not adopt this
approach. To be sure, tradition has a legitimate role to play
in constitutional adjudication. For instance, the longstand-
ing practice of the political branches can reinforce our under-
standing of the Constitution's original meaning. Consumer
Page Proof Pending Publication
Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial
Services Assn. of America, Ltd., 601 U. S. 416, 442 (2024)
(Kagan, J., concurring). A course of deliberate practice
might liquidate ambiguous constitutional provisions. See
The Federalist No. 37, p. 229 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961). The
views of preceding generations can persuade, and, in the
realm of stare decisis, even bind. But tradition is not an
end in itself—and I fear that the Court uses it that way here.
   The Court does not (and could not) argue that the late-19th
and early-20th century names-restriction tradition serves as
evidence of the original meaning of the Free Speech Clause.
Cf. Samia v. United States, 599 U. S. 635, 655–656 (2023)
(Barrett, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg-
ment). Nor does it treat the history it recites as a persua-

tionality. By presenting its evidence as conclusive, “the Court over-
claims.” Samia v. United States, 599 U. S. 635, 657 (2023) (Barrett, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
324                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

                 Barrett, J., concurring in part

sive data point. Instead, it presents tradition itself as the
constitutional argument; the late-19th and early-20th cen-
tury evidence is dispositive of the First Amendment issue.
Yet what is the theoretical justifcation for using tradition
that way?
   Relying exclusively on history and tradition may seem like
a way of avoiding judge-made tests. But a rule rendering
tradition dispositive is itself a judge-made test. And I do
not see a good reason to resolve this case using that approach
rather than by adopting a generally applicable principle.
(After all, there is a tradition of the latter approach too.
See, e. g., McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 421 (1819)
(adopting standard for application of the Necessary and
Proper Clause).) In the course of applying broadly worded
text like the Free Speech Clause, courts must inevitably ar-
ticulate principles to resolve individual cases. I do not think
we can or should avoid doing so here. As I explained in
Page Proof Pending Publication
Part I–B, the takeaway from history is that content-based
trademark restrictions have long been central to trademark's
purpose of facilitating source identifcation, and they have
not posed a serious risk of censorship. This principle offers
a generally applicable way to think about whether registra-
tion restrictions “ `play well with the First Amendment.' ”
Ante, at 300. We should bring clarity to the law by adopt-
ing it.
   In my view, the Court's laser-like focus on the history of
this single restriction misses the forest for the trees. It
gives secondary billing to what I think is the central point:
that the names clause “refects trademark law's historical ra-
tionale of identifying the source of goods.” Ante, at 305. I
see no reason to proceed based on pedigree rather than prin-
ciple. Besides, as the Court admits, its approach merely
delays the inevitable: Eventually, the Court will encounter
a restriction without a historical analogue and be forced to
articulate a test for analyzing it. Ante, at 308.
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)           325

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

                         *      *      *
   Trademark protection cannot exist without content dis-
crimination. So long as content-based registration restric-
tions reasonably relate to the purposes of the trademark sys-
tem, they are constitutional. The names clause clears this
bar. I respectfully concur in part.
  Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Kagan and
Justice Jackson join, concurring in the judgment.
   This case involves a free-speech challenge to a viewpoint-
neutral, content-based condition on trademark registration.
In deciding how to evaluate this kind of challenge, the Court
faces two options: Either look only to the history and tradi-
tion of the condition, or look to trademark law and settled
First Amendment precedent. The frst option, which asks
whether the history of a particular trademark registration
bar plays well with the First Amendment, leads this Court
Page Proof Pending Publication
into uncharted territory that neither party requests. The
other guides it through well-trodden terrain. I would follow
the well-trodden path.
   In assessing the constitutionality of the names clause and
other trademark registration provisions, I would rely on this
Court's tried-and-tested First Amendment precedent. This
Court has held in a variety of contexts that withholding ben-
efts for content-based, viewpoint-neutral reasons does not
violate the Free Speech Clause when the applied criteria are
reasonable and the scheme is necessarily content based.
That is the situation here. Content discrimination is an
inescapable feature of the trademark system, and federal
trademark registration only confers additional benefts on
trademark holders. The denial of trademark registration is
therefore consistent with the First Amendment if it turns on
“reasonable, viewpoint-neutral content regulations.” Iancu
v. Brunetti, 588 U. S. 388, 424 (2019) (Sotomayor, J., concur-
ring in part and dissenting in part). Because the names
326                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

               Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

clause satisfes that test, I would uphold the constitutionality
of the provision on that ground alone.

                                I
                                A
   This case is the latest in a trilogy of challenges to the
constitutionality of trademark registration bars in the Lan-
ham Act. See id., at 390; Matal v. Tam, 582 U. S. 218, 223
(2017). In the frst two cases, the Court struck down as un-
constitutional certain registration bars that discriminated
based on viewpoint. Ante, at 293 (majority opinion) (citing
Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 390, 393–394; Tam, 582 U. S., at 243
(plurality opinion); id., at 248–249 (Kennedy, J., concurring
in part and concurring in judgment). Because those cases
involved viewpoint-based provisions, there was no occasion
to consider the framework for “how to evaluate viewpoint-
neutral restrictions on trademark registration.” Brunetti,
Page Proof Pending Publication
588 U. S., at 398, n. This case, by contrast, presents that
very circumstance—a viewpoint-neutral, content-based con-
dition on trademark registration.
   The names clause prohibits registration of a mark that
“[c]onsists of or comprises a name . . . identifying a particular
living individual except by his written consent.” 15 U. S. C.
§ 1052(c). No one disputes that the names clause is content
based. Its application turns, after all, on the mark's con-
tent, i.e., whether it identifes by name a particular living
individual without his or her written consent. See City of
Austin v. Reagan Nat. Advertising of Austin, LLC, 596 U. S.
61, 69 (2022) (explaining that a regulation is content based if
its application turns on “ `the topic discussed or the idea or
message expressed' ”). The names clause is also viewpoint
neutral because it is agnostic as to how the name in the mark
is being used and does not “distinguis[h] between two opposed
sets of ideas.” Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 394; see ante, at 293–
294, and n. 2 (majority opinion) (holding that the clause is view-
point neutral both on its face and in practice). On these
                    Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)             327

               Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

points, and on the conclusion that the names clause is consti-
tutional, we all agree. Our disagreement boils down pri-
marily to methodology.
                              B
   Those familiar with this trilogy of First Amendment chal-
lenges to the Lanham Act may be surprised, perhaps even
disappointed, to learn that, although this case presents the
“situation we did not address in Tam or Brunetti,” the Court
has shied away from setting forth a “framework `for deciding
free speech challenges to provisions of the Lanham Act.' ”
Ante, at 295 (majority opinion) (quoting Tam, 582 U. S., at
245, n. 17 (plurality opinion)). Yet perhaps the biggest sur-
prise (and disappointment) of today's fve-Justice majority
opinion is its reliance on history and tradition as a dispositive
test to resolve this case.
   In holding that the names clause is constitutional, that ma-
jority asserts that one need look only to the “history and
Page Proof Pending Publication
tradition” of the clause and “no further.” Ante, at 301.
Why look to history and tradition alone? Because, the ma-
jority says, it “is suffcient to conclude that the names clause
. . . is compatible with the First Amendment.” Ibid. Con-
sidering this Court has never applied this kind of history-
and-tradition test to a free-speech challenge, and that “[n]o
one briefed, argued, or even hinted at the rule that the Court
announces today,” one would have expected a more satisfac-
tory explanation. Lozman v. Riviera Beach, 585 U. S. 87,
102 (2018) (Thomas, J., dissenting). There is none grounded
in our First Amendment doctrine and precedent.
   Justice Barrett questions the majority's because-it-is-
suffcient explanation in part by claiming that, if anything,
the Court's evidence “does not establish a historical analogue
for the names clause.” Ante, at 311 (opinion concurring in
part). That may well be true. Yet this back-and-forth
highlights the indeterminacy of the Court's history-and-
tradition inquiry, which one might aptly describe as the
equivalent of entering a crowded cocktail party and looking
328                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

over everyone's heads to fnd your friends. Cf. Conroy v.
Aniskoff, 507 U. S. 511, 519 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in
judgment). To make matters worse, the fve-Justice major-
ity that undertakes this tradition-as-dispositive inquiry
found its friends in a crowded party to which it was not in-
vited. That majority has drawn conclusive inferences from
its historical evidence, all without any guidance from the liti-
gants or the court below. That stark departure from settled
principles of party presentation and adversarial testing in
favor of in-chambers historical research by nonhistorians
raises more questions than answers. Cf. Maslenjak v.
United States, 582 U. S. 335, 354 (2017) (Gorsuch, J., joined
by Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg-
ment) (“[T]he crucible of adversarial testing on which we
usually depend, along with the experience of our thoughtful
colleagues on the district and circuit benches, could yield in-
sights (or reveal pitfalls) we cannot muster guided only by
our own lights”).
Page Proof Pending Publication
   It is not appropriate, much less necessary, to fnd common-
law analogues to settle the constitutionality of the names
clause or any other trademark registration provision. I
agree with Justice Barrett that, even if the majority's
historical “evidence were rock solid,” there is no good reason
to believe that “hunting for historical forebears on a
restriction-by-restriction basis is the right way to analyze
the constitutional question.” Ante, at 311, 323. The major-
ity attempts to reassure litigants and the lower courts that
a “history-focused approac[h]” here is sensible and workable,
by citing to New York State Rife & Pistol Assn., Inc. v.
Bruen, 597 U. S. 1 (2022). Ante, at 307–308, n. 4. To say
that such reassurance is not comforting would be an under-
statement. One need only read a handful of lower court de-
cisions applying Bruen to appreciate the confusion this
Court has caused. Cf. Brief for Second Amendment Law
Scholars as Amici Curiae in United States v. Rahimi, O. T.
2023, No. 22–915, pp. 4–6 (discussing examples of confusion
among lower courts applying Bruen).
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            329

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

  Ultimately, I am reluctant to go further down this preci-
pice of looking for questionable historical analogues to re-
solve the constitutionality of Congress's legislation. To bor-
row Justice Scalia's criticism from a different context, such
hunting “far into the dimmy past” is not just “a waste of
research time and ink” but also “a false and disruptive lesson
in the law . . . that . . . condemns litigants (who, unlike us,
must pay for it out of their own pockets) to subsidizing his-
torical research by lawyers.” Conroy, 507 U. S., at 519
(opinion concurring in judgment). I would instead apply
this Court's First Amendment precedent, just as the parties
did in arguing this case.
                                C
   The most straightforward way to resolve this and other
free-speech challenges to trademark registration criteria is
through a doctrinal framework drawn from this Court's First
Amendment precedent. The analysis should proceed in two
Page Proof Pending Publication
steps. First ask whether the challenged provision targets
particular views taken by speakers on a given subject. If
the trademark registration bar is viewpoint based, it is pre-
sumptively unconstitutional and heightened scrutiny applies;
if it is viewpoint neutral, however, the trademark registra-
tion bar need only be reasonable in light of the purpose of the
trademark system. Specifcally, the trademark registration
bar must reasonably serve its purpose of identifying and dis-
tinguishing goods for the public. If the challenged provision
is both viewpoint neutral and reasonable, then it does not
violate the Free Speech Clause.

                                II
                                A
  This Court has applied strict constitutional scrutiny to
viewpoint-neutral content classifcations on some occasions,
and thus treated them as “presumptively unconstitutional.”
Reed v. Town of Gilbert, 576 U. S. 155, 163 (2015). It has
declined to do so, however, when any “risk” that such classi-
330                    VIDAL v. ELSTER

               Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

fcation “will impermissibly interfere with the marketplace
of ideas” is “attenuated”; that is, when “ `there is no realistic
possibility that offcial suppression of ideas is afoot.' ” Dav-
enport v. Washington Ed. Assn., 551 U. S. 177, 188–189
(2007) (quoting R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 390 (1992)).
In those cases, “the difference between viewpoint-based and
viewpoint-neutral content discrimination can be decisive.”
Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 421 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). This
is such a case: Whereas the denial of trademark registration
under viewpoint- and content-based criteria is presumptively
unconstitutional under heightened scrutiny, a denial under
viewpoint-neutral, content-based criteria is not constitution-
ally suspect and does not trigger the same exacting scrutiny.
See ante, at 292–300 (majority opinion).
   In explaining why the difference is decisive in this context,
the Court and Justice Barrett emphasize that trademarks
are inherently content based, yet have long coexisted with
Page Proof Pending Publication
the First Amendment. Ante, at 295–300 (majority opinion);
ante, at 312–317 (opinion of Barrett, J.). I agree with the
use of historical evidence to support this point. History in-
forms the understanding that content-based distinctions are
an intrinsic feature of trademarks, and that the marks' pur-
pose is to identify and distinguish goods for the public. See
ante, at 312–316 (opinion of Barrett, J.). That use of his-
tory is legitimate and in fact valuable, just as evidence of a
longstanding practice of government can inform the meaning
of constitutional provisions in appropriate cases. See ante,
at 323–324 (opinion of Barrett, J.); cf. Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Assn.
of America, Ltd., 601 U. S. 416, 442 (2024) (Kagan, J., concur-
ring); The Pocket Veto Case, 279 U. S. 655, 689 (1929). That
is not how the fve-Justice majority is using history, however.
The majority instead treats a disputed (and isolated) account
of the history and tradition of the names clause as determina-
tive of its constitutionality. Cf. ante, at 300–308 (applying
new history-and-tradition test). It is that “judge-made test”
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            331

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

that is unmoored from constitutional text and precedent, and
which I repudiate as unhelpful. Ante, at 324 (opinion of
Barrett, J.).
   Even then, history does not give us the full story. The
assertion that content-based distinctions in trademark law
have long played well with the First Amendment, although
true, requires a more fulsome explanation, particularly as
applied to the trademark registration system. The primary
reason why viewpoint-neutral trademark registration crite-
ria easily coexist with the Free Speech Clause is that they
do not burden expression. Instead, a denial of registration
withholds ancillary benefts that might bolster someone's ex-
pression. When a government confers a beneft that sup-
ports some forms of expressive activity, the decision to with-
hold that beneft on viewpoint-neutral grounds “ `cannot be
equated with the imposition of a “penalty” on that activity,' ”
which would trigger heightened scrutiny. Rust v. Sullivan,
500 U. S. 173, 193 (1991) (quoting Harris v. McRae, 448 U. S.
Page Proof Pending Publication
297, 317, n. 19 (1980)).
                               1
   “The First Amendment protects the freedom of speech; it
does not require the Government to give aid and comfort to
those using” particular “modes of expression.” Brunetti,
588 U. S., at 401 (Roberts, C. J., concurring in part and dis-
senting in part). Indeed, this Court has recognized repeat-
edly that the First Amendment permits governmental bod-
ies to rely on reasonable, viewpoint-neutral, content-based
criteria when deciding to beneft certain communicative ac-
tivities. See, e. g., National Endowment for Arts v. Finley,
524 U. S. 569, 587–588 (1998) (“[T]he Government may allo-
cate competitive funding according to criteria that would be
impermissible were direct regulation of speech or a criminal
penalty at stake”).
   As I explained in Brunetti, and the Solicitor General ar-
gues in this case, various strands of precedent support this
point, ranging from cases about limited public (or nonpublic)
332                         VIDAL v. ELSTER

                  Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

forums to those involving monetary subsidies and noncash
governmental programs (such as the collection of fees by
public-sector labor unions). See 588 U. S., at 422– 424
(collecting cases); Brief for Petitioner 16–21 (same).1 In
these cases, content discrimination was necessarily a part of
the governmental initiative at issue, yet the initiative was
not subject to the constitutional straitjacket of heightened
scrutiny. See, e. g., Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educa-
tors' Assn., 460 U. S. 37, 49 (1983) (noting that content dis-
crimination is “[i]mplicit in the concept of the nonpublic
forum,” yet declining to apply heightened scrutiny). That
was so because each “initiative . . . supported some forms of
expression without restricting others. Some speakers were
better off, but no speakers were worse off.” Brunetti, 588
U. S., at 423 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.).
   These cases “may not be controlling [here] in a strict
sense, yet they do provide some instruction.” Legal Serv-
Page Proof Pending Publication
ices Corporation v. Velazquez, 531 U. S. 533, 544 (2001).
They generally stand for the proposition that the Free
Speech Clause permits governmental bodies to impose a
“reasonable, viewpoint-neutral limitation” on a “state-
bestowed entitlement.” Davenport, 551 U. S., at 189; see,
e. g., Christian Legal Soc. Chapter of Univ. of Cal., Hastings
College of Law v. Martinez, 561 U. S. 661, 669 (2010) (uphold-
ing “reasonable, viewpoint-neutral condition” on access to
government initiative); Ysursa v. Pocatello Ed. Assn., 555
U. S. 353, 355 (2009) (same); Cornelius v. NAACP Legal De-
fense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788, 808 (1985) (same);

  1
    According to Justice Thomas (who is joined by two Justices), I focus
primarily on cash-subsidy and union-dues cases. A closer look at this
opinion and the cases that I cite will reveal that is not exactly true. As
I mentioned in Brunetti, and both the Government and Justice Barrett
assert in this case, limited public (or nonpublic) forum cases also constitute
helpful analogies for arriving at the generally applicable principles that
should apply to this kind of case. See Brief for Petitioner 18–19; accord,
ante, at 317–319, and n. 2 (opinion of Barrett, J.).
                       Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                    333

                 Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash., 461 U. S.
540, 550 (1983) (same).2
                          2
   Someone with a federally registered mark enjoys certain
benefts by virtue of that registration. Even so, free speech
is not abridged when these benefts are denied to someone
based on reasonable, viewpoint-neutral criteria.
   Consider three basic tenets of trademark law, each of
which the Court rightly acknowledges. See ante, at 290–
291. First, “every trademark's `primary' function” is to tell
the public who is responsible for a particular product, that
is, to serve as a source identifer. Jack Daniel's Properties,
Inc. v. VIP Products LLC, 599 U. S. 140, 146 (2023). Al-
though trademarks may also communicate a “message,” that
message is only incidental to “what a trademark is and does.”
Id., at 145–146. Second, “federal law does not create trade-
marks.” B&B Hardware, Inc. v. Hargis Industries, Inc.,
Page Proof Pending Publication
575 U. S. 138, 142 (2015). Rather, by virtue of common law,
the frst person to use a “distinct mark in commerce . . .
acquires rights to that mark,” including exclusivity rights to
“preven[t] others from using the mark.” Ibid. Third, fed-
eral registration provides increased trademark protection

  2
    Justice Thomas responds that these precedents are an “ill ft” for the
names clause because this case does not involve “cash subsid[ies],” “union
dues,” or a “limited public forum.” Ante, at 309. That response misses
the entire point. In the past, this Court has relied on limited-public-
forum cases as instructive, even if not controlling, when resolving consti-
tutional challenges to governmental subsidies (and vice versa). See, e. g.,
Legal Services Corporation, 531 U. S., at 544. The Court relied on these
decisions for their underlying legal principle only. That is, after all, how
law works. That the trademark registration system does not involve cash
subsidies, union dues, or a limited public forum is immaterial for purposes
of the analysis in this opinion. As just discussed, the legal principle in
each of these cases is that the Constitution permits reasonable, viewpoint-
neutral limitations on speech where, as here, the Government only benefts
certain forms of expression through initiatives that are intrinsically con-
tent based without restricting other expression.
334                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

only by conferring additional benefts on trademark holders.
See ibid. For example, it (1) provides “nationwide con-
structive notice of the registrant's claim of ownership of the
mark,” which forecloses some defenses in infringement ac-
tions; and (2) constitutes “prima facie evidence” of the mark's
validity and exclusivity in commerce. Ante, at 291 (citing
15 U. S. C. §§ 1072, 1115(a)). To be sure, nothing in the Con-
stitution requires these predominantly commercial benefts.
   One conclusion follows from these three principles: By
prohibiting trademark registration for viewpoint-neutral,
content-based reasons, Congress simply denies an applicant
the opportunity to include his mark on a list and secure
“certain benefts” that are “useful in infringement litigation.”
Jack Daniel's, 599 U. S., at 146. The risk of speech suppres-
sion is therefore “attenuated” because denying a trademark
holder these ancillary benefts does not prevent him from
using his mark in commerce or communicating any message
incidental to the mark. Davenport, 551 U. S., at 188; see
Page Proof Pending Publication
Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 421–422 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.);
id., at 401 (opinion of Roberts, C. J.) (“Whether . . . marks
can be registered does not affect the extent to which their
owners may use them in commerce to identify goods. No
speech is being restricted; no one is being punished. The
owners of such marks are merely denied certain additional
benefts associated with federal trademark registration”).

                               B
   Now consider the facts of this case. Respondent Steve
Elster wants to sell shirts with the phrase TRUMP TOO
SMALL on them. He also wants increased trademark pro-
tection by federally registering the phrase. In the registra-
tion request, Elster explained that the phrase “invokes a
memorable exchange between President Trump and Senator
Marco Rubio from a 2016 presidential primary debate, and
aims to `convey[ ] that some features of President Trump and
his policies are diminutive.' ” In re Elster, 26 F. 4th 1328,
1330 (CA Fed. 2022) (alteration in original).
                   Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)            335

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

   When the U. S. Patent and Trademark Offce rejected the
registration request, it denied Elster the opportunity to se-
cure the Government-bestowed benefts associated with reg-
istration. Critically, the denial did not prevent Elster from
communicating his message. It also did not restrict his pre-
ferred mode of expression. Elster can still sell shirts dis-
playing the same message. Elster could also use a different
phrase (such as ELSTER APPAREL) as a source identifer
to obtain the desired benefts of registration while continu-
ing to sell shirts with his preferred message across the front.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 23–24 (discussing “Elster Apparel” ex-
ample). Put simply, the denial only barred Elster from reg-
istering a mark asserting exclusive rights in another person's
name without their written consent.

                               III
                                A

Page
  Because Proof
           trademark Pending          Publication
                     registration criteria limit statutory
benefts in a necessarily content-based scheme, the First
Amendment requires the criteria to be viewpoint neutral and
reasonable. Supra, at 329, 331–332; Brunetti, 588 U. S., at
424 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.). From this Court's analogous
nonpublic-forum and limited-public-forum cases, it is clear
that “reasonable” means that the challenged provision must
reasonably serve the purpose of the content-based scheme.
On this point, I agree with Justice Barrett that the chal-
lenged trademark registration criteria must be “reasonable
in light of the trademark system's purpose of facilitating
source identifcation.” Ante, at 312; see ante, at 317–319.
   In Cornelius, for example, the Court confronted a free-
speech challenge to the Government's decision to exclude
“legal defense and political advocacy organizations from par-
ticipation in the Combined Federal Campaign (CFC or Cam-
paign), a charity drive aimed at federal employees.” 473
U. S., at 790. After concluding that the CFC was a nonpub-
lic forum “not dedicated to general debate or the free ex-
change of ideas,” the Court held that the First Amendment
336                   VIDAL v. ELSTER

              Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

permits content- and speaker-based “distinctions” so long as
they are “reasonable in light of the purpose served by the
forum and are viewpoint neutral.” Id., at 806, 811. Impor-
tantly, the “decision to restrict access . . . need not be the
most reasonable or the only reasonable limitation.” Id., at
808–809. Based on this test, the Court ultimately concluded
that the Government acted reasonably, and consistent with
the Free Speech Clause, in “limit[ing] participation in the
CFC in order to minimize disruption to the federal work-
place, to ensure the success of the fundraising effort, or to
avoid the appearance of political favoritism without regard
to the viewpoint of the excluded groups.” Id., at 813.
   Justice Thomas ( joined by two Justices) rejects this test,
implying that it is subjective because it supposedly turns on
what a given judge might think is reasonable. Ante, at 308.
That statement misunderstands the inquiry. As just dis-
cussed, a trademark registration condition is reasonable if it
Page Proof Pending Publication
serves as a source identifer, a concept that is familiar to
anyone who has worked on a trademark case. See Jack
Daniel's, 599 U. S., at 146; 1 J. McCarthy, Trademarks and
Unfair Competition § 3:1 (5th ed. 2023). More generally, this
kind of reasonableness inquiry appears in every limited pub-
lic (or nonpublic) forum case. Far from being subjective and
unworkable, this kind of test goes to the very core of what
judges and lawyers do every day. When contrasted to their
preferred history-driven approach, the criticism of the rea-
sonableness inquiry is even more unpersuasive. As dis-
cussed above, the history-and-tradition approach is not just
fawed as a matter of frst principles, but also highly indeter-
minate and unfamiliar to judges and litigants in this area of
the law. See supra, at 327–329. How much history is enough
to clear the historical analogue bar the fve-Justice majority
set up? What does that look like in this context? When it
comes to subjectivity, their preferred approach empowers
judges to pick their friends in a crowded party. See supra, at
327–328. When faced with the two options, I choose the test
                       Cite as: 602 U. S. 286 (2024)                     337

                 Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

that is rooted in this Court's First Amendment doctrine and
precedent, is attuned to what judges and lawyers are prop-
erly trained to do, and does not limit Congress from dealing
with modern-day conditions based on the foresight of yester-
day's generation.
                               B
   “Content-based criteria for trademark registration do not
abridge the right to free speech so long as they reasonably
relate to the preservation of the markowner's goodwill and
the prevention of consumer confusion,” “goals” that a “par-
ticular restriction will serve . . . if it helps ensure that regis-
tered marks actually function as source identifers.” Ante,
at 318 (opinion of Barrett, J.) The names clause easily
passes this reasonableness test. Source identifcation is,
after all, at the heart of what the names clause does.
   Imagine someone who wants to manufacture and sell the
best bats and catchers' mitts in baseball. Unsurprisingly,
Page Proof Pending Publication
that person wants to use the names of Derek Jeter and Jorge
Posada to capitalize on their goodwill to promote the prod-
ucts. So, the manufacturer lands on JETER OUT OF THE
PARK and CATCH LIKE POSADA as marks. The names
clause bars registration of these phrases without the named
individuals' written consent. It does so for good reason:
Jeter and Posada may not want consumers to misattribute
these products to them, just as consumers may not want to
buy products under the false pretense that these goods
somehow are connected to the players.3 Source identifca-

   3
     Other Lanham Act provisions prohibit the registration of marks that
deceive or falsely suggest a connection to a person or entity. See 15
U. S. C. § 1052(a). That there is some overlap between the false-
suggestion and names clauses does not change the fact that the names
clause reasonably serves the purpose of source identifcation. When
heightened scrutiny is not in play, Congress is free to use belts and sus-
penders to support an asserted interest. I therefore also agree with Jus-
tice Barrett that “Congress is entitled to make [the] categorical judg-
men[t] . . . that, on the whole, protecting marks that include another living
338                       VIDAL v. ELSTER

                Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment

tion is especially important when, for example, the named
individual produces similar products—say, Jeter and Posada
sell their own baseball goods under the marks MR. NOVEM-
BER BATS BY JETER and CHAMP'S MITTS BY PO-
SADA. They would not want manufacturers to dilute the
commercial value of their name and reputation. Nor would
Jeter and Posada want a Boston Red Sox fan to manufacture
cheaper goods and use their names to promote second-rate
products. The names clause prevents that from happening.
   Congress was entitled to make this legislative judgment.
The Government, after all, “has a reasonable interest in re-
fraining from lending its ancillary support to marks” that
use an unconsenting individual's name for commercial gain.
Brunetti, 588 U. S., at 425 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.); cf. id.,
at 401 (opinion of Roberts, C. J.) (“The Government, mean-
while, has an interest in not associating itself with trade-
marks whose content is obscene, vulgar, or profane”). In
sum, the names clause is constitutional because it is a
Page Proof Pending Publication
viewpoint-neutral, reasonable limitation on a trademark's
registration.
                         *     *     *
  The Court's “decision today is narrow,” and its history-
and-tradition test is good only for “the relatively simple case
before us today.” Ante, at 308, 310. Ultimately, all nine
Justices agree that Congress can innovate when it comes to
trademark law, and we further agree that nothing in today's
opinion calls into question the constitutionality of viewpoint-
neutral provisions lacking a historical pedigree. See ibid.;
ante, at 311 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part); ante, at
311–312 (opinion of Barrett, J.); supra, at 327–329.
  For the reasons set forth above, I respectfully concur in
the judgment.


person's name without consent risks undermining the goals of trademark.”
Ante, at 319.
                           Reporter’s Note

  The attached opinion has been revised to refect the usual publication
and citation style of the United States Reports. The revised pagination
makes available the offcial United States Reports citation in advance of
publication. The syllabus has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions
for the convenience of the reader and constitutes no part of the opinion of
the Court. A list of counsel who argued or fled briefs in this case, and
Page Proof Pending Publication
who were members of the bar of this Court at the time this case was
argued, has been inserted following the syllabus. Other revisions may
include adjustments to formatting, captions, citation form, and any errant
punctuation. The following additional edits were made:

p. 286, line 9: “the” is replaced with “a”
p. 289, lines 12–13: “analog” is replaced with “analogue”
p. 303, line 20: “own” is inserted after “his”
p. 304, line 8 from bottom: “Trade” is replaced with “Trading”